"If my business is done," said Hugo. And then he went back to his little experiments in caligraphy.

It was not until the afternoon of the 18th of August that he found himself at the door of No.
14, Tarragon-street. It was a dingy-looking house in a dismal-looking street. Hugo shivered
a little as he pulled the tarnished bell-handle. "How can people live in streets like this?"
he said to himself, with a slight contemptuous shrug of his shoulders.

"Mr. Vasari?" he said, interrogatively, as a downcast-looking woman came to the door.

"Yes, sir. What name, sir, if you please?"

"Say that a gentleman from Scotland wishes to see him."

The woman gave him a keen look, as if she knew something of the errand upon which Dino Vasari
had come to her house; but said nothing, and ushered him at once into a sitting-room on the
ground-floor. The room was curtained so heavily that it seemed nearly dark. Hugo could not
see whether it was tenanted by more than one person; of one he was sure, because that one person
came to meet him with outstretched hands and eager words of greeting.

"Mr. Luttrell! You have come, then; you have come--I knew you would!"

"I beg your pardon," said Hugo, and at the sound of his voice the first speaker fell back amazed;
"but I am Hugo Luttrell--not Brian. I come from him."

"A thousand pardons; this English darkness is to blame," said the other, in fluent English
speech, though with a slightly foreign accent. "Let us have lights; then we can know each other.
I am--Dino Vasari."

He said the name with a certain hesitation, as though not sure whether or no he ought to call
himself by it. The light of a candle fell suddenly upon the two faces--which were turned towards
one another in some curiosity. The two had a kind of superficial likeness of feature, but a
total dissimilarity of expression. The subtlety of Hugo's eyes and mouth was never shown more
clearly than when contrasted with the noble gravity that marked every line of Dino's traits.
They stood and looked at each other for a moment--Dino, wrapped in admiration; Hugo, lost in
a thought of dark significance.

"So you are the man!" he was saying to himself. "You call yourself my cousin, do you? And you
want the Strathleckie and the Luttrell estates? Be warned and go back to Italy, my good cousin,
while you have time; you will never reach Scotland alive, I promise you. I shall kill you first,
as I should kill a snake lying in my path. Never in your life, Mr. Dino Vasari, were you in
greater danger than you are just now."

CHAPTER XXI.

A FLASK OF ITALIAN WINE.

"I am Brian Luttrell's cousin," said Hugo, quietly, "and I come from him."

"Then you know--you know----" Dino stammered, and he looked eagerly into Hugo's face.

"I know all."

"You know where he is now?"

"I do. I have brought you a letter from him--a sort of introduction," said Hugo, with a faint
smile. "I trust that you will find it satisfactory."

"No introduction is necessary," was Dino's polite reply. "I have heard him speak of you."

Hugo's eyes flashed an interrogation. What had Brian said of him? But Dino's tones were so
courteous, his face so calmly impassive, that Hugo was reassured. He bowed slightly, and placed
a card and a letter on the table. Dino made an apology for opening the letter, and moved away
from the table whilst he read it.

There was a pause. Hugo's face flushed, his hands twitched a little. He was actually nervous
about the success of his scheme. Suppose Dino were to doubt the genuineness of that letter!

It consisted of a few words only, and they were Italian:--

"Dino mio," it began, "the bearer of this letter is my cousin Hugo, who knows all the circumstances
and will explain to you what are my views. I am ill, and cannot come to London. Burn this note.

    "Brian Luttrell."

Dino read it twice, and then handed it to Hugo, who perused it with as profound attention as
though he had never seen the document before. When he gave it back, he was almost surprised
to see Dino take it at once to the grate, deposit it amongst the coals, and wait until it was
consumed to ashes before he spoke. There was a slight sternness of aspect, a compression of
the lips, and a contraction of the brow, which impressed Hugo unfavourably during the performance
of this action. It seemed to show that Dino Vasari might not be a man so easy to deal with
as Brian Luttrell.

"I have done what I was asked to do," he said, drawing himself up to his full height, and turning
round with folded arms and darkening brow. "I have burnt his letter, and I should now be glad,
Mr. Luttrell, to hear the views which you were to explain to me."

"My cousin Brian----" began Hugo, with some deliberation; but he was not allowed to finish
his sentence. Quick as thought, Dino Vasari interrupted him.

"Pardon me, would it not be as well--under the circumstances--to speak of the gentleman in
question as Mr. Stretton?"

Hugo shrugged his shoulders.

"I have no objection," he said, "so long as you do not take my calling him by that name to
be the expression of my opinion concerning the subject under consideration."

This was so elaborate a sentence that Dino took some little time to consider it.

"I see," he said at last, with a questioning look; "you mean that you are not convinced that
he is the son of Vincenza Vasari?"

"Neither is he," said Hugo.

"But if we have proof----"

"Mr. Vasari, you cannot imagine that my cousin will give up his rights without a struggle?"

"But he has given them up," said Dino, vehemently. "He refuses to be called by his own name;
he has let the estates pass away from him----"

"But he means to claim his rights again," said Hugo.

"Oh." Then there was a long silence. Dino sat down in a chair facing that of Hugo, and confronted
him steadily. "I understood," he said at last, "when I was in Italy, that he had resolved to
give up all claim to his name, or to his estate. He had disagreeable associations with both.
He determined to let himself be thought dead, and to earn his own living under the name of
John Stretton."

"He did do so," said Hugo, softly; "but he has changed his mind."

"And why?"

"If I tell you why, may I ask you to keep what I say a profound secret?"

Dino hesitated. Then he said firmly, "I will keep it secret so long as he desires me to do so."

"Then listen. The reason of his change of mind is this. He has fallen in love. You will ask--with
whom? With the woman to whom his estate has passed--Miss Murray. He means to marry her, and
in that way to get back the estate which, by his own mad folly, he has forfeited."

"Is this true?" said Dino, slowly. He fixed his penetrating dark eyes upon Hugo as he spoke,
and turned a little pale. "And does this lady--this Miss Murray--know who he is? For I hear
that he calls himself Stretton in her house. Does she know?"

Hugo deliberated a little. "No," he answered, "I am sure that she does not."

Dino rose to his feet. "It is impossible," he said, with an indignant flash of his dark eyes,
which startled Hugo; "Brian would never be so base."

"My only wonder is," murmured Hugo, reflectively, "that Brian should be so clever."

"You call it clever?" said Dino, still more indignantly. "You call it clever to deceive a woman,
to marry her for her money, to mislead her about one's name? Are these your English fashions?
Is it clever to break your word, to throw away the love and the help that is offered you, to
show yourself selfish, and designing, and false? This is what you tell me about the man whom
you call your cousin, and then you ask me to admire his behaviour? Oh, no, I do not admire
it. I call it mean, and base, and vile. And that is why he would not come to see me himself;
that is why he sent you as an emissary. He could not look me in the face and tell me the things
that you have told me!"

He sat down again. The fire died out of his eyes, the hectic colour from his cheek. "But I
do not believe it!" he said, more sorrowfully than angrily; and in a much lower voice; "I do
not believe that he means to do this thing. He was always good and always true."

Hugo watched him, and spoke after a little pause. "You had his letter," he said. "He told you
to believe what I said to you. I could explain his views."

"Ah, but look you, perhaps you do not understand," said Dino, turning towards him with renewed
vivacity. "It is a hard position, this of mine. Ever since I was a little child, it was hinted
to me that I had English parents, that I did not belong to the Vasari family. When I grew older,
the whole story of Vincenza's change of the children was told to me, and I used to think of
the Italian boy who had taken my place, and wonder whether he would be sorry to exchange it
for mine. I was not sorry; I loved my own life in the monastery. I wanted to be a priest. But
I thought of the boy who bore my name; I wove fancies about him night and day; I wished with
all my heart to see him. I used to think that the day would come when I should say to him--'Let
us know each other; let us keep our secret, but love each other nevertheless. You can be Brian
Luttrell, and I will be Dino Vasari, as long as the world lasts. We will not change. But we
will be friends.'"

His voice grew husky; he leaned his head upon his hands for a few moments, and did not speak.
Hugo still watched him curiously. He was interested in the revelation of a nature so different
from his own; interested, but contemptuous of it, too.

"I could dream in this way," said Dino at last, "so long as no land--no money--was concerned.
While Brian Luttrell was the second son the exchange of children was, after all, of very little
consequence. When Richard Luttrell died, the position of things was changed. If he had lived,
you would never have heard of Vincenza Vasari's dishonesty. The priests knew that there would
be little to be gained by it. But when he died my life became a burden to me, because they
were always saying--'Go and claim your inheritance. Go to Scotland and dispossess the man who
lords it over your lands, and spends your revenues. Take your rights.'"

"And then you met Brian?" said Hugo, as the narrator paused again.

"I met him and I loved him. I was sorry for his unhappiness. He learnt the story that I had
known for so many years, and it galled him. He refused to see the man who really ought to have
borne his name. He knew me well enough, but he never suspected that I was Mr. Luttrell's son.
We parted at San Stefano with friendly words; he did not suspect that I was leaving the place
because I could not bear to see him day by day brooding over his grief, and never tell him
that I did not wish to take his place."

"But why did you not tell him?"

"I was ordered to keep silence. The Prior said that he would tell him the whole story in good
time. They sent me away, and, after a time, I heard from Father Cristoforo that he was gone,
and had found a tutorship in an English family, that he vowed never to bear the name of Luttrell
any more, and that the way was open for me to claim my own rights, as the woman Vincenza Vasari
had been found and made confession."

"So you came to England with that object?"

"With the object, first," said Dino, lifting his face from his crossed arms, "of seeing him
and asking him whether he was resolved to despoil himself of his name and fortune. I would
not have raised a hand to do either, but, if he himself did it, I thought that I might pick
up what he threw away. Not for myself, but for the Church to which I belong. The Church should
have it all."

"Would you give it away?" cried Hugo.

"I am to be a monk. A monk has no property," was Dino's answer. "I wanted to be sure that he
did not repent of his decision before I moved a finger."

"You seem to have no scruple about despoiling Miss Murray of her goods," said Hugo, drily.

A fresh gleam shot from the young man's eyes.

"Miss Murray is a woman," he said, briefly. "She does not need an estate. She will marry."

"Marry Brian Luttrell, perhaps."

"If she marries him as Mr. Stretton, she must take the consequences."

"Well," said Hugo, "I must confess, Mr. Vasari, that I do not understand you. In one breath
you say you would not injure Brian by a hair's-breadth; in another you propose to leave him
and his wife in poverty if he marries Miss Murray."

"No, pardon me, you mistake," replied Dino, gently. "I will never injure him whom you call,
Brian, but if he keeps the name of Stretton I shall claim the rights which he has given up.
And, when the estate is mine, I will give him and his wife what they want; I will give them
half, if they desire it, but I will have what is my own, first of all, and in spite of all."

"You say, in fact, that you will not injure Brian, but that you do not care how much you injure
Miss Murray."

"That is not it," cried Dino, his dark eye lighting up and his form positively trembling with
excitement. "I say that, if Brian himself had come to me and asked me to spare him, or the
woman he loved, for his sake I would have yielded and gone back to San Stefano to-morrow; I
would have destroyed the evidence; I would have given up all, most willingly; but when he treats
me harshly, coldly--when he will not, now that he knows who I am, make one little journey to
see me and tell me what he wishes; when he even tries to deceive me, and to deceive this lady
of whom you speak--why, then, I stand upon my rights; and I will not yield one jot of my claim
to the Luttrell estate and the Luttrell name."

"You will not?"

"I will fight to the death for it."

Hugo smiled slightly.

"There will be very little fighting necessary, if you have your evidence ready. You have it
with you, I presume?"

"I have copies; the original depositions are with my lawyer."

"Ah. And he is----"

"A Mr. Grattan; there is his address," said Dino, placing a card before his visitor. "I suppose
that all further business will be transacted through him?"

"I suppose so. Then you have made your decision?"

"Yes. One moment, Mr. Luttrell. Excuse me for mentioning it; but you have made two statements,
one of which seems to me to contradict the other." Dino had recovered all his usual coolness,
and fixed his keen gaze upon Hugo in a way which that young man found a little embarrassing.
"You told me that Brian--as we may still call him--intended to claim his old name once more.
Then you said that he meant to marry Miss Murray under the name of Stretton. You will remark
that these two intentions are incompatible; he cannot do both these things."

Hugo felt that he had blundered.

"I spoke hastily," he said, with an affectation of ingenuous frankness, which sat very well
upon his youthful face. "I believe that his intentions are to preserve the name of Stretton,
and to marry Miss Murray under it."

"Then I will tell Mr. Grattan to take the necessary steps to-morrow," said Dino, rising, as
if to hint that the interview had now come to an end.

Hugo looked at him with surprised, incredulous eyes.

"Oh, Mr. Vasari," he said, naively, "don't let us part on these unfriendly terms. Perhaps you
will think better of the matter, and more kindly of Brian, if we talk it over a little more."

"At the present moment, I think talk will do more harm than good, Mr. Luttrell."

"Won't you write yourself to Brian?" faltered Hugo, as if he hardly dared to make the suggestion.

"No, I think not. You will tell him my decision."

"I'm afraid I have been a bad ambassador," said Hugo, with an air of boyish simplicity, "and
that I have offended you."

"Not at all." Dino held out his hand. "You have spoken very wisely, I think. Do not let me
lose your esteem if I claim what I believe to be my rights."

Hugo sighed. "I suppose we ought to be enemies--I don't know," he said. "I don't like making
enemies--won't you come and dine with me to-night, just to show that you do not bear me any
malice. I have rooms in town; we can be there in a few minutes. Come back with me and have dinner."

Dino tried to evade the invitation. He would much rather have been alone; but Hugo would take
no denial. The two went out together without summoning the landlady: Hugo took his companion
by the arm, and walked for a little way down the street, then summoned a hansom from the door
of a public-house, and gave an address which Dino did not hear. They drove for some distance.
Dino thought that his new friend's lodgings were situated in a rather obscure quarter of London;
but he made no remark in words, for he knew his own ignorance of the world, and he had never
been in England before. Hugo's lodgings appeared to be on the second-floor of a gloomy-looking
house, of which the ground-floor was occupied by a public bar and refreshment-room. The waiters
were German or French, and the cookery was distinctly foreign in flavour. There was a touch
of garlic in every dish, which Dino found acceptable, and which was not without its charm for
Hugo Luttrell.

Dessert was placed upon the table, and with it a flask of some old Italian wine, which looked
to Dino as if it had come straight from the cellars of the monastery at San Stefano. "It is
our wine," he said, with a smile. "It looks like an old friend."

"I thought that you would appreciate it," said Hugo, with a laugh, as he rose and poured the
red wine carelessly into Dino's glass. "It is too rough for me; but I was sure that you would
like it."

He poured out some for himself and raised the glass, but he scarcely touched it with his lips.
His eyes were fixed upon his guest.

Dino smiled, praised his host's thoughtfulness, and swallowed a mouthful or two of the wine;
then set down his glass.

"There is something wrong with the flavour," he said: "something a little bitter."

"Try it again," said Hugo, averting his eyes. "I thought it very good. At any rate, it is harmless:
one may drink any amount of it without doing oneself an injury."

"Yes, but this is curiously coarse in flavour," persisted Dino. "One would think that it was
mixed with some other spirit or cordial. But I must try it again."

He drained his glass. Hugo refilled it immediately, but soon perceived that it was needless
to offer his guest a second draught. Dino raised his hand to his brow with a puzzled gesture,
and then spoke confusedly.

"I do not know how it is," he said. "I am quite dizzy--I cannot see--I----"

His eyes grew dim: his hands fell to his sides, and his head upon his breast. He muttered a
few incoherent words, and then sank into silence, broken only by the sound of his heavy breathing
and something like an occasional groan. Hugo watched him carefully, and smiled to himself now
and then. In a short time he rose, emptied the remainder of the wine in the flask into Dino's
glass, rinsed out the flask with clear water, then poured the dregs, as well as the wine in
the glasses, into the mould of a large flower-pot that stood in a corner of the room. "Nobody
can tell any tales now, I think," said Hugo, with a triumphant, disagreeable smile. And then
he called the waiter and paid his bill--as if he were a temporary visitor instead of having
lodgings in the house, as he had led Dino to believe.

The waiter glanced once or twice at the figure on the chair. "Gentleman had a leetle moche
to drink," he said, nodding towards poor Dino.

"A little too much," said Hugo, carelessly. "He'll be better soon." Then he went and shook
the young man by the arm. "Come," he said, "it's time for us to go. Wake up; I'll see you home.
That wine was a little too strong for you, was it not?"

Dino opened his eyes, half-rose, muttered something, and then sank back in his chair.

"Gentleman want a cab, perhaps?" said the waiter.

"Well, really, I don't know," said Hugo, looking quite puzzled and distressed. "If he can't
walk we must have a cab; but if he can, I'd rather not; his lodgings are not far from here.
Come, Jack, can't you try?"

Dino, addressed as Jack for the edification of the waiter, rose, and with Hugo's help staggered
a few steps. Hugo was somewhat disconcerted. He had not counted upon Dino's small experience
of intoxicating liquors when he prepared that beverage for him beforehand. He had meant Dino
to be wild and noisy: and, behold, he presented all the appearance of a man who was dead drunk,
and could hardly walk or stand.

They managed to get him downstairs, and there, revived by the fresh air, he seemed able to
walk to the lodgings which, as Hugo said, were close at hand. The landlord and the waiters
laughed to each other when the two gentlemen were out of sight. "He must have taken a good
deal to make him like that," said one of them. "The other was sober enough. Who were they?"
The landlord shook his head. "Never saw either of them before yesterday," he said. "They paid,
at any rate: I wish all my customers did as much." And he went back to the little parlour which
he had quitted for a few moments in order to observe the departure of the gentleman who had
got so drunk upon a flask of heady Italian wine.

Meanwhile, Hugo was leading his victim through a labyrinth of dark streets and lanes. Dino
was hard to conduct in this manner; he leaned heavily upon his guide, he staggered at times,
and nearly fell. The night was dark and foggy; more than once Hugo almost lost his bearings
and turned in a wrong direction. But he had a reason for all the devious windings and turnings
which he took; he was afraid of being spied upon, followed, tracked. It was not until he came
at last to a dark lane, between rows of warehouses, where not a light twinkled in the rooms,
nor a solitary pedestrian loitered about the pavement, that he seemed inclined to pause. "This
is the place," he said to himself, tightening his grasp upon the young man's arm. "This is
the place I chose."

He led Dino down the lane, looking carefully about him until he came to a narrow archway on
his left hand. This archway opened on a flagged passage, at the end of which a flight of steps
led up to one of the empty warehouses. It was a lonely, deserted spot.

He dragged his companion into this entry; the steps of the two men echoed upon the flags for
a little way, and then were still. There was the sound of a fall, a groan, then silence. And
after five minutes of that silence, Hugo Luttrell crept slowly back to the lane, and stood
there alone. He cast one fearful glance around him: nobody was in sight, nobody seemed to have
heard the sounds that he had heard. With a quick step and resolute mien he plunged again into
the network of little streets, reached a crowded thoroughfare at last, and took a cab for the
Strand. He had a ticket for a theatre in his pocket. He went to the theatre.

CHAPTER XXII.

BRIAN'S WELCOME.

The hint given in the Prior's letter concerning Brian's reasons for continuing to teach in
the Heron family, together with Hugo's own quickness of perception, had enabled that astute
young man to hit upon something very like the exact truth. He had exaggerated it in his conversation
with Dino: he had attributed motives to Brian which certainly never entered Brian's mind; but
this was done for his own purposes. He thought that Brian's love for Elizabeth Murray might
prove a useful weapon in the struggle between Dino's sense of his rights and the romantic affection
that he entertained for the man who had taken his place in the world--an affection which Hugo
understood so little and despised so much, that he fancied himself sure of an easy victory
over Dino's resolution to fight for his rightful position. It was greatly to his surprise that
he found so keen a sense of justice and resentment at the little trust that Brian had reposed
in him present in Dino's mind: the young man had been irritatingly firm in his determination
to possess the Strathleckie estate; he knew precisely what he wanted, and what he meant to
do. And although he was inclined to be generous to Brian and to Miss Murray, there seemed no
reason to expect that he would be equally generous to Hugo. Therefore Hugo had felt himself
obliged to use what he called "strong measures."

He did not like strong measures. They were disagreeable to him. But they were less disagreeable
than the thought of being poor. Hugo made little account of human life and human suffering
so long as the suffering did not actually touch himself. He seemed to be born with as little
heart as a beast of prey, which strikes when it is angry, or when it wants food, with no remorse
and no regret. "A disagreeable necessity," Hugo called his evil deed, but he considered that
the law of self-preservation justified him in what he did.

And Brian Luttrell? What reason was it that made him fling prudence to the winds, and follow
the Herons to the neighbourhood of a place where he had resolved never to show his face again?

There was one great, overmastering reason--so great that it made him attempt what was well-nigh
impossible. His love for Elizabeth Murray had taken full possession of him: he dreamed of her,
he worshipped the very ground she trod upon; he would have sacrificed life itself for the chance
of a gentle word from her.

Life, but not honour. Much as he loved her, he would have fled to the very ends of the earth
if he had known, if he had for one moment suspected, that she was the Miss Murray who owned
the landed estate which once went with the house and grounds of Netherglen.

It seemed almost incredible that he should not have had this fact forced from the first upon
his knowledge; but such at present was the case. They had remained in Italy for the first three
months of his engagement, and, during that time, he had not lived in the Villa Venturi, but
simply given his lessons and taken his departure. Sometimes he breakfasted or lunched with
the family party, but at such times no business affairs were discussed. And Elizabeth had made
it a special request that Mr. Stretton should not be informed of the fact that it was she who
furnished money for the expenses of the household. She had taken care that his salary should
be as large as she could make it without attracting remark, but she had an impression that
Mr. Stretton would rather be paid by Mr. Heron than by her. And, as she wished for silence
on the subject of her lately-inherited wealth, and as the Herons were of that peculiarly happy-go-lucky
disposition that did not consider the possession of wealth a very important circumstance, Mr.
Stretton passed the time of his sojourn in Italy in utter ignorance of the fact that Elizabeth
was the provider of villa, gardens, servants, and most of the other luxuries with which the
Herons were well supplied. Percival, in his outspoken dislike of the arrangement, would probably
have enlightened him if they had been on friendly terms; but Percival showed so decided and
unmistakable an aversion to the tutor, that he scarcely spoke to him during his stay, and,
indeed, made his visit a short one, chiefly on account of Mr. Stretton's presence.

The change from Italy to Scotland was made at the doctor's suggestion. The children's health
flagged a little in the heat, and it was thought better that they should try a more bracing
air. When the matter was decided, and Mr. Colquhoun had written to them that Strathleckie was
vacant, and would be a convenient house for Miss Murray's purposes in all respects--then, and
not till then, was Mr. Stretton informed of the proposed change of residence, and asked whether
he would accompany the family to Scotland.

Brian hesitated. He knew well enough the exact locality of the house to which they were going:
he had visited it himself in other days. But it was several miles from Netherglen: he would
be allowed, he knew, to absent himself from the drawing-room or the dinner-table whenever he
chose, he need not come in contact with the people whom he used to know. Besides, he was changed
beyond recognition. And probably the two women at Netherglen led so retired a life that neither
of them was likely to be encountered--not even at church; for, although the tenants of Netherglen
and Strathleckie went to the same town for divine worship on Sunday mornings, yet Mrs. Luttrell
and Angela attended the Established Church, while the Herons were certain to go to the Episcopal.
And Hugo was away. There was really small chance of his being seen or recognised. He thought
that he should be safe. And, while he still hesitated, he looked up and saw that the eyes of
Miss Murray were bent upon him with so kindly an inquiry, so gracious a friendliness in their
blue depths, that his fears and doubts suddenly took wing, and he thought of nothing but that
he should still be with her.

He consented. And then, for the first time, it crossed his mind to wonder whether she was a
connection of the Murrays to whom his estate had passed, and from whom he believed that Mr.
Heron was renting the Strathleckie house.

He had left England without ascertaining what members of the Murray family were living; and
the letter in which Mr. Colquhoun detailed the facts of Elizabeth's existence and circumstances,
had reached Geneva after his departure upon the expedition which was supposed to have resulted
in his death. He had never heard of the Herons. He imagined Gordon Murray to be still living--probably
with a large family and a wife. He knew that they could not live at Netherglen, and he wondered
vaguely whether he should meet them in the neighbourhood to which he was going. Murray was
such an ordinary name that in itself it told him nothing at all. Elizabeth Murray! Why, there
might be a dozen Elizabeth Murrays within twenty miles of Netherglen: there was no reason at
all to suppose that this Elizabeth Murray was a connection of the Gordon Murrays who were cousins
of his own--no, not of his own: he had forgotten that never more could he claim that relationship
for himself. They were cousins of some unknown Brian Luttrell, brought up under a false name
in a small Italian village. What had become of that true Brian, whom he had refused to meet
at San Stefano? And had Father Cristoforo succeeded in finding the woman whom he sought, and
supplying the missing links in the evidence? In that case, the Murrays would soon hear of the
claimant to their estate, and there would be a law-suit. Brian began to feel interested in
the matter again. He had lost all care for it in the period following upon his illness. He
now foresaw, with something almost like pleasure, that he could easily obtain information about
the Murrays if he went with the Herons to Strathleckie. And he should certainly take the first
opportunity of making inquiries. Even if he himself were no Luttrell, there was no reason why
he should not take the deepest interest in the Luttrells of Netherglen. He wanted particularly
to know whether the Italian claimant had come forward.

He was perfectly ignorant of the fact of which Father Cristoforo's letter would have informed
him, that this possible Italian claimant was no other than his friend, Dino Vasari.

Of course, he could not be long at Strathleckie without finding out the truth about Elizabeth.
If he had lived much with the Herons, he would have found it out in the course of the first
twenty-four hours. Elizabeth's property was naturally referred to by name: the visitors who
came to the house called upon her rather than upon the Herons: it was quite impossible that
the secrecy upon which Elizabeth had insisted in Italy could be maintained in Scotland. The
only wonder was that he should live, as he did live, for five whole days at Strathleckie without
discovering the truth. Perhaps Elizabeth took pains to keep it from him!

She had been determined to keep another secret, even if she could not hide the fact, that she
was a rich woman. She would not have her engagement to Percival made public. For two whole
years, she said, she would wait: for two whole years neither she nor her cousin should consider
each other as bound. But that she herself considered the engagement morally binding might be
inferred from the fact of her allowing Percival to kiss her--she surely would not have permitted
that kiss if she had not meant to marry him! So Percival himself understood it; so Elizabeth
knew that he understood.

She was not quite like herself in the first days of her residence in Scotland. She was graver
and more reticent than usual: little inclined to talk, and much occupied with the business
that her new position entailed upon her. Mr. Colquhoun, her solicitor, was astonished at her
clear-headedness; Stewart, the factor, was amazed at the attention she bestowed upon every
detail; even the Herons were surprised at the methodical way in which she parcelled out her
days and devoted herself to a full understanding of her position. She seemed to shrink less
than heretofore from the responsibilities that wealth would bring her, and perhaps the added
seriousness of her lip and brow was due to her resolve to bear the burden that providence meant
her to bear instead of trying to lay it upon other people's shoulders.

A great deal of this necessary business had been transacted before Mr. Stretton made his appearance
at Strathleckie. He had been offered a fortnight's holiday, and had accepted it, seeing that
his absence was to some extent desired by Mrs. Heron, who was always afraid lest her dear children
should be overworked by their tutor. Thus it happened that he did not reach Strathleckie until
the very day on which Hugo also arrived on his way to Netherglen. They had seen each other
at the station, where Brian incautiously appeared without the blue spectacles which he relied
upon as part of his disguise. From the white, startled horror which overcast Hugo's face, this
young man saw that he had been almost, if not quite, recognised; and he expected to be sought
out and questioned as to his identity. But Hugo made no effort to question him: in fact, he
did not see the tutor again until the day when he came to restore a fragment of the letter
which Brian had carelessly dropped in the road before he read it. During this interview he
betrayed no suspicion, and Brian comforted himself with the thought that Hugo had, at any rate,
not read the sheet that he returned to him.

A dog-cart was sent for him and his luggage on the day of his arrival. He had a five miles'
drive before he reached Strathleckie, where he received a tumultuous welcome from the boys,
a smiling one from Mrs. Heron and Kitty, a hearty shake of the hands from Mr. Heron. But where
was Elizabeth? He did not dare to ask.

She was out, he learnt afterwards: she had driven over to the town to lunch with the Colquhouns.
For a moment he did think this strange; then he put aside the thought and remembered it no more.

There was a long afternoon to be dragged through: then there was a school-room tea, nominally
at six, really not until nearly seven, according to the lax and unpunctual fashion of the Heron
family. Mr. Stretton had heard that there were to be guests at dinner, and, keeping up his
character as a shy man, declined to be present. He was sitting in a great arm-chair by the
cheerful, little fire, which was very acceptable even on an August evening: the clock on the
mantelpiece had just chimed a quarter-past seven, and he was beginning to wonder where the
boys could possibly be, when the door opened and Elizabeth came in. He rose to his feet.

"They told me that you had come," she said, extending her hand to him with quiet friendliness.
"I hope you had a pleasant journey, Mr. Stretton."

"Very pleasant, thank you."

He could not say more: he was engaged in devouring with his eyes every feature of her fair
face, and thinking in his heart that he had underrated the power of her beauty. In the fortnight
that he had been away from her he had pictured her to himself as not half so fair. She had
taken off her out-door things, and was dressed in a very plain, brown gown, which fitted closely
to her figure. At her throat she wore a little bunch of sweet autumn violets, with one little
green leaf, fastened into her dress by a gold brooch. It was the very ostentation of simplicity,
yet, with that noble carriage of her head and shoulders, and those massive coils of golden-brown
hair, nobody could have failed to remark the distinction of her appearance, nor to recognise
the fact that there is a kind of beauty which needs no ornament.

Brian took off the ugly, blue spectacles which he had adopted of late, and laid them upon the
mantelshelf. He did not need them in the flickering firelight, which alone illumined the dimness
of the room.

Elizabeth laid her shapely arm upon the mantelpiece and looked into the fire. He stood beside
her, looking down at her--for he was a little taller than herself--but she seemed unconscious
of his gaze. She spoke presently in rather low tones.

"The boys are late. I hope they do not often keep you waiting in this way."

"They have never done it before. I do not mind."

"They were very anxious to have you back. They missed you very much."

Had she missed him, too? He could not venture to ask that question.

"You will find things changed," she went on, restlessly lifting a little vase upon the mantelpiece
and setting it down again; "you will find us much busier than we used to be--much more absorbed
in our own pursuits. Scotland is not like Italy."

"No. I wish it were."

"And I----" Her voice broke, as if some emotion troubled her; there came a swift, short sigh,
and then she spoke more calmly. "I wish sometimes that one had no duties, no responsibilities;
but life would not be worth having if one shirked them, after all."

"There is a charm in life without them--at least, so far without them as that pleasant life
in Italy used to be," said he, rather eagerly.

"Yes, but that is all over."

"All over?"

She bowed her head.

"Is there nothing left?" said Brian, approaching her a little more nearly. Then, as she was
silent, he continued in a hurried, low voice, "I knew that life must be different here, but
I thought that some of the pleasantest hours might be repeated--even in Scotland--although
we are without those sunny skies and groves of orange trees. Even if the clouds are grey, and
the winds howl without, we might still read Dante's 'Paradiso' and Petrarca's 'Sonnets,' as
we used to do at the Villa Venturi."

"Yes," said Elizabeth, gently, "we might. But here I shall not have time."

"Why not? Why should you sacrifice yourself for others in the way you do? It is not right."

"I--sacrifice myself?" she said, lifting her eyes for a moment to his face. "What do you mean?"

"I mean," he said, "that I have watched you for the last three months, and I have seen you
day after day give up your own pleasure and your own profit for others, until I longed to ask
them what right they had to claim your whole life and leave you nothing--nothing--for yourself----"

"You mistake," she interrupted him quickly. "They leave me all I want; and they were kind to
me when I came amongst them--a penniless child----"

"What does it matter if you were penniless?" said Brian. "Have you not paid them a thousand
times for all that they did for you?" Then, as she looked at him with rather a singular expression
in her eyes, he hastened to explain. "I mean that you have given them your love, your care,
your time, in a way that no sister, no daughter, ever could have done! You have taught the
children all they know; you have sympathised with the cares of every one in turn--I have watched
you and seen it day by day! And I say that even if you are penniless, as you say, you have
repaid them a thousand times for all that they have done; and that you are wrong to let them
take your time and your care, to the exclusion of your own interests. I beg your pardon; I
have said too much," he said, breaking off suddenly, as the singular expression deepened upon
her musing face.

"No," she said, with a smile, "I like to hear it: go on. What ought I to do?"

"Ah, that I cannot tell you. But I think you give yourself almost too much to others. Surely,
no one could object if you took a little time from the interests of the rest of the family
for your own pleasure, for your studies, your amusements?"

"No," she answered, quietly, "I do not suppose they would."

She stood and looked into the fire, and the smile again crossed her face.

"I have said more than I ought to have done," repeated Brian. "Forgive me."

"I will forgive you for everything," she said, "except for thinking that one can do too much
for the people that one loves. I am sure that you do not act upon that principle, Mr. Stretton."

"It can be carried to an extreme, like any other," said Mr. Stretton, wisely.

"And you think I carry it to an extreme? Oh, no. I only do what it is a pleasure to me to do.
Think of the situation: an orphaned, penniless girl--that is what you have said to yourself
is it not----?"

"Yes," said Brian, wondering a little at the keen inquiry in her eyes as she paused for the
reply. The questioning look was lost in a lovely smile as she proceeded; she cast down her
eyes to hide the expression of pleasure and amusement that his words had caused.

"An orphaned, penniless girl, then, cast on the charity of friends who were then not very well
able to support her, educated by them, loved by them--does she not owe them a great debt, Mr.
Stretton? What would have become of me without my uncle's care? And, now that I am able to
repay them a little--in various ways"--she hesitated as she spoke--"ought I not to do my best
to please them? Ought I not to give them as much of myself as they want? Make a generous answer,
and tell me that I am right."

"You are always right--too right!" he said, half-impatiently. "If you could be a little less
generous----"

"What then?" said Elizabeth.

"Why, then, you would be--more human, perhaps, more like ourselves--but less than what we have
always taken you for," said Mr. Stretton, smiling.

Elizabeth laughed. "You have spoilt the effect of your lecture," she said, turning away.

"I beg your pardon. I ought not to have said what I did," said Brian, sensitively alive to
her slightest change of tone. "Miss Murray, tell me at least that I have not offended you before
you go."

"You have not offended me," she said. He could not see her face.

"You are quite sure?" he said, anxiously. "For, indeed, I had forgotten that it was not my
part to offer any opinion upon your conduct, and I am afraid that I have given it with impertinent
bluntness. You will forgive me?"

She turned round and looked at him with a smile. There was a colour in her cheek, a softness
in her eye, that he did not often see. "Indeed, Mr. Stretton," she said, gently, "I have nothing
to forgive. I am very much obliged to you."

He took a step towards her as if there was something else that he would have gladly said; but
at that moment the sound of the boys' voices echoed through the hall.

"There is no time for more," said Brian, with some annoyance.

"No," she answered. "And yet I have something else to say to you. Will you remember that some
other day?"

"Indeed, I shall remember," he said, fervently. And then the boys burst into the room, and
in the hubbub of their arrival Elizabeth escaped.

Her violets had fallen out of her brooch. Brian found them upon the floor when she had gone;
henceforth he kept them amongst his treasures.

CHAPTER XXIII.

THE WISHING WELL.

Hugo's first call at Strathleckie was made on the day following Mr. Stretton's arrival. Father
Cristoforo's letter had been delivered by that morning's post, and it was during a stroll,
in which, to tell the truth, Brian was more absorbed by the thought of Elizabeth than by any
remembrance of his own position or of the Prior's views, that he dropped the letter of which
the contents had so important a bearing on his future life. In justice to Brian, it must be
urged that he had no idea that the Prior's letter was likely to be of any importance. Ever
since he left San Stefano, the Prior had corresponded with him; but his letters were generally
on very trivial subjects, or filled with advice upon moral and doctrinal points, which Brian
could not find interesting. The severe animadversions upon his folly in returning to Scotland
under an assumed name, which filled the first sheet, did not rouse in him any lively desire
to read the rest of the letter. It was not likely to contain anything that he ought to know;
and, at any rate, he could explain the loss and apologise for it in his next note to Padre
Cristoforo.

The meeting between him and Elizabeth in the garden, which had been such a revelation to Hugo's
mind, was purely accidental and led to no great result. She had been begged by the children
to ask Mr. Stretton for a holiday. They wanted to go to a Wishing Well in the neighbourhood,
and to have a picnic in honour of Kitty's birthday. Mr. Stretton was sure not to refuse them
they said--if Elizabeth asked. And Mr. Stretton did not refuse.

His love for Elizabeth--that love which had sprung into being almost as soon as he beheld her,
and which had grown with every hour spent in her company--was one of those deep and overmastering
passions which a man can feel but once in a lifetime, and which many men never feel at all.
If Brian had lived his life in London and at Netherglen with no great shock, no terrible grief,
no overthrow of all his hopes, he might not have experienced this glow and thrill of passionate
emotion; he might have walked quietly into love, made a suitable marriage, and remained ignorant
to his life's end of the capabilities for emotion which existed within him. But, as often happens
immediately after the occurrence of a great sorrow or recovery from a serious illness, his
whole being seemed to undergo a change. When the strain of anxiety and prolonged anguish of
mind was relaxed, the claims of youth re-asserted themselves. With returning health and strength
there came an almost passionate determination to enjoy as much as remained to be enjoyed in
life. The sunshine, the wind, the sea, the common objects of Nature,

    "To him were opening Paradise."

And when, for the first time, Love also entered into his life, the world seemed to be transfigured.
Although he had suffered much and lost much, he found it possible to dream of a future in which
he might make for himself a home, and know once more the meaning of happiness. Was he selfish
in hoping that life still contained a true joy for him, in spite of the sorrows that fate had
heaped upon his head, as if she meant to overwhelm him altogether? At least, the hope was a
natural one, and showed courage and resolution. He clung to it desperately, fiercely; he felt
that after all he had lost he could not bear to let it go. The hope was too sweet--the chance
of happiness too beautiful--to be lost. He felt as if he had a right to this one blessing.
He had lost all beside. But, perhaps, this was a presumptuous mood, destined to rebuke and
disappointment.

The fourth day after his arrival dawned, and he had not yet perceived, in his blindness of
heart, the difference of position between the Elizabeth of his dreams and the Elizabeth of
reality. Could the crisis be averted very much longer?

He fancied that Elizabeth was colder to him after that little scene in the study than she had
ever been before. She looked pale and dispirited, and seemed to avoid speaking to him or meeting
his eye. At breakfast-time that morning he noticed that she allowed a letter that had been
brought to her to lie unopened beside her plate "It's from Percival, isn't it?" said Kitty,
thoughtlessly. "You don't seem to be very anxious to read it." Elizabeth made no answer, but
the colour rose to her cheek and then spread to the very roots of her golden-brown hair. Brian
noticed the blush, and for the first time felt his heart contract with a bitter pang of jealousy.
What right had Percival Heron to write letters to Elizabeth? Why did she blush when she was
asked a question about a letter from him?

The whole party set off soon after ten o'clock for an expedition to a little loch amongst the
hills. They intended to lunch beside the loch, then to enjoy themselves in different ways:
Mr. Heron meant to sketch; Mrs. Heron took a novel to read; the others proposed to visit a
spring at some little distance known as "The Wishing Well." This programme was satisfactorily
carried out; but it chanced that Kitty and the boys reached the well before the others, and
then wandered away to reach a further height, so that Brian and Elizabeth found themselves
alone together beside the Wishing Well.

It was a lonely spot from which nothing but stretches of barren moor and rugged hills could
be discerned. One solitary patch of verdure marked the place where the rising spring had fertilised
the land; but around this patch of green the ground was rich only in purple heather. Not even
a hardy pine or fir tree broke the monotony of the horizon. Yet, the scene was not without
its charm. There was grandeur in the sweep of the mountain-lines; there was a wonderful stillness
in the sunny air, broken only by the buzz of a wandering bee and the trickle of the stream;
there was the great arch of blue above the moor, and the magical tints of purple and red that
blossoming heather always brings out upon the mountain-sides. The bareness of the land was
forgotten in its wealth of colouring; and perhaps Brian and Elizabeth were not wrong when they
said to each other that Italy had never shown them a scene that was half so fair.

The water of the spring fell into a carved stone basin, which, tradition said, had once been
the font of an old Roman Catholic chapel, of which only a few scattered stones remained. People
from the surrounding districts still believed in the efficacy of its waters for the cure of
certain diseases; and the practice of "wishing," which gave the well its name, was resorted
to in sober earnest by many a village boy and girl. Elizabeth and Brian, who had hitherto behaved
in a curiously grave and reserved manner to each other, laughed a little as they stood beside
the spring and spoke of the superstition.

"We must try it," said Elizabeth, looking down into the sparkling water. "A crooked pin must
be thrown in, and then we must silently wish for anything we especially desire, and, of course,
we shall obtain it."

"Quite worth trying, if that is the case," said Brian. "But--I have tried the experiment before."

"Here?"

"Yes, here."

"I did not know that you had been to Dunmuir before."

"My wish did not come to pass," remarked Brian; "but there is no reason why you should not
be more successful than I was, Miss Murray. And I feel a certain sort of desire to try once again."

"Here is a crooked pin," said Elizabeth. "Drop it into the water."

"Are you going to try?" he asked, when the ceremony had been performed.

"There is nothing that I wish for very greatly."

"Nothing? Ah, I have one wish--only one."

"I am unfortunate in that I have none," said Elizabeth.

"Then give me the benefit of your wishes. Wish that my wish may be fulfilled," said Brian.

She hesitated for a moment, then smiled, and threw a crooked pin into the water.

"I have wished," she said, as she watched it sink, "but I must not say what I wish: that breaks
the charm."

"Sit down and rest," said Brian, persuasively, as she turned away. "There is a little shade
here; and the others will no doubt join us by-and-bye. You must be tired."

"I am not tired, but I will sit down for a little while," said Elizabeth.

She seated herself on a stone beside the well; and Brian also sat down, but rather below her,
so that he seemed to be sitting at her feet, and could look up into her face when he spoke.
He kept silence at first, but said at last, with gentle deference of tone:--

"Miss Murray, there was something that you said you would tell me when you had the opportunity."

She paused before she answered.

"Not just now," he understood her to say at last, but her words were low and indistinct.

"Then--may I tell you something?"

She spoke more clearly in reply.

"I think not."

"Forgive me for saying so, but you must hear it some time. Why not now?"

She did not speak. Her colour varied a little, and her brows contracted with a slight look of pain.

"I do not know how to be silent any longer," he said, raising his eyes to her face, with a
grave and manly resolve in their brown depths. "I have thought a great deal about it--about
you; and it seems to me that there is no real reason why I should not speak. You are of age;
you can do as you please; and I could work for both--because--Elizabeth--I love you."

It was brokenly, awkwardly said, after all; but more completely uttered, perhaps, than if he
had told his tale at greater length, for then he would have been stopped before he reached
the end. As it was, Elizabeth's look of terror and dismay brought him to a sudden pause.

"Oh, no!" she said, "no; you don't mean that. Take back what you have said, Mr. Stretton."

"I cannot take it back," he said, quickly, "and I would not if I could; because you love me, too."

The conviction of his words made her turn pale. She darted a distressed look at him, half-rose
from her seat, and then sat down again. Twice she tried to speak and failed, for her tongue
clove to the roof of her mouth. But at last she found her voice.

"You do not know," she said, hurriedly and hoarsely, "that I am engaged to my cousin Percival."

He rose to his feet, and withdrew two or three paces, looking down on her in silent consternation.
She did not lift her eyes, but she felt that his gaze was upon her. It seemed to pierce to
the very marrow of her bones, to the bottom of her heart.

"Is this true?" he said at last, in a voice as changed as her own had been--hoarse and broken
almost beyond recognition. "And you never told me?"

"Why should I have told you? Only my uncle knows. It was a secret," she answered, in a clearer
and colder tone. "I am sorry you did not know."

"So am I. God knows that I am sorry," said the young man, turning away to hide the look of
bitter despair and disappointment, which he could not help but feel was too visibly imprinted
on his face. "For if I had known, I might never have dared to love you. If I had known, I should
never have dreamt of you as my wife."

At the sound of these two words, a shiver ran through her frame, as if a cold wind had blown
over her from the mountain-heights above. She did not speak, however, and Brian went on in
the low, difficult voice which told the intensity of his feelings more clearly than his words.

"I have been blind--mad, perhaps--but I thought that there was a hope for me. I fancied that
you cared for me a little, that you guessed what I felt--that you, perhaps, felt it also. Oh,
you need not tell me that I have been presumptuous. I see it now. But it was my one hope in
life--I had nothing left; and I loved you."

His voice sank; he still stood with his face averted; a bitter silence fell upon him. For the
moment he thought of the many losses and sorrows that he had experienced, and it seemed to
him that this was the bitterest one of all. Elizabeth sat like a statue; her face was pale,
her under-lip bitten, her hands tightly clasped together. At the end of some minutes' silence
she roused herself to speak. There was an accent of hurt pride in her voice, but there was
a tremor, too.

"I gave you no reason to think so, Mr. Stretton," she said.

"No," he answered, still without turning round. "I see now; I made a mistake."

"That you should ever have made the mistake," said Elizabeth, slowly, "seems to me----"

She did not finish the sentence. She spoke so slowly that Brian found it easy to interrupt
her. He turned and broke impetuously into the middle of her phrase.

"It seems an insult--I understand. But I do not mean it as an insult. I mean it only as a tribute
to your exquisite goodness, your sweetness, which would not let me pass upon my way without
a word of kindly greeting--and yet what can I say, for I did not misunderstand that kindliness.
I was not such a fool as to do that! No, I never really hoped; I never thought that you could
for a moment look at me; believe me when I say that, even in my wildest dreams, I knew myself
to be far, infinitely far, below you, utterly unworthy of your love, Elizabeth."

"No, no," she murmured, "you must not say that."

"But I do say it, and I mean it. I only ask to be forgiven for that wild dream--it lasted but
for a moment, and there was nothing in it that could have offended even you, I think; nothing
but the love itself. And I believe in a man's right to love the woman who is the best, the
most beautiful, the noblest on earth for him, even if she were the Queen herself! If you think
that I hoped where I ought to have despaired, forgive me; but don't say you forgive me for
merely loving you; I had the right, to do that."

She altered her attitude as he spoke. Her hands were now before her face, and he saw that the
tears were trickling between her fingers. All the generosity of the man's nature was stirred
at the sight.

"I am very sorry that I have distressed you," he said. "I am sorry that I spoke so roughly--so
hastily--at first. Trust me when I say that I will not offend in the same way again."

She lifted her face a little, and tried to wipe away her tears. "I am not offended, Mr. Stretton,"
she said. "You mistake me--I am only sorry--deeply sorry--that I--if I--have misled you in
any way."

"Oh, you did not mislead me, Miss Murray," replied Brian, gently; "it was my own folly that
was to blame. But since I have spoken, may I say something more? I should like, if possible,
to justify myself a little in your eyes."

She bowed her head. "Will you not sit down?" she said, softly. "Say what you like; or, at least,
what you think best."

He did not sit down exactly, but he came back to the stone on which he had been sitting at
her feet, and dropped on one knee upon it.

"Let me speak to you in this way, as a culprit should speak," he said, with a faint smile which
had in it a gleam of some slightly ironical feeling, "and then you can pardon or condemn me
as you choose."

"If you feel like a culprit you condemn yourself," said Elizabeth, lifting her eyes to his.

"I do not feel like a culprit, Miss Murray. I have, as I said before, a perfect right to love
you if I choose----" Elizabeth's eyes fell, and the colour stole into her cheeks--"I would
maintain that right against all the world. But I want you to be merciful: I want you to listen
for a little while----"

"Not to anything that I ought not to hear, Mr. Stretton."

"No: to nothing that would wrong Mr. Percival Heron even by a thought. Only--it is a selfish
wish of mine; but I have been misjudged a good deal in my life, and I do not want you to misjudge
me--I should like you to understand how it was that I dared--yes, I dared--to love you. May
I speak?"

"I don't know whether I ought to listen. I think I ought to go," said Elizabeth, with an irrepressible
little sob. "No, do not speak--I cannot bear it."

"But in justice to me you ought to listen," said Brian, gently, and yet firmly. He laid one
hand upon hers, and prevented her from rising. "A few words only," he said, in pleading tones.
"Forgive me if I say I must go on. Forgive me if I say you must listen. It is for the last--and
the only--time."

With a great sigh she sank back upon the stone seat from which she had tried to rise. Brian
still held her hand. She did not draw it away. The lines of her face were all soft and relaxed;
her usual clearness of purpose had deserted her. She did not know what to do.

"If you had loved me, Elizabeth--let me call you Elizabeth just for once; I will not ask to
do it again--or if you had even been free--I would have told you my whole history from beginning
to end, and let you judge how far I was justified in taking another name and living the life
I do. But I won't lay that burden upon you now. It would not be fair. I think that you would
have agreed with me--but it is not worth while to tell you now."

"I am sure that you would not have acted as you did without a good and honourable motive,"
said Elizabeth, trembling, though she did not know why.

"I acted more on impulse than on principle, I am afraid,", he answered. "I was in great trouble,
and it seemed easier--but I saw no reason afterwards to change my decision. Elizabeth, my friends
think me dead, and I want them to think so still. I had been accused of a crime which I did
not commit--not publicly accused, but accused in my own home by one--one who ought to have
known me better; and I had inadvertently--by pure accident, remember--brought great misery
and sorrow upon my house. In all this--I could swear it to you, Elizabeth--I was not to blame.
Can you believe my word?"

"I can, I do."

"God bless you for saying so, my love--the one love of my life--Elizabeth! Forgive me: I will
not say it again. To add to my troubles, then, I found reason to believe that I had no right
to the name I bore, that I was of a different family, a different race, altogether; that it
would simplify the disposal of certain property if I were dead; and so--I died. I disappeared.
I can never again take the name that once was mine."

He said all this, but no suspicion of the truth crossed Elizabeth's mind. That she was the
person who had benefited by his disappearance was as far from her thoughts as from Brian's
at that moment. That he was the Brian Luttrell of whom she had so often heard, whose death
in the Alps had seemed so certain that even the law courts had been satisfied that she might
rightfully inherit his possessions, that he--John Stretton, the boys' tutor--could be this
dead cousin of her's, was too incredible a thought ever to occur to her. She felt nothing but
sorrow for his past troubles, and a conviction that he was perfectly in the right.

"But you are deceiving your friends," she said.

"For their good, as I firmly believe," answered Brian, sorrowfully. "If I went back to them,
I should cause a great deal of confusion and distress: I should make my so-called heirs uncomfortable
and unhappy, and, as far as I can see, I should have no right to the property that they would
not consent to retain if I were living."

"Yes--if I am dead, and if no one else appears to claim it. It is a complicated business, and
one that would take some time to explain. Let it suffice that I was utterly hopeless, utterly
miserable, when I cast away what had always seemed to me to be my birthright; that I was then
for many months very ill; and that, when you met me in Italy, I was just winning my way back
to health, and repose of mind and body. And then--do you remember how you looked and spoke
to me? Of course, you do not know. You were good, and sweet, and kind: you stretched out your
hand to aid a fallen man, for I was poorer and more friendless than you knew; and from the
moment when you said you trusted me, as we sat together on the bench upon the cliffs my whole
soul went out to you, Elizabeth, and I loved you as I never had loved before--as I never shall
love again."

"In time," she murmured, "you will learn to care for someone else, in time you will forget me."

"Forget you! I can never forget you, Elizabeth. Your trust in me--an unknown, friendless man,
your goodness to me, your sweet pity for me, will never be forgotten. Can you wonder if I loved
you, and if I thought that my love must surely have betrayed itself? I fancied that you guessed
it----"

"No, no," she said, hurriedly. "I did not guess. I did not think. I only knew that you were
a kind friend to me, and taught me and helped me in many ways. I have been often very lonely--I
never had a friend."

"Is Percival Heron, then, no friend to you?" he asked, with something of indignant sternness
in his voice.

"Ah, yes, he is a friend; but not--not--I cannot tell you what he is----"

"But you love him?" cried Brian, the sternness changing to anguish, as the doubt first presented
itself to him. "Elizabeth, do not tell me that you have promised yourself to a man that you
do not love! I may be miserable; but do not let me think that you will be miserable, too."

He caught both her hands in his and looked her steadily in the face. "I have heard them say
that you never told a lie in all your life," he went on. "Speak the truth still, Elizabeth,
and tell me whether you love Percival Heron as a woman should love a man! Tell me the truth."

She shrank a little at first, and tried to take her hands away. But when she found that Brian's
clasp was firm, she drew herself up and looked him in the face with eyes that were full of
an unutterable sadness, but also of a resolution which nothing on earth could shake.

"You have no right to ask me the question," she said; "and I have no right to give you any answer."

But something in her troubled face told him what that answer would have been.

CHAPTER XXIV.

"GOOD-BYE."

"I see," he said, dropping her hands and turning away with a heavy sigh. "I was too late."

"Don't misunderstand me," said Elizabeth, with an effort. "I shall be very happy. I owe a debt
to my uncle and my cousins which scarcely anything can repay."

"Give them anything but yourself" he said, gravely. "It is not right--I do not speak for myself
now, but for you--it is not right to marry a man whom you do not love."

"But I did not say that I do not love him," she cried, trying to shield herself behind this
barrier of silence. "I said only that you had no right to ask the question."

Brian looked at her and paused.

"You are wrong," he said at last, but so gently that she could not take offence. "Surely one
who cares for you as I do may know whether or not you love the man that you are going to marry.
It is no unreasonable question, I think, Elizabeth. And if you do not love him, then again
I say that you are wrong and that it is not like your brave and honest self to be silent."

"I cannot help it," she said, faintly. "I must keep my word."

"You are the best judge of that," he answered. But there was a little coldness in his tone.

"Yes, I am the best judge," she went on more firmly. "I have promised; and I will not break
the promise that I have made. I told you before how much I consider that I owe to them. Now
that I have the chance of doing a thing that will benefit, not only Percival, but all of them--from
a worldly point of view, I mean--I cannot bear to think of drawing back from what I said I
would do."

"How will it benefit them?"

"In a very small way, no doubt," she said, looking aside, so that she might not see the mute
protest of his face; "because worldly prosperity is a small thing after all; but if you had
seen, as I have, what it was to my uncle to live in a poverty-stricken, sordid way, hampered
with duns and debts, and Percival harassing himself with vain endeavours to set things straight,
and the children feeling the sting of poverty more and more as they grew older--and then to
know that one has the power in one's hands of remedying everything, without giving pain or
hurting any one's pride, or----"

"I am sorry," said Brian, as she hesitated for a word. "But I do not understand."

"Why not!"

"How can you set things straight? And how is it that things want setting straight? Mr. Heron
is--surely--a rich man."

She laughed; even in the midst of her agitation, she laughed a soft, pleasant, little laugh.

"Oh, I forgot," she said, suddenly. "You do not know. I found out on the day you came that
you did not know."

"Did not know--what?"

She raised her eyes to his face, and spoke with gravity, but great sweetness.

"Nobody meant to deceive you," she said; "in fact, I scarcely know how it is that you have
not learnt the truth--partly; I suppose, because in Italy I begged them not to tell anybody
the true state of the case; but, really, my uncle is not rich at all. He is a poor man. And
Percival is poor, too--very poor," she added, with a lingering sigh over the last two words.

"Poor! But--how could a poor man travel in Italy, and rent the Villa Venturi, say nothing of
Strathleckie?"

"He did not rent it. They were my guests."

"Your guests? And what are they now, then?"

"My guests still."

Brian rose to his feet.

"Then you are a rich woman?"

"Yes."

"It is you, perhaps, who have paid me for teaching these boys?"

"There is no disgrace in being paid for work that is worth doing and that is done well," said
Elizabeth, flashing an indignant look at him.

He bowed his head to the rebuke.

"You are right, Miss Murray. But you will, I hope, do me the justice to see that I was perfectly
ignorant of the state of affairs; that I was blind--foolishly blind----"

"Not foolishly. You could not help it."

"I might have seen. I might have known. I took you for----" And there Brian stopped, actually
colouring at the thought of his mistake.

"For the poor relation; the penniless cousin. But it was most natural that you should, and
two years ago it would have been perfectly true. I have not been a rich woman for very many
months, and I do not love my riches very much."

"If I had known," began Brian; and then he burst out with a sudden change of tone. "Give them
your riches, since they value them and you do not, and give yourself to me, Elizabeth. Surely
your debt to them would then be paid."

"What! by recompensing kindness with treachery?" she said, glancing at him mournfully. "No,
that plan would not answer. The money is a small part of what I owe them. But I do sometimes
wish that it had gone to anybody but me; especially when I remember the sad circumstances under
which it became mine. When I think of poor Mrs. Luttrell of Netherglen, I have never felt as
if it were right to spend her sons' inheritance in what gave pleasure to myself alone."

"Mrs. Luttrell of ---- But what have you to do with her?" said Brian, with a sudden fixity
of feature and harshness of voice that alarmed Elizabeth. "Mrs. Luttrell of Netherglen! Good
Heaven! It is not you--you--who inherited that property? The Luttrell-Murrays----"

"I am the only Luttrell-Murray living," said Elizabeth.

He stared at her dumbly, as if he could not believe his ears.

"And you have the Luttrell estate?" he said at last.

"I have."

"I am glad of it," he answered; and then he put his hand over his eyes for a second or two,
as if to shut out the light of day. "Yes, I am very glad."

"What do you mean, Mr. Stretton?" said Elizabeth, who was watching him intently. "Do you know
anything of my family? Do you know anything of the Luttrells?"

"I have met some of them," he answered, slowly. His face was paler than usual, and his eyes,
after one hasty glance at her, fell to the ground. "It was a long time ago. I do not know them
now."

"You said you had been here before. You----"

"Miss Murray, don't question me as to how I knew them. You cannot guess what a painful subject
it is to me. I would rather not discuss it."

"But, Mr. Stretton----"

"Let me tell you something else," he said, hastily, as if anxious to change the subject. "Let
me ask you--as you are the arbitress of my destiny, my employer, I may call you--when you will
let me go. Could the boys do without me at once, do you think? You would soon find another tutor."

"Mr. Stretton! Why should you go? Do you mean to leave us?" exclaimed Elizabeth. "Oh, surely
it is not necessary to do that!"

"Do you think it would be so easy for me, then, to take money from your hands after what has
passed between us?"

"Money is a small thing," said she.

"Money! yes; but there are other things in the world beside money. And it is better that I
should go away from you now. It is not for my peace to see you every day, and know that you
are to marry Percival Heron. Cannot you guess what pain it is to me?"

"But the children: you have no love for them, then. I thought that you did love our little
Jack--and they are so fond of you."

"Don't try to keep me," he said, hoarsely. "It is hard enough to say good-bye without having
to refuse you anything. The one thing now for which I could almost thank God is that you never
loved me, Elizabeth."

She shivered, and drew a long, sobbing breath. Her face looked pale and cold: her voice did
not sound like itself as she murmured--

"Why?"

"Because--no, I can't tell you why. Think for yourself of a reason. It is not that I love you
less; and yet--yet--not for the world would I marry you now that I know what I know."

"You would not marry me because I am rich: that is it, is it not?" she asked him. "I knew that
some men were proud; but I did not think that you would be so proud."

"What does it signify? There is no chance of your marrying me; you are going to marry another
man--whom you do not love; we may scarcely ever see each other again after to-day. It is better
so."

"If I were free," she said, slowly, "and if--if--I loved you, you would be doing wrong to leave
me because--only because--I was a little richer than you. I do not think that that is your
only motive. It is since you heard that I was one of the Luttrell-Murrays that you have spoken
in this way."

"What if it were? The fact remains," he said, gloomily. "You do not care for me; and I--I would
give my very soul for you, Elizabeth. I had better go. Think of me kindly when I am away--that
is all. I see Miss Heron and the boys on the brow of the hill signalling to us. Will you excuse
me if I say good-bye to you now, and walk back towards Strathleckie?"

"Must it be now?" she said, scarcely knowing what the words implied. She turned her face towards
him with a look that he never forgot--a look of inexpressible regret, of yearning sweetness,
of something only too like the love that he thought he had failed to win. It caused him to
turn back and to lean over her with a half-whispered question--

"Would it have been possible, Elizabeth, if we had met earlier, do you think that you ever
could have loved me?"

"Do you think you ought to ask me?"

"Ah, give me one word of comfort before I go. Remember that I go for ever. It will do no one
any harm. Could you have loved me, Elizabeth?"

"I think I could," she murmured in so low a tone that he could hardly hear the words. He seized
her hands and pressed them closely in his own; he could do no more, for the Herons were very
near. "Good-bye, my love, my own darling!" were the last words she heard. They rang in her
ears as if they had been as loud as a trumpet-call; she could hardly believe that they had
not re-echoed far and wide across the moor. She felt giddy and sick. The last sight of his
face was lost in a strange, momentary darkness. When she saw clearly again he was walking away
from her with long, hasty strides, and her cousins were close at hand. She watched him eagerly,
but he did not turn round. She knew instinctively that he had resolved that she should never
see his face again.

"What is the matter, Betty?" cried one of the children. "You look so white! And where is Mr.
Stretton going? Mr. Stretton! Wait for us!"

"Don't call Mr. Stretton," said Elizabeth, collecting her forces, and speaking as nearly as
possible in her ordinary tone. "He wants to get back to Strathleckie as quickly as possible.
I am rather tired and am resting."

"You are not usually tired with so short a walk," said Kitty, glancing sharply at her cousin's
pallid cheeks. "Are you not well?"

"Yes, I am quite well," Elizabeth answered. "But I am very, very tired."

And then she rose and made her way back to the loch-side, where Mr. and Mrs. Heron were still
reposing. But her steps lagged, and her face did not recover its usual colour as she went home,
for, as she had said, she was tired--strangely and unnaturally tired--and it was with a feeling
of relief that she locked herself into her own room at Strathleckie, and gave way to the gathering
tears which she had hitherto striven to restrain. She would willingly have stayed away from
the dinner-table, but she was afraid of exciting remark. Her pale face and heavy eyelids excited
remark as much as her absence would have done; but she did not think of that. Mr. Stretton,
who usually dined with them, sent an excuse to Mrs. Heron. He had a headache, and preferred
to remain in his own room.

"It must have been the sun," said Mrs. Heron. "Elizabeth has a headache, too. Have you a headache,
Kitty?"

"Not at all, thank you," said Kitty.

There was something peculiar in her tone, thought Elizabeth. Or was it only that her conscience
was guilty, and that she was becoming apt to suspect hidden meanings in words and tones that
used to be harmless and innocent enough? The idea was a degrading one to her mind. She hated
the notion of having anything to conceal--anything, at least, beyond what was lawful and right.
Her inheritance, her engagement to Percival, had been to some extent kept secret; but not,
as she now said passionately to herself, not because she was ashamed of them. Now, indeed,
she was ashamed of her secret, and there was nothing on earth from which she shrank so much
as the thought of its being discovered.

She went to bed early, but she could not sleep. The words that Brian had said to her, the answers
that she had made to him, were rehearsed one after the other, turned over in her mind, commented
on, and repeated again and again all through the night. She hardly knew the meaning of her
own excitement of feeling, nor of the intense desire that possessed her to see him again and
listen once more to his voice. She only knew that her brain was in a turmoil and that her heart
seemed to be on fire. Sleep! She could not think of sleep. His face was before her, his voice
was sounding in her ears, until the cock crew and the morning sunlight flooded all the room.
And then for a little while, indeed, she slept, and dreamt of him.

She awoke late and unrefreshed. She dressed leisurely, wondering somewhat at the vehemence
of last night's emotion, but not mistress enough of herself to understand its danger. In that
last moment of her interview with Brian she had given way far more than he knew. If he had
understood and taken advantage of that moment of weakness, she would not have been able to
refuse him anything. At a word she would have given up all for him--friends, home, riches,
even her promise to Percival--and gone forth into the world with the man she loved, happier
in her poverty than she had ever been in wealth. "Ask me no more, for at a touch I yield,"
was the silent cry of her inmost soul. But Brian had not understood. He did not dream that
with Elizabeth, as with most women, the very weakest time is that which immediately follows
the moment of greatest apparent strength. She had refused to listen to him at all--and after
that refusal she was not strong, but weak in heart and will as a wearied child.

Realising this, Elizabeth felt a sensation of relief and safety. She had escaped a great gulf--and
yet--and yet--she had not reached that point of reasonableness and moderation at which she
could be exactly glad that she had escaped.

She made her way downstairs, and reached the dining-room to find that everyone but herself
had breakfasted and gone out. She was too feverish to do more than swallow a cup of coffee
and a little toast, and she had scarcely concluded her scanty meal before Mr. Heron entered
the room with a disconcerted expression upon his face.

"Do you know the reason of this freak of Stretton's, Elizabeth?" he asked almost immediately.

"What do you mean, Uncle Alfred?"

"I mean--has he taken a dislike to Strathleckie, or has anybody offended him? I can't understand
it. Just when we were settling down so nicely, and found him such an excellent tutor for the
boys! To run away after this fashion! It is too bad!"

"Does Mr. Stretton think of leaving Strathleckie?" said Elizabeth, with her eyes bent steadfastly
upon the table-cloth.

"Think of leaving! My dear Lizzie, he has left! Gone: went this morning before any of us were
down. Spoke to me last night about it; I tried to dissuade him, but his mind was quite made up."

"What reason did he give?"

"Well, he would not tell me the exact reason. I tried to find out, but he was as close as--as--wax,"
said Mr. Heron, trying to find a suitable simile. "He said he was much obliged to us all for
our kindness to him; had no fault to find with anything or anybody; liked the place; but, all
the same, he wanted to go, and go he must. I offered him double the salary--at least, I hinted
as much: I knew you would not object, Lizzie dear, but it was no use. Partly family affairs;
partly private reasons: that was all I could get out of him."

Mr. Heron's long speech left Elizabeth the time to consider what to say.

"It does not matter very much," she answered at length, indifferently: "we can find someone
who will teach the boys quite as well, I have no doubt."

"Do you think so?" asked Mr. Heron. "Well, perhaps so. But, you see, it is not always easy
to get a tutor at this time of the year, Elizabeth; and, besides, we shall not find one, perhaps,
so ready to read Italian with you, as Mr. Stretton used to do----"

Oh, those Italian readings! How well she remembered them! How the interest which Mr. Stretton
had from the first inspired in her had grown and strengthened in the hours that they spent
together, with heads bent over the same page, and hearts throbbing in unison over the lines
that spoke of Dante's Beatrice, or Petrarca's Laura! She shuddered at the remembrance, now
fraught to her with keenest pain.

"I shall not want to read Italian again," she said, rising from the table. "We had better advertise
for a tutor, Uncle Alfred, unless you think the boys might run wild for a little while, or
unless Percival can find us one."

"Shall you be writing to Percival to-day, my dear?"

"I don't know."

"Because you might mention that Mr. Stretton has left us. I am afraid that Percival will be
glad," said Mr. Heron, with a little laugh; "he had an unaccountable dislike to poor Stretton."

"Yes, Percival will be glad," said Elizabeth, turning mechanically to leave the room. At the
door she paused. "Mr. Stretton left an address, I suppose?"

"No, he did not. He said he would write to me when his plans were settled. And I'm sorry to
say he would not take a cheque. I pressed it upon him, and finally left it on the table for
him--where I found it again this morning. He said that he had no right to it, leaving as suddenly
as he did--some crochet of that kind. I should think that Stretton could be very Quixotic if
he chose."

"When he writes," said Elizabeth, "you will send him the cheque, will you not, Uncle Alfred?
I do not think that he is very well off; and it seems a pity that he should be in want of money
for the sake of--of--a scruple."

She did not wait for a reply, but closed the door behind her, and stood for a few moments in
the hall, silently wondering what to do and where to go. Finally she put on her garden hat
and went out into the grounds. She felt that she must be alone.

A sort of numbness came over her. He had gone, without a word, without making any effort to
see her again. His "Good-bye" had been spoken in solemn earnest. He had been stronger than
Elizabeth; although in ordinary matters it might be thought that her nature was the stronger
of the two. There was nothing, therefore, for her to say or do; she could not write to him,
she could not call him back. If she could have done so she would. She had never known before
what it was to hunger for the sight of a beloved face, to think of the words that she might
have said, and long to say them. She did not as yet know by what name to call her misery. Only,
little by little she woke up to the fact that it was what people meant when they spoke of love.
Then she began to understand her position. She had promised to marry Percival Heron, but her
heart was given to the penniless tutor who called himself John Stretton.

CHAPTER XXV.

A COVENANT.

Brian had no fixed notion of what he should do, but he thought it better to go to London, where
he could more easily decide on his future movements. He was in no present difficulty, for the
liberal salary which he had received from the Herons during the past few months was almost
untouched, and although he had just now a morbid dislike to touching the money that had come
to him through Elizabeth's generosity, he had the sense to see that he must make use of it,
and turn it to the best possible account.

In the course of his journey he bought a newspaper. His eyes fell almost immediately upon a
paragraph which caused him some amazement.

"Mysterious Case of Attempted Murder.--A young man of respectable appearance was discovered
early this morning in a state of complete insensibility at the end of a passage leading out
of Mill-street, Blackfriars. He was found to have received a severe wound, presumably with
a knife, in the left side, and had lost a considerable amount of blood, but, although weak,
was still living. His watch and purse had not been abstracted, a fact which points to the conclusion
either that the wound was inflicted by a companion in a drunken brawl, or that the thief was
disturbed in his operations before the completion of the work. The young man speaks a little
English as well as Italian, but he has not yet been able to give a precise account of the assault
committed upon him. It is thought that the police have a clue to the criminal. The name given
in the gentleman's pocket-book is Vasari; and he has been removed to Guy's Hospital, where
he is reported to be doing well."

"Vasari! Dino Vasari! can it be he?" said Brian, throwing down his newspaper. "What brings
him to London?"

Then it occurred to him that Father Cristoforo's long letter might have contained information
concerning Dino's visit to London: possibly he had been asked to do the young Italian some
service, which, of course, he had been unable to render as he had not read the letter. He felt
doubly vexed at his own carelessness as he thought of this possibility, and resolved to go
to the hospital and see whether the man who had been wounded was Dino Vasari or not. And then
he forgot all about the newspaper paragraph, and lost himself in sad reflections concerning
the unexpected end of his connection with the Herons.

Arrived in London, he found out a modest lodging, and began to arrange his plans for the future.
A fit of restlessness seemed to have come upon him. He could not bear to think of staying any
longer in England. He paid a visit next morning to an Emigration Agency Office, asking whether
the agents could direct him to the best way of obtaining suitable work in the Colonies. He
did not care where he went or what he did; his preference was for work in the open air, because
he still at times felt the effect of that brain-fever which had so nearly ended his existence
at San Stefano; but his physique was not exactly of the kind which was most suited to bush-clearing
and sheep-farming. This he was told, and informed, moreover, that so large a number of clerks
arrived yearly in Australia and America, that the market in that sort of labour was over-stocked,
and that, if he was a clerk, he had a better chance in the Old World than in the New.

"I am not a clerk; I have lately been a tutor," said Brian.

References?

He could refer them to his late employer.

A degree? Oxford or Cambridge?

And there the questions ceased to be answered satisfactorily. He could not tell them that he
had been to Oxford, because he dared not refer them to the name under which he studied at Balliol.
He hesitated, blundered a little--he certainly had never mastered the art of lying with ease
and fluency--and created so unfavourable an impression in the mind of the emigration agent
that that gentleman regarded him with suspicion from that moment, and apparently ceased to
wish to afford him any aid.

"I am very sorry," he said, politely, "but I don't think that we have anything that would suit
you. There is a college at Dunedin where they want a junior master, but there, a man with a
good degree and--hum--unimpeachable antecedents would be required. People out there are in
want of men with a trade: not of clerks, nor of poor professional men."

"Then I must go as a hodman or a breaker of stones," said Brian, "for I mean to go."

"I don't think that that employment is one for which you are especially fitted, Mr. Smith,"
said the agent, with a slight smile. Brian had impatiently given the name of Smith in making
his application, and the agent, who was a man of wide experience, did not believe that it was
his own; "but, of course, if you like to try it, you can look at these papers about 'assisted
passages.'"

"Thank you, that is not necessary," answered Brian, rather curtly. "A steerage passage to Australia
does not cost a fortune. If I go out as a labouring man I think I can manage it. But I am obliged
to you for your kindness in answering my questions."

He had resumed his usual manner, which had been somewhat ruffled by the tone taken by the agent,
and now asked one or two practical questions respecting the fares, the lines of steamers, and
matters of that kind; after which he bade the agent a courteous good-morning and went upon his way.

He foresaw that the inevitable cloud hanging over his past story would prove a great obstacle
to his obtaining employment in the way he desired. Any work requiring certificates or testimonials
was utterly out of the question for him in England. In Australia or New Zealand things might
be different. He had no great wish to go to America--he had once spent a summer holiday in
the Eastern States, and did not fancy that they would be agreeable places of residence for
him in his present circumstances, and he had no great desire to "go West;" besides, he had
a wish to put as great a distance as possible between himself and England. As he walked away
from the emigration office he made up his mind to take the first vessel that sailed for Sydney.

He had nothing to do. He wanted to divert his mind from thoughts of Elizabeth. It flashed across
his mind that he would go to the hospital and inquire after the man who had been stabbed, and
who called himself Vasari.

He made his request to see the patient, and was admitted with such readiness that he suspected
the case to be a dangerous one. And, indeed, the house-surgeon acknowledged this to be so.
The stab, he said, had gone wonderfully near the vital parts; a hair's-breadth deviation to
the right or left, and Vasari would have been a dead man. It was still uncertain whether he
would recover, and all agitation must be avoided, as he was not allowed either to move or speak.

"I am not sure whether he is the young man I used to know or not," said Brian, doubtfully.
"Vasari--was there a Christian name given as well?"

"Yes: Bernardino, and in another place simply Dino. Was that the name of your friend?"

"Yes, it was. If I saw him I should be sure. I don't suppose that my appearance would agitate
him," said Brian, little suspecting the deep interest and importance which would attach to
his visit in Dino's mind.

"Come, then." And the surgeon led the way to the bed, hidden by a screen from the rest of the
ward, where Dino lay.

Brian passed with the nurse inside the screen, and looked pityingly at the patient.

"Yes," he said, in a low tone, "it is the man I know."

He thought that Dino was unconscious, but at the sound of his voice--low though it was--the
patient opened his eyes, and fixed them upon Brian's face. Brian had said that his appearance
would produce no agitation, but he was mistaken. A sudden change passed over that pale countenance.
Dino's great dark eyes seemed to grow larger than ever; his face assumed a still more deathly
tinge; the look of mingled anguish and horror was unmistakable. He tried to speak, he tried
to rise in his bed, but the effort was too great, and he sank back insensible. The indignant
nurse hustled Brian away, and would not allow him to return; he ought to have known, she said,
that the sight of him would excite the patient. Brian had not known, and was grieved to think
that his visit had been unacceptable. But that did not prevent him from writing an account
of the state in which he had found Dino Vasari to his friend, Padre Cristoforo; nor from calling
at the hospital every day to inquire after the state of his Italian friend. He was glad to
hear at last that Dino was out of danger; then, that he was growing a little stronger; and
then that he had expressed a desire to see the English gentleman when he called again.

By this time he had, to some extent, changed his plans. Neither Australia nor New Zealand would
be his destination. He had taken his passage in a vessel bound for Pernambuco, and a very short
time remained to him in England. He was glad to think that he should see Dino before he went.

He found the young man greatly altered: his eyes gleamed in orbits of purple shadow: his face
was white and wasted. But the greatest change of all lay in this--that there was no smile upon
his lips, no pleasure in his eyes, when he saw Brian draw near his bed.

"Dino!" said Brian, holding out his hand. "How did you come here, amico mio?" And then he noticed
the absence of any welcoming word or gesture on Dino's part. The large dark eyes were bent
upon him questioningly, and yet with a proud reserve in their shadowy depths. And the blue-veined
hands locked themselves together upon the coverlet instead of returning Brian's friendly grasp.

"Why have you come?" said Dino, in a loud whisper. "What do you want?"

"I want nothing save to ask how you are and to see you again," replied Brian, after a pause
of astonishment.

"If you want to alter your decision it is not yet too late. I have taken no steps towards the
claiming of my rights."

"His mind must be wandering," thought Brian to himself. He added aloud in a soothing tone,
"I have made no decision about anything, Dino. Can I do anything for you?"

Dino looked at him long and meditatively. Brian's face expressed some surprise, but perfect
tranquility of mind. He had seated himself at Dino's bed-side, and was leaning his chin upon
his hand and his elbow upon his crossed knees.

"Why did you make Hugo Luttrell your messenger? Why not come to meet me yourself as Padre Cristoforo
begged you to do?"

Brian shook his head. "I don't think you had better talk, Dino," he said. "You are feverish,
surely. I will come and see you again to-morrow."

"No, no: answer my question first," said Dino, a slight flush rising to his thin cheeks. "Why
could you not come yourself?"

"When?"

"When! You know."

"Upon my honour, Dino, I don't know what you mean."

"You--you--had a letter from Padre Cristoforo--about me?" said Dino, stammering with eagerness.

Brian looked guilty. "I was a great fool, Dino," he said, penitently. "I had a letter from
him, and I managed to lose it before I had read more than the first sheet, in which there was
nothing about you. I suppose he told me in that letter why you came to London, and asked me
to meet you or something; and I wish I had met you, if it would have prevented this unfortunate
accident of yours, or whatever it was. My own carelessness is always to blame," said Brian,
with a heavy sigh, "and I don't wonder that you look coldly upon me, Dino, when I seem to have
done you such an unfriendly turn. But I don't think I need say that I never meant to do it."

"How did you know that I was here?" asked Dino, with breathless interest.

"I saw in the papers an account of your being found insensible from a wound in your side. The
name Vasari was mentioned, and I came to see if it could possibly be you."

Dino was silent for a few minutes. Then his face lighted up, his pale lips parted with a smile.
"So you never read Father Cristoforo's letter?" he said. "And you sent me no message of reply?"

"Certainly not. How could I, when I did not know that you were in England?"

Dino held out his hands. "I misjudged you," he said, simply, "Will you forgive me and take
my hand again?"

Brian clasped his hand. "You know there's nothing to forgive," he said, with a smile. "But
I am glad you don't think I neglected you on purpose, Dino. I had not forgotten those pleasant
days at San Stefano."

Dino smiled, too, but did not seem inclined to speak again. The nurse came to say that the
interview had lasted long enough, and Brian took his leave, promising to come on the morrow,
and struck with the look of perfect peace and quiet upon the placid face as it lay amongst
the white pillows, almost as white as they.

He had only a couple of days left before he was to start for Pernambuco, where he had heard
of work that was likely to suit him. He had made his arrangements, taken his passage in the
steerage: he had nothing to do now but to write a farewell letter to Mr. Heron, telling him
whither he was bound, and another--should he write that other or should he not?--to Elizabeth.
He felt it hard to go without saying one last farewell to her. The discovery that she was the
heiress of his property had finally decided him to leave England. He dared not risk the chance
of being recognised and identified, if such recognition and identification would lead to her
poverty. For even if, by a deed of gift in his supposed name of Brian Luttrell, he devised
his wealth to her, he knew that she would never consent to take it if he were still alive.
The doubt thrown on his birth and parentage would not be conclusive enough in her mind to justify
her in despoiling him of what all the judges in the land would have said was his birthright.
But then Brian did not know that Vincenza Vasari had been found. The existence of another claimant
to the Luttrell estate never troubled him in the least. He wronged nobody, he thought, by allowing
Elizabeth Murray to suppose that Brian Luttrell was dead.

He wrote a few lines to Mr. Heron, thanking him for his kindness, and informing him that he
was leaving England for South America; and then he proceeded to the more difficult task of
writing to Elizabeth. He destroyed many sheets of paper, and spent a great deal of time in
the attempt, although the letter, as it stood at last, was a very simple affair, scarcely worthy
of the pains that had been bestowed upon it.

"Dear Miss Murray," he wrote, "when you receive this note I shall have left England, but I
cannot go without one word of farewell. You will never know how much you did for me in those
early days of our acquaintance in Italy; how much hope you gave me back, how much interest
in life you inspired in me; but for all that you did I thank you. Is it too much to ask you
to remember me sometimes? I shall remember you until the hour of my death. Forgive me if I
have said too much. God bless you, Elizabeth! Let me write that name once, for I shall never
write to you nor see your face again."

He put no signature. He could not bear to use a false name when he wrote to her; and he was
sure that she would know from whom the letter came.

He went out and dropped it with his own hands into a letter-box; then he came back to his dreary
lodgings, never expecting to find there anything of interest. But he found something that interested
him very much indeed. He found a long and closely written letter from the Prior of San Stefano.

Father Cristoforo could not resist the opportunity of lecturing his young friend a little.
He gave him a good many moral maxims before he came to the story that he had to tell, and he
pointed them by observing rather severely that if it were not for Brian's carelessness, his
pupil might possibly have escaped the "accident" that had befallen him. For if Brian had met
Dino in London on the appointed day, he would not have been wandering alone in the streets
(as Father Cristoforo imagined him to have been) or fallen into the hands of thieves and murderers.

With which prologue the Padre once more began his story. And this time Brian read it all.

He put down the letter at last with a curious smile: the smile of a man who does not want to
acknowledge that he suffers pain. "Dino," he said to himself, lingeringly. "Dino! It is he
who is Brian Luttrell, then, after all. And what am I? And, oh, my poor Elizabeth! But she
will only regret the loss of the money because she will no longer be able to help other people.
The Herons will suffer more than she. And Percival Heron! How will it affect him? I think he
will be pleased. Yes, I think he is disinterested enough to be thoroughly pleased that she
is poor. I should be pleased, in his case.

"There is no doubt about it now, I suppose," he said, beginning to pace up and down the little
room, with slow, uneven steps and bent head. "I am not a Luttrell. I am a Vasari. My mother's
name was Vincenza Vasari--a woman who lied and cheated for the sake of her child. And I was
the child! Good God! how can it be that I have that lying blood in my veins? Yet I have no
right to say so; it was all done for me--for me--who never knew a mother's love. Oh, mother,
mother, how much happier your son would have been if you had reared him in the place where
he was born, amongst the vines and olive-yards of his native land.

"And I must see Dino to-morrow. So he knows the whole story. I understand now why he thought
ill of me for not coming to meet him, poor fellow! I must go early to-morrow."

He went, but as soon as he reached Dino's bed-side he found that he knew not what to say, Dino
looked up at him with eyes full of grave, wistful affection, and suddenly smiled, as if something
unwontedly pleasant had dawned upon his mind.

"Ah," he said, "at last--you know."

"Yes, I know," said Brian.

"And you are sorry? I am sorry, too."

"No," said Brian, finding it rather difficult to express himself at that moment; "I am not
sorry that you are the man who will bear the name of Luttrell, that I have wrongly borne so
long. I suppose--from what the Prior says--that your claim can be proved; if I were in my old
position I should be the first to beg you to prove it, and to give up my name and place to
you if justice required it. As it is, I do not stand in your way, because the old Brian Luttrell--the
one who killed his brother, you know--is dead."

"But if you were in your old position, could you still pardon me and be friendly with me, even
if I claimed my rights?"

"I hope so," said Brian. "I hope that I should not be so ungenerous as to look upon you as
an enemy because you wished to take your own place amongst your own kindred. You ought rather
to look upon me as your enemy, because I have occupied your place so long."

"You are good--you are generous--you are noble!" said Dino, his eyes suddenly filling with
tears. "If all the world were like you! And do you know what I shall do if the estate ever
becomes mine? You shall take the half--you may take it all, if it please you better. But we
will divide it, at any rate, and be to each other as brothers, shall we not? I have thought
of you so often!"

He spoke ardently, eagerly; pressing Brian's hands between his own from time to time. It was
from an impulse as strong and simple as any of Dino's own that Brian suddenly stooped down
and kissed him on the forehead. The caress seemed natural enough to Dino; it was as the ratification
of some sacred bond to the English-bred Brian Luttrell. Henceforth, the two became to each
other as brothers, indeed; the interests of one became the interests of the other. Before long,
Dino learnt from Brian himself the whole of his sad story. He lay with shining eyes and parted
lips, his hand clasped in Brian's, listening to his account of the events of the last two years.
The only thing that Brian did not touch upon was his love for Elizabeth. That wound was too
recent to be shown, even to Dino, who had leaped all at once, as it seemed, into the position
of his bosom friend. But Dino guessed it all.

As Brian walked back to his lodgings from the hospital, he was haunted by a verse of Scripture
which had sprung up in his mind, and which he repeated with a certain sense of pleasure as
soon as he recollected the exact words. He liked the words. He looked them out in a Bible belonging
to his landlady when he reached home, and he found another verse that touched him, too.

Had not Brian Luttrell and Dino Vasari made a covenant?

The practical result of their friendship was an important one to Brian. He sacrificed his passage
money, and did not sail on the following day for Pernambuco.

CHAPTER XXVI.

ELIZABETH'S CONFESSION.

"I wonder what she wants with me," said Percival Heron, meditatively. He was sitting at his
solitary breakfast-table, having pushed from him an empty coffee-cup and several newspapers:
a letter from Elizabeth was in his hands. It consisted of a few lines only, and the words that
had roused his wonderment were these:--

"I am very anxious to see you. Could you come down to Strathleckie at once? If not, pray come
as soon as possible."

"I suppose she is too true a woman to say exactly what she wants," said Percival, a gay smile
curling his lips beneath his black moustache. "Perhaps she won't be very angry with me this
time if I press her a little on the subject of our marriage. We parted on not very good terms
last time, rather en délicatesse, if I'm not mistaken, after quarrelling over our old subject
of dispute, the tutor. Well, my lady's behests are to be obeyed. I'll wire an acceptance of
the invitation and start to-night."

He made the long journey very comfortably, grumbling now and then in a good-tempered way at
Elizabeth for sending for him in so abrupt a fashion; but on the whole he felt pleased that
she had done so. It showed that she had confidence in him. And he was very anxious for the
engagement to be made public: its announcement would be a sort of justification to him in allowing
her to do as much as she had done for his family. Percival had, in truth, always protested
against her generosity, but failed in persuading his father not to accept it. Mr. Heron was
too simple-minded to see why he should not take Elizabeth's gifts, and Mrs. Heron did not see
the force of Percival's arguments at all.

"Elizabeth is not here, then," he said to Kitty, who met him at the station.

"No," answered Kitty in rather a mysterious voice. "She wouldn't come."

"Why wouldn't she come?" said Percival, sharply. He followed his sister into the waggonette
as he spoke: he did not care about driving, and gladly resigned the reins to the coachman.

"I can't tell you. I don't think she is well."

"Not well? What's the matter?"

"I don't know. She always has a headache. Did she want you to come, Percival?"

"She wrote to ask me."

"I'm glad of that."

"Kitty, will you have the goodness to say what you mean, instead of hinting?"

Kitty looked frightened.

"I don't mean anything," she said, hurriedly, while a warm wave of colour spread itself over
her cheeks and brow.

"Don't mean anything? That's nonsense. You should not say anything then. Out with it, Kitty.
What do you think is wrong with Elizabeth?"

"Oh, Percival, don't be so angry with me," said Kitty, with the tears in her eyes. "Indeed,
I scarcely meant to speak; but I did wish you to understand beforehand----"

"What?"

"I don't think she wants to marry you." And then Kitty glanced up from under her thick, curling
lashes, and was startled at the set and rigid change which suddenly came over her brother's
features. She dared not say any more, and for some minutes they drove on in silence. Presently,
Percival turned round to her with an icy sternness in his voice.

"You should not say such things unless you have authority from Elizabeth to say them. Did she
tell you to do so?"

"No, no, indeed she did not," cried Kitty, "and, of course, I may be mistaken; but I came to
see you, Percival, on purpose to tell you."

"No woman is happy unless she is making mischief," said her brother, grimly.

"You ought not to say that, Percival; it is not fair. And I must say what I came to say. Elizabeth
is very unhappy about something. I don't know what; and after all her goodness to us you ought
to be careful that you are not making her do anything against her will."

"Did you ever know Elizabeth do anything against her will?"

"Against her wishes, then," said Kitty, firmly, "and against the dictates of her heart."

"'These be fine words, indeed!'" quoted Percival, with a savage laugh. "And who has taught
you to talk about the 'dictates of her heart?' Leave Elizabeth and me to settle our affairs
between ourselves, if you please. We know our duty to each other without taking advice from
a little schoolgirl."

Kitty stifled a sob. "If you break Elizabeth's heart," she said, vehemently, "you can't say
I didn't warn you."

Percival looked at her, stifled a question at the tip of his tongue, and clutched his newspaper
viciously. It occurred to him that Kitty knew something, that she would never have uttered
a mere vague suspicion; but he would not ask her a direct question. No, Elizabeth's face and
voice would soon tell him whether she was unhappy.

He was right. Kitty had seen the parting between Brian and Elizabeth; and she had guessed a
great deal more than she saw. She spoke out of no desire to make mischief, but from very love
for her cousin and care for her happiness; but when she noted Percival's black brows she doubted
whether she had done right.

Percival did not speak again throughout the drive. He sat with his eyes bent on his newspaper,
his hand playing with his moustache, a frown on his handsome face. It was not until the carriage
stopped at the door of Strathleckie, and he had given his hand to Kitty to help her down that
he opened his lips.

"Don't repeat what you have said to me to any other person, please."

"Of course not, Percival."

There was no time for more. The barking of dogs, the shouts of children, the greeting of Mr.
Heron, prevented anything further. Percival looked round impatiently. But Elizabeth was not there.

He was tired, although he would not confess it, with his night journey; and a bath, breakfast,
and change of clothes did not produce their usual exhilarating effect. He found it difficult
to talk to his father or to support the noise made by the children. Kitty's hint had put his
mind into a ferment.

"Can these boys not be sent to their lessons?" he said, at last, knitting his brows.

"Oh, don't you know?" said Harry, cutting a delighted caper. "We have holidays now. Mr. Stretton
has gone away. He went away a fortnight ago, or nearly three weeks now."

Percival looked suddenly at Kitty, who coloured vividly.

"Why did he go?" he asked.

"I'm sure I can't tell you," said Mr. Heron, almost peevishly. "Family affairs, he said. And
now he has gone to South America. I don't understand it at all."

Neither did Percival.

"Where is Elizabeth?" said Mr. Heron, looking round the room as if in search of her. "She can't
know that Percival has come: go and tell her, one of you boys."

"No, never mind," said Percival, quickly; but it was too late, the boy was gone.

There was a little silence. Percival sat at one side of the whitely-draped table, with a luxurious
breakfast before him and a great bowl of autumn flowers. The sunshine streamed in brightly
through the broad, low windows; the pleasant room was fragrant with the scent of the burning
wood upon the fire; the dogs wandered in and out, and stretched themselves comfortably upon
the polished oak floor. Kitty sat in a cushioned window-seat and looked anxious; Mr. Heron
stood by the fireplace and moved one of the burning logs in the grate with his foot. A sort
of constraint had fallen over the little party, though nobody quite knew why; and it was not
dispelled, even when Harry's footsteps were heard upon the stairs, and he threw open the door
for Elizabeth.

Percival threw down his serviette and started up to meet her. And then he knew why his father
and sister looked uncomfortable. Elizabeth was changed; it was plain enough that Elizabeth
must be ill.

She was thinner than he had ever seen her, and her face had grown pale. But the fixed gravity
and mournfulness of her expression struck him even more than the sharpened contour of her features
or the dark lines beneath her eyes. She looked as if she suffered: as if she was suffering still.

"You are ill!" he said, abruptly, holding her by the hand and looking down into her face.

"That's what I've been saying all along!" muttered Mr. Heron. "I knew he would be shocked by
her looks. You should have prepared him, Kitty."

"I have had neuralgia, that is all," said Elizabeth, quietly.

"Strathleckie does not suit you; you ought to go away," remarked Percival, devouring her with
his eyes. "What have you been doing to yourself?"

"Nothing: I am perfectly well; except for this neuralgia," she said, with a faint, vexed smile.
"Did you have a comfortable journey, and have you breakfasted?"

"Yes, thank you."

"Then you will come out with me for a little stroll? I want to show you the grounds; and the
others can spare you to me for a little while," she went on, with perfect ease and fluency.
The only change in her manner was its unusual gravity, and the fact that she did not seem able
to meet Percival's eye. "Are you too tired?"

"Not at all." And they left the room together.

She took him down the hill on which the house stood, by a narrow, winding path, to the side
of a picturesque stream in the valley below. He had seen the place before, but he followed
her without a word until they reached a wooden seat close to the water's edge, with its back
fixed to the steep bank behind it. The rowan trees, with their clusters of scarlet berries,
hung over it, and great clumps of ferns stood on either hand. It was an absolutely lonely place,
and Percival knew instinctively that Elizabeth had brought him to it because she could here
speak without fear of interruption.

"It is a beautiful place, is it not?" she said, as he took his seat beside her.

He did not answer. He rather disdained the trivial question. He was silent for a few minutes,
and then said briefly:--

"Tell me why you wanted me."

"I have been unhappy," she said, simply.

"That is easy to be seen."

"Is it? Oh, I am sorry for that. But I have had neuralgia. I have, indeed. That makes me look
pale and tired."

Percival threw his arm over the back of the seat with an impatient motion, and looked at the
river. "Nothing else?" he asked, drily. "It seems hardly worth while to send for me if that
was all. The doctor would have done better."

"There is something else," said Elizabeth, in so quiet and even a voice as to sound almost
indifferent.

"Well, I supposed so. What is it?"

"You are making it very hard for me to tell you, Percival," said she, with one of her old,
straight glances. "What is it you know? What is it you suspect?"

"Excuse me, Elizabeth, I have not said that I know or suspect anything. Everybody seems a little
uncomfortable, but that is nothing. What is the matter?"

As she did not answer, he turned and looked at her. Her face was pale, but there was a look
of indomitable resolve about her which made him flinch from his purpose of maintaining a cold
and reserved manner. A sudden fear ran through his heart lest Kitty's warning should be true!

"Elizabeth," he said, quickly and passionately, "forgive me for the way in which I have spoken.
I am an ill-tempered brute. It is my anxiety for you that makes me seem so savage. I cannot
bear to see you look as you do: it breaks my heart!"

Her lip trembled at this. She would rather that he had preserved his hard, sullen manner: it
would have made it more easy for her to tell her story. She locked her hands closely together,
and answered in low, hesitating tones:--

"I am not worth your anxiety. I did not mean to be--untrue--to you, Percival. I suffered a
great deal before I made up my mind that I had better tell you--everything."

A tear fell down her pale cheek unheeded. Percival rose to his feet.

"I don't think there is much to tell, is there?" he said. "You mean that you wish to give me
up, to throw me over? Is that all?"

His words were calm, but the tone of ironical bitterness in which they were uttered cut Elizabeth
to the quick. She lifted her head proudly.

"No," she said, "you are wrong. I wish nothing of the kind."

He stood in an attitude of profound attention, waiting for her to explain. His face wore its
old, rigid look: the upright line between his brows was very marked indeed. But he would not
speak again.

"Percival," she said--and her tone expressed great pain and profound self-abasement--"when
I promised to marry you--someday, you will remember that I never said I loved you. I thought
that I should learn to love in time. And so I did--but not--not you."

"And who taught you the lesson that I failed to impart?" asked Percival, with the sneer in
his voice which she knew and dreaded.

"Don't ask me," she said, painfully. "It is not fair to ask me that. I did not know until it
was too late."

"Until he--whoever he was--asked you to marry him, I suppose? Well, when is the ceremony to
take place? Do you expect me to dance at the wedding? Do you think I am going tamely to resign
my rights? My God, Elizabeth, is it you who can treat me in this way? Are all women as false
as you?"

He struck his foot fiercely against the ground, and walked away from her. When he came back
he found her in the same position; white as a statue, with her hands clasped together upon
her knee, and her eyes fixed upon the running water.

"Do you think that I am a stone," he said, violently, "that you tell me the story of your falseness
so quietly, as if it were a tale that I should like to hear? Do you think that I feel nothing,
or do you care so little what I feel? You had better have refused me outright at once than
kept me dangling at your feet for a couple of years, only to throw me over at the last!"

"I have not thrown you over," she said, raising her blue-grey eyes steadily to his agitated
face. "I wanted to tell you; that was all. If you like to marry me now, knowing the truth,
you may do so."

"What!"

"I may have been false to you in heart," she said, the hot blood tinting her cheeks with carnation
as she spoke, "but I will not break my word."

"And what did your lover say to that?" he asked, roughly, as he stood before her. "Did he not
say that you were as false to him as you were to me? Did he not say that he would come back
again and again, and force you to be true, at least, to him? For that is what I should have
done in his place."

"Then," Elizabeth said, with a touch of antagonism in her tones, "he was nobler than you."

"Oh, no doubt," said Percival, tossing aside his head. "No doubt he is a finer fellow in every
way. Am I to have the pleasure of making his acquaintance?"

His scorn, his intolerance, were rousing her spirit at last. She spoke firmly, with a new light
in her eyes, a new self-possession in her manner.

"You are unjust, Percival. I think that you do not understand what I mean to tell you. He accepted
my decision, and I shall never see him again. I thought at first that I would not tell you,
but let our engagement go on quietly; and then again I thought that it would be unfair to you
not to tell you the whole truth. I leave it to you to say what we should do. I have no love
to give you--but you knew that from the first. The difference now is that I--I love another."

Her voice sank almost to a whisper as she uttered the last few words, and she covered her face
with her hands. Percival's brow cleared a little; the irony disappeared from his lips, the
flash of scorn from his eye. He advanced to her side, and stood looking down at her for several
minutes before he attempted any answer to her speech.

"You mean to say," he began, in a softer tone, "that you rejected this man because you had
given your promise to me?"

"Yes."

"You sent him away?"

"Yes."

"And he knew the reason? Did he know that you loved him, Elizabeth?"

The answer was given reluctantly, after a long pause. "I do not know. I am afraid--he did."

Percival drew a short, impatient breath. "You must forgive me if I was violent just now, Elizabeth.
This is very hard to bear."

"I dare not ask your pardon," she murmured, with her face still between her hands.

"Oh, my pardon? That will do you little good," he said, contemptuously. "The question is--what
is to be done? I suppose this man--this lover of yours--is within call, as it were, Elizabeth?
You could summon him with your little finger? If I released you from this engagement to me,
you could whistle him back to you next day?"

"Oh, no," she said, looking up at him wonderingly. "He is gone away from England. I do not
know where he is."

"It is this man Stretton, then?" said Percival, quietly.

A sudden rush of colour to her face assured him that he had guessed the truth. "I always suspected
him," he muttered.

"You had no need. He behaved as honourably as possibly. He did not know of my engagement to you."

"Honourably? A penniless adventurer making love to one of the richest women in Scotland!"

"You mistake, Percival. He did not know that I was rich."

"A likely story!"

"You insult him--and me," said Elizabeth, in a very low tone. "If you have no pity, have some
respect--for him--if you have none for me." And then she burst into an agony of tears, such
as he had never seen her shed before. But he was pitiless still. The wound was very deep: his
pain very sharp and keen.

"Have you had any pity for me?" he said. "Why should I pity him? To my mind, he is the most
enviable man on earth, because he has your love. Respect him, when he has stolen from me the
thing that I value more than my life! You do not know what you say."

She still wept, and presently he sat down beside her and leaned his head on his hand, looking
at her from out of the shadow made by his bent fingers above his eyes.

"Let me understand matters clearly," he said. "You sent him away, and he has gone to America,
never to return. Is that it? And you will marry me, although you do not love me, because you
have promised to do so, if I ask you? What do you expect me to say?"

She shook her head. She could not speak.

"I am not generous," he went on deliberately. "You have known me long enough to be aware that
I am a very selfish man. I will not give you up to Stretton. He is not the right husband for
you. He is a man whom you picked up in the streets, without a character, without antecedents,
with a history which he dares not tell. So much I gathered from my father. I say nothing about
his behaviour in this case; he may have acted well, or he may have acted badly; I have no opinion
to give. But you shall never be his wife."

Elizabeth's tears were dried as if by magic. She sat erect, listening with set lips and startled
eyes to the fierce energy of his tones.

"I accept your sacrifice," he said. "You will thank me in the end that I did so. No, I do not
release you from your engagement, Elizabeth. You have said that you would keep your word, and
I hold you to it."

He drew her to him with his arm, and kissed her cheek with passionate determination. She shrank
away, but he would not let her go.

"No," he proceeded, "you are my promised wife, Elizabeth. I have no intention of giving you
up for Stretton or anybody else. I love you more than ever now that I see how brave and honest
you can be. We will have no more concealments. When we go back to the house we will tell all
the world of our engagement. It was the secrecy that worked this mischief."

She wrenched herself away from him with a look of mingled pain and anger. "Percival!" she cried,
"do you want to make me hate you?"

"I would rather have hate than indifference," he answered. "And whether you hate me or not,
Elizabeth, you shall be my wife before the year is out. I shall not let you go."

CHAPTER XXVII.

PERCIVAL'S OWN WAY.

Percival had his way. He came back to the house looking stern and grim, but with a resolute
determination to carry his point. In half-an-hour it was known throughout the whole household
that Miss Murray was engaged to be married to young Mr. Heron, and that the marriage would
probably take place before Christmas.

Kitty cast a frightened glance at Elizabeth's face when the announcement was made, but gathered
little from its expression. A sort of dull apathy had come over the girl--a reaction, perhaps,
from the excitement of feeling through which she had lately passed. It gave her no pain when
Percival insisted upon demonstrations of affection which were very contrary to her former habits.
She allowed him to hold her hand, to kiss her lips, to call her by endearing names, in a way
that would ordinarily have roused her indignation. She seemed incapable of resistance to his
will. And this passiveness was so unusual with her that it alarmed and irritated Percival by turns.

Anger rather than affection was the motive of his conduct. As he himself had said, he was rather
a selfish man, and he would not willingly sacrifice his own happiness unless he was very sure
that hers depended upon the sacrifice. He was enraged with the man who had won Elizabeth's
love, and believed him to be a scheming adventurer. Neither patience nor tolerance belonged
to Percival's character; and although he loved Elizabeth, he was bitterly indignant with her,
and not indisposed to punish her for her faithlessness by forcing her to submit to caresses
which she neither liked nor returned. If he had any magnanimity in him he deliberately put
it on one side; he knew that he was taking a revenge upon her for which she might never forgive
him, which was neither delicate nor generous, but he told himself that he had been too much
injured to show mercy. It was Elizabeth's own fault if he assumed the airs of a sultan with
a favourite slave, instead of kneeling at her feet. So he argued with himself; and yet a little
grain of conscience made him feel from time to time that he was wrong, and that he might live
to repent what he was doing now.

"We will be married before Christmas, Elizabeth," he said one day, when he had been at Strathleckie
nearly a week. He spoke in a tone of cool insistence.

"As you think best," she answered, sadly.

"Would you prefer a later date?"

"Oh, no," said Elizabeth, smiling a little. "It is all the same to me. 'If 'twere done at all,
'twere well done quickly,' you know."

"Do you mean that?"

"Yes."

"Then why delay it at all? Why not next week--next month, at latest? What is there to wait for?"

They were sitting in the little school-room, or study, as it was called, near the front door--the
very room in which Elizabeth had talked with Brian on the night of his arrival at Strathleckie.
The remembrance of that conversation prompted her reply.

"Oh, no," she said, in a tone of almost agonised entreaty. "Percival, have a little mercy.
Not yet--not yet."

His face hardened: his keen eyes fixed themselves relentlessly upon her white face. He was
sitting upon the sofa: she standing by the fireplace with her hands clasped tightly before
her. For a minute he looked at her thus, and then he spoke.

"You said just now that it was all the same to you. May I ask what you mean?"

"There is no need to ask me," she said, resolutely, although, her pale lips quivered. "You
know what I mean. I will marry you before Christmas, if you like; but not with such--such indecent
haste as you propose. Not this month, nor next."

"In December then?"

"Yes."

"You promise? Even if this man--this tutor--should come back?"

"I suppose I have given you a right to doubt me, Percival," she said. "But I have never broken
my word--never! From the first, I only promised to try to love you; and, indeed, I tried."

"Oh, of course, I know that I am not a lovable individual," said Percival, throwing himself
back on the cushions with a savage scowl.

She looked up quickly: there was a bitter word upon her tongue, but she refrained from uttering
it. The struggle lasted for a moment only; then she went over to him, and laid her hand softly
upon his arm.

"Percival, are you always going to be so hard upon me?" she said. "I know you do not easily
forgive, and I have wronged you. Can I do more than be sorry for my wrong-doing? I was wrong
to object to your wishes. I will marry you when you like: you shall decide everything for me now!"

His face had been gloomily averted, but he turned and looked at her as she said the last few
words, and took both her hands in his.

"I'm not quite such a brute as you think me, Elizabeth," he answered, with some emotion in
his voice. "I don't want to make you do what you find painful."

"That is nonsense," she said, more decidedly than he had heard her speak for many days. "The
whole matter is very painful to both of us at present. The only alleviation----"

"Well, what is the only alleviation? Why do you hesitate?"

She lifted her serious, clear eyes to his face.

"I hesitated," she said, "because I did not feel sure whether I had the right to speak of it
as an alleviation. I meant--the only thing that makes life bearable at all is the trying to
do right; and, when one has failed in doing it, to get back to the right path as soon as possible,
leaving the sin and misery behind."

He still held her hands, and he looked down at the slender wrists (where the blue veins showed
so much more distinctly than they used to do) with something like a sigh.

"If one failure grieves you in this way, Elizabeth, what would you do if you had chosen a path
from which you could not turn back, although you knew that it was wrong? There are many men
and women whose lives are based upon what you would call, I suppose, wrong-doing."

There was little of his usual sneering emphasis in the words. His face had fallen into an expression
of trouble and sadness which it did not often wear; but there was so much less hardness in
its lines than there had been of late that Elizabeth felt that she might answer him freely
and frankly.

"I don't think there is any path of wrong-doing from which one might not turn back, Percival.
And it seems to me that the worst misery one could go through would be the continuing in any
such path; because the consciousness of wrong would spoil all the beauty of life and take the
flavour out of every enjoyment. It would end, I think, by breaking ones heart altogether."

"A true woman's view," said Percival, starting up and releasing her hands, "but not one that
is practicable in the world of men. I suppose you think you know one man, at least, who would
come up to your ideal in that respect?"

"I know several; you amongst them," she replied. "I am sure you would not deliberately do a
wicked, dishonourable action for the world."

"You have more faith in me than I deserve," he said, walking restlessly up and down the room.
"I am not so sure--but of one thing I am quite sure, Elizabeth," and he came up to her and
put his hands on her shoulders, "I am quite sure that you are the best and truest woman that
ever lived, and I beg your pardon if I seemed for one moment to doubt you. Will you grant it
to me, darling?"

For the first time since the beginning of the visit, she looked at him gratefully, and even
affectionately.

"I have nothing to forgive you," she said. "If only I could forgive myself!" And then she burst
into tears, and Percival forgot his ill-humour and his sense of wrong in trying to soothe her
into calmness again.

This conversation made them both happier. Elizabeth lost her unnatural passiveness of demeanour,
and looked more like her clear-headed, energetic self; and Percival was less exacting and overbearing
than he had been during the past week. He went back to London with a strong conviction that
time would give him Elizabeth's heart as well as her hand; and that she would learn to forget
the unprincipled scoundrel--so Percival termed him--who had dared to aspire to her love.

The Herons were to return to London in November, and the purchase of Elizabeth's trousseau
was postponed until then. But other preparations were immediately begun: there was a great
talk of "settlements" and "entail" in the house; and Mr. Colquhoun had some very long and serious
interviews with his fair client. It need hardly be stated that Mr. Colquhoun greatly objected
to Miss Murray's marriage with her cousin, and applied to him (in strict privacy) not a few
of the adjectives which Percival had bestowed upon the tutor. But the lawyer was driven to
admit that Mr. Percival Heron, poor though he might be, showed a very disinterested spirit
when consulted upon money matters, and that he stood firm in his determination that Elizabeth's
whole fortune should be settled upon herself. He declared also that he was not going to live
upon his wife's money, and that he should continue to pursue his profession of journalism and
literature in general after his marriage; but at this assertion Mr. Colquhoun shook his head.

"It shows a very independent spirit in ye, Mr. Heron," he said, when Percival announced his
resolve in a somewhat lordly manner; "but I think that in six months' time after the marriage,
ye'll just agree with me that your determination was one that could not be entirely carried out."

"I usually do carry out my determinations, Mr. Colquhoun," said Percival, hotly.

"No doubt, no doubt. It's a determination that reflects credit upon ye, Mr. Heron. Ye'll observe
that I'm not saying a word against your determination," replied Mr. Colquhoun, warily, but
with emphasis. "It's highly creditable both to Miss Murray and to yourself."

And although Percival felt himself insulted, he could not well say more.

The continuation of his connection with the daily press was the proof which he intended to
offer to the world of his disinterestedness in marrying Elizabeth Murray. He disliked the thought
of her wealth, but he was of too robust a nature, in spite of his sensitiveness on many points,
to refuse to marry a woman simply because she was richer than himself. In fact, that is a piece
of Quixotism not often practised, and though Percival would perhaps have been capable of refusing
to make an offer of marriage to Elizabeth after she had come into her fortune, he was not disposed
to withdraw that offer because it had turned out a more advantageous one for himself than he
had expected. It is only fair to say that he did not hold Elizabeth to her word on account
of her wealth; he never once thought of it in that interview with her on the river-bank. Selfish
as he might be in some things, he was liberal and generous to a fault when money was in the
question.

It was Mr. Colquhoun who told Mrs. Luttrell of Miss Murray's engagement. He was amazed at the
look of anger and disappointment that crossed her face. "Ay!" she said, bitterly, "I am too
late, as I always am. This will be a sore blow to Hugo."

"Hugo!" said the old lawyer. "Was he after Miss Murray too? Not a bad notion, either. It would
have been a good thing to get the property back to the Luttrells. He could have called himself
Murray-Luttrell then."

"Too late for that," said Mrs. Luttrell, grimly. "Well, he shall have Netherglen."

"Are you quite decided in your mind on that point?" queried Mr. Colquhoun.

"Quite so. I'll give you my instructions about the will as soon as you like."

"Take time! take time!" said the lawyer.

"I have taken time. I have thought the matter over in every light, and I am quite convinced
that what I possess ought to go to Hugo. There is no other Luttrell to take Netherglen--and
to a Luttrell Netherglen must go."

"I should have thought that you would like better to leave it to Miss Murray, who is of your
own father's blood," said Mr. Colquhoun, cautiously. "She is your second cousin, ye'll remember;
and a good girl into the bargain."

"A good girl she may be, and a handsome one; and I would gladly have seen her the mistress
of Netherglen if she were Hugo's wife; but Netherglen was never mine, it was my husband's,
and though it came to me at his death, it shall stay in the Luttrell family, as he meant it
to do. Elizabeth Murray has the Strathleckie property; that ought to be enough for her, especially
as she is going to marry a penniless cousin, who will perhaps make ducks and drakes of it all."

"Hugo's a fortunate lad," said Mr. Colquhoun, drily, as he seated himself at a writing-table,
in order to take Mrs. Luttrell's instructions. "I hope he may be worthy of his good luck."

Hugo did not seem to consider himself very fortunate when he heard the news of Miss Murray's
approaching marriage. He looked thoroughly disconcerted. Mrs. Luttrell was inclined to think
that his affections had been engaged more deeply than she knew, and in her hard, unemotional
way, tried to express some sympathy with him in his loss. It was not a matter of the affections
with Hugo, however, but his purse. His money affairs were much embarrassed: he was beginning
to calculate the amount that he could wring out of Mrs. Luttrell, and, if she failed him, he
had made up his mind to marry Elizabeth.

"Heron!" he exclaimed, in a tone of surprise and disgust, "I don't believe she cares a rap
for Heron."

"How can you tell?" said his aunt.

Hugo looked at her, looked down, and said nothing.

"If you think she liked you better than Mr. Heron," said Mrs. Luttrell, in a meditative tone,
"something might yet be done to change the course of affairs."

"No, no," said Hugo, hastily. "Dear Aunt Margaret, you are too kind. No, if she is happy, it
is all I ask. I will go to Strathleckie this afternoon; perhaps I can then judge better."

"I don't want you to do anything dishonourable," said his aunt, "but, if Elizabeth likes you
best, Hugo, I could speak to Mr. Heron--the father, I mean--and ascertain whether the engagement
is absolutely irrevocable. I should like to see you happy as well as Elizabeth Murray."

Hugo sighed, kissed his aunt's hand, and departed--not to see Elizabeth, but Kitty Heron. He
felt that if his money difficulties could only be settled, he was well out of that proposed
marriage with Elizabeth; but then money difficulties were not easily settled when one had no
money. In the meantime, he was free to make love to Kitty.

Percival spent two or three busy weeks in London, and found that hard work was the best specific
for the low spirits from which he had suffered during his stay in Scotland. He heard regularly
from Elizabeth, and her letters, though not long, and somewhat coldly expressed, gave him complete
satisfaction. He noticed with some surprise that she spoke a good deal of Hugo Luttrell; he
seemed to be always with them, and the distant cousinship existing between him and Elizabeth
had been made the pretext for a good deal of apparent familiarity. He was "Hugo" now to the
whole family; he had been "Mr. Luttrell" only when Percival left Strathleckie.

He was sitting alone in his "den," as he nicknamed it, late in the afternoon of a November
day, when a low knock at the door made itself faintly heard. Percival was smoking; having come
in cold and tired, he had wheeled an arm-chair in front of the fire, and was sitting with his
feet on the bars of the grate, whereby a faint odour of singed leather was gradually mingling
with the fumes of the very strong tobacco that he loved. His green shaded lamp stood on a small
table beside him, throwing its light full upon the pages of the French novel that he had taken
up to read (it was "Spiridion" and he was reading it for about the twentieth time); books and
newspapers, as usual, strewed the floor, the tables, and the chairs; well-filled book-shelves
lined three of the walls; the only ornaments were the photographs of two or three actors and
actresses, some political caricatures pinned to the walls, a couple of foils and boxing-gloves,
and on the mantelpiece a choice collection of pipes. The atmosphere was thick, the aspect of
the furniture dusty: Percival Heron's own appearance was not at that moment calculated to insure
admiration. His hair was absolutely dishevelled; truth compels us to admit that he had not
shaved that day, and that his chin was consequently of a blue-black colour and bristly surface,
which could not be called attractive: his clothes were shabby to the last degree, frayed at
the cuffs, and very shiny on the shoulders. Heron was a poor man, and had a good deal of the
Bohemian in his constitution: hence came a certain contempt for appearances, which sometimes
offended his friend Vivian, as well as a real inability to spend money on clothes and furniture
without getting into debt. And Percival, extravagant as he sometimes seemed, was never in debt:
he had seen too much of it in his father's house not to be alive to its inconveniences, and
he had had the moral courage to keep a resolution made in early boyhood, that he would never
owe money to any man. Hence came the shabbiness--and also, perhaps, some of the arrogance--of
which his friends complained.

Owing partly therefore to the shabbiness, partly to the untidiness, partly to the very comfort
of the slightly overheated room, the visitor who entered it did not form a very high opinion
of its occupant. Percival's frown, and momentary stare of astonishment, were, perhaps, enough
to disconcert a person not already very sure of his reception.

"Am I dreaming?" muttered Heron to himself, as he cast the book to the ground, and rose to
his feet. "One would think that George Sand's visionary young monk had walked straight out
of the book into my room. Begging, I suppose. Good evening. You have called on behalf of some
charity, I suppose? Come nearer to the fire; it is a cold night."

The stranger--a young man in a black cassock--bowed courteously, and seated himself in the
chair that Percival pointed out. He then spoke in English, but with a foreign accent, which
did not sound unpleasantly in Heron's ears.

"I have not come on behalf of any charity," he said, "but I come in the interests of justice."

"The same thing, I suppose, in the long run," Percival remarked to himself. "But what a fine
face the beggar has! He's been ill lately, or else he is half-starved--shall I give him some
whisky and a pipe? I suppose he would feel insulted!"

While he made these reflections, he replied politely that he was always pleased to serve the
interests of justice, offered his guest a glass of wine (chiefly because he looked so thin
and pale)--an offer which was smilingly rejected--then crossed his legs, looked up to the ceiling,
and awaited in silent resignation the pitiful story which he was sure that this young monk
had come to tell.

But, after a troubled glance at Mr. Heron's face, (which had a peculiarly reckless and defiant
expression by reason of the tossed hair, the habitual frown and the bristles on his chin),
the visitor began to speak in a very different strain from the one which Percival had expected.

"I have come," he said, "on affairs which concern yourself and your family; and, therefore,
I most heartily beg your pardon if I appear to you an insolent intruder, speaking of matters
which it does not concern me to know."

His formal English sentences were correct enough, but seemed to be constructed with some difficulty.
Percival's eyes came down from the ceiling and rested upon his thin, pale face with lazy curiosity.

"I should not have thought that my affairs would be particularly interesting to you," he said.

"But there you are wrong, they interest me very much," said the young man, with much vivacity.
His dark eyes glowed like coals of fire as he proceeded. "There is scarcely anyone whose fortunes
are of so much significance to me."

"I am much obliged to you," murmured Percival, with lifted eyebrows; "but I hardly understand----"

"You will understand quite soon enough, Mr. Heron," said the visitor, quietly. "I have news
for you that may not be agreeable. I believe that you have a cousin, a Miss Murray, who lately
succeeded to a great fortune."

"Yes, but what has that to do with you, if you please?" demanded Heron, his amiability vanishing
into space.

The stranger lifted his hand.

"Allow me one moment. She inherited this fortune on the death of a Mr. Brian Luttrell, I think?"

"Exactly--but what----"

"Excuse me, Mr. Heron. I come to my piece of news at last. Miss Murray has no right to the
property which she is enjoying. Mr. Brian Luttrell is alive!"

CHAPTER XXVIII.

A REVELATION.

Percival started from his chair. His first exclamation was a rather profane one, for which
the monk immediately reproved him. He did not take much notice of the reproof: he stared hard
at the young man for a minute or two, unconsciously repeated the objectionable expression,
and then took one or two turns up and down the room. After which he came to a standstill, thrust
his hands into his pockets, and allowed his features to relax into a sardonically-triumphant smile.

"You couldn't tell me a thing which I should be better pleased to hear," he said. "But I don't
believe it's true."

This was rude, but the visitor was not disconcerted. He looked at Percival's masterful face
with interest, and a little suspicion, and answered quietly:--

"I do not know exactly what evidence will satisfy you, sir. Of course, you will require evidence.
I, myself, Bernardino Vasari of San Stefano, can testify that I saw Brian Luttrell in our monastery
on the 27th day of November, some days after his reputed death. I can account for all his time
after that date, and I can tell you where he is to be found at present. His cousin, Hugo Luttrell,
has already recognised him, and, although he is much changed, I fancy that there would be small
doubt about his identification."

"But why, in Heaven's name, did he allow himself to be thought dead?" cried Percival.

"You know, probably, the circumstances attending his brother's death?" said Dino, gently. "These,
and a cruel letter from Mrs. Luttrell, made him resolve to take advantage of an accident in
which his companions were killed. He made his way to a little inn on the southern side of the
Alps, and thence to our monastery, where I recognised him as the gentleman whom I had previously
seen travelling in Germany. I had had some conversation with him, and he had interested me--I
remembered him well."

"Did he give his name as Brian Luttrell then?"

"I accosted him by it, and he begged me at once not to do so, but to give him another name."

"What name?"

"I will tell you the name presently, Mr. Heron. He remained in the monastery for some months:
first ill of a fever on the brain, then, after his recovery, as a teacher to our young pupils.
When he grew stronger he became tired of our peaceful life; he left the monastery and wandered
from place to place in Italy. But he had no money: he began to think of work. He was learned:
he could teach: he thought that he might be a tutor. Shall I go on?"

"Good God!" said Percival, below his breath. He had actually turned pale, and was biting his
moustache savagely. "Go on, sir!" he thundered, looking at Dino from beneath his knitted brows.
"Tell me the rest as quickly as you can."

"He met with an English family," Dino continued, watching with keen interest the effect of
his words. "They were kind to him: they took him, without character, without recommendations,
and allowed him to teach their children. He did not know who they were: he thought that they
were rich people, and that the young lady who was so dutiful to them, and cared so tenderly
for their children, was poor like himself, a dependent like himself. He dared, therefore----"

"He lies and you lie!" Percival burst out, furiously. "How dare you come to me with a tale
of this sort? He must have known! It was simply a base deception in order to get back his estate.
If I had him here----"

"If you had him here you would listen to him, Mr. Heron," said Dino, in a perfectly unmoved
voice, "as you will listen to me when the first shock of your surprise is over."

"Your garb, I suppose, protects you," said Percival, sharply. "Else I would throw you out of
the window to join your accomplice outside. I daresay he is there. I don't believe a word of
your story. May I trouble you to go?"

"This conduct is unworthy of you, sir," said Dino. "Brian Luttrell's identity will not be disproved
by bluster. There is not the least doubt about it. Mr. Brian Luttrell is alive and has been
teaching in your father's family for the last few months under the name of John Stretton."

"Then he is a scoundrel," said Percival. He threw himself into his chair again, with his feet
stretched out before him, and his hands still thrust deep into his trousers' pockets. His face
was white with rage. "I always thought that he was a rogue; and, if this story is true, he
has proved himself one."

"How?" said Dino, quietly. "By living in poverty when he might have been rich? By allowing
others to take what was legally his own, because he had a scruple about his moral right to
it? If you knew all Brian Luttrell's story you would know that his only fault has been that
of over-conscientiousness, over-scrupulousness. But you do not know the story, perhaps you
never will, and, therefore, you cannot judge."

"I do not want to judge. I have nothing to do with Mr. Stretton and his story," said Percival.

"I will tell you----"

"I will not hear. You are impostors, the pair of you."

Dino's eyes flashed and his lips compressed themselves. His face, thin from his late illness,
assumed a wonderful sternness of expression.

"This is folly," he said, with a cold serenity of tone which impressed Percival in spite of
himself. "You will have to hear part of his story sooner or later, Mr. Heron; for your own
sake, for Miss Murray's sake, you had better hear it now."

"Look here, my good man," said Percival, sitting up, and regarding his visitor with contemptuous
disgust, "don't go bringing Miss Murray's name into this business, for, if you do, I'll call
a policeman and give you in charge for trying to extort money on false pretences, and you may
thank your priest's dress, or whatever it is, that I don't kick you out of the house. Do you hear?"

"Sir," said Dino, mildly, but with great dignity, "have I asked you for a single penny?"

Heron looked at him as if he would like to carry out the latter part of his threat, but the
young man was so frail, so thin, so feeble, that he felt suddenly ashamed of having threatened
him. He rose, planted his back firmly against the mantelpiece, and pointed significantly to
the door. "Go!" he said, briefly. "And don't come back."

"If I go," said Dino, rising from his chair, "I shall take the express train to Scotland at
eight o'clock to-night, and I shall see Miss Murray to-morrow morning."

The shot told. A sort of quiver passed over Percival's set face. He muttered an angry ejaculation.
"I'll see you d----d first," he said. "You'll do nothing of the kind."

"Then will you hear my story?"

Heron paused. He could have ground his teeth with fury; but he was quite alive to the difficulties
of the situation. If this young monk went with his story to Elizabeth, and Elizabeth believed
it, what would become of her fidelity to him? With his habitual cynicism, he told himself that
no woman would keep her word, if by doing so she lost a fortune and a lover both. He must hear
this story, if only to prevent its being told to her.

"Well," he said at last, taking his pipe from the mantelshelf, "I'll listen. Be so good as
to make your story short. I have no time to waste." And then he rammed the tobacco into the
bowl with his thumb in a suggestively decisive manner, lighted it, and proceeded to puff at
his pipe with a sort of savage vigour. He sent out great clouds of smoke, which speedily filled
the air and rendered speaking difficult to Dino, whose lungs had become delicate in consequence
of his wound. But Percival was rather pleased than otherwise to inconvenience him.

"There are several reasons," the young man began, "why Brian Luttrell wished to be thought
dead. He had killed his brother by accident, and Mrs. Luttrell thought that there had been
malice as well as carelessness in the deed. That was one reason. His mother's harshness preyed
upon his mind and drove him almost to melancholy madness. Mrs. Luttrell made another statement,
and made it in a way that convinced him that she had reasons for making it----"

"Can't you cut it short?" said Percival. "It's all very interesting, no doubt: but as I don't
care a hang what Brian Luttrell said, or thought, or did, I should prefer to have as little
of it as possible."

"I am sorry to inconvenience you, but I must tell my story in my own way," answered Dino. The
flash of his eye and the increased colour in his cheek showed that Heron's words irritated
him, but his voice was carefully calm and cool. "Mrs. Luttrell's statement was this: that Brian
Luttrell was not her son at all. I have in my possession the letter that she wrote to him on
the subject, assuring him confidently that he was the child of her Italian nurse, Vincenza
Vasari, and that her own child had died in infancy, and was buried in the churchyard of San
Stefano. Here is the letter, if you like to assure yourself that what I have said is true."

Percival made a satirical little bow of refusal. But a look of attention had come into his eyes.

"Brian believed this story absolutely, although he had then no proof of its truth," continued
Dino. "She told him that the Vasari family lived at San Stefano----"

"Vasari! Relations of your own, I presume," interposed Percival, with ironical politeness.

"And to San Stefano, therefore, he was making his way when the accident on the mountain occurred,"
said Dino, utterly disregarding the interruption. "There were inquiries made about him at San
Stefano soon after the news of his supposed death arrived in England, for Mrs. Luttrell guessed
that he would go thither if he were still living; but he had not then appeared at the monastery.
He did not arrive at San Stefano, as I said before, until a fortnight after the date of the
accident; he had been ill, and was footsore and weary. When he recovered from the brain-fever
which prostrated him as soon as he reached the monastery, he told his whole story to the Prior,
Padre Cristoforo of San Stefano, a man whose character is far beyond suspicion. I have also
Padre Cristoforo's statement, if you would like to see it."

Percival shook his head. But his pipe had gone out; he was listening now with interest.

"As it happened," the narrator went on, "Padre Cristoforo was already interested in the matter,
because the mother of Mrs. Luttrell's nurse, Vincenza, had, before her death, confided to him
her suspicions, and those of Vincenza's husband concerning the child that she had nursed. There
was a child living in the village of San Stefano, a child who had been brought up as Vincenza's
child, but Vincenza had told her this boy was the true Brian Luttrell, and that her son had
been taken back to Scotland as Mrs. Luttrell's child."

"I see your drift now," remarked Percival, quietly re-lighting his pipe. "Where is this Italian
Brian Luttrell to be found?"

"Need I tell you? Should I come here with this story if I were not the man?"

He asked the question almost sadly, but with a simplicity of manner which showed him to be
free from any desire to produce any theatrical effect. He waited for a moment, looking steadily
at Percival, whose darkening brow and kindling eyes displayed rapidly-rising anger.

"I was called Dino Vasari at San Stefano," he continued, "but I believe that my rightful name
is Brian Luttrell, and that Vincenza Vasari changed the children during an illness of Mrs.
Luttrell's."

"And that, therefore," said Percival, slowly, "you are the owner of the Strathleckie property--or,
as it is generally called, the Luttrell property--now possessed by Miss Murray?"

Dino bowed his head.

Percival puffed away at his pipe for a minute or two, and surveyed him from head to foot with
angry, contemptuous eyes. The only thing that prevented him from letting loose a storm of rage
upon Dino's head was the young man's air of grave simplicity and good faith. He did not look
like an intentional impostor, such as Percival Heron would gladly have believed him to be.

"Do you know," inquired Heron, after a momentary pause, "what the penalties are for attempting
to extort money, or for passing yourself off under a false name in order to get property? Did
you ever hear of the Claimant and Portland Prison? I would advise you to acquaint yourself
with these details before you come to me again. You may be more fool than knave; but you may
carry your foolery or your knavery elsewhere."

Dino smiled.

"You had better hear the rest of my story before you indulge in these idle threats, Mr. Heron.
I know perfectly well what I am doing."

There was a tone of lofty assurance, almost of superiority, in Dino's calm voice, which galled
Percival, because he felt that it had the power of subduing him a little. Before he had thought
of a rejoinder, the young Benedictine resumed his story.

"You will say rightly enough that these were not proofs. So Padre Cristoforo said when he kept
me in the monastery until I came to years of discretion. So he told Brian Luttrell when he
came to San Stefano. But since that day new witnesses have arisen. Vincenza Vasari was not
dead: she had only disappeared for a time. She is now found, and she is prepared to swear to
the truth of the story that I have told you. Mrs. Luttrell's suspicions, the statement made
by Vincenza's husband and mother, the confession of another woman who was Vincenza's accomplice,
all form corroborative evidence which will, I think, be quite sufficient to prove the case.
So, at least, Messrs. Brett and Grattan assure me, and they have gone carefully into the matter,
and have the original papers in their possession."

"Brett and Grattan!" repeated Percival. He knew the names. "Do you say that Brett and Grattan
have taken it up? You must have managed matters cleverly: Brett and Grattan are a respectable
firm."

"You are at liberty, of course, to question them. You may, perhaps, credit their statement."

"I will certainly go to them and expose this imposture," said Percival, haughtily. "I suppose
you have no objection," with a hardly-concealed sneer, "to go with me to them at once?"

"Not in the least. I am quite ready."

Percival was rather staggered by his willingness to accompany him. He laid down his pipe, which
he had been holding mechanically for some time in his hand, and made a step towards the door.
But as he reached it Dino spoke again.

"I wish, Mr. Heron, that before you go to these lawyers you would listen to me a little longer.
If for a moment or two you would divest yourself of your suspicions, if you would for a moment
or two assume (only for the sake of argument) the truth of my story, I could tell you then
why I came. As yet, I have scarcely approached the object of my errand."

"Money, I suppose!" said Percival. "Truth will out, sooner or later."

"Mr. Heron," said Dino, "are we to approach this subject as gentlemen or not? When I ask you
for money, you will be at liberty to insult me, not before."

Again that tone of quiet superiority! Percival broke out angrily:--

"I will listen to nothing more from you. If you like to go with me to Brett and Grattan, we
will go now; if not, you are a liar and an impostor, and I shall be happy to kick you out into
the street."

Dino raised his head; a quick, involuntary movement ran through his frame, as if it thrilled
with anger at the insulting words. Then his head sank; he quietly folded his arms across his
breast, and stood as he used to stand when awaiting an order or an admonition from the Prior--tranquil,
submissive, silent, but neither ill-humoured nor depressed. The very silence and submission
enraged Percival the more.

"If you were of Scotch or English blood," he said, sharply, pausing as he crossed the room
to look over his shoulder at the motionless figure in the black robe, with folded arms and
bent head, "you would resent the words I have hastily used. That you don't do so is proof positive
to my mind that you are no Luttrell."

"If I am a Luttrell, I trust that I am a Christian, too," said Dino, tranquilly. "It is a monk's
duty--a monk's privilege--to bear insult."

"Detestable hypocrisy!" growled Percival to himself, as he stepped to the door and ostentatiously
locked it, putting the key into his pocket, before he went into the adjoining bed-room to change
his coat. "We'll soon see what Brett and Grattan say to him. Confound the fellow! Who would
think that that smooth saintly face covered so much insolence! I should like to give him a
good hiding. I should, indeed."

He returned to the sitting-room, unlocked the door, and ordered a servant to fetch a hansom-cab.
Then he occupied himself by setting some of the books straight on the shelves, humming a tune
to himself meanwhile, as if nobody else were in the room.

"Mr. Heron," Dino said at last, "I came to propose a compromise. Will you listen to it yet?"

"No," said Percival, drily. "I'll listen to nothing until I have seen Brett. If your case is
as good as you declare it is, he will convince me; and then you can talk about compromises.
I'm not in the humour for compromises just now."

He noticed that Dino's eyes were fixed earnestly upon something on his writing-table. He drew
near enough to see that it was a cabinet photograph of Elizabeth Murray in a brass frame--a
likeness which had just been taken, and which was considered remarkably good. The head and
shoulders only were seen: the stately pose of the head, the slightly upturned profile, the
rippling mass of hair resting on the fine shoulders, round which a shawl had been loosely draped--these
constituted the chief points of a portrait which some people said was "idealised," but which,
in the opinion of the Herons, only showed Elizabeth at her best. Percival coolly took up the
photograph and marched away with it to another table, on which he laid it face downwards. He
did not choose to have the Italian impostor scrutinising Elizabeth Murray's face. Dino understood
the action, and liked him for it better than he had done as yet.

The drive to Messrs. Brett and Grattan's office was accomplished in perfect silence. The office
was just closing, but Mr. Brett--the partner with whom Percival happened to be acquainted--was
there, and received the visitors very civilly.

"You seem to know this--this gentleman, Mr. Brett?" began Percival, somewhat stiffly.

"I think I have that pleasure," said Mr. Brett, who was a big, red-faced, genial-looking man,
as much unlike the typical lawyer of the novel and the stage, as a fox-hunting squire would
have been. But Mr. Brett's reputation was assured. "I think I have that pleasure," he repeated,
rubbing his hands, and looking as though he was enjoying the interview very much. "I have seen
him before once or twice, have I not? eh, Mr.--er--Mr.----"

"Ah, that is just the point," said Percival. "Will you have the goodness to tell me the name
of this--this person?"

Mr. Brett stopped rubbing his hands, and looked from Dino to Percival, and back again to Dino.
The look said plainly enough, "What shall I tell him? How much does he know?"

"I wish to have no secrets from Mr. Heron," said Dino, simply. "He is the gentleman who is
going to marry Miss Elizabeth Murray, and, of course, he is interested in the matter."

"Ah, of course, of course. I don't know that you ought to have brought him here," said Mr.
Brett, shaking his head waggishly at Dino. "Against rules, you know: against custom: against
precedent. But I believe you want to arrange matters pleasantly amongst yourselves. Well, Mr.
Heron, I don't often like to commit myself to a statement, but, under the circumstances, I
have no hesitation in saying that I believe this gentleman now before you, who called himself
Vasari in Italy, is in reality----"

"Well?" said Percival, feeling his heart sink within him and speaking more impatiently than
usual in consequence, "Well, Mr. Brett?"

"Is in reality," said Mr. Brett, with great deliberation and emphasis, "the second son of Edward
and Margaret Luttrell, stolen from them in infancy--Brian Luttrell."

CHAPTER XXIX.

DINO'S PROPOSITION.

Dino turned away. He would not see the discomfiture plainly depicted upon Percival's face.
Mr. Brett smiled pleasantly, and rubbed his hands.

"I see that it's a shock to you, Mr. Heron," he said. "Well, we can understand that. It's natural.
Of course you thought Miss Murray a rich woman, as we all did, and it is a little disappointing----"

"Your remarks are offensive, sir, most offensive," said Percival, whose ire was thoroughly
roused by this address. "I will bid you and your client good-evening. I have no more to say."

He made for the door, but Dino interposed.

"It is my turn now, I think, Mr. Heron. You insisted upon my coming here: I must insist now
upon your seeing the documents I have to show you, and hearing what I have to say." And with
a sharp click he turned the key in the lock, and stood with his back against the door.

"Tut, tut, tut!" said Mr. Brett; "there is no need to lock the door, no need of violence, Mr.
Luttrell." In spite of himself, Percival started when he heard that name applied to the young
monk before him. "Let the matter be settled amicably, by all means. You come from the young
lady; you have authority to act for her, have you, Mr. Heron?"

"No," said Percival, sullenly. "She knows nothing about it."

"This is an informal interview," said Dino. "Mr. Heron refused to believe that you had undertaken
my case, Mr. Brett, until he heard the fact from your own lips. I trust that he is now satisfied
on that point, at any rate."

"Mr. Brett is an old acquaintance of mine. I have no reason to doubt his sincerity," said Percival,
shortly and stiffly.

If Dino had hoped for anything like an apology, he was much mistaken. Percival's temper was
rampant still.

"Then," said Dino, quitting the door, with the key in his hand, "we may as well proceed to
look at those papers of mine, Mr. Brett. There can be no objection to Mr. Heron's seeing them,
I suppose?"

The lawyer made some objections, but ended by producing from a black box, a bundle of papers,
amongst which were the signed and witnessed confessions of Vincenza Vasari and a woman named
Rosa Naldi, who had helped in the exchange of the children. Mr. Brett would not allow these
papers to go out of his own hands, but he showed them to Percival, expounded their contents,
and made comments upon the evidence, remarking amongst other things that Vincenza Vasari herself
was expected in England in a week or two, Padre Cristoforo having taken charge of her, and
undertaken to produce her at the fitting time.

"The evidence seems to be very conclusive," said Mr. Brett, with a pleasant smile. "In fact,
Miss Murray has no case at all, and I dare say her legal adviser will know what advice to give
her, Mr. Heron. Is there any question that you would like to ask?"

"No," said Percival, rising from his chair and glancing at Dino, who had stood by without speaking,
throughout the lawyer's exposition of the papers. Then, very ungraciously: "I suppose I owe
this gentleman in ecclesiastical attire--I hardly know what to call him--some sort of apology.
I see that I was mistaken in what I said."

"My dear sir, I am sure Mr. Luttrell will make allowance for words spoken in the heat of the
moment. No doubt it was a shock to you," said Mr. Brett, with ready sympathy, for which Percival
hated him in his heart. His brow contracted, and he might have said something uncivil had Dino
not come forward with a few quiet words, which diverted him from his purpose.

"If Mr. Heron thinks that he was mistaken," he said, "he will not refuse now to hear what I
wished to say before we left his house. It will be simple justice to listen to me."

"Very well," answered Percival, frowning and looking down. "I will listen."

"Could we, for a few moments only, have a private room?" said Dino to Mr. Brett, with some
embarrassment.

"You won't want me again?" said that cheerful gentleman, locking his desk. "Then, if you won't
think me uncivil, I'll leave you altogether. My clerk is in the outer room, if you require
him. I have a dinner engagement at eight o'clock which I should like to keep. Good-bye, Mr.
Heron; sorry for your disappointment. Good-bye, Mr. Luttrell; I wish you wouldn't don that
monkish dress of yours. It makes you look so un-English, you know. And, after all, you are
not a monk, and never will be."

"Do not be too sure of that," said Dino, smiling.

Mr. Brett departed, and the two young men were left together. Percival was standing, vexation
and impatience visible in every line of his handsome features. He gave his shoulders a shrug
as the door closed behind Mr. Brett, and turned to the fire.

"And now, Mr. Heron," said Dino, "will you listen to my proposition?" He spoke in Italian,
not English, and Percival replied in the same language.

"I have said I would listen."

"It refers to Brian Luttrell--the man who has borne that name so long that I think he should
still be called by it."

"Ah! You have proved to me that Mr. Brett believes your story, and you have shown me that your
case is a plausible one; but you have not proved to me that the man Stretton is identical with
Brian Luttrell."

"It is not necessary that that should be proved just now. It can be proved; but we will pass
over that point, if you please. I am sorry that what I have to say trenches somewhat on your
private and personal affairs, Mr. Heron. I can only entreat your patience for a little time.
Your marriage with Miss Murray----"

"Need that be dragged into the discussion?"

"It is exactly the point on which I wish to speak."

"Indeed." Percival pulled the lawyer's arm-chair towards him, seated himself, and pulled his
moustache. "I understand. You are Mr. Stretton's emissary!"

"His emissary! No." The denial was sharply spoken. It was with a softening touch of emotion
that Dino added--"I doubt whether he will easily forgive me. I have betrayed him. He does not
dream that I would tell his secret."

"Are you friendly with him, then?"

"We are as brothers."

"Where is he?"

"In London."

"Not gone to America then?"

"Not yet. He starts in a few days, if not delayed. I am trying to keep him back."

"I knew that his pretence of going was a lie!" muttered Percival. "Of course, he never intended
to leave the country!"

"Pardon me," said Dino, who had heard more than was quite meant for his ears. "The word 'lie'
should never be uttered in connection with any of Brian's words or actions. He is the soul
of honour."

Percival sneered bitterly. "As is shown----" he began, and then stopped short. But Dino understood.

"As is shown," he said, steadily, "by the fact that when he learnt, almost in the same moment,
that Miss Murray was the person who had inherited his property, and that she was promised in
marriage to yourself, he left the house in which she lived, and resolved to see her face no
more. Was there no sense of honour shown in this? For he loved her as his own soul."

"Upon my word," explained Percival, with unconcealed annoyance, "you seem to know a great deal
about Miss Murray's affairs and mine, Mr.--Mr.--Vasari. I am flattered by the interest they
excite; but I don't see exactly what good is to come of it. I knew of Mr. Stretton's proposal
long ago: a very insolent one, I considered it."

"Let me ask you a plain question, Mr. Heron. You love Miss Murray, do you not?"

"If I do," said Heron, haughtily, "it is not a question that I am disposed to answer at present."

"You love Miss Murray," said Dino, as if the question had been answered in the affirmative,
"and there is nothing on earth so dear to me as my friend Brian Luttrell. It may seem strange
to you that it should be so; but it is true. I have no wish to take his place in Scotland----"

"Then what are you doing in Mr. Brett's office?" asked Percival, bluntly.

For the first time Dino showed some embarrassment.

"I have been to blame," he said, hanging his head. "I was forced into this position--by others;
and I had not the strength to free myself. But I will not wrong Brian any longer."

"If your story is proved, it will not be wronging Brian or anybody else to claim your rights.
Take the Luttrell property, by all means, if it belongs to you. We shall do very well without it."

"Yes," said Dino, almost in a whisper, "you will do very well without it, if you are sure that
she loves you."

Percival sat erect in his chair and looked Dino in the face with an expression which, for the
first time, was devoid of scorn or anger. It was almost one of dread; it was certainly the
look of one who prepares himself to receive a shock.

"What have you to tell me?" he said, in an unusually quiet voice. "Is she deceiving me? Is
she corresponding with him? Have they made you their confidant?"

"No, no," cried Dino, earnestly. "How can you think so of a woman with a face like hers, of
a man with a soul like Brian's? Even he has told me little; but he has told me more than he
knows--and I have guessed the rest. If I had not known before, your face would have told me all."

"Tricked!" said Percival, falling back in his chair with a gesture of disgust. "I might have
known as much. Well, sir, you are wrong. And Miss Murray's feelings are not to be canvassed
in this way."

"You are right," said Dino; "we will not speak of her. We will speak of Brian, of my friend.
He is not happy. He is very brave, but he is unhappy, too. Are we to rob him of both the things
which might make his happiness? Are you to marry the woman that he loves, and am I to take
to myself his inheritance?"

"Hardly to be called his inheritance, I think," said Percival, in a parenthetic way, "if he
was the child of one Vincenza Vasari, and not of the Luttrells."

"I have my proposals to make," said Dino again lowering his voice. A nervous flush crept up
to his forehead: his lips twitched behind the thin fingers with which he had partly covered
them: the fingers trembled, too. Percival noted these signs of emotion without seeming to do
so: he waited with some curiosity for the proposition. It startled him when it came. "I have
been thinking that it would be better," said Dino, so simply and naturally that one would never
have supposed that he was indicating a path of stern self-sacrifice, "if I were to withdraw
all my claims to the estate, and you to relinquish Miss Murray's hand to Brian, then things
would fall into their proper places, and he would not go to America."

Percival stared at him for a full minute before he seemed quite to understand all that was
implied in this proposal; then he burst into a fit of scornful laughter.

"This is too absurd!" he cried. "Am I to give her up tamely because Mr. Brian Luttrell, as
you call him, wishes to marry her? I am not so anxious to secure Mr. Brian Luttrell's happiness."

"But you wish to secure Miss Murray's, do you not?"

Percival became suddenly silent. Dino went on persuasively.

"I care little for the money and the lands which they say would be mine. My greatest wish in
life is to become a monk. That is why I put on the gown that I used to wear, although I have
taken no vows upon me yet, but I came to you in the spirit of one to whom earthly things are
dead. Let me give up this estate to Brian, and make him happy with the woman that he loves.
When he is married to Elizabeth you shall never see my face again."

"This is your proposition?" said Percival, after a little pause.

"Yes."

"If I give up Elizabeth"--he forgot that he had not meant to call her by her Christian name
in Dino Vasari's presence--"you will give up your claim to the property?"

"Yes."

"And if I refuse, what will you do?"

"Fight the matter out by the help of the lawyers," said Dino, with an irrepressible flash of
his dark eyes. And then there was another pause, during which Percival knitted his brows and
gazed into the fire, and Dino never took his eyes from the other's face.

"Well, I refuse," said Percival at last, getting up and walking about the room, with an air
of being more angry than he really was. "I will have none of your crooked Italian ways. Fair
play is the best way of managing this matter. I refuse to carry out my share of this 'amicable
arrangement,' as Brett would call it. Let us fight it out. Every man for himself, and the devil
take the hindmost."

The last sentence was an English one.

"But what satisfaction will the fight give to anybody?" said Dino, earnestly. "For myself--I
may gain the estate--I probably shall do so--and what use shall I make of it? I might give
it, perhaps, to Brian, but what pleasure would it be to him if she married you? Miss Murray
will be left in poverty."

"And do you think she will care for that? Do you think I should care?"

"Money is a good thing: it is not well to despise it," said Dino. "Think what you are doing.
If you refuse my proposition you deprive Miss Murray of her estate, and--I leave you to decide
whether you deprive her of her happiness."

"Miss Murray can refuse me if she chooses," said Percival, shortly. "I should be a great fool
if I handed her over at your recommendation to a man that I know nothing about. Besides, you
could not do it. This Italian friend of yours, this Prior of San Stefano, would not let the
matter fall through. He and Brett would bring forward the witnesses----"

Dino turned his eyes slowly upon him with a curiously subtle look.

"No," he said. "I have received news to-day which puts the matter completely in my own hands.
Vincenza Vasari is dead: Rosa Naldi is dying. They were in a train when a railway accident
took place. They will never be able to appear as witnesses."

"But they made depositions----"

"Yes. I believe these depositions would establish the case. But depositions are written upon
paper, and hearsay evidence is not admitted. Nobody could prove it, if I did not wish it to
be proved."

"I doubt whether it could be proved at all," said Percival, hesitatingly. "Of course, it would
make Miss Murray uncomfortable. And if that other Brian Luttrell is living still, the money
would go back to him. Would he divide it with you, do you think, if he got it, even as you
would share it all with him?"

"I believe so," answered Dino. "But I should not want it--unless it were to give to the monastery;
and San Stefano is already rich. A monk has no wants."

"But I am not a monk. There lies the unfairness of your proposal. You give up what you care
for very little: I am to give up what is dearer than the whole world to me. No; I won't do
it. It's absurd."

"Is this your answer, Mr. Heron?" said Dino. "Will you sacrifice Brian's happiness--I say nothing
of her's, for you understand her best--for your own?"

"Yes, I will," Percival declared, roundly. "No man is called upon to give up his life for another
without good reason. Your friend is nothing to me. I'll get what I can out of the world for
myself. It is little enough, but I cannot be expected to surrender it for some ridiculous notion
of unselfishness. I never professed to be unselfish in my life. Mr. Stretton is a man to whom
I owe a grudge. I acknowledge it."

Dino sighed heavily. The shade of disappointment upon his face was so deep that Heron felt
some pity for him--all the more because he believed that the monk was destined to deeper disappointment
still. He turned to him with almost a friendly look.

"You can't expect extraordinary motives from an ordinary man like me," he said. "I must say
in all fairness that you have made a generous proposal. If I spoke too violently and hastily,
I hope you will overlook it. I was rather beside myself with rage--though not with the sort
of regret which Mr. Brett kindly attributes to me."

"I understood that," said Dino.

By a sudden impulse Percival held out his hand. It was a strong testimony to Dino's earnestness
and simplicity of character that the two parted friends after such a stormy interview.

As they went out of the office together Percival said, abruptly:--

"Where are you staying?"

Dino named the place.

"With the man you call Brian Luttrell?"

"With Brian Luttrell."

"What is the next thing you mean to do?"

"I must tell Brian that I have betrayed his secret."

"Oh, he won't be very angry with you for that!" laughed Percival.

Dino shook his head. He was not so sure.

As soon as they had separated, Percival went off at a swinging pace for a long walk. It was
his usual way of getting rid of annoyance or excitement; and he was vexed to find that he could
not easily shake off the effects that his conversation with Dino Vasari had produced upon his
mind. The unselfishness, the devotion, of this man--younger than himself, with a brilliant
future before him if only he chose to take advantage of it--appealed powerfully to his imagination.
He tried to laugh at it: he called Dino hard names--"Quixotic fool," "dreamer," and "enthusiast"--but
he could not forget that an ideal of conduct had been presented to his eyes, which was far
higher than any which he should have thought possible for himself, and by a man upon whose
profession of faith and calling he looked with profound contempt.

He tried to disbelieve the story that he had been told. He tried hard to think that the man
whom Elizabeth loved could not be Brian Luttrell. He strove to convince himself that Elizabeth
would be happier with him than with the man she loved. Last of all he struggled desperately
with the conviction that it was his highest duty to tell her the whole story, set her free,
and let Brian marry her if he chose. With the respective claims of Dino, Brian, and Elizabeth
to the estate, he felt that he had no need to interfere. They must settle it amongst themselves.

Of one thing he wanted to make sure. Was the tutor who had come with the Herons from Italy
indeed Brian Luttrell? How could he ascertain?

Chance favoured him, he thought. On the following morning he met Hugo Luttrell in town, and
accosted him with unusual eagerness.

"I've an odd question to ask you," he said, "but I have a strong reason for it. You saw the
tutor at Strathleckie when you were in Scotland?"

"Yes," said Hugo, looking at him restlessly out of his long, dark eyes.

"Had you any idea that Stretton was not his real name?"

Hugo paused before he replied.

"It is rather an odd question, certainly," he said, with a temporising smile. "May I ask what
you want to know for?"

"I was told that he came to the house under a feigned name: that's all."

"Who told you so?"

"Oh, a person who knew him."

"An Italian? A priest?"

Hugo was thinking of the possibility of Father Christoforo's having made his way to England.

"Yes," said Percival, dubiously. "A Benedictine monk, I believe. He hinted that you knew Stretton's
real name."

"Quite a mistake," said Hugo. "I know nothing about him. But your priest sounds romantic. An
old fellow, isn't he, with grey hair?"

"Not at all: young and slight, with dark eyes and rather a finely-cut face. Calls himself Dino
Vasari or some such name."

Hugo started: a yellowish pallor overspread his face. For a moment he stopped short in the
street: then hurried on so fast that Percival was left a few steps behind.

"What's the matter? So you know him?" said Heron, overtaking him by a few vigorous strides.

"A little. He's the biggest scoundrel I ever met," replied Hugo, slackening his pace and trying
to speak easily. "I was surprised at his being in England, that was all. Do you know where
he lives, that I may avoid the street!" he added, laughing.

Percival told him, wondering at his evident agitation.

"Then you can't tell me anything about Stretton?" he said, as they came to a building which
he was about to enter.

"Nothing. Wish I could," said Hugo, turning away.

"So he escaped, after all!" he murmured to himself, as he walked down the street, with an occasional
nervous glance to the right and left. "I thought I had done my work effectually: I did not
know I was such a bungler. Does he guess who attacked him, I wonder? I suppose not, or I should
have heard of the matter before now. Fortunate that I took the precaution of drugging him first.
What an escape! And he has got hold of Heron! I shall have to make sure of the old lady pretty
soon, or I foresee that Netherglen--and Kitty--never will be mine."

CHAPTER XXX.

FRIENDS AND BROTHERS.

In a little room on the second-floor of a London lodging-house near Manchester-square, Brian
Luttrell was packing a box, with the few scanty possessions that he called his own. He had
little light to see by, for the slender, tallow candle burnt with a very uncertain flame: the
glare of the gas lamps in the street gave almost a better light. The floor was uncarpeted,
the furniture scanty and poor: the fire in the grate smouldered miserably, and languished for
want of fuel. But there was a contented look on Brian's face. He even whistled and hummed to
himself as he packed his box, and though the tune broke down, and ended with a sigh, it showed
a mind more at ease than Brian's had been for many a long day.

"Heigho!" he said, rising from his task, and giving the box a shove with his foot into a corner,
"I wonder where Dino is? He ought not to be out so late with that cough of his. I suppose he
has gone to Brett and Grattan's. I am glad the dear fellow has put himself into their hands.
Right ought to be done: she would have said so herself, and I know Dino will be generous. It
would suit him very well to take a money compensation, and let her continue to reign, with
glories somewhat shorn, however, at Strathleckie. I am afraid he will do nothing but enrich
San Stefano with his inheritance. He certainly will not settle down at Netherglen as a country
squire.

"What will my mother say? Pooh! I must get out of that habit of calling her my mother. She
is no relation of mine, as she herself told me. Mrs. Luttrell!--it sounds a little odd. Odder,
too, to think that I must never sign myself Brian Luttrell any more. Bernardino Vasari! I think
I might as well stick to the plain John Stretton, which I adopted on the spur of the moment
at San Stefano. I suppose I shall soon have to meet the woman who calls herself--who is--my
mother. I will say nothing harsh or unkind to her, poor thing! She has done herself a greater
injury than she has done me."

So he meditated, with his face bent over his folded arms upon the mantelpiece. A slow step
on the stair roused him, he poked the fire vigorously, lighted another candle, and then opened
the door.

"Is that you, Dino?" he said. "Where have you been for the last three hours?"

Dino it was. He came in without speaking, and dropped into a chair, as if exhausted with fatigue.
Brian repeated his question, but when Dino tried to answer it, a fit of coughing choked his
words. It lasted several minutes, and left him panting, with the perspiration standing in great
beads upon his brow.

With a grave and anxious face Brian brought him some water, wrapped a cloak round his shaking
shoulders, and stood by him, waiting for the paroxysm of coughing to abate. Dino's cough was
seldom more than the little hacking one, which the wound in his side seemed to have left, but
it was always apt to grow worse in cold or foggy weather, and at times increased to positive
violence. Brian, who had visited him regularly while he was in hospital, and nursed him with
a woman's tenderness as soon as he was discharged from it, had never known it to be so bad
as it was on this occasion.

"You've been overdoing yourself, old fellow," he said, affectionately, when Dino was able to
look up and smile. "You have been out too late. And this den of mine is not the place for you.
You must clear out of it as soon as you can."

"Not as long as you are here," said Dino.

"That was all very well as long as we could remain unknown. But now that Brett and Grattan
consent to take up your case, as I knew they would all along, they will want to see you: your
friends and relations will want to visit you; and you must not be found here with me. I'll
settle you in new lodgings before I sail. There's a comfortable place in Piccadilly that I
used to know, with a landlady who is honest and kind."

"Too expensive for me," Dino murmured, with a pleasant light in his eyes, as Brian made preparations
for their evening meal, with a skill acquired by recent practice.

"You forget that your expenses will be paid out of the estate," said Brian, "in the long run.
Did not Brett offer to advance you funds if you wanted them?"

"Yes, and I declined them. I had enough from Father Christoforo," answered Dino, rather faintly.
"I did not like to run the risk of spending what I might not be able to repay."

"Brett would not have offered you money if he did not feel very sure of his case. There can
be no doubt of that," said Brian, as he set two cracked tea-cups on the table, and produced
a couple of chops and a frying-pan from a cupboard. "You need not be afraid."

For some minutes the sound of hissing and spluttering that came from the frying-pan effectually
prevented any further attempts at conversation. When the cooking was over, Dino again addressed
his friend.

"Do you want to know what I have been doing?"

"Yes, I mean you to give an account of yourself. But not until you have had some food. Eat
and drink first; then talk."

Dino smiled and came to the table. But he had no appetite: he swallowed a few mouthfuls, evidently
to please Brian only; then went back to the solitary arm-chair by the fire, and closed his eyes.

Brian did not disturb him. It was plain that Dino, not yet strong after his accident, had wearied
himself out. He was glad, however, when the young man roused himself from a light and fitful
doze, and said in his naturally tranquil voice:--

"I am ready to give an account of myself, as you call it, now."

"Then tell me," said Brian, leaning his elbow on the mantelpiece, and looking down upon the
pale, somewhat emaciated countenance, with a tender smile, "what you mean by going about London
in a dress which I thought that you had renounced for ever?"

"It only means," said Dino, returning the smile, "that you were mistaken. I had not renounced
it, and I think that I shall keep to it now."

"You can hardly do that in your position," said Brian, quietly.

"My position! What is that to me? 'I had rather be a door-keeper in the house of the Lord'--you
know what I mean: I have said it all to you before. If I go back to Italy, Brian, and the case
falls through, as it may do through lack of witnesses, will you not take your own again?"

"And turn out Miss Murray? Certainly not." Then, after a pause, Brian asked, rather sternly,
"What do you mean by the lack of witnesses? There are plenty of witnesses. There is--my--my
mother--for one."

"No. She is dead."

"Dead. Vincenza Vasari dead?"

Dino recounted to him briefly enough the details of the catastrophe, but acknowledged, in reply
to his quick questions, that there was no necessity for his claim to be given up on account
of the death of these two persons. Mr. Brett, with whom he had conferred before visiting Percival
Heron, had assured him that there could be no doubt of his identity with the child whom Mrs.
Luttrell had given Vincenza to nurse; and, knowing the circumstances, he thought it probable
that the law-suit would be an amicable one, and that Miss Murray would consent to a compromise.
All this, Dino repeated, though with some reluctance, to his friend.

"You see, Brian," he continued, "there will be no reason for your hiding yourself if my case
is proved. You would not be turning out Miss Murray or anybody else. You would be my friend,
my brother, my helper. Will you not stay in England and be all this to me? I ask you, as I
have asked you many times before, but I ask it now for the last time. Stay with me, and let
it be no secret that you are living still."

"I can't do it, Dino. I must go. You promised not to ask it of me again, dear old fellow."

"Let me come with you, then. We will both leave Miss Murray to enjoy her inheritance in peace."

"No, that would not be just."

"Just! What do I care for justice?" said Dino, indignantly, while his eyes grew dark and his
cheeks crimson with passionate feeling. "I care for you, for her, for the happiness of you
both. Can I do nothing towards it?"

"Nothing, I think, Dino mio."

"But you will stay with me until you go? You will not cast me off as you have cast off your
other friends? Promise me."

"I promise you, Dino," said Brian, laying his hand soothingly on the other's shoulder. It seemed
to him that Dino must be suffering from fever; that he was taking a morbidly exaggerated view
of matters. But his next words showed that his excitement proceeded from no merely physical cause.

"I have done you no harm, at any rate," he said, rising and holding Brian's hand between his
own. "I have made up my mind. I will have none of this inheritance. It shall either be yours
or hers. I do not want it. And I have taken the first step towards ridding myself of it."

"What have you done?" said Brian.

"Will you ever forgive me?" asked Dino, looking half-sadly, half-doubtfully, into his face.
"I am not sure that you ever will. I have betrayed you. I have said that you were alive."

Brian's face first turned red, then deathly pale. He withdrew his hand from Dino's grasp, and
took a backward step.

"You!" he said, in a stifled voice. "You! whom I thought to be my friend!"

"I am your friend still," said Dino.

Brian resumed his place by the mantelpiece, and played mechanically with the ornaments upon
it. His face was pale still, but a little smile had begun to curve his lips.

"So," he said, slowly, "my deep-laid plans are frustrated, it seems. I did not think you would
have done this, Dino. I took a good deal of trouble with my arrangements."

The tone of gentle satire went to Dino's heart. He looked appealingly at Brian, but did not speak.

"You have made me look like a very big fool," said Brian, quietly, "and all to no purpose.
You can't make me stay in England, you know, or present myself to be recognised by Mrs. Luttrell,
and old Colquhoun. I shall vanish to South America under another name, and leave no trace behind,
and the only result of your communication will be to disturb people's minds a little, and to
make them suppose that I had repented of my very harmless deception, and was trying to get
money out of you and Miss Murray."

"Nobody would think so who knows you."

"Who does know me? Not even you, Dino, if you think I would take advantage of what you have
said to-night. Go to-morrow, and tell Brett that you were mistaken. It is Brett you have told,
of course."

"It is not Brett."

"Who then?"

"Mr. Percival Heron," said Dino, looking him steadily in the face.

Brian drew himself up into an upright posture, with an ejaculation of astonishment. "Good Heavens,
Dino! What have you been doing?"

"My duty," answered Dino.

"Your duty! Good Heavens!--unpardonable interference I should call it from any one but you.
You don't understand the ways of the world! How should you, fresh from a Romish seminary? But
you should understand that it is wiser, safer, not to meddle with the affairs of other people."

"Your affairs are mine," said Dino, with his eyes on the ground.

Brian laughed bitterly. "Hardly, I think. I have given no one any authority to act for me.
I may manage my affairs badly, but on the whole I must manage them for myself."

"I knew that I should have to bear your reproaches," said Dino, with folded arms and downcast
eyes. Then, after a pause, during which Brian walked up and down the room impatiently, he added
in a lower tone, "But I did not think that they would have been so bitter."

Brian stopped short and looked at him, then came and laid his hand gently on his shoulder.
"Poor Dino!" he said, "I ought to remember how unlike all the rest of the world you are. Forgive
me. I did not mean to hurt you. No doubt you thought that you were acting for the best."

Dino looked up, and met the somewhat melancholy kindness of Brian's gaze. His heart was already
full: his impulsive nature was longing to assert itself: with one great sob he threw his arms
round Brian's neck, and fell weeping upon his shoulder.

"But, my dear Dino," said Brian, when the storm (the reason of which he understood very imperfectly)
had subsided, "you must see that this communication of my secret to Mr. Heron will make a difference
in my plans."

"What difference?"

"I must start to-morrow instead of next week."

"No, Brian, no."

"I must, indeed. Heron will tell your story to Brett, to Colquhoun, to Mrs. Luttrell, to Miss
Murray. He may have telegraphed it already. It is very important to him, because, you see,"
said Brian, with a sad half-smile, "he is going to marry Miss Murray, and, unless he knows
your history, he will think that my existence will deprive her of her fortune."

"I do not believe he will tell your story to anyone."

"Dino, caro mio! Heron is a man of honour. He can do nothing less, unfortunately."

"I think he will do less. I think that no word of what I have told him will pass his lips."

"It would be impossible for him to keep silence," remarked Brian, coldly, and Dino said nothing
more.

It was after a long silence, when the candle had died out, and the fire had grown so dim that
they could not see each other's faces, that Brian said in a low, but quiet tone--

"Did you tell him why I left Strathleckie?"

"Yes, I did."

Brian suppressed a vexed exclamation. It was no use trying to make Dino understand his position.

"What did he say?" he asked.

"He knew already."

"Ah! Yes. So I should have supposed." And there the conversation ended.

Long after Dino was tranquilly sleeping, Brian Luttrell sat by the ricketty round table in
the middle of the room labouring at the composition of one or two letters, which seemed very
difficult to write. Sheet after sheet was torn up and thrown aside. The grey dawn was creeping
in at the window before the last word was written, and the letters placed within their respective
envelopes. Slowly and carefully he wrote the address of the longest letter--wrote it, as he
thought, for the last time--Mrs. Luttrell, Netherglen, Dunmuir. Then he stole quietly out of
the house, and slipped it into the nearest pillar-box. The other letter--a few lines merely--he
put in his pocket, unaddressed. On his return he entered the tiny slip of a room which Dino
occupied, fearing lest his movements should have disturbed the sleeper. But Dino had not stirred.
Brian stood and looked at him for a little while, thinking of the circumstances in which they
had first met, of the strange bond which subsisted between them, and lastly of the curious
betrayal of his confidence, so unlike Dino's usual conduct, which Brian charitably set down
to ignorance of English customs and absence of English reserve. He guessed no finer motive,
and his mouth curled with an irrepressible, if somewhat mournful, smile, as he turned away,
murmuring to himself:--

"I have had my revenge."

He did not leave England next day. Dino's entreaties weighed with him; and he knew also that
he himself had acted in a way which was likely to nullify his friend's endeavours to reinstate
him in his old position. He waited with more curiosity than apprehension for the letter, the
telegram, the visit, that would assure him of Percival's uprightness. For Brian had no doubt
in his own mind as to what Percival Heron ought to do. If he learnt that Brian Luttrell was
still living, he ought to communicate the fact to Mr. Colquhoun at least. And if Mr. Colquhoun
were the kindly old man that he used to be, he would probably hasten to London to shake hands
once more with the boy that he had known and loved in early days. Brian was so certain of this
that he caught himself listening for the door-bell, and rehearsing the sentences with which
he should excuse his conduct to his kind, old friend.

But two days passed away, and he watched in vain. No message, no visitor, came to show him
that Percival Heron had told the story. Perhaps, however, he had written it in a letter. Brian
silently calculated the time that a letter and its answer would take. He found that by post
it was not possible to get a reply until an hour after the time at which he was to start.

In those two days Dino had an interview with Mr. Brett, from which he returned looking anxious
and uneasy. He told Brian, however, nothing of its import, and Brian did not choose to ask.
The day and the hour of Brian's departure came without further conversation between them on
the subject which was, perhaps, nearer than any other to their hearts. Dino wanted to accompany
his friend to the ship by which he was to sail: but Brian steadily refused to let him do so.
It was strange to see the relation between these two. In spite of his youth, Dino usually inspired
a feeling of respect in the minds of other men: his peculiarly grave and tranquil manner made
him appear older and more experienced than he really was. But with Brian, he fell naturally
into the position of a younger brother: he seemed to take a delight in leaning upon Brian's
judgment, and surrendering his own will. He had been brought up to depend upon others in this
way all through his life; but Brian saw clearly enough that the habit was contrary to his native
temperament, and that, when once freed from the leading-strings in which he had hitherto been
kept, he would certainly prove himself a man of remarkably strong and clear judgment. It was
this conviction that caused Brian to persist in his intention of going to South America: Dino
would do better when left to himself, than when leaning upon Brian, as his affection led him to do.

"You will come back," said Dino, in a tone that admitted of no contradiction. "I know you will
come back."

"Dino mio, you will come to see me some day, perhaps," said Brian. "Listen. I leave their future
in your care. Do you understand? Make it possible for them to be happy."

"I will do what is possible to bring you home again."

"Caro mio, that is not possible," said Brian. "Do not try. You see this letter? Keep it until
I have been an hour gone; then open it. Will you promise me that?"

"I promise."

"And now good-bye. Success and good fortune to you," said Brian, trying to smile. "When we
meet again----"

"Shall we ever meet again?" said Dino, with one arm round Brian's neck, with his eyes looking
straight into Brian's, with a look of pathetic longing which his friend never could forget.
"Or is it a last farewell? Brother--my brother--God bless thee, and bring thee home at last."
But it was of no earthly home that Dino thought.

And then they parted.

It was more than an hour before Dino thought of opening the letter which Brian had left with
him. It ran as follows:--

"Dino mio, pardon me if I have done wrongly. You told my story and I have told yours. I feared
lest you, in your generosity, should hide the truth, and therefore I have written fully to
your mother. Go to her if she sends for you, and remember that she has suffered much. I have
told her that you have the proofs: show them to her, and she will be convinced. God bless you,
my only friend and brother."

Dino's head dropped upon his hands. Were all his efforts vain to free himself from the burden
of a wealth which he did not desire? The Prior of San Stefano had forced him into the position
of a claimant to the estate. With his long-formed habits of obedience it seemed impossible
to gainsay the Prior's will. Here, in England, it was easier. And Dino was more and more resolved
to take his own way.

A letter was brought to him at that moment. He opened it, and let his eyes run mechanically
down the sheet. Then he started violently, and read it again with more attention. It contained
one sentence and a signature:--

"If Dino Vasari of San Stefano will visit me at Netherglen, I will hear what he has to say.

    "Margaret Luttrell."

Could he have expected more? And yet, to his excited fancy, the words seemed cold and hard.

CHAPTER XXXI.

ACCUSER AND ACCUSED.

There had been solemn council in the house of Netherglen. Mrs. Luttrell and Mr. Colquhoun had
held long interviews; letters and papers of all sorts had been produced and compared; the dressing-room
door was closed against all comers, and even Angela was excluded. Hugo was once summoned, and
came away from the conference with the air of a desperate man at once baffled and fierce. He
lurked about the dark corners of the house, as if he were afraid to appear in the light of
the day; but he took no one into his confidence. Fortune, character, life itself, perhaps,
seemed to him to be hanging on a thread. For, if Dino Vasari remembered his treachery and exposed
it, he knew that he should be ruined and disgraced. And he was resolved not to survive any
such public exposure. He would die by his own hand rather than stand in the dock as a would-be
murderer.

Even if things were not so bad as that, he did not see how he was to exonerate himself from
another charge; a minor one, indeed, but one which might make him look very black in some people's
eyes. He had known of Dino's claims for many weeks, as well as of Brian's existence. Why had
he told no one of his discoveries? What if Dino spoke of the tissue of lies which he had concocted,
the forgery of Brian's handwriting, in the interview which they had had in Tarragon-street?
Fortunately, Dino had burned the letter, and there had been no auditor of the conversation.
Of course, he must deny that he had known anything of the matter. Dino could prove nothing
against him; he could only make assertions. But assertions were awkward things sometimes.

So Hugo skulked and frowned and listened, and was told nothing definite; but saw by the light
of previous knowledge that there was great excitement in the bosoms of his aunt and the family
lawyer. There were letters and telegrams sent off, and Hugo was disgusted to find that he could
not catch sight of their addresses, much less of their contents. Mr. Colquhoun looked gloomy;
Mrs. Luttrell sternly exultant. What was going on? Was Brian coming home; or was Dino to be
recognised in Brian's place?

Hugo knew nothing. But one fine autumn morning, as he was standing in the garden at Netherglen,
he saw a dog-cart turn in at the gate, a dog-cart in which four men had with some difficulty
squeezed themselves--the driver, Mr. Colquhoun, Dino Vasari, and a red-faced man, whom Hugo
recognised, after a minute's hesitation, as the well-known solicitor, Mr. Brett.

Hugo drew back into the shrubbery and waited. He dared not show himself. He was trembling in
every limb. The hour of his disgrace was drawing near.

Should he take advantage of the moment, and leave Netherglen at once, or should he wait and
face it out? After a little reflection he determined to wait. From what he had seen of Dino
Vasari he fancied that it would not be easy to manage him. Yet he seemed to be a simple-minded
youth, fresh from the precincts of a monastery: he could surely by degrees be cajoled or bullied
into silence. If he did accuse Hugo of treachery, it was better, perhaps, that the accused
should be on the spot to justify himself. If only Hugo could see him before the story had been
told to Mrs. Luttrell!

He loitered about the house for some time, then went to his own room, and began to pack up
various articles which he should wish to take away with him, if Mrs. Luttrell expelled him
from the house. At every sound upon the stairs, he paused in his occupation and looked around
nervously. When the luncheon-bell rang he actually dared not go down to the dining-room. He
summoned a servant, and ordered brandy and water and a biscuit, alleging I an attack of illness
as an excuse for his non-appearance. And, indeed, the suspense and anxiety which he was enduring
made him feel and look really ill. He was sick with the agony of his dread.

The afternoon wore on. His window commanded a view of the drive: he was sure that the guests
had not yet left the house. It was four o'clock when somebody at length approached his door,
knocked, and then shook the door-handle.

"Hugo! Are you there?" It was Mr. Colquhoun's voice. "Can't you open the door?"

Hugo hesitated a moment: then turned the key, leaving Mr. Colquhoun to enter if he pleased.
He came in looking rather astonished at this mode of admittance.

"So! It's sick, you are, is it? Well, I don't exactly wonder at that. You've lost your chance
of Netherglen, Mr. Hugo Luttrell."

Hugo's face grew livid. He looked to Mr. Colquhoun for explanation, but did not speak.

"It's just the most remarkable coincidence I ever heard of," said Mr. Colquhoun, seating himself
in the least comfortable chair the room afforded, and rubbing his forehead with a great, red
silk-handkerchief. "Brian alive, and meeting with the very man who had a claim to the estate!
Though, of course, if one thinks of it, it is only natural they should meet, when Mrs. Luttrell,
poor body, had been fool enough to send Brian to San Stefano, the very place where the child
was brought up. You know the story?"

"No," said Hugo. His heart began to beat wildly. Had Dino kept silence after all?

Mr. Colquhoun launched forth upon the whole history, to which Hugo listened without a word
of comment. He was leaning against the window-frame, in a position from which he could still
see the drive, and his face was so white that Mr. Colquhoun at last was struck by its pallor.

"Man alive, are you going to faint, Hugo? What's wrong?"

"Nothing. I've had a headache. Then my aunt is satisfied as to the genuineness of this claim?"

"Satisfied! She's more than satisfied," said the old lawyer, with a groan. "I doubt myself
whether the court will see the matter in the same light. If Miss Murray, or if Brian Luttrell,
would make a good fight, I don't believe this Italian fellow would win the case. He might.
Brett says he would; But Brian--God bless him! he might have told me he was living still--Brian
has gone off to America, poor lad! and Elizabeth Murray--well, I'll make her fight, if I can,
but I doubt--I doubt."

"My aunt wants this fellow to have Strathleckie and Netherglen, too, then?"

"Yes, she does; so you are cut out there, Hugo. Don't build on Netherglen, if Margaret Luttrell's
own son is living. I must be going: Brett's to dine with me. I used to know him in London."

"Is Dino Vasari staying here, then?"

Mr. Colquhoun raised a warning finger. "You'll have to learn to call him by another name, if
he stays in this house, young man," he said. "He declines to be called Brian--he has that much
good sense--but it seems that Dino is short for Bernardino, or some such mouthful, and we're
to call him Bernard to avoid confusion. Bernard Luttrell--humph!--I don't know whether he will
stay the night or not. We met Miss Murray on our way up. The young man looked at her uncommonly
hard, and asked who she was. I think he was rather struck with her. Good-bye, Hugo; take care
of yourself, and don't be too downhearted. Poor Brian always told me to look after you, and
I will." But the assurance did not carry the consolation to Hugo's mind which Mr. Colquhoun
intended.

The two lawyers drove away to Dunmuir together. Hugo watched the red lamps of the dog-cart
down the road, and then turned away from the window with a gnawing sense of anxiety, which
grew more imperious every moment. He felt that he must do something to relieve it. He knew
where the interview with Dino was taking place. Mrs. Luttrell had lately been growing somewhat
infirm: a slight stroke of paralysis, dangerous only in that it was probably the precursor
of other attacks, had rendered locomotion particularly distasteful to her. She did not like
to feel that she was dependent upon others for aid, and, therefore, sat usually in a wheeled
chair in her dressing-room, and it was the most easily accessible room from her sleeping apartment.
She was in her dressing-room now, and Dino Vasari was with her.

Hugo stole quietly through the passage until he reached the door of Mrs. Luttrell's bed-room,
which was ajar. He slipped into the room and looked round. It was dimly lighted by the red
glow of the fire, and by this dim light he saw that the door into the dressing-room was also
not quite closed. He could hear the sound of voices. He paused a moment, and then advanced.
There was a high screen near the door, of which one fold was so close to the wall that only
a slight figure could slip behind it, though, when once behind there, it would be entirely
hidden. Hugo measured it with his eye: he would have to pass the aperture of the door to reach
it, but a cautious glance from a distance assured him that both Mrs. Luttrell and Dino had
their backs to him and could not see. He ensconced himself, therefore, between the screen and
the wall: he could see nothing, but every word fell distinctly upon his ear.

"Sit down beside me," Mrs. Luttrell was saying--how could her voice have grown so tender?--"and
tell me everything about your past life. I knew--I always knew--that that other child was not
my son. I have my own Brian now. Call me mother: it is long since I have heard the word."

"Mother!" Dino's musical tones were tremulous. "My mother! I have thought of her all my life."

"Ay, my poor son, and but for the wickedness of others, I might have seen and known you years
ago. I had an interloper in my house throughout all those years, and he worked me the bitterest
sorrow of my life."

"Do not speak so of Brian, mother," said Dino, gently. "He loved you--and he loved Richard.
His loss--his grief--has been greater even than yours."

"How dare you say so to me?" said Mrs. Luttrell, with a momentary return to her old, grim tones.
Then, immediately softening them--"But you may say anything you like. It is pleasure enough
to hear your voice. You must stay with me, Brian, and let me feast my eyes on you for a time.
I have no patience, no moderation left: 'my son was dead and is alive again, he was lost and
is found.'"

He raised his mother's hand and kissed it silently. The action would, of course, have been
lost upon Hugo, as he could not see the pair, but for Mrs. Luttrell's next words.

"Nay," she said, "kiss me on the cheek, not on the hand, Brian. I let Hugo Luttrell do it,
because of his foreign blood; but you have only a foreign training which you must forget. They
said something about your wearing a priest's dress: I am glad you did not wear it here, for
you would have been mobbed in Dunmuir. It's a sad pity that you're a Papist, Brian; but we
must set Mr. Drummond, our minister, to talk to you, and he'll soon show you the error of your
ways."

"I shall be very glad to hear what Mr. Drummond has to say," said Dino, with all the courtesy
which his monastic training had instilled; "but I fear that he will have his labour thrown
away. And I have one or two things to tell you, mother, now that those gentlemen have gone.
If I am to disappoint you, let me do it at once, so that you may understand."

"Disappoint me? and how can you do that?" asked Mrs. Luttrell, scornfully. "Perhaps you mean
that you will winter in the South! If your health requires it, do you think I would stand in
the way? You have a sickly air, but it makes you all the more like one whom I well remember--your
father's brother, who died of a decline in early youth. No, go if you like; I will not tie
you down. You can come back in the summer, and then we will think about your settling down
and marrying. There are plenty of nice girls in the neighbourhood, though none so good as Angela,
nor perhaps so handsome as Elizabeth Murray."

"Mother, I shall never marry."

"Not marry? and why not?" cried Mrs. Luttrell, indignantly. "But you say this to tease me only;
being a Luttrell--the only Luttrell, indeed, save Hugo, that remains--you must marry and continue
the family."

"I shall never marry," said Dino, with a firmness which at last seemed to make an impression
upon Mrs. Luttrell, "because I am going to be a monk."

Hugo could not stifle a quick catching of his breath. Did Dino mean what he said? And what
effect would this decision have upon the lives of the many persons whose future seemed to be
bound up with his? What would Mrs. Luttrell say?

At first she said nothing. And then Dino's voice was heard again.

"Mother, my mother, do not look at me like that. I must follow my vocation. I would have given
myself years ago, but I was not allowed. The Prior will receive me now. And nothing on earth
will turn me from my resolution. I have made up my mind."

"What!" said Mrs. Luttrell, very slowly. "You will desert me too, after all these years!"

Dino answered by repeating in Latin the words--"He that loveth father or mother more than Me,
is not worthy of Me." But Mrs. Luttrell interrupted him angrily.

"I want none of your Latin gibberish," she said. "I want plain commonsense. If you go into
a monastery, do you intend to give the property to the monks? Perhaps you want to turn Netherglen
into a convent, and establish a priory at Strathleckie? Well, I cannot prevent you. What fools
we are to think that there is any happiness in this world!"

"Mother!" said Dino, and his voice was very gentle, "let me speak to you of another before
we talk about the estates. Let me speak to you of Brian."

"Brian!" Her voice had a checked tone for a moment; then she recovered herself and spoke in
her usual harsh way. "I know no one of that name but you."

"I mean my friend whom you thought to be your son for so many years, mother. Have you no tenderness
for him? Do you not think of him with a little love and pity? Let me tell you what he suffered.
When he came to us first at San Stefano he was nearly dying of grief. It was long before we
nursed him back to health. When I think how we all learnt to love him, mother, I cannot but
believe that you must love him, too."

"I never loved him," said Mrs. Luttrell. "He stood in your place. If you had a spark of proper
pride in you, you would know that he was your enemy, and you will feel towards him as I do."

"He is an enemy that I have learned to love," answered Dino. "At any rate, mother"--his voice
always softened when he called her by that name--"at any rate, you will try to love him now."

"Why now?" She asked the question sharply.

"Because I mean him to fill my place."

There was a little silence, in which the fall of a cinder from the grate could be distinctly
heard. Then Mrs. Luttrell uttered a long, low moan. "Oh, my God!" she said. "What have I done
that I should be tormented in this way?"

"Mother, mother, do not say so," said Dino, evidently with deep emotion. Then, in a lower and
more earnest voice, he added--"Perhaps if you had tried to love the child that Vincenza placed
within your arms that day, you would have felt joy and not sorrow now."

"Do you dare to rebuke your mother?" said Mrs. Luttrell, fiercely. "If I had loved that child,
I would never have acknowledged you to-day. Not though all the witnesses in the world swore
to your story."

"That perhaps would have been the better for me," said Dino, softly. "Mother, I am going away
from you for ever; let me leave you another son. He has never grieved you willingly; forgive
him for those misfortunes which he could not help; love him instead of me."

"Never!"

"He has gone to the other side of the world, but I think he would come back if he knew that
you had need of him. Let me send him a line, a word, from you: make him the master of Netherglen,
and let me go in peace."

"I will not hear his name, I will not tolerate his presence within these walls," cried Mrs.
Luttrell, passionately. "He was never dear to me, never; and he is hateful to me now. He has
robbed me of both my sons: his hand struck Richard down, and for twenty-three years he usurped
your place. I will never see him again. I will never forgive him so long as my tongue can speak."

"Then may God forgive you," said Dino, in a strangely solemn voice, "for you are doing a worse
injustice, a worse wrong, than that done by the poor woman who tried to put her child in your
son's place. Have you held that child upon your knee, kissed his face, and seen him grow up
to manhood, without a particle of love for him in your heart? Did you send him away from you
with bitter reproaches, because of the accident which he would have given his own life to prevent?
You have spoilt his life, and you do not care. Your heart is hard then, and God will not let
that hardness go unpunished. Mother, pray that his judgments may not descend upon you for this."

"You have no right to talk to me in that way," said Mrs. Luttrell, with a great effort. "I
have not been unjust. You are ungrateful. If you go away from me, I will leave all that I possess
to Hugo, as I intended to do. Brian, as you call him--Vincenza Vasari's son--shall have nothing."

"And Brian is to be disinherited in favour of Hugo Luttrell, is he?" said Dino, in a still
lower voice, but one which the listener felt instinctively had a dangerous sound. "Do you know
what manner of man this Hugo Luttrell is, that you wish to enrich him with your wealth, and
make him the master of Netherglen?"

"I know no harm of him," she answered.

He paused a little, and turned his face--was it consciously or unconsciously?--towards the
open door, from which could be seen the screen, behind which the unhappy listener crouched
and quivered in agony of fear. Willingly would Hugo have turned and fled, but flight was now
impossible. The fire was blazing brightly, and threw a red glow over all the room. If he emerged
from behind the screen, his figure would be distinctly visible to Dino, whose face was turned
in that direction. What was he going to say?

"I know no harm of him," she answered.

"Then I will enlighten you. Hugo Luttrell knew that Brian was alive, that I was in England,
two months ago. A letter from the Prior of San Stefano must have been in some way intercepted
by him; he made use of his knowledge, however he obtained it, to bring the messages from Brian
which were utterly false, to try and induce me to relinquish my claim on you; he forged a letter
from Brian for that purpose; and finally----"

Mrs. Luttrell's voice, harsh and strident with emotion, against which she did her best to fight,
broke the sudden silence.

"Do you call it fair and right," she said, "to accuse a man of such faults as these behind
his back? If you want to tell me anything against Hugo, send for him and tell it to me in his
presence. Then he can defend himself."

"He will try to defend himself, no doubt," said Dino, with a note of melancholy scorn in his
grave, young voice. "But I will do nothing behind his back. You wish him to be summoned?"

"Yes, I do. Ring the bell instantly!" cried Mrs. Luttrell, whose loving ardour seemed to have
given way to the most unmitigated resentment.

"Tell the servants to find him and bring him here."

"They would not have far to go," said Dino, coolly. "He is close to hand. Hugo Luttrell, come
here and answer for yourself."

"What do you mean? Where is he?" exclaimed Mrs. Luttrell, struck with his tone of command.
"He is not in this room!"

"No, but he is in the next, hiding behind that screen. He has been there for the last half-hour.
You need play the spy no longer, sir. Have the goodness to step forward and show yourself."

The inexorable sternness of his voice struck the listeners with amaze. Pale as a ghost, trembling
like an aspen leaf, Hugo emerged from his hiding-place, and confronted the mother and the son.

CHAPTER XXXII.

RETRIBUTION.

"Confess!" said Dino, whose stern voice and outstretched, pointing finger seemed terrible as
those of some accusing and avenging angel to the wretched culprit. "Confess that I have only
told the truth. Confess that you lied and forged and cheated | to gain your own ends. Confess
that when other means failed you tried to kill me. Confess--and then"--with a sudden lowering
of his tones to the most wonderful exquisite tenderness--"God knows that I shall be ready to
forgive!"

But the last words passed unheeded. Hugo cowered before his eye, covered his ears with his
hands, and made a sudden dash to the door, with a cry that was more like the howl of a hunted
wild animal, than the utterance of a human being. Mrs. Luttrell called for help, and half-rose
from her chair. But Dino laid his hand upon her arm.

"Let him go," said he. "I have no desire to punish him. But I must warn you."

The door clanged behind the flying figure, and awakened the echoes of the old house. Hugo was
gone: whither they knew not: away, perhaps, into the world of darkness that reigned without.
Mrs. Luttrell sank back into her chair, trembling from head to foot.

"Mother," said Dino, going up to her, and kneeling before her, "forgive me if I have spoken
too violently. But I could not bear that you should never know what sort of man this Hugo Luttrell
has grown to be."

Her hand closed convulsively on his. "How--how did you know--that he was there?"

"I saw his reflection in the mirror before me as he passed the open door. He was afraid, and
he hid himself there to listen. Mother, never trust him again."

"Never--never," she stammered. "Stay with me--protect me."

"You will not need my protection," he said, looking at her with calm, surprised eyes. "You
will have your friends: Mr. Colquhoun, and the beautiful lady that you call Angela. And, for
my sake, let me think that you will have Brian, too."

"No, no!" Her voice took new strength as she answered him, and she snatched her hand angrily
away from his close clasp. "I will never speak to him again."

"Not even when he returns?"

"You told me that he was gone to America!"

"I feel sure that some day he will come back. He will learn the truth--that I have withdrawn
my claim; then he and Miss Murray must settle the matter of property between them. They may
divide it; or they might even marry."

His voice was perfectly calm; he had brooded over this arrangement for so long that it scarcely
struck him how terrible it would sound in Mrs. Luttrell's ears.

"Do you mean it?" she said, feebly. "You renounce your claim--to be--my son?"

"Oh, not your son, mother," he said, kissing the cold hand, which she immediately drew away
from him. "Not your son! Not the claim to be loved, and the right to love you! But let that
rest between ourselves. Why should the money that I do not want come between me and you, between
me and my friend? Let Brian come home, and you will have two sons instead of one."

"Rather say that I shall have no son at all," said Mrs. Luttrell, with gathering anger. "If
you do this thing I cast you off. I forbid you to give what is your own to Vincenza Vasari's son."

"You make it hard for me to act if you forbid me," said Dino, rising and standing before her
with a pleading look upon his face. "But I hold to my intention, mother. I will not touch a
penny of this fortune. It shall be Brian's, or Miss Murray's--never mine."

"The matter is in a lawyer's hands. Your rights will be proved in spite of you."

"I do not think they will. I hold the proofs in my hand. I can destroy them every one, if I
choose."

"But you will not choose. Besides, these are the copies, not the originals."

"No, excuse me. I obtained the originals from Mr. Brett. He expects me to take them back to
him to-night." Dino held out a roll of papers. "They're all here. I will not burn them, mother,
if you will send for Brian back and let him have his share."

"They would be no use if he came back. You must have the whole or nothing. Let us make a bargain;
give up your scheme of entering a monastery, and then I will consent to some arrangement with
Brian about money matters. But I will never see him!"

Dino shook his head. He turned to the fireplace with the papers in his hand.

"I withdraw my claims," he said, simply.

Mrs. Luttrell was quivering with suppressed excitement, but she mastered herself sufficiently
to speak with perfect coldness.

"Unless you consent to abandon a monastic life, I would rather that your claims were given
up," she said. "Let Elizabeth Murray keep the property, and do you and the man Vasari go your
separate ways."

"Mother----"

"Call me 'mother' no longer," she said, sternly, "you are no more my son than he was, if you
can leave me, in my loneliness and widowhood, to be a monk."

"Then--this is the end," said Dino.

With a sudden movement of the hand he placed the roll of papers in the very centre of the glowing
fire. Mrs. Luttrell uttered a faint cry, and struggled to rise to her feet, but she had not
the strength to do so. Besides, it was too late. With the poker, Dino held down the blazing
mass, until nothing but a charred and blackened ruin remained. Then he laid down the poker,
and faced Mrs. Luttrell with a wavering but victorious smile.

"It is done," he said, with something of exultation in his tone. "Now I am free. I have long
seen that this was the only thing to do. And now I can acknowledge that the temptation was
very great."

With lifted head and kindling eye, he looked, in this hour of triumph over himself, as if no
temptation had ever assailed, or ever could assail, him. But then his glance fell upon Mrs.
Luttrell, whose hands fiercely clutched the arms of her chair, whose features worked with uncontrollable
agitation. He fell on his knees before her.

"Mother!" he cried. "Forgive me. Perhaps I was wrong. I will--I will ... I will pray for you."

The last few words were spoken after a long pause, with a fall in his voice, which showed that
they were not those which he had intended to say when he began the sentence. There was something
solemn and pathetic in the sound. But Mrs. Luttrell would not hear.

"Go!" she said, hoarsely. "Go. You are no son of mine. Sooner Brian--or Hugo--than you. Go
back to your monastery."

She thrust him away from her with her hands when he tried to plead. And at last he saw that
there was no use in arguing, for she pulled a bell which hung within her reach, and, when the
servant appeared, she placed the matter beyond dispute by saying sharply:--

"Show this gentleman out."

Dino looked at her face, clasped his hands in one last silent entreaty, and--went. There was
no use in staying longer. The door closed behind him, and the woman who had thrust away from
her the love that might have been hers, but for her selfishness and hardness of heart, was
left alone.

A whirl of raging, angry thoughts made her brain throb and reel. She had put away from her
what might have been the great joy of her life; her will, which had never been controlled by
another, had been simply set aside and disregarded. What was there left for her to do? All
the repentance in the world would not give her back the precious papers that her son had burnt
before her eyes. And where had he gone? Back to his monastery? Should she never, never see
him again? Was he tramping the long and weary way to the Dunmuir station, where the railway
engine would presently come shrieking and sweeping out of the darkness, and, like a fabled
monster in some old fairy tale, gather him into its embrace, and bear him away to a place whence
he would never more return?

So grotesque this fancy appeared to her that her anger failed her, and she laughed a little
to herself--laughed with bloodless lips that made no sound. A kind of numbness of thought came
over her: she sat for a little time in blank unconsciousness of her sorrow, and yet she did
not sleep. And then a host of vividly-pictured images began to succeed each other with frightful
rapidity across the tabula rasa of her mind.

It seemed to her in that quiet hour she saw her son as he walked dawn the dark road to Dunmuir.
The moon was just rising; the trees on either hand lifted their gaunt branches to a wild and
starless sky. Whose face, white as that of a corpse, gleamed from between those leafless stems?
Hugo's, surely. And what did he hold in his hand? Was it a knife on which a faint ray of moonlight
was palely reflected? He was watching for that solitary traveller who came with heedless step
and hanging head upon the lonely road. In another moment the spring would be taken, the thrust
made, and a dying man's blood would well out upon the stones. Could she do nothing? "Brian!
Brian!" she cried--or strove to cry; but the shriek seemed to be stifled before it left her
lips. "Brian!" Three times she tried to call his name, with an agony of effort which, perhaps,
brought her back to consciousness--for the dream, if dream it was, vanished, and she awoke.

Awoke--to the remembrance of what she had heard, concerning Hugo's attempt on Dino's life,
and the fact that she had sent her son out of the house to walk to Dunmuir alone. She was not
so blind to Hugo's inherited proclivities to passion and revenge as she pretended to be. She
knew that he was a dangerous enemy, and that Dino had incurred his hatred. What might not happen
on that lonely road between Netherglen and Dunmuir if Dino (Brian, she called him) traversed
it unwarned, alone, unarmed? She must send servants after him at once, to guard him as he went
upon his way. She heard her maid in the next room. Should she call Janet, or should she ring
the bell?

What a curiously-helpless sensation had come over her! She did not seem able to rouse herself.
She could not lift her hand. She was tired; that was it. She would call Janet. "Janet!" But
Janet did not hear.

How was it that she could not speak? Her faculties were as clear as usual: her memory was as
strong as ever it had been. She knew exactly what she wanted: she could arrange in her own
mind the sentences that she wished to say. But, try as she would, she could not articulate
a word, she could not raise a finger, or make a sign. And again the terrible dread of what
would happen to the son she loved took possession of her mind.

Oh, if only he would return, she would let him have his way. What did it matter that the proof
of his birth had been destroyed? She would acknowledge him as her son before all the world;
and she would let him divide his heritage with whomsoever he chose. Netherglen should be his,
and the three claimants might settle between themselves, whether the rest of the property should
belong to one of them, or be divided amongst the three. He might even go back to San Stefano;
she would love him and bless him throughout, if only she knew that his life was safe. She went
further. She seemed to be pleading with fate--or rather with God--for the safety of her son.
She would receive Brian with open arms; she would try to love him for Dino's sake. She would
do all and everything that Dino required from her, if only she could conquer this terrible
helplessness of feeling, this dumbness of tongue which had come over her. Surely it was but
a passing phase: surely when someone came and stood before her the spell would be broken, and
she would be able to speak once more.

The maid peeped in, thought she was sleeping, and quietly retired. No one ventured to disturb
Mrs. Luttrell if she nodded, for at night she slept so little that even a few minutes' slumber
in the daytime was a boon to her. A silent, motionless figure in her great arm-chair, with
her hands folded before her in her lap, she sat--not sleeping--with all her senses unnaturally
sharpened, it seemed to her; hearing every sound in the house, noting every change in the red
embers of the fire in which the proof of her son's history had been consumed, and all the while
picturing to herself some terrible tragedy going on outside the house, which a word from her
might have averted. And she not able to pronounce that word!

Dino, meanwhile, had plunged into the darkness, without a thought of fear for himself. He walked
away from the house just as she had seen him in her waking dream, with head bent and eyes fixed
on the ground. He took the right road to Dunmuir, more by accident than by design, and walked
beneath the rows of sheltering trees, through which the loch gleamed whitely on the one hand,
while on the other the woods looked ominously black, without a thought of the revengeful ferocity
which lurked beneath the velvet smoothness of Hugo Luttrell's outer demeanour. If something
moved amongst the trees on his right hand, if something crouched amongst the brushwood, like
a wild animal prepared to spring, he neither saw nor heard the tokens which might have moved
him to suspicion. But suddenly it seemed to him that a wild cry rang out upon the stillness
of the night air. His friend's name--or was it his own?--three times repeated, in tones of
heartrending pain and terror. "Brian! Brian! Brian!" Whose voice had called him? Not that of
anyone he knew. And yet, what stranger would use that name? He stopped, looked round, and answered:--

"Yes, I am here."

And then it struck him that the voice had been close beside him, and that, standing where he
stood in the middle of the long, white road, it was quite impossible that any one could be
so near, and yet remain unseen.

With a slight shudder he let his eyes explore the sides of the road: the hedgerows, and the
bank that rose on his right hand towards the wood. Surely there was something that moved and
stopped, and moved again amongst the bracken. With one bound Dino reached the moving object,
and dragged it forth into the light. He knew whom he was touching before he saw the face. It
was Hugo who lurked in the hedgerows, waiting--and for what?

"You heard it?" said Dino, as the young man crouched before him, scarcely daring to lift up
his head, although at that moment, if he had had his wits about him, he could not have had
a better chance for the accomplishment of any sinister design. "Who called?"

Hugo cast a quick startled glance at the wood behind him. "I heard nothing," he said, sullenly.

"I heard a voice that called me," said Dino. Then he looked at Hugo, and pressed his shoulder
somewhat heavily with his hand. "What were you doing there? For whom were you waiting?"

"For nobody," muttered Hugo.

"Are you sure of that? I could almost believe that you were waiting for me; and should I be
far wrong? When I think of that other time, when you deceived me, and trapped me, and left
me dying, as you thought, in the streets, I can believe anything of you now."

Hugo's trembling lips refused to articulate a word. He could neither deny the charge nor plead
for mercy.

Dino's exultation of mood led him to despise an appeal to any but the higher motives. He would
not condescend to threaten Hugo with the police-court and the criminal cell. He loosed his
hold on the young man's shoulder, and told him to rise from the half-kneeling posture, to which
fear, rather than Dino's strength, had brought him. And when Hugo stood before him, he spoke
in the tone of one to whom the spiritual side of life was more real, more important than any
other, and it seemed to Hugo as if he spoke from out some other world.

"There is a day coming," he said, "when the secrets of all men's hearts will be revealed. And
where will you be, what will you do in that dread day? When you stand before the Judge of all
men on His great white Throne, how will you justify yourself to Him?"

The strong conviction, the deep penetrating accents of his words, carried a sting to Hugo's
conscience. He felt as if Dino had a supernatural knowledge of his past life and his future,
when he said solemnly:--

"Think of the secrets of your heart which shall then be made known to all men. What have you
done? Have you not broken God's laws? Have you not in very truth committed murder?... There
is a commandment in God's Word which says, 'Thou shalt not kill.'"

"Stop, stop, for Heaven's sake, stop!" gasped Hugo, covering his face with his hands. "How
can you know all this? I did not mean to kill him. I meant only to have my revenge. I did not
know----"

"Nay, do not try to excuse yourself," said Dino, who caught the words imperfectly, and did
not understand that they referred to any crime but the one so nearly accomplished against himself.
"God knows all. He saw what you did: He can make it manifest in His own way. Confess to Him
now: not to me. I pardon you."

There was a great sob from behind Hugo's quivering fingers; but it was only of relief, not
repentance. Dino waited a moment or two before he said, with the tone of quiet authority which
was natural to him:--

"Now fetch me the knife which you dropped amongst the ferns by the hedge over there."

With the keen, quick sight that he possessed, he had caught a glimpse of it in the scuffle,
and seen it drop from Hugo's hand. But the young Sicilian took the order as another proof of
the sort of superhuman knowledge of his deeds and motives which he attributed to Dino Vasari,
and went submissively to the place where the weapon was lying, picked it up, and with hanging
head, presented it humbly to the man whose spiritual force had for the moment mastered him.

"You must not return to Netherglen," said Dino, looking at him as he spoke. "My mother will
not see you again: she does not want you near her. You understand?"

Hugo assented, with a sort of stifled groan.

"I was forced to tell her, in order to put her on her guard. But if you obey me, I will tell
no one else. I have not even told Brian. If I find that you return to your evil courses, I
shall keep the secret of your conduct no longer. Then, when Brian comes home, he can reckon
with you."

"Brian!" ejaculated Hugo.

"Yes: Brian. What I require from you is that you trouble Netherglen no more. I cannot think
of you with peace in my mother's house. You will leave it to-night--at once."

"Yes," Hugo muttered. He had no desire to return to Netherglen.

"I am going to Dunmuir," said Dino. "You can walk on with me."

Hugo made no opposition. He turned his face vaguely in the specified direction, and moved onward;
but the sound of Dino's voice, clear and cold, gave him a thrill of shame, amounting to positive
physical pain.

"Walk before me, if you please. I cannot trust you."

They walked on: Hugo a pace or two in front, Dino behind. Not a word was spoken between them
until they reached the chief street of Dunmuir, and then Dino called to him to pause. They
were standing in front of Mr. Colquhoun's door.

"You are not going in here?" said Hugo, with a sharp note of terror in his voice. "You will
not tell Colquhoun?"

"I will tell no one," said Dino, "so long as you fulfil the condition I have laid upon you.
This is our last word on the subject. God forgive you, as I do."

They stood for a moment, face to face. The moon had risen, and its light fell peacefully upon
the paved street, the old stone houses, the broad, beautiful river with its wooded banks, the
distant sweep of hills. It fell also on the faces of the two men, not unlike in feature and
colouring, but totally dissimilar in expression, and seemed to intensify every point of difference
between them. There was a lofty serenity upon Dino Vasari's brow, while guilt and fear and
misery were deeply imprinted on Hugo's boyish, beautiful face. For the first time the contrast
between them struck forcibly on Hugo's mind. He leaned against the stone wall of Mr. Colquhoun's
house, and gave vent to his emotion in one bitter, remorseful sob of pain.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

WHAT PERCIVAL KNEW.

Mr. Colquhoun and Mr. Brett were sitting over their wine in the well-lighted, well-warmed dining-room
of the lawyer's house. They had been friends in their earlier days, and were delighted to have
an opportunity of meeting (in a strictly unprofessional way) and chatting over the memories
of their youth. It was a surprise to both of them when the door was opened to admit Dino Vasari
and Hugo Luttrell: two of the last visitors whom Mr. Colquhoun expected. His bow to Dino was
a little stiff: his greeting of Hugo more cordial than usual.

"You come from Mrs. Luttrell?" he asked, in surprise.

Hugo's pallid lips, and look of agitation, convinced him that some disaster was impending.
But Dino answered with great composure.

"I come to bring you news which I think ought not to be kept from you for a moment longer than
is necessary," he said.

"Pray take a glass of wine, Mr.--er--Mr.----" The lawyer did not quite know how to address
his visitor. "Won't you sit down, Hugo?"

"I have not come to stay," said Dino. "I am going to the hotel for the night. I wished only
to speak to you at once." He put one hand on the table by which he was standing and glanced
at Mr. Brett. For the first time he showed some embarrassment. "I hope it will not inconvenience
you," he said, "if I tell you that I have withdrawn my claim."

Dead silence fell on the assembly. Mr. Brett pushed back his chair a little way and stared.
Mr. Colquhoun shook his head and smiled.

"I find," continued Dino, "that Mrs. Luttrell and I have entirely different views as to the
disposition of the property and the life that I ought to lead. I cannot give up my plans--even
for her. The easiest way to set things straight is to let the estate remain in Miss Murray's
hands."

"You can't!" said Mr. Colquhoun, abruptly. "Brian Luttrell is alive!"

"Then let it go to Brian Luttrell."

"My dear sir," said Mr. Brett, "you have offered us complete documentary evidence that the
gentleman now on his way to America is not Brian Luttrell at all."

"Yes, but there is only documentary evidence," said Dino. "The deaths of Vincenza Vasari and
Rosa Naldi in a railway accident deprived us of anything else."

"Where are those papers?" asked Mr. Brett, sharply. "I hope they are safe."

"Quite safe, Mr. Brett. I have burnt them all." The shock of this communication was too much,
even for the case-hardened Mr. Brett. He turned positively pale.

"Burnt them! Burnt them!" he ejaculated. "Oh, the man is mad. Burnt the proofs of his position
and birth----"

"I have done all that I wanted to do," said Dino, colouring as the three pairs of eyes were
fastened upon him with different expressions of disbelief, surprise, and even scorn. "My mother
knows that I am her son: that is all I cared for. That is what I came for, not for the estate."

"But, my dear, young friend," said Mr. Colquhoun, with unusual gentleness, "don't you see that
if Mrs. Luttrell and Brian and Miss Murray are all convinced that you are Mrs. Luttrell's son,
you are doing them a wrong by destroying the proofs and leaving everybody in an unsettled state?
You should never have come to Scotland at all if you did not mean to carry the matter through."

"That's what I say," cried Mr. Brett, who was working himself up into a violent passion. "He
has played fast and loose with all us! He has tricked and cheated me. Why, he had a splendid
case! And to think that it can be set aside in this way!"

"Very informal," said Mr. Colquhoun, shaking his head, but with a little gleam of laughter
in his eye. If Dino Vasari had told the truth, the matter had taken a fortunate turn in Mr.
Colquhoun's opinion.

"Scandalous! scandalous!" exclaimed Mr. Brett. "Actionable, I call it. You had no right to
make away with those papers, sir. However, it may be possible to repair the loss. They were
not all there."

"I will not have it," said Dino, decisively. "Nothing more shall be done. I waive my claims
entirely. Brian and Miss Murray can settle the rest."

And then the party broke up. Mr. Brett seized his client by the arm and bore him away to the
hotel, arguing and scolding as he went. Before his departure, however, Dino found time to say
a word in Mr. Colquhoun's ear.

"Will you kindly look after Hugo to-night?" he said. "Mrs. Luttrell will not wish him to return
to Netherglen."

"Oh! There's been a quarrel, has there?" said Mr. Colquhoun eyeing the young man curiously.

After a little consideration, Dino thought himself justified in saying "Yes."

"I will see after him. You are going with Brett. You'll not have a smooth time of it."

"It will be smoother by-and-bye. You will shake hands with me, Mr. Colquhoun?"

"That I will," said the old lawyer, heartily. "And wish you God-speed, my lad. You've not been
very wise, maybe, but you've been generous."

"You will have Brian home, before long, I hope."

"I hope so. I hope so. It's a difficult matter to settle," said Mr. Colquhoun, cautiously,
"but I think we might see our way out of it if Brian were at home. If you want a friend, lad,
come to me."

Left alone with Hugo, the solicitor took his place once more at the table, and hastily drank
off a glass of wine, then glanced at his silent guest with a queerly-questioning look.

"What's wrong with ye, lad?" he said. "Cheer up, and drink a glass of good port wine. Your
aunt has quarrelled with many people before you, and she'll like enough come to her senses
in course of time."

"Did he say I had quarrelled with my aunt?" asked Hugo, in a dazed sort of way.

"Well, he said as much. He said there had been a quarrel. He asked me to keep an eye on you.
Why, Hugo, my man, what's the matter?"

For Hugo, utterly careless of the old man's presence, suddenly laid his aims on the table,
and his head on his arms, and burst into passionate hysterical tears.

"Tut, tut, tut, man! this will never do," said Mr. Colquhoun, rebukingly. "You're not a girl,
nor a child, to cry for a sharp word or two. What's wrong?"

But he got no answer. Not even when Hugo, spent and exhausted with the violence of his emotion,
lifted up his face and asked hoarsely for brandy. Mr. Colquhoun gave him what he required,
without asking further questions, and tried to induce him to take some solid food; but Hugo
absolutely refused to swallow anything but a stiff glass of brandy and water, and allowed himself
to be conducted to a bed-room, where he flung himself face downwards on the bed, and preserved
a sullen silence.

Mr. Colquhoun did not press him to speak. "I'll hear it all from Margaret Luttrell to-morrow
morning," he said to himself. "My mind misgives me that there have been strange doings up at
Netherglen to-night. But I'll know to-morrow."

It was at that very moment that Angela Vivian, going into the dressing-room, found a motionless,
silent figure, sitting upright in the wheeled arm-chair, a figure, not lifeless, indeed, but
with life apparent only in the agonised glance of the restless eyes, which seemed to plead
for help. But no help could be given to her now. No more hard words could fall from those stricken
lips: no more bitter sentences be written by those nerveless fingers. She might live for years,
if dragging on a mute, maimed existence could be, indeed, called living; but, as far as power
over the destiny of others, of doing good or harm to her loved ones, was concerned, Margaret
Luttrell was practically dead!

Mr. Colquhoun heard the news of Mrs. Luttrell's seizure on the following morning, and made
good use of it as a reproach to Dino in the conversation that he had with him. But Dino, although
deeply grieved at the turn which things had taken, stood firm. He would have nothing to do
with the Strathleckie or the Luttrell properties. Whereupon, Mr. Colquhoun went straight to
Miss Murray, and told her, to the best of his ability, the long and intricate story. Be it
observed that, although Mr. Colquhoun knew that Brian was living, and that he had lately been
in England, he did not know of Brian's appearance at Strathleckie under the name of Stretton,
and was, therefore, unable to give Elizabeth any information on this point.

Elizabeth was imperative in her decision.

"At any rate," she said, "the property cannot belong to me. It must belong either to Mr. Luttrell
or to Mr. Vasari. I have no right to it."

"Possession is nine points of the law, my dear," said the lawyer. "Nobody can turn you out
until Brian comes home again. It may be all a mistake."

"You don't think it a mistake, Mr. Colquhoun?"

Mr. Colquhoun smiled, pursed up his lips, and gave his head a little shake, as much as to say
that he was not going to be tricked into any expression of his private opinions.

"The thing will be to get Mr. Brian Luttrell back," said Elizabeth.

"Not such an easy thing as it seems, I am afraid, Miss Murray. The lad, Dino Vasari, or whatever
his name is, tried hard to keep him, but failed. He is an honest lad, I believe, this Dino,
but he's an awful fool, you know, begging your pardon. If he wanted to keep Brian in England,
why couldn't he write to me?"

"Perhaps he did not know of your friendship for Brian," said Elizabeth, smiling.

"Then he knew very little of Brian's life and Brian's friends, my dear, and, according to his
own account, he knew a good deal. Of course, he is a foreigner, and we must make allowances
for him, especially as he was brought up in a monastery, where I don't suppose they learn much
about the forms of ordinary life. What puzzles me is the stupidity of one or two other people,
who might have let me know in time, if they had had their wits about them. I've a crow to pluck
with your Mr. Heron on that ground," concluded Mr. Colquhoun, never dreaming that he was making
mischief by his communication.

Elizabeth started forward. "Percival!" she said, contracting her brows and looking at Mr. Colquhoun
earnestly. "You don't mean that Percival knew!"

Mr. Colquhoun perceived that he had gone too far, but could not retract his words.

"Well, my dear Miss Murray, he certainly knew something----" and then he stopped short and
coughed apologetically.

"Oh," said Elizabeth, with a little extra colour in her cheeks, and the faintest possible touch
of coldness, "no doubt he had his reasons for being silent; he will explain them when he comes."

"No doubt," said the lawyer, gravely; but he chuckled a little to himself over the account
which Mr. Brett had given him that morning of Mr. Heron's disappointment. (Mr. Brett had thrown
up the case, he told his friend Colquhoun; would have nothing more to do with it at any price.
"I think the case has thrown you up," said Mr. Colquhoun, laughing slyly.)

He had taken up some papers which he had brought with him and was turning towards the door
when a new thought caused him to stop, and address Elizabeth once more.

"Miss Murray," he said, "I do not wish to make a remark that would be unpleasant to you, but
when I remember that Mr. Heron was in possession of the facts that I have just imparted to
you, nearly a week ago, I do think, like yourself, that his conduct calls for an explanation."

"I did not say that I thought so, Mr. Colquhoun," said Elizabeth, feeling provoked. But Mr.
Colquhoun was gone.

Nevertheless, she agreed with him so far that she sent off a telegram to Percival that afternoon.
"Come to me at once, if possible. I want you."

When Percival received the message, which he did on his return from his club about eleven o'clock
at night, he eyed the thin, pink paper on which it was written as if it had been a reptile
of some poisonous kind. "I expected it," he said to himself, and all the gaiety went out of
his face. "She has found something out."

It was too late to do anything that night. He felt resentfully conscious that he should not
sleep if he went to bed; so he employed the midnight hours in completing some items of work
which ought to be done on the following day. Before it was light he had packed a hand-bag,
and departed to catch the early train. He sent a telegram from Peterborough to say that he
was on the way.

Of course, it was late when he reached Strathleckie, and he assured himself with some complacency
that Elizabeth would expect no conversation with him until next morning. But he was a little
mistaken. In her quality of mistress, she had chosen to send everyone else to bed: the household
was so well accustomed to Percival's erratic comings and goings, that nobody attached any importance
to his visits; and even old Mr. Heron appeared only for a few minutes to gossip with his son
while he ate a comfortable supper, retiring at last, with a nod to his niece which Percival
easily understood. It meant--"I will do now what you told me you wished--leave you together
to have your talk out." And Percival felt irritated by Elizabeth's determination.

"Will you smoke?" she asked, when the meal was over.

"I don't mind if I do. Will you come into the study--that's the smoking-room, is it not?--or
is it too late for you?"

"It is not very late," said Elizabeth.

When they were seated in the study, Percival in a great green arm-chair, and Elizabeth opposite
to him in a much smaller one, he attempted to take matters somewhat into his own hands.

"I won't ask to-night what you wanted me for," he said, easily. "I am rather battered and sleepy;
we shall talk better to-morrow."

"You can set my mind at rest on one point, at any rate," rejoined Elizabeth, whose face burned
with a feverish-looking flush. "It is, of course, a mistake that you knew a week ago of Brian
Luttrell being in London?"

"Oh, of course," said Percival. But the irony in his voice was too plain for her to be deceived
by it.

"Did you know, Percival?"

"Well, if you must have the plain truth," he said, sitting up and examining the end of his
cigar with much attention, "I did."

She was silent. He raised his eyes, apparently with some effort, to her face; saw there a rather
shocked and startled look, and rushed immediately into vehement speech.

"What if I did! Do you expect me to rush to you with every disturbing report I hear? I did
not see this man, Brian Luttrell; I should not know him if I did--as Brian Luttrell, at any
rate. I merely heard the story from a--an acquaintance of mine----"

"Dino Vasari," said Elizabeth.

"Oh, I see you know the facts. There is no need for me to say any more. Of course, you attach
no weight to any reasons I might have for silence."

"Indeed, I do, Percival; or I should do, if I knew what they were."

"Can you not guess them?" he said, looking at her intently. "Can you think of no powerful motive
that would make me anxious to delay the telling of the story?"

"None," she said. "None, except one that would be beneath you."

"Beneath me? Is it possible?" scoffed Percival. "No motive is too base for me, allow me to
tell you, my dear child. I am the true designing villain of romance. Go on: what is the one
bad motive which you attribute to me?"

"I do not attribute it to you," said Elizabeth, slowly, but with some indignation. "I never
in my life believed, I never shall believe, that you cared in the least whether I was rich
or poor."

Percival paused, as if he had met with an unexpected check, and then went off into a fit of
rather forced laughter.

"So you never thought that," he said. "And that was the only motive that occurred to you? Then,
perhaps you will kindly tell me the story as it was told to you, for you seem to have had a
special edition. Has Dino Vasari been down here?"

She gave him a short account of the events that had occurred at Netherglen, and she noticed
that as he listened, he forgot to smoke his cigar, and that he leaned his elbow on the arm
of the great chair, and shaded his eyes with his hand. There was a certain suppressed eagerness
in his manner, as he turned round when she had finished, and said, with lifted eyebrows:--

"Is that all?"

"What else do you know?" said Elizabeth.

He rubbed his hand impatiently backwards and forwards on the arm of the chair, and did not
speak for a moment.

"What does Colquhoun advise you to do?" he asked, presently.

"To wait here until Brian Luttrell is found and brought home."

"Brought home. They think he will come?"

"Oh, yes. Why not? When everybody knows that he is alive there will be no possible reason why
he should stay away. In fact, if he is a right-thinking man, he will see that justice requires
him to come home at once."

"I should not think, myself, that he was a right-thinking man," said Percival, without looking
at her.

"Because he allowed himself to be thought dead?" said Elizabeth, watching him as he relighted
his cigar. "But, then, he was in such terrible trouble--and the opportunity offered itself,
and seemed so easy. Poor fellow! I was always very sorry for him."

"Were you?"

"Yes. His mother, at least, Mrs. Luttrell, for I suppose she is not his mother really, must
have been very cruel. From all that I have heard he was the last man to be jealous of his brother,
or to wish any harm to him."

"In short, you are quite prepared to look upon him as a héros de roman, and worship him as
such when he appears. Possibly you may think there is some reason in Dino Vasari's naive suggestion
that you should marry Mr. Luttrell and prevent any division of the property."

"A suggestion which, from you, Percival, is far more insulting than that of the motive which
I did not attribute to you," said Elizabeth, with spirit.

"You wouldn't marry Brian Luttrell, then?"

"Percival!"

"Not under any consideration? Well, tell me so. I like to hear you say it."

Elizabeth was silent.

"Tell me so," he said, stretching out his hand to her, and looking at her attentively, "and
I will tell you the reason of my week's silence."

"I have no need to tell you so," she answered, in a suppressed voice. "And if I did you would
not trust me."

"No," he said, drily, "perhaps not; but promise me, all the same, that under no circumstances
will you ever marry Brian Luttrell."

"I promise," she said, in a low tone of humiliation. Her eyes were full of tears. "And now
let me go, Percival. I cannot stay with you--when you say that you trust me so little."

He had taken advantage of her rising to seize her hand. He now tossed his cigar into the fire,
and rose, too, still holding her hand in his. He looked down at her quivering lips, her tear-filled
eyes, with gathering intensity of emotion. Then he put both arms round her, pressed her to
his breast with passionate vehemence, and kissed her again and again, on cheek, lip, neck,
and brow. She shivered a little, but did not protest.

"There!" he said, suddenly putting her away from him, and standing erect with the black frowning
line very strongly marked upon his forehead. "I will tell you now why I did not try to keep
Brian Luttrell in England. I knew that I ought to make a row about it. I knew that I was bound
in honour to write to Colquhoun, to you, to Mrs. Luttrell, to any of the people concerned.
And I didn't do it. I didn't precisely mean not to do it, but I wanted to shift the responsibility.
I thought it was other people's business to keep him in England: not mine. As a matter of fact,
I suppose it was mine. What do you say?"

"Yes," said Elizabeth, lifting her lovely, grieved eyes to his stormy face. "I think it was
partly yours."

"Well, I didn't do it, you see," said Percival. "I was a brute and a cad, I suppose. But it
seemed fatally easy to hold one's tongue. And now he has gone to America."

"But he can be brought back again, Percival."

"If he will come. I fancy that it will take a strong rope to drag him back. You want to know
the reason for my silence? It isn't far to seek. Brian Luttrell and the tutor, Stretton, who
fell in love with you, were one and the same person. That's all."

And then he walked straight out of the room, and left her to her own reflections.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

PERCIVAL'S ATONEMENT.

Percival felt a decided dread of his next meeting with Elizabeth. He could not guess what would
be the effect of his information upon her mind, nor what would be her opinion of his conduct.
He was in a state of exasperating uncertainty about her views. The only thing of which he was
sure was her love and respect for truthfulness; he did not know whether she would ever forgive
any lapse from it. "Though, if it comes to that," he said to himself, as he finished his morning
toilet, "she ought to be as angry with Stretton as she is with me; for he took her in completely,
and, as for me, I only held my tongue. I suppose she will say that 'the motive was everything.'
Which confirms me in my belief that one man may steal a horse, while the other may not look
over the wall." And then he went down to breakfast.

He was late, of course; when was he not late for breakfast? The whole family-party had assembled;
even Mrs. Heron was downstairs to welcome her step-son. Percival responded curtly enough to
their greetings; his eyes and ears and thoughts were too much taken up with Elizabeth to be
bestowed on the rest of the family. And Elizabeth, after all, looked much as usual. Perhaps
there was a little unwonted colour in her cheek, and life in her eye; she did not look as if
she had not slept, or had had bad dreams; there was rather an unusually restful and calm expression
upon her face.

"Confound the fellow!"--thus Percival mentally apostrophised the missing Brian Luttrell. "One
would think that she was glad of what I told her." He was thoroughly put out by this reflection,
and munched his breakfast in sulky silence, listening cynically to his step-mother's idle utterances
and Kitty's vivacious replies. He was conscious of some disinclination to meet Elizabeth's
tranquil glance, of which he bitterly resented the tranquillity. And she scarcely spoke, except
to the children.

"I wonder how poor Mrs. Luttrell is to-day," Isabel Heron was saying. "It is sad that she should
be so ill."

"Yes, I wondered yesterday what was the matter, when I met Hugo," said Kitty. "He looked quite
pale and serious. He was staying at Dunmuir, he told me. I suppose he does not find the house
comfortable while his aunt is ill."

"Rather a cold-blooded young fellow, if he can consider that," said Mr. Heron. "Mrs. Luttrell
has always been very kind to him, I believe."

"Perhaps he is tired of Netherglen," said Kitty. ("Nobody knows anything about the story of
the two Brian Luttrells, then!" Percival reflected, with surprise. "Elizabeth has a talent
for silence when she chooses.") Kitty went on carelessly, "Netherglen is damp in this weather.
I don't think I should care to live there." Then she blushed a little, as though some new thought
had occurred to her.

"The weather is growing quite autumnal," said Mrs. Heron, languidly. "We ought to return to
town, and make our preparations----" She looked with a sly smile from Percival to Elizabeth,
and paused. "When is it to be, Lizzie?"

Elizabeth drew up her head haughtily and said nothing. Percival glanced at her, and drew no
good augury from the cold offence visible in her face. There was an awkward silence, which
Mrs. Heron thought it better to dispel by rising from the table.

Percival smoked his morning cigar on the terrace with his father, and wondered whether Elizabeth
was not going to present herself and talk to him. He was ready to be very penitent and make
every possible sign of submission to her wishes, for he felt that he had wronged her in his
mind, and that she might justly be offended with him if she guessed his thoughts. He paced
up and down, looking in impatiently at the windows from time to time, but still she came not.
At last, standing disconsolately in the porch, he saw her passing through the hall with little
Jack in her arms, and the other boys hanging on to her dress, quite in the old Gower-street
fashion.

"Elizabeth, won't you come out?" he said.

"I can't, just now. I am going to give the children some lessons. I do that, first thing."

"Always?"

"Ever since Mr. Stretton left," she said.

"Give them a holiday. I want you. There are lots of things we have to talk about."

"Are there? I thought there was nothing left to say," said she, sweetly but coldly. "But I
am going to Dunmuir at half-past two this afternoon, and you can drive down with me if you like."

She passed on, and shut herself into the study with the children. Percival felt injured. "She
should not have brought me all the way from London if she had nothing to say," he grumbled.
"I'll go back to-night. And I might as well go and see Colquhoun this morning."

He went down to Mr. Colquhoun's office, and was not received very cordially by that gentleman.
The interview resulted in rather a violent quarrel, which ended by Percival being requested
to leave Mr. Colquhoun's presence, and not return to it uninvited. Mr. Colquhoun could not
easily forgive him for neglecting to inform the Luttrells, at the earliest opportunity, of
Brian's reappearance. "We should have saved time, money, anxiety: we might have settled the
matter without troubling Miss Murray, or agitating Mrs. Luttrell; and I call it downright dishonesty
to have concealed a fact which was of such vital importance," said Mr. Colquhoun, who had lost
his temper. And Percival flung himself out of the room in a rage.

He was still inwardly fuming when he seated himself beside Elizabeth that afternoon in a little
low carriage drawn by two grey ponies--an equipage which she specially affected--in order to
drive to Dunmuir. For full five minutes neither of them spoke, but at last Elizabeth said,
with a faint accent of surprise:--

"I thought you had something to say to me."

"I have so many things that I don't know where to begin. Have you nothing to say--about what
I told you last night?"

"I can only say that I am very glad of it."

"The deuce you are!" thought Percival, but his lips were sealed. Elizabeth went on to explain
herself.

"I am glad, because now I understand various things that were very hard for me to understand
before. I can see why Mr. Stretton hesitated about coming here; I see why he was startled when
he discovered that I was the very girl whom he must have heard of before he left England. Of
course, I should never have objected to surrender the property to its rightful owner; but in
this case I shall be not only willing but pleased to give it back."

Her tone was proud and independent. Percival did not like it, but would not say so.

"I was saying last night," she continued, "that Brian Luttrell must come back. This discovery
makes his return all the more necessary. I am going now to ask Mr. Colquhoun what steps had
better be taken for bringing him home."

"Do you think he will come?"

"He must come. He must be made to see that it is right for him to come. I have been thinking
of what I will ask Mr. Colquhoun to say to him. If he remembers me"--and her voice sank a little--"he
will not refuse to do what would so greatly lighten my burden."

"Better write yourself, Elizabeth," said Percival, in a sad yet cynical tone. "You can doubtless
say what would bring him back by the next steamer."

She made no answer, but set her lips a little more firmly, and gave one of the grey ponies
a slight touch with the whip. It was the silence that caused Percival to see that she was wounded.

"I have a knack of saying what I don't mean," he remarked, rousing himself. "I beg your pardon
for this and every other rude speech that I may make, Elizabeth; and ask you to understand
that I am only translating my discontent with myself into words when I am ill-tempered. Have
a little mercy on me, for pity's sake."

She smiled. He thought there was some mockery in the smile.

"What are you laughing at?" he said, abruptly, dropping the apologetic tone.

"I am not laughing. I was wondering that you thought it worth while to excuse yourself for
such a trifle as a rude word or two. I thought possibly, when I came out with you, that you
had other apologies to make."

"May I ask what you mean?"

"I mean that, by your own showing, you have not been quite straightforward," said Elizabeth,
plainly. "And I thought that you might have something to say about it."

"Not straightforward!" he repeated. It was not often that his cheeks tingled as they tingled
now. "What have I done to make you call me not straightforward, pray?"

"You knew that I inherited this property because of Brian Luttrell's death. You knew--did you
not?--that he had only a few days to spend in London, and that he meant to start for America
this week. You must have known that some fresh arrangement was necessary before I could honestly
enjoy any of his money--that, in fact, he ought to have it all. And, unless he himself confided
in you under a promise of secrecy, or anything of that sort, I think you ought to have written
to Mr. Colquhoun at once."

"He did not confide in me: I did not see him. It was Dino Vasari who sought me out and told
me," said Percival, with some anger.

"And did Dino Vasari intend you to keep the matter a secret?"

"No. The real fact was, Elizabeth, that I did not altogether believe Vasari's story. I did
not in the least believe that Brian Luttrell was living. I thought it was a hoax. Upon my word,
I am half-inclined to believe so still. I thought it was not worth while to take the trouble."

"You did not know where to find him, I suppose?"

"Well--yes; I had the address."

"And you did nothing?" she said, flashing upon him a look of indignant surprise.

"I did nothing," returned Percival.

"That is what I complain of," she remarked, shortly.

For some time she drove on in silence, lightly flicking her ponies' heads from time to time
with her whip, her face set steadily towards the road before her, her strong, well-gloved hands
showing determination in the very way she held the whip and reins. Percival grew savage, and
then defiant.

"You ask too much," he said, pulling his long moustache, and uttering a bitter laugh. "It would
have been easy and natural enough to move Heaven and earth for the sake of Brian Luttrell's
rights, if Brian Luttrell had not constituted himself my rival in another domain. But when
his 'rights' meant depriving you of your property, and placing Mr. Stretton in authority--I
decline."

"I call that mean and base," said Elizabeth, giving the words a low but clear-toned emphasis,
which made Percival wince.

"Thank you," he said. And there was another long silence, which lasted until they drew up at
Mr. Colquhoun's door.

Percival waited for nearly an hour before she came back, and had time to go through every possible
phase of anger and mortification. He felt that he had more reason on his side than Elizabeth
could understand: the doubt of Dino's good faith, which seemed so small to her, had certainly
influenced him very strongly. No doubt it would have been better--wiser--if he had tried to
find out the truth of Dino's story; but the sting of Elizabeth's judgment lay in the fact that
he had fervently hoped that Dino's story was not true, and that he had refused to meet Dino's
offer half-way, the offer that would have secured Elizabeth's own happiness. Would she ever
hear a full account of that interview? And what would she think of his selfishness if she came
to know it? Ever since that conversation in Mr. Brett's office Percival had been conscious
of bitter possibilities of evil in his own soul. He had had a bad time of it during the past
week, and, when he contrasted his own conduct with the generous candour and uprightness that
Elizabeth seemed to expect from him, he was open to confess to himself that he fell very short
of her standard.

She came back to her place attended by Mr. Colquhoun, who wrapped her rugs about her in a fatherly
way, and took not the slightest notice of Mr. Percival Heron. She had some small purchases
to make in the town, and it was growing almost dusk before they turned homewards. Then she
began to speak in her ordinary tone.

"Mr. Colquhoun has been telling me what to do," she said, "and I think that he is right. Dino
Vasari has already gone back to Italy, but before he went, he signed a paper relinquishing
all claim to the property in favour of Brian Luttrell and myself. Mr. Colquhoun says it was
a useless thing to do, except as it shows his generosity and kindness of heart, and that it
would not be valid in a court at all; but that nothing farther can be done, as he does not
press his claim, until Brian Luttrell comes back to England or writes instructions. There might
be a friendly suit when he came; but that would be left for him (and, I suppose, myself) to
decide. When he comes we shall try to get Dino Vasari back, and have a friendly consultation
over the matter. I don't see why we need have lawyers to interfere at all. I should resign
the property with a very good grace, but Mr. Colquhoun thinks that Mr. Luttrell will have scruples."

"He ought to have," muttered Percival, but Elizabeth took no notice.

"It seems that he went in a sailing vessel," she went on, in a perfectly calm and collected
voice, "because he could get a very cheap passage in that way. Mr. Colquhoun proposes that
we should write to Pernambuco; but he might not be expecting any letters--he might miss them--and
go up the country; there is no knowing. I think that a responsible, intelligent person ought
to be sent out by a fast steamer and wait for him at Pernambuco. Then everything would be satisfactorily
explained and enforced--better than by letter. Mr. Colquhoun says he feels inclined to go himself."

She gave a soft, pleased laugh as she said the words; but there was excitement and trouble
underneath its apparent lightness. "That, of course, would never do; but he has a clerk whom
he can thoroughly trust, and he will start next week for the Brazils."

Percival sat mute. Had she no idea that he was suffering? She went on quickly.

"Mr. Salt--that is the clerk's name--will reach Pernambuco many days before the sailing vessel;
but it is better that he should be too early than too late. They may even pass the Falcon--that
is the name of Mr. Luttrell's ship--on the way. The worst is"--and here her voice began to
tremble--"that Mr. Colquhoun has heard a report that the Falcon was not--not--quite--sea-worthy."

She put up one gloved hand and dashed a tear from her eyes. Percival's silence exasperated
her. For almost the first time she turned upon him with a reproach.

"Will you remember," she said, bitterly, "if his ship goes to the bottom, that you might have
stopped him, and--did not think it worth while to take the trouble?"

"Good God, Elizabeth, how unjust you are!" cried Percival, impetuously.

Elizabeth did not answer. She had to put up her hand again and again to wipe away her tears.
The strain of self-control had been a severe one, and when it once slipped away from her the
emotion had to have its own way. Percival tried to take the reins from her, but this she would
not allow; and they were going uphill on a quiet sheltered road of which the ponies knew every
step as well as he did himself.

When she was calmer, he broke the silence by saying in an oddly-muffled, hoarse voice:--

"It is no use going on like this. I suppose you wish our engagement to be broken off?"

"I?" said Elizabeth.

"Yes, you. Can't I see that you care more for this man Stretton or Luttrell than you care for
me? I don't want my wife to be always sighing after another man."

"That you would not have," she said, coldly.

"I don't care. I know now what you feel. And if Stretton comes back, I suppose I must go to
the wall."

