Is Mars Habitable?

A CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF PROFESSOR PERCIVAL LOWELL'S BOOK "MARS AND ITS CANALS," WITH AN ALTERNATIVE
EXPLANATION

BY ALFRED RUSSEL WALLACE F.R.S., ETC.

PREFACE.

But the more complete presentation of the opposite view in the volume now under discussion
required a more detailed examination of the various physical problems involved, and as the
subject is one of great, popular, as well as scientific interest, I determined to undertake
the task.

This was rendered the more necessary by the fact that in July last Professor Lowell published
in the Philosophical Magazine an elaborate mathematical article claiming to demonstrate that,
notwithstanding its much greater distance from the sun and its excessively thin atmosphere,
Mars possessed a climate on the average equal to that of the south of England, and in its polar
and sub-polar regions even less severe than that of the earth. Such a contention of course
required to be dealt with, and led me to collect information bearing upon temperature in all
its aspects, and so enlarging my criticism that I saw it would be necessary to issue it in
book form.

Two of my mathematical friends have pointed out the chief omission which vitiates Professor
Lowell's mathematical conclusions--that of a failure to recognise the very large conservative
and cumulative effect of a dense atmosphere. This very point however I had already myself discussed
in Chapter VI., and by means of some remarkable researches on the heat of the moon and an investigation
of the causes of its very low temperature, I have, I think, demonstrated the incorrectness
of Mr. Lowell's results. In my last chapter, in which I briefly summarise the whole argument,
I have further strengthened the case for very severe cold in Mars, by adducing the rapid lowering
of temperature universally caused by diminution of atmospheric pressure, as manifested in the
well-known phenomenon of temperate climates at moderate heights even close to the equator,
cold climates at greater heights even on extensive plateaux, culminating in arctic climates
and perpetual snow at heights where the air is still far denser than it is on the surface of
Mars. This argument itself is, in my opinion, conclusive; but it is enforced by two others
equally complete, neither of which is adequately met by Mr. Lowell.

The careful examination which I have been led to give to the whole of the phenomena which Mars
presents, and especially to the discoveries of Mr. Lowell, has led me to what I hope will be
considered a satisfactory physical explanation of them. This explanation, which occupies the
whole of my seventh chapter, is founded upon a special mode of origin for Mars, derived from
the Meteoritic Hypothesis, now very widely adopted by astronomers and physicists. Then, by
a comparison with certain well-known and widely spread geological phenomena, I show how the
great features of Mars--the 'canals' and 'oases'--may have been caused. This chapter will perhaps
be the most interesting to the general reader, as furnishing a quite natural explanation of
features of the planet which have been termed 'non-natural' by Mr. Lowell.

Incidentally, also, I have been led to an explanation of the highly volcanic nature of the
moon's surface. This seems to me absolutely to require some such origin as Sir George Darwin
has given it, and thus furnishes corroborative proof of the accuracy of the hypothesis that
our moon has had an unique origin among the known satellites, in having been thrown off from
the earth itself.

I am indebted to Professor J. H. Poynting, of the University of Birmingham, for valuable suggestions
on some of the more difficult points of mathematical physics here discussed, and also for the
critical note (at the end of Chapter V.) on Professor Lowell's estimate of the temperature of Mars.

BROADSTONE, DORSET, October 1907.

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.

EARLY OBSERVERS OF MARS,
--Mars the only planet the surface of which is
  distinctly visible
--Early observation of the snow-caps and seas
--The 'canals' seen by Schiaparelli in 1877
--Double canals first seen in 1881
--Round spots at intersection of canals seen
  by Pickering in 1892
--Confirmed by Lowell in 1894
--Changes of colour seen in 1892 and 1894
--Existence of seas doubted by Pickering and
  Barnard in 1894.

CHAPTER II.

MR. LOWELL'S DISCOVERIES AND THEORIES,
--Observatory at Flagstaff, Arizona
--Illustrated book on his observations of
  Mars
--Volume on Mars and its canals, 1906
--Non-natural features
--The canals as irrigation works of an intelligent
  race
--A challenge to the thinking world
--The canals as described and mapped by Mr. Lowell
--The double canals
--Dimensions of the canals
--They cross the supposed seas
--Circular black spots termed oases
--An interesting volume.

CHAPTER III.

THE CLIMATE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY OF MARS,
--No permanent water on Mars
--Rarely any clouds and no rain
--Snow-caps the only source of water
--No mountains, hills, or valleys on Mars
--Two-thirds of the surface a desert
--Water from the snow-caps too scanty to supply
  the canals
--Miss Clerke's views as to the water-supply
--Description of some of the chief canals
--Mr. Lowell on the purpose of the canals
--Remarks on the same
--Mr. Lowell on relation of canals to oases and
  snow-caps
--Critical remarks on the same.

CHAPTER IV.

IS ANIMAL LIFE POSSIBLE ON MARS?
--Water and air essential for animal life
--Atmosphere of Mars assumed to be like ours
--Blue tint near melting snow the only evidence
  of water
--Fallacy of this argument
--Dr. Johnstone Stoney's proof that water-vapour
  cannot exist on Mars
--Spectroscope gives no evidence of water.

CHAPTER V.

TEMPERATURE OF MARS--MR. LOWELL'S ESTIMATE, --Problem of terrestrial temperature --Ice under
recent lava --Tropical oceans ice-cold at bottom --Earth's surface-heat all from the sun --Absolute
zero of temperature --Complex problem of planetary temperatures --Mr. Lowell's investigation
of the problem --Abstract of Mr. Lowell's paper --Critical remarks on Mr. Lowell's paper.

CHAPTER VI.

A NEW ESTIMATE OF THE TEMPERATURE OF MARS,
--Langley's determination of lunar heat
--Rapid loss of heat by radiation on the
  earth
--Rapid loss of heat on moon during eclipse
--Sir George Darwin's theory of the moon's origin
--Very's researches on the moon's temperature
--Application of these results to the case of Mars
--Cause of great difference of temperatures of earth
  and moon
--Special features of Mars influencing its
  temperature
--Further criticism of Mr. Lowell's article
--Very low temperature of arctic regions on Mars.

CHAPTER VII.

A SUGGESTION AS TO THE 'CANALS' OF MARS, --Special features of the canals --Mr. Pickering's
suggested explanation --The meteoritic hypotheses of origin of planets --Probable mode of origin
of Mars --Structural straight lines on the earth --Probable origin of the surface-features
of Mars --Symmetry of basaltic columns --How this applies to Mars --Suggested explanation of
the oases --Probable function of the great fissures --Suggested origin of blue patches adjacent
to snow-caps --The double canals --Concluding remarks on the canals.

CHAPTER VIII.

PAGE SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION,
--The canals the origin of Mr. Lowell's theory
--Best explained as natural features
--Evaporation difficulty not met by Mr. Lowell
--How did Martians live without the canals
--Radiation due to scanty atmosphere not taken account
  of
--Three independent proofs of low temperature and
  uninhabitability of Mars
--Conclusion.

CHAPTER I.

EARLY OBSERVERS OF MARS.

Few persons except astronomers fully realise that of all the planets of the Solar system the
only one whose solid surface has been seen with certainty is Mars; and, very fortunately, that
is also the only one which is sufficiently near to us for the physical features of the surface
to be determined with any accuracy, even if we could see it in the other planets. Of Venus
we probably see only the upper surface of its cloudy atmosphere.[1] As regards Jupiter and
Saturn this is still more certain, since their low density will only permit of a comparatively
small proportion of their huge bulk being solid. Their belts are but the cloud-strata of their
upper atmosphere, perhaps thousands of miles above their solid surfaces, and a somewhat similar
condition seems to prevail in the far more remote planets Uranus and Neptune. It has thus happened,
that, although as telescopic objects of interest and beauty, the marvellous rings of Saturn,
the belts and ever-changing aspects of the satellites of Jupiter, and the moon-like phases
of Venus, together with its extreme brilliancy, still remain unsurpassed, yet the greater amount
of details of these features when examined with the powerful instruments of the nineteenth
century have neither added much to our knowledge of the planets themselves or led to any sensational
theories calculated to attract the popular imagination.

[Footnote 1: Mercury also seems to have a scanty atmosphere, but as its mass is only one-thirtieth
that of the earth it can retain only the heavier gases, and its atmosphere may be dust-laden,
as is that of Mars, according to Mr. Lowell. Its dusky markings, as seen by Schiaparelli, seem
to be permanent, and they are also for considerable periods unchangeable in position, indicating
that the planet keeps the same face towards the sun as does Venus. This was confirmed by Mr.
Lowell in 1896. Its distance from us and unfavourable position for observation must prevent
us from obtaining any detailed knowledge of its actual surface, though its low reflective power
indicates that the surface may be really visible.]

But in the case of Mars the progress of discovery has had a very different result. The most
obvious peculiarity of this planet--its polar snow-caps--were seen about 250 years ago, but
they were first proved to increase and decrease alternately, in the summer and winter of each
hemisphere, by Sir William Herschell in the latter part of the eighteenth century. This fact
gave the impulse to that idea of similarity in the conditions of Mars and the earth, which
the recognition of many large dusky patches and streaks as water, and the more ruddy and brighter
portions as land, further increased. Added to this, a day only about half an hour longer than
our own, and a succession of seasons of the same character as ours but of nearly double the
length owing to its much longer year, seemed to leave little wanting to render this planet
a true earth on a smaller scale. It was therefore very natural to suppose that it must be inhabited,
and that we should some day obtain evidence of the fact.

The Canals discovered by Schiaparelli.

Hence the great interest excited when Schiaparelli, at the Milan Observatory, during the very
favourable opposition of 1877 and 1879, observed that the whole of the tropical and temperate
regions from 60° N. to 60° S. Lat. were covered with a remarkable network of broader curved
and narrower straight lines of a dark colour. At each successive favourable opposition, these
strange objects called canali (channels) by their discoverer, but rather misleadingly 'canals'
in England and America, were observed by means of all the great telescopes in the world, and
their reality and general features became well established. In Schiaparelli's first map they
were represented as being much broader and less sharply defined than he himself and other observers
found by later and equally favourable observations that they really were.

Discovery of the Double Canals.

