With this little explosion of his spleen, Sir Mungo remained satisfied, until the dishes were
removed, when, fixing his eyes on the brave new doublet of Lord Dalgarno, he complimented him
on his economy, pretending to recognise it as the same which his father had worn in Edinburgh
in the Spanish ambassador's time. Lord Dalgarno, too much a man of the world to be moved by
any thing from such a quarter, proceeded to crack some nuts with great deliberation, as he
replied, that the doublet was in some sort his father's, as it was likely to cost him fifty
pounds some day soon. Sir Mungo forthwith proceeded in his own way to convey this agreeable
intelligence to the earl, observing, that his son was a better maker of bargains than his lordship,
for he had bought a doublet as rich as that his lordship wore when the Spanish ambassador was
at Holyrood, and it had cost him but fifty pounds Scots;--"that was no fool's bargain, my lord."

"Pounds sterling, if you please, Sir Mungo," answered the earl, calmly; "and a fool's bargain
it is, in all the tenses. Dalgarno WAS a fool when he bought--I will be a fool when I pay--and
you, Sir Mungo, craving your pardon, are a fool in praesenti, for speaking of what concerns
you not."

So saying, the earl addressed himself to the serious business of the table and sent the wine
around with a profusion which increased the hilarity, but rather threatened the temperance,
of the company, until their joviality was interrupted by the annunciation that the scrivener
had engrossed such deeds as required to be presently executed.

George Heriot rose from the table, observing, that wine-cups and legal documents were unseemly
neighbours. The earl asked the scrivener if they had laid a trencher and set a cup for him
in the buttery and received the respectful answer, that heaven forbid he should be such an
ungracious beast as to eat or drink until his lordship's pleasure was performed.

"Thou shalt eat before thou goest," said Lord Huntinglen; "and I will have thee try, moreover,
whether a cup of sack cannot bring some colour into these cheeks of thine. It were a shame
to my household, thou shouldst glide out into the Strand after such a spectre-fashion as thou
now wearest--Look to it, Dalgarno, for the honour of our roof is concerned."

Lord Dalgarno gave directions that the man should be attended to. Lord Glenvarloch and the
citizen, in the meanwhile, signed and interchanged, and thus closed a transaction, of which
the principal party concerned understood little, save that it was under the management of a
zealous and faithful friend, who undertook that the money should be forthcoming, and the estate
released from forfeiture, by payment of the stipulated sum for which it stood pledged, and
that at the term of Lambmas, and at the hour of noon, and beside the tomb of the Regent Earl
of Murray, in the High Kirk of Saint Giles, at Edinburgh, being the day and place assigned
for such redemption. [Footnote: As each covenant in those days of accuracy had a special place
nominated for execution, the tomb of the Regent Earl of Murray in Saint Giles's Church was
frequently assigned for the purpose.]

When this business was transacted, the old earl would fain have renewed his carouse; but the
citizen, alleging the importance of the deeds he had about him, and the business he had to
transact betimes the next morning, not only refused to return to table, but carried with him
to his barge Lord Glenvarloch, who might, perhaps, have been otherwise found more tractable.

When they were seated in the boat, and fairly once more afloat on the river, George Heriot
looked back seriously on the mansion they had left--"There live," he said, "the old fashion
and the new. The father is like a noble old broadsword, but harmed with rust, from neglect
and inactivity; the son is your modern rapier, well-mounted, fairly gilt, and fashioned to
the taste of the time--and it is time must evince if the metal be as good as the show. God
grant it prove so, says an old friend to the family."

Nothing of consequence passed betwixt them, until Lord Glenvarloch, landing at Paul's Wharf,
took leave of his friend the citizen, and retired to his own apartment, where his attendant,
Richie, not a little elevated with the events of the day, and with the hospitality of Lord
Huntinglen's house-keeping, gave a most splendid account of them to the buxom Dame Nelly, who
rejoiced to hear that the sun at length was shining upon what Richie called "the right side
of the hedge."

CHAPTER XI

  You are not for the manner nor the times,
  They have their vices now most like to virtues;
  You cannot know them apait by any difference,
  They wear the same clothes, eat the same meat--
  Sleep i' the self-same beds, ride in those coaches,
  Or very like four horses in a coach,
  As the best men and women.
                            Ben Jonson

On the following morning, while Nigel, his breakfast finished, was thinking how he should employ
the day, there was a little bustle upon the stairs which attracted his attention, and presently
entered Dame Nelly, blushing like scarlet, and scarce able to bring out--"A young nobleman,
sir--no one less," she added, drawing her hand slightly over her lips, "would be so saucy--a
young nobleman, sir, to wait on you!"

And she was followed into the little cabin by Lord Dalgarno, gay, easy, disembarrassed, and
apparently as much pleased to rejoin his new acquaintance as if he had found him in the apartments
of a palace. Nigel, on the contrary, (for youth is slave to such circumstances,) was discountenanced
and mortified at being surprised by so splendid a gallant in a chamber which, at the moment
the elegant and high-dressed cavalier appeared in it, seemed to its inhabitant, yet lower,
narrower, darker, and meaner than it had ever shown before. He would have made some apology
for the situation, but Lord Dalgarno cut him short--

"Not a word of it," he said, "not a single word--I know why you ride at anchor here--but I
can keep counsel--so pretty a hostess would recommend worse quarters."

"On my word--on my honour," said Lord Glenvarloch--

"Nay, nay, make no words of the matter," said Lord Dalgarno; "I am no tell-tale, nor shall
I cross your walk; there is game enough in the forest, thank Heaven, and I can strike a doe
for myself."

All this he said in so significant a manner, and the explanation which he had adopted seemed
to put Lord Glenvarloch's gallantry on so respectable a footing, that Nigel ceased to try to
undeceive him; and less ashamed, perhaps, (for such is human weakness,) of supposed vice than
of real poverty, changed the discourse to something else, and left poor Dame Nelly's reputation
and his own at the mercy of the young courtier's misconstruction.

He offered refreshments with some hesitation. Lord Dalgarno had long since breakfasted, but
had just come from playing a set of tennis, he said, and would willingly taste a cup of the
pretty hostess's single beer. This was easily procured, was drunk, was commended, and, as the
hostess failed not to bring the cup herself, Lord Dalgarno profited by the opportunity to take
a second and more attentive view of her, and then gravely drank to her husband's health, with
an almost imperceptible nod to Lord Glenvarloch. Dame Nelly was much honoured, smoothed her
apron down with her hands, and said

"Her John was greatly and truly honoured by their lordships--he was a kind painstaking man
for his family, as was in the alley, or indeed, as far north as Paul's Chain."

She would have proceeded probably to state the difference betwixt their ages, as the only alloy
to their nuptial happiness; but her lodger, who had no mind to be farther exposed to his gay
friend's raillery, gave her, contrary to his wont, a signal to leave the room.

Lord Dalgarno looked after her, and then looked at Glenvarloch, shook his head, and repeated
the well-known lines--

"'My lord, beware of jealousy--
 It is the green-eyed monster which doth make
 The meat it feeds on.'

"But come," he said, changing his tone, "I know not why I should worry you thus--I who have
so many follies of my own, when I should rather make excuse for being here at all, and tell
you wherefore I came."

So saying, he reached a seat, and, placing another for Lord Glenvarloch, in spite of his anxious
haste to anticipate this act of courtesy, he proceeded in the same tone of easy familiarity:--

"We are neighbours, my lord, and are just made known to each other. Now, I know enough of the
dear North, to be well aware that Scottish neighbours must be either dear friends or deadly
enemies--must either walk hand-in-hand, or stand sword-point to sword-point; so I choose the
hand-in-hand, unless you should reject my proffer."

"How were it possible, my lord," said Lord Glenvarloch, "to refuse what is offered so frankly,
even if your father had not been a second father to me?"--And, as he took Lord Dalgarno's hand,
he added--"I have, I think, lost no time, since, during one day's attendance at Court, I have
made a kind friend and a powerful enemy."

"The friend thanks you," replied Lord Dalgarno, "for your just opinion; but, my dear Glenvarloch--or
rather, for titles are too formal between us of the better file--what is your Christian name?"

"Nigel," replied Lord Glenvarloch.

"Then we will be Nigel and Malcolm to each other," said his visitor, "and my lord to the plebeian
world around us. But I was about to ask you whom you suppose your enemy?"

"No less than the all-powerful favourite, the great Duke of Buckingham."

"You dream! What could possess you with such an opinion?" said Dalgarno.

"He told me so himself," replied Glenvarloch; "and, in so doing, dealt frankly and honourably
with me."

"O, you know him not yet," said his companion; "the duke is moulded of an hundred noble and
fiery qualities, that prompt him, like a generous horse, to spring aside in impatience at the
least obstacle to his forward course. But he means not what he says in such passing heats--I
can do more with him, I thank Heaven, than most who are around him; you shall go visit him
with me, and you will see how you shall be received."

"I told you, my lord," said Glenvarloch firmly, and with some haughtiness, "the Duke of Buckingham,
without the least offence, declared himself my enemy in the face of the Court; and he shall
retract that aggression as publicly as it was given, ere I will make the slightest advance
towards him."

"You would act becomingly in every other case," said Lord Dalgarno, "but here you are wrong.
In the Court horizon Buckingham is Lord of the Ascendant, and as he is adverse or favouring,
so sinks or rises the fortune of a suitor. The king would bid you remember your Phaedrus,

'Arripiens geminas, ripis cedentibus, ollas--'

and so forth. You are the vase of earth; beware of knocking yourself against the vase of iron."

"The vase of earth," said Glenvarloch, "will avoid the encounter, by getting ashore out of
the current--I mean to go no more to Court."

"O, to Court you necessarily must go; you will find your Scottish suit move ill without it,
for there is both patronage and favour necessary to enforce the sign-manual you have obtained.
Of that we will speak more hereafter; but tell me in the meanwhile, my dear Nigel, whether
you did not wonder to see me here so early?"

"I am surprised that you could find me out in this obscure corner," said Lord Glenvarloch.

"My page Lutin is a very devil for that sort of discovery," replied Lord Dalgarno; "I have
but to say, 'Goblin, I would know where he or she dwells,' and he guides me thither as if by
art magic."

"I hope he waits not now in the street, my lord," said Nigel; "I will send my servant to seek him."

"Do not concern yourself--he is by this time," said Lord Dalgarno, "playing at hustle-cap and
chuck-farthing with the most blackguard imps upon the wharf, unless he hath foregone his old
customs."

"Are you not afraid," said Lord Glenvarloch, "that in such company his morals may become depraved?"

"Let his company look to their own," answered Lord Dalgarno, cooly; "for it will be a company
of real fiends in which Lutin cannot teach more mischief than he can learn: he is, I thank
the gods, most thoroughly versed in evil for his years. I am spared the trouble of looking
after his moralities, for nothing can make them either better or worse."

"I wonder you can answer this to his parents, my lord," said Nigel.

"I wonder where I should find his parents," replied his companion, "to render an account to them."

"He may be an orphan," said Lord Nigel; "but surely, being a page in your lordship's family,
his parents must be of rank."

"Of as high rank as the gallows could exalt them to," replied Lord Dalgarno, with the same
indifference; "they were both hanged, I believe--at least the gipsies, from whom I bought him
five years ago, intimated as much to me.--You are surprised at this, now. But is it not better
that, instead of a lazy, conceited, whey-faced slip of gentility, to whom, in your old-world
idea of the matter, I was bound to stand Sir Pedagogue, and see that he washed his hands and
face, said his prayers, learned his acddens, spoke no naughty words, brushed his hat, and wore
his best doublet only on Sunday,--that, instead of such a Jacky Goodchild, I should have something
like this?"

He whistled shrill and clear, and the page he spoke of darted into the room, almost with the
effect of an actual apparition. From his height he seemed but fifteen, but, from his face,
might be two or even three years older, very neatly made, and richly dressed; with a thin bronzed
visage, which marked his gipsy descent, and a pair of sparkling black eyes, which seemed almost
to pierce through those whom he looked at.

"There he is," said Lord Dalgarno, "fit for every element--prompt to execute every command,
good, bad, or indifferent--unmatched in his tribe, as rogue, thief, and liar."

"All which qualities," said the undaunted page, "have each in turn stood your lordship in stead."

"Out, you imp of Satan!" said his master; "vanish-begone-or my conjuring rod goes about your
ears." The boy turned, and disappeared as suddenly as he had entered. "You see," said Lord
Dalgarno, "that, in choosing my household, the best regard I can pay to gentle blood is to
exclude it from my service--that very gallows--bird were enough to corrupt a whole antechamber
of pages, though they were descended from kings and kaisers."

"I can scarce think that a nobleman should need the offices of such an attendant as your goblin,"
said Nigel; "you are but jesting with my inexperience."

"Time will show whether I jest or not, my dear Nigel," replied Dalgarno; "in the meantime,
I have to propose to you to take the advantage of the flood-tide, to run up the river for pastime;
and at noon I trust you will dine with me."

Nigel acquiesced in a plan which promised so much amusement; and his new friend and he, attended
by Lutin and Moniplies, who greatly resembled, when thus associated, the conjunction of a bear
and a monkey, took possession of Lord Dalgarno's wherry, which, with its badged watermen, bearing
his lordship's crest on their arms, lay in readiness to receive them. The air was delightful
upon the river; and the lively conversation of Lord Dalgarno added zest to the pleasures of
the little voyage. He could not only give an account of the various public buildings and noblemen's
houses which they passed in ascending the Thames, but knew how to season his information with
abundance of anecdote, political innuendo, and personal scandal; if he had not very much wit,
he was at least completely master of the fashionable tone, which in that time, as in ours,
more than amply supplies any deficiency of the kind.

It was a style of conversation entirely new to his companion, as was the world which Lord Dalgarno
opened to his observation; and it is no wonder that Nigel, notwithstanding his natural good
sense and high spirit, admitted, more readily than seemed consistent with either, the tone
of authoritative instruction which his new friend assumed towards him. There would, indeed,
have been some difficulty in making a stand. To attempt a high and stubborn tone of morality,
in answer to the light strain of Lord Dalgarno's conversation, which kept on the frontiers
between jest and earnest, would have seemed pedantic and ridiculous; and every attempt which
Nigel made to combat his companion's propositions, by reasoning as jocose as his own, only
showed his inferiority in that gay species of controversy. And it must be owned, besides, though
internally disapproving much of what he heard, Lord Glenvarloch, young as he was in society,
became less alarmed by the language and manners of his new associate, than in prudence he ought
to have been.

Lord Dalgarno was unwilling to startle his proselyte, by insisting upon any topic which appeared
particularly to jar with his habits or principles; and he blended his mirth and his earnest
so dexterously, that it was impossible for Nigel to discover how far he was serious in his
propositions, or how far they flowed from a wild and extravagant spirit of raillery. And, ever
and anon, those flashes of spirit and honour crossed his conversation, which seemed to intimate,
that, when stirred to action by some adequate motive, Lord Dalgarno would prove something very
different from the court-haunting and ease-loving voluptuary, which he was pleased to represent
as his chosen character.

As they returned down the river, Lord Glenvarloch remarked, that the boat passed the mansion
of Lord Huntinglen, and noticed the circumstance to Lord Dalgarno, observing, that he thought
they were to have dined there. "Surely no," said the young nobleman, "I have more mercy on
you than to gorge you a second time with raw beef and canary wine. I propose something better
for you, I promise you, than such a second Scythian festivity. And as for my father, he proposes
to dine to-day with my grave, ancient Earl of Northampton, whilome that celebrated putter-down
of pretended prophecies, Lord Henry Howard."

"And do you not go with him?" said his companion.

"To what purpose?" said Lord Dalgarno. "To hear his wise lordship speak musty politics in false
Latin, which the old fox always uses, that he may give the learned Majesty of England an opportunity
of correcting his slips in grammar? That were a rare employment!"

"Nay," said Lord Nigel, "but out of respect, to wait on my lord your father."

"My lord my father," replied Lord Dalgarno, "has blue-bottles enough to wait on him, and can
well dispense with such a butterfly as myself. He can lift the cup of sack to his head without
my assistance; and, should the said paternal head turn something giddy, there be men enough
to guide his right honourable lordship to his lordship's right honourable couch.--Now, do not
stare at me, Nigel, as if my words were to sink the boat with us. I love my father--I love
him dearly--and I respect him, too, though I respect not many things; a trustier old Trojan
never belted a broadsword by a loop of leather. But what then? He belongs to the old world,
I to the new. He has his follies, I have mine; and the less either of us sees of the other's
peccadilloes, the greater will be the honour and respect--that, I think, is the proper phrase--I
say the respect in which we shall hold each other. Being apart, each of us is himself, such
as nature and circumstances have made him; but, couple us up too closely together, you will
be sure to have in your leash either an old hypocrite or a young one, or perhaps both the one
and t'other."

As he spoke thus, the boat put into the landing-place at Blackfriars. Lord Dalgarno sprung
ashore, and, flinging his cloak and rapier to his page, recommended to his companion to do
the like. "We are coming among a press of gallants," he said; "and, if we walked thus muffled,
we shall look like your tawny-visaged Don, who wraps him close in his cloak, to conceal the
defects of his doublet."

"I have known many an honest man do that, if it please your lordship," said Richie Moniplies,
who had been watching for an opportunity to intrude himself on the conversation, and probably
remembered what had been his own condition, in respect to cloak and doublet, at a very recent
period.

Lord Dalgarno stared at him, as if surprised at his assurance; but immediately answered, "You
may have known many things, friend; but, in the meanwhile, you do not know what principally
concerns your master, namely, how to carry his cloak, so as to show to advantage the gold-
laced seams, and the lining of sables. See how Lutin holds the sword, with his cloak cast partly
over it, yet so as to set off the embossed hilt, and the silver work of the mounting.--Give
your familiar your sword, Nigel," he continued, addressing Lord Glenvarloch, "that he may practise
a lesson in an art so necessary."

"Is it altogether prudent," said Nigel, unclasping his weapon, and giving it to Richie, "to
walk entirely unarmed?"

"And wherefore not?" said his companion. "You are thinking now of Auld Reekie, as my father
fondly calls your good Scottish capital, where there is such bandying of private feuds and
public factions, that a man of any note shall not cross your High Street twice, without endangering
his life thrice. Here, sir, no brawling in the street is permitted. Your bull-headed citizen
takes up the case so soon as the sword is drawn, and clubs is the word."

"And a hard word it is," said Richie, "as my brain-pan kens at this blessed moment."

"Were I your master, sirrah," said Lord Dalgarno, "I would make your brain-pan, as you call
it, boil over, were you to speak a word in my presence before you were spoken to."

Richie murmured some indistinct answer, but took the hint, and ranked himself behind his master
along with Lutin, who failed not to expose his new companion to the ridicule of the passers-by,
by mimicking, as often as he could do so unobserved by Richie, his stiff and upright stalking
gait and discontented physiognomy.

"And tell me now, my dear Malcolm," said Nigel, "where we are bending our course, and whether
we shall dine at an apartment of yours?"

"An apartment of mine--yes, surely," answered Lord Dalgarno, "you shall dine at an apartment
of mine, and an apartment of yours, and of twenty gallants besides; and where the board shall
present better cheer, better wine, and better attendance, than if our whole united exhibitions
went to maintain it. We are going to the most noted ordinary of London."

"That is, in common language, an inn, or a tavern," said Nigel.

"An inn, or a tavern, my most green and simple friend!" exclaimed Lord Dalgarno. "No, no--these
are places where greasy citizens take pipe and pot, where the knavish pettifoggers of the law
spunge on their most unhappy victims--where Templars crack jests as empty as their nuts, and
where small gentry imbibe such thin potations, that they get dropsies instead of getting drunk.
An ordinary is a late-invented institution, sacred to Bacchus and Comus, where the choicest
noble gallants of the time meet with the first and most ethereal wits of the age,--where the
wine is the very soul of the choicest grape, refined as the genius of the poet, and ancient
and generous as the blood of the nobles. And then the fare is something beyond your ordinary
gross terrestrial food! Sea and land are ransacked to supply it; and the invention of six ingenious
cooks kept eternally upon the rack to make their art hold pace with, and if possible enhance,
the exquisite quality of the materials."

"By all which rhapsody," said Lord Glenvarloch, "I can only understand, as I did before, that
we are going to a choice tavern, where we shall be handsomely entertained, on paying probably
as handsome a reckoning."

"Reckoning!" exclaimed Lord Dalgarno in the same tone as before, "perish the peasantly phrase!
What profanation! Monsieur le Chevalier de Beaujeu, pink of Paris and flower of Gascony--he
who can tell the age of his wine by the bare smell, who distils his sauces in an alembic by
the aid of Lully's philosophy--who carves with such exquisite precision, that he gives to noble,
knight and squire, the portion of the pheasant which exactly accords with his rank--nay, he
who shall divide a becafico into twelve parts with such scrupulous exactness, that of twelve
guests not one shall have the advantage of the other in a hair's breadth, or the twentieth
part of a drachm, yet you talk of him and of a reckoning in the same breath! Why, man, he is
the well-known and general referee in all matters affecting the mysteries of Passage, Hazard,
In and In, Penneeck, and Verquire, and what not--why, Beaujeu is King of the Card-pack, and
Duke of the Dice- box--HE call a reckoning like a green-aproned, red-nosed son of the vulgar
spigot! O, my dearest Nigel, what a word you have spoken, and of what a person! That you know
him not, is your only apology for such blasphemy; and yet I scarce hold it adequate, for to
have been a day in London and not to know Beaujeu, is a crime of its own kind. But you shall
know him this blessed moment, and shall learn to hold yourself in horror for the enormities
you have uttered."

"Well, but mark you," said Nigel, "this worthy chevalier keeps not all this good cheer at his
own cost, does he?"

"No, no," answered Lord Dalgarno; "there is a sort of ceremony which my chevalier's friends
and intimates understand, but with which you have no business at present. There is, as majesty
might say, a symbolum to be disbursed--in other words, a mutual exchange of courtesies take
place betwixt Beaujeu and his guests. He makes them a free present of the dinner and wine,
as often as they choose to consult their own felicity by frequenting his house at the hour
of noon, and they, in gratitude, make the chevalier a present of a Jacobus. Then you must know,
that, besides Comus and Bacchus, that princess of sublunary affairs, the Diva Fortuna, is frequently
worshipped at Beaujeu's, and he, as officiating high-priest, hath, as in reason he should,
a considerable advantage from a share of the sacrifice."

"In other words," said Lord Glenvarloch, "this man keeps a gaming- house."

"A house in which you may certainly game," said Lord Dalgarno, "as you may in your own chamber
if you have a mind; nay, I remember old Tom Tally played a hand at put for a wager with Quinze
le Va, the Frenchman, during morning prayers in St. Paul's; the morning was misty, and the
parson drowsy, and the whole audience consisted of themselves and a blind woman, and so they
escaped detection."

"For all this, Malcolm," said the young lord, gravely, "I cannot dine with you to-day, at this
same ordinary."

"And wherefore, in the name of heaven, should you draw back from your word?" said Lord Dalgarno.

"I do not retract my word, Malcolm; but I am bound, by an early promise to my father, never
to enter the doors of a gaming-house."

"I tell you this is none," said Lord Dalgarno; "it is but, in plain terms, an eating-house,
arranged on civiller terms, and frequented by better company, than others in this town; and
if some of them do amuse themselves with cards and hazard, they are men of honour, and who
play as such, and for no more than they can well afford to lose. It was not, and could not
be, such houses that your father desired you to avoid. Besides, he might as well have made
you swear you would never take accommodation of an inn, tavern, eating-house, or place of public
reception of any kind; for there is no such place of public resort but where your eyes may
be contaminated by the sight of a pack of pieces of painted pasteboard, and your ears profaned
by the rattle of those little spotted cubes of ivory. The difference is, that where we go,
we may happen to see persons of quality amusing themselves with a game; and in the ordinary
houses you will meet bullies and sharpers, who will strive either to cheat or to swagger you
out of your money."

"I am sure you would not willingly lead me to do what is wrong," said Nigel; "but my father
had a horror for games of chance, religious I believe, as well as prudential. He judged from
I know not what circumstance, a fallacious one I should hope, that I should have a propensity
to such courses, and I have told you the promise which he exacted from me."

"Now, by my honour," said Dalgarno, "what you have said affords the strongest reason for my
insisting that you go with me. A man who would shun any danger, should first become acquainted
with its real bearing and extent, and that in the company of a confidential guide and guard.
Do you think I myself game? Good faith, my father's oaks grow too far from London, and stand
too fast rooted in the rocks of Perthshire, for me to troll them down with a die, though I
have seen whole forests go down like nine-pins. No, no--these are sports for the wealthy Southron,
not for the poor Scottish noble. The place is an eating- house, and as such you and I will
use it. If others use it to game in, it is their fault, but neither that of the house nor ours."

Unsatisfied with this reasoning, Nigel still insisted upon the promise he had given to his
father, until his companion appeared rather displeased, and disposed to impute to him injurious
and unhandsome suspicions. Lord Glenvarloch could not stand this change of tone. He recollected
that much was due from him to Lord Dalgarno, on account of his father's ready and efficient
friendship, and something also on account of the frank manner in which the young man himself
had offered him his intimacy. He had no reason to doubt his assurances, that the house where
they were about to dine did not fall under the description of places which his father's prohibition
referred; and finally, he was strong in his own resolution to resist every temptation to join
in games of chance. He therefore pacified Lord Dalgarno, by intimating his willingness to go
along with him; and, the good-humour of the young courtier instantaneously returning, he again
ran on in a grotesque and rodomontade account of the host, Monsieur de Beaujeu, which he did
not conclude until they had reached the temple of hospitality over which that eminent professor
presided.

CHAPTER XII

    ----This is the very barn-yard,
    Where muster daily the prime cocks o' the game,
    Ruffle their pinions, crow till they are hoarse,
    And spar about a barleycorn. Here too chickens,
    The callow, unfledged brood of forward folly,
    Learn first to rear the crest, and aim the spur,
    And tune their note like full-plumed Chanticleer.
                                        The Bear-Garden.

The Ordinary, now an ignoble sound, was in the days of James, a new institution, as fashionable
among the youth of that age as the first- rate modern club-houses are amongst those of the
present day. It differed chiefly, in being open to all whom good clothes and good assurance
combined to introduce there. The company usually dined together at an hour fixed, and the manager
of the establishment presided as master of the ceremonies.

Monsieur le Chevalier, (as he qualified himself,) Saint Priest de Beaujeu, was a sharp, thin
Gascon, about sixty years old, banished from his own country, as he said, on account of an
affair of honour, in which he had the misfortune to kill his antagonist, though the best swordsman
in the south of France. His pretensions to quality were supported by a feathered hat, a long
rapier, and a suit of embroidered taffeta, not much the worse for wear, in the extreme fashion
of the Parisian court, and fluttering like a Maypole with many knots of ribbon, of which it
was computed he bore at least five hundred yards about his person. But, notwithstanding this
profusion of decoration, there were many who thought Monsieur le Chevalier so admirably calculated
for his present situation, that nature could never have meant to place him an inch above it.
It was, however, part of the amusement of the place, for Lord Dalgarno and other young men
of quality to treat Monsieur de Beaujeu with a great deal of mock ceremony, which being observed
by the herd of more ordinary and simple gulls, they paid him, in clumsy imitation, much real
deference. The Gascon's natural forwardness being much enhanced by these circumstances, he
was often guilty of presuming beyond the limits of his situation, and of course had sometimes
the mortification to be disagreeably driven back into them.

When Nigel entered the mansion of this eminent person, which had been but of late the residence
of a great Baron of Queen Elizabeth's court, who had retired to his manors in the country on
the death of that princess, he was surprised at the extent of the accommodation which it afforded,
and the number of guests who were already assembled. Feathers waved, spurs jingled, lace and
embroidery glanced everywhere; and at first sight, at least, it certainly made good Lord Dalgarno's
encomium, who represented the company as composed almost entirely of youth of the first quality.
A more close review was not quite so favourable. Several individuals might be discovered who
were not exactly at their ease in the splendid dresses which they wore, and who, therefore,
might be supposed not habitually familiar with such finery. Again, there were others, whose
dress, though on a general view it did not seem inferior to that of the rest of the company,
displayed, on being observed more closely, some of these petty expedients, by which vanity
endeavours to disguise poverty.

Nigel had very little time to make such observations, for the entrance of Lord Dalgarno created
an immediate bustle and sensation among the company, as his name passed from one mouth to another.
Some stood forward to gaze, others stood back to make way--those of his own rank hastened to
welcome him--those of inferior degree endeavoured to catch some point of his gesture, or of
his dress, to be worn and practised upon a future occasion, as the newest and most authentic
fashion.

The genius loci, the Chevalier himself, was not the last to welcome this prime stay and ornament
of his establishment. He came shuffling forward with a hundred apish conges and chers milors,
to express his happiness at seeing Lord Dalgarno again.--"I hope you do bring back the sun
with you, Milor--You did carry away the sun and moon from your pauvre Chevalier when you leave
him for so long. Pardieu, I believe you take them away in your pockets."

"That must have been because you left me nothing else in them, Chevalier," answered Lord Dalgarno;
but Monsieur le Chevalier, I pray you to know my countryman and friend, Lord Glenvarloch!"

"Ah, ha! tres honore--Je m'en souviens,--oui. J'ai connu autrefois un Milor Kenfarloque en
Ecosse. Yes, I have memory of him--le pere de milor apparemment-we were vera intimate when
I was at Oly Root with Monsieur de la Motte--I did often play at tennis vit Milor Kenfarloque
at L'Abbaie d'Oly Root--il etoit meme plus fort que moi--Ah le beaucoup de revers qu'il avoit!--I
have memory, too that he was among the pretty girls--ah, un vrai diable dechaine--Aha! I have
memory--"

"Better have no more memory of the late Lord Glenvarloch," said Lord Dalgarno, interrupting
the Chevalier without ceremony; who perceived that the encomium which he was about to pass
on the deceased was likely to be as disagreeable to the son as it was totally undeserved by
the father, who, far from being either a gamester or libertine, as the Chevalier's reminiscences
falsely represented him, was, on the contrary, strict and severe in his course of life, almost
to the extent of rigour.

"You have the reason, milor," answered the Chevalier, "you have the right--Qu'est ce que nous
avons a faire avec le temps passe?--the time passed did belong to our fathers--our ancetres--very
well--the time present is to us--they have their pretty tombs with their memories and armorials,
all in brass and marbre--we have the petits plats exquis, and the soupe-a-Chevalier, which
I will cause to mount up immediately."

So saying, he made a pirouette on his heel, and put his attendants in motion to place dinner
on the table. Dalgarno laughed, and, observing his young friend looked grave, said to him,
in a tone of reproach-Why, what!-you are not gull enough to be angry with such an ass as that?"

"I keep my anger, I trust, for better purposes," said Lord Glenvarloch; "but I confess I was
moved to hear such a fellow mention my father's name--and you, too, who told me this was no
gaming-house, talked to him of having left it with emptied pockets."

"Pshaw, man!" said Lord Dalgarno, "I spoke but according to the trick of the time; besides,
a man must set a piece or two sometimes, or he would be held a cullionly niggard. But here
comes dinner, and we will see whether you like the Chevalier's good cheer better than his conversation."

Dinner was announced accordingly, and the two friends, being seated in the most honourable
station at the board, were ceremoniously attended to by the Chevalier, who did the honours
of his table to them and to the other guests, and seasoned the whole with his agreeable conversation.
The dinner was really excellent, in that piquant style of cookery which the French had already
introduced, and which the home-bred young men of England, when they aspired to the rank of
connoisseurs and persons of taste, were under the necessity of admiring. The wine was also
of the first quality, and circulated in great variety, and no less abundance. The conversation
among so many young men was, of course, light, lively, and amusing; and Nigel, whose mind had
been long depressed by anxiety and misfortune, naturally found himself at ease, and his spirits
raised and animated.

Some of the company had real wit, and could use it both politely and to advantage; others were
coxcombs, and were laughed at without discovering it; and, again, others were originals, who
seemed to have no objection that the company should be amused with their folly instead of their
wit. And almost all the rest who played any prominent part in the conversation had either the
real tone of good society which belonged to the period, or the jargon which often passes current
for it.

In short, the company and conversation was so agreeable, that Nigel's rigour was softened by
it, even towards the master of ceremonies, and he listened with patience to various details
which the Chevalier de Beaujeu, seeing, as he said, that Milor's taste lay for the "curieux
and Futile," chose to address to him in particular, on the subject of cookery. To gratify,
at the same time, the taste for antiquity, which he somehow supposed that his new guest possessed,
he launched out in commendation of the great artists of former days, particularly one whom
he had known in his youth, "Maitre de Cuisine to the Marechal Strozzi--tres bon gentilhomme
pourtant;" who had maintained his master's table with twelve covers every day during the long
and severe blockade of le petit Leyth, although he had nothing better to place on it than the
quarter of a carrion-horse now and then, and the grass and weeds that grew on the ramparts.
"Despardieux c'dtoit un homme superbe! With one tistle-head, and a nettle or two, he could
make a soupe for twenty guests--an haunch of a little puppy-dog made a roti des plus excellens;
but his coupe de maitre was when the rendition-- what you call the surrender, took place and
appened; and then, dieu me damme, he made out of the hind quarter of one salted horse, forty-five
couverts; that the English and Scottish officers and nobility, who had the honour to dine with
Monseigneur upon the rendition, could not tell what the devil any of them were made upon at all.

The good wine had by this time gone so merrily round, and had such genial effect on the guests,
that those of the lower end of the table, who had hitherto been listeners, began, not greatly
to their own credit, or that of the ordinary, to make innovations.

"You speak of the siege of Leith," said a tall, raw-boned man, with thick mustaches turned
up with a military twist, a broad buff belt, a long rapier, and other outward symbols of the
honoured profession, which lives by killing other people--"you talk of the siege of Leith,
and I have seen the place--a pretty kind of a hamlet it is, with a plain wall, or rampart,
and a pigeon-house or so of a tower at every angle. Uds daggers and scabbards, if a leaguer
of our days had been twenty-four hours, not to say so many months, before it, without carrying
the place and all its cocklofts, one after another, by pure storm, they would have deserved
no better grace than the Provost- Marshal gives when his noose is reeved."

"Saar," said the Chevalier, "Monsieur le Capitaine, I vas not at the siege of the petit Leyth,
and I know not what you say about the cockloft; but I will say for Monseigneur de Strozzi,
that he understood the grande guerre, and was grand capitaine--plus grand-- that is more great,
it may be, than some of the capitaines of Angleterre, who do speak very loud--tenez, Monsieur,
car c'est a vous!"

"O Monsieur." answered the swordsman, "we know the Frenchman will fight well behind his barrier
of stone, or when he is armed with back, breast, and pot."

"Pot!" exclaimed the Chevalier, "what do you mean by pot--do you mean to insult me among my
noble guests? Saar, I have done my duty as a pauvre gentilhomme under the Grand Henri Quatre,
both at Courtrai and Yvry, and, ventre saint gris! we had neither pot nor marmite, but did
always charge in our shirt."

"Which refutes another base scandal," said Lord Dalgarno, laughing, "alleging that linen was
scarce among the French gentlemen-at-arms."

"Gentlemen out at arms and elbows both, you mean, my lord," said the captain, from the bottom
of the table." Craving your lordship's pardon, I do know something of these same gens-d'armes."

"We will spare your knowledge at present, captain, and save your modesty at the same time the
trouble of telling us how that knowledge was acquired," answered Lord Dalgarno, rather contemptuously.

"I need not speak of it, my lord," said the man of war; "the world knows it--all perhaps, but
the men of mohair--the poor sneaking citizens of London, who would see a man of valour eat
his very hilts for hunger, ere they would draw a farthing from their long purses to relieve
them. O, if a band of the honest fellows I have seen were once to come near that cuckoo's nest
of theirs!"

"A cuckoo's nest!-and that said of the city of London!" said a gallant who sat on the opposite
side of the table, and who, wearing a splendid and fashionable dress, seemed yet scarce at
home in it--"I will not brook to hear that repeated."

"What!" said the soldier, bending a most terrific frown from a pair of broad black eyebrows,
handling the hilt of his weapon with one hand, and twirling with the other his huge mustaches;
"will you quarrel for your city?"

"Ay, marry will I," replied the other. "I am a citizen, I care not who knows it; and he who
shall speak a word in dispraise of the city, is an ass and a peremptory gull, and I will break
his pate, to teach him sense and manners."

The company, who probably had their reasons for not valuing the captain's courage at the high
rate which he himself put upon it, were much entertained at the manner in which the quarrel
was taken up by the indignant citizen; and they exclaimed on all sides, "Well run, Bow-bell!"--"Well
crowed, the cock of Saint Paul's!"--"Sound a charge there, or the soldier will mistake his
signals, and retreat when he should advance."

"You mistake me, gentlemen," said the captain, looking round with an air of dignity. "I will
but inquire whether this cavaliero citizen is of rank and degree fitted to measure swords with
a man of action; (for, conceive me, gentlemen, it is not with every one that I can match myself
without loss of reputation;) and in that case he shall soon hear from me honourably, by way
of cartel."

"You shall feel me most dishonourably in the way of cudgel," said the citizen, starting up,
and taking his sword, which he had laid in a corner. "Follow me."

"It is my right to name the place of combat, by all the rules of the sword," said the captain;
"and I do nominate the Maze, in Tothill- Fields, for place--two gentlemen, who shall be indifferent
judges, for witnesses;--and for time--let me say this day fortnight, at daybreak."

"And I," said the citizen, "do nominate the bowling-alley behind the house for place, the present
good company for witnesses, and for time the present moment."

So saying, he cast on his beaver, struck the soldier across the shoulders with his sheathed
sword, and ran down stairs. The captain showed no instant alacrity to follow him; yet, at last,
roused by the laugh and sneer around him, he assured the company, that what he did he would
do deliberately, and, assuming his hat, which he put on with the air of Ancient Pistol, he
descended the stairs to the place of combat, where his more prompt adversary was already stationed,
with his sword unsheathed. Of the company, all of whom seemed highly delighted with the approaching
fray, some ran to the windows which overlooked the bowling-alley, and others followed the combatants
down stairs. Nigel could not help asking Dalgarno whether he would not interfere to prevent
mischief.

"It would be a crime against the public interest," answered his friend; "there can no mischief
happen between two such originals, which will not be a positive benefit to society, and particularly
to the Chevalier's establishment, as he calls it. I have been as sick of that captain's buff
belt, and red doublet, for this month past, as e'er I was of aught; and now I hope this bold
linendraper will cudgel the ass out of that filthy lion's hide. See, Nigel, see the gallant
citizen has ta'en his ground about a bowl's-cast forward, in the midst of the alley--the very
model of a hog in armour. Behold how he prances with his manly foot, and brandishes his blade,
much as if he were about to measure forth cambric with it. See, they bring on the reluctant
soldado, and plant him opposite to his fiery antagonist, twelve paces still dividing them--Lo,
the captain draws his tool, but, like a good general, looks over his shoulder to secure his
retreat, in case the worse come on't. Behold the valiant shop-keeper stoops his head, confident,
doubtless, in the civic helmet with which his spouse has fortified his skull--Why, this is
the rarest of sport. By Heaven, he will run a tilt at him, like a ram."

It was even as Lord Dalgarno had anticipated; for the citizen, who seemed quite serious in
his zeal for combat, perceiving that the man of war did not advance towards him, rushed onwards
with as much good fortune as courage, beat down the captain's guard, and, pressing on, thrust,
as it seemed, his sword clear through the body of his antagonist, who, with a deep groan, measured
his length on the ground. A score of voices cried to the conqueror, as he stood fixed in astonishment
at his own feat, "Away, away with you!--fly, fly--fly by the back door!--get into the Whitefriars,
or cross the water to the Bankside, while we keep off the mob and the constables." And the
conqueror, leaving his vanquished foeman on the ground, fled accordingly, with all speed.

"By Heaven," said Lord Dalgarno, "I could never have believed that the fellow would have stood
to receive a thrust--he has certainly been arrested by positive terror, and lost the use of
his limbs. See, they are raising him."

Stiff and stark seemed the corpse of the swordsman, as one or two of the guests raised him
from the ground; but, when they began to open his waistcoat to search for the wound which nowhere
existed, the man of war collected, his scattered spirits; and, conscious that the ordinary
was no longer a stage on which to display his valour, took to his heels as fast as he could
run, pursued by the laughter and shouts of the company.

"By my honour," said Lord Dalgarno, "he takes the same course with his conqueror. I trust in
heaven he will overtake him, and then the valiant citizen will suppose himself haunted by the
ghost of him he has slain."

"Despardieux, milor," said the Chevalier, "if he had stayed one moment, he should have had
a torchon--what you call a dishclout, pinned to him for a piece of shroud, to show he be de
ghost of one grand fanfaron."

"In the meanwhile," said Lord Dalgarno, "you will oblige us, Monsieur le Chevalier, as well
as maintain your own honoured reputation, by letting your drawers receive the man-at-arms with
a cudgel, in case he should venture to come way again."

"Ventre saint gris, milor," said the Chevalier, "leave that to me.-- Begar, the maid shall
throw the wash-sud upon the grand poltron!"

When they had laughed sufficiently at this ludicrous occurrence, the party began to divide
themselves into little knots--some took possession of the alley, late the scene of combat,
and put the field to its proper use of a bowling-ground, and it soon resounded with all the
terms of the game, as "run, run-rub, rub--hold bias, you infernal trundling timber!" thus making
good the saying, that three things are thrown away in a bowling-green, namely, time, money,
and oaths. In the house, many of the gentlemen betook themselves to cards or dice, and parties
were formed at Ombre, at Basset, at Gleek, at Primero, and other games then in fashion; while
the dice were used at various games, both with and without the tables, as Hazard, In-and-in,
Passage, and so forth. The play, however, did not appear to be extravagantly deep; it was certainly
conducted with great decorum and fairness; nor did there appear any thing to lead the young
Scotsman in the least to doubt his companion's assurance, that the place was frequented by
men of rank and quality, and that the recreations they adopted were conducted upon honourable
principles.

Lord Dalgarno neither had proposed play to his friend, nor joined in the amusement himself,
but sauntered from one table to another, remarking the luck of the different players, as well
as their capacity to avail themselves of it, and exchanging conversation with the highest and
most respectable of the guests. At length, as if tired of what in modern phrase would have
been termed lounging, he suddenly remembered that Burbage was to act Shakespeare's King Richard,
at the Fortune, that afternoon, and that he could not give a stranger in London, like Lord
Glenvarloch, a higher entertainment than to carry him to that exhibition; "unless, indeed,"
he added, in a whisper, "there is paternal interdiction of the theatre as well as of the ordinary."

"I never heard my father speak of stage-plays," said Lord Glenvarloch, "for they are shows
of a modern date, and unknown in Scotland. Yet, if what I have heard to their prejudice be
true, I doubt much whether he would have approved of them."

"Approved of them!" exclaimed Lord Dalgarno--"why, George Buchanan wrote tragedies, and his
pupil, learned and wise as himself, goes to see them, so it is next door to treason to abstain;
and the cleverest men in England write for the stage, and the prettiest women in London resort
to the playhouses, and I have a brace of nags at the door which will carry us along the streets
like wild-fire, and the ride will digest our venison and ortolans, and dissipate the fumes
of the wine, and so let's to horse--Godd'en to you, gentlemen--Godd'en, Chevalier de la Fortune."

Lord Dalgarno's grooms were in attendance with two horses, and the young men mounted, the proprietor
upon a favourite barb, and Nigel upon a high-dressed jennet, scarce less beautiful. As they
rode towards the theatre, Lord Dalgarno endeavoured to discover his friend's opinion of the
company to which he had introduced him, and to combat the exceptions which he might suppose
him to have taken. "And wherefore lookest thou sad," he said, "my pensive neophyte? Sage son
of the Alma Mater of Low-Dutch learning, what aileth thee? Is the leaf of the living world
which we have turned over in company, less fairly written than thou hadst been taught to expect?
Be comforted, and pass over one little blot or two; thou wilt be doomed to read through many
a page, as black as Infamy, with her sooty pinion, can make them. Remember, most immaculate
Nigel, that we are in London, not Leyden-- that we are studying life, not lore. Stand buff
against the reproach of thine over-tender conscience, man, and when thou summest up, like a
good arithmetician, the actions of the day, before you balance the account on your pillow,
tell the accusing spirit, to his brimstone beard, that if thine ears have heard the clatter
of the devil's bones, thy hand hath not trowled them--that if thine eye hath seen the brawling
of two angry boys, thy blade hath not been bared in their fray."

"Now, all this may be wise and witty," replied Nigel; "yet I own I cannot think but that your
lordship, and other men of good quality with whom we dined, might have chosen a place of meeting
free from the intrusion of bullies, and a better master of your ceremonial than yonder foreign
adventurer."

"All shall be amended, Sancte Nigelle, when thou shalt come forth a new Peter the Hermit, to
preach a crusade against dicing, drabbing, and company-keeping. We will meet for dinner in
Saint Sepulchre's Church; we will dine in the chancel, drink our flask in the vestry, the parson
shall draw every cork, and the clerk say amen to every health. Come man, cheer up, and get
rid of this sour and unsocial humour. Credit me, that the Puritans who object to us the follies
and the frailties incident to human nature, have themselves the vices of absolute devils, privy
malice and backbiting hypocrisy, and spiritual pride in all its presumption. There is much,
too' in life which we must see, were it only to learn to shun it. Will Shakespeare, who lives
after death, and who is presently to afford thee such pleasure as none but himself can confer,
has described the gallant Falconbridge as calling that man

  ----' a bastard to the time,
  That doth not smack of observation;
  Which, though I will not practise to deceive,
  Yet, to avoid deceit, I mean to learn."

But here we are at the door of the Fortune, where we shall have matchless Will speaking for
himself.--Goblin, and you other lout, leave the horses to the grooms, and make way for us through
the press."

They dismounted, and the assiduous efforts of Lutin, elbowing, bullying, and proclaiming his
master's name and title, made way through a crowd of murmuring citizens, and clamorous apprentices,
to the door, where Lord Dalgarno speedily procured a brace of stools upon the stage for his
companion and himself, where, seated among other gallants of the same class, they had an opportunity
of displaying their fair dresses and fashionable manners, while they criticised the piece during
its progress; thus forming, at the same time, a conspicuous part of the spectacle, and an important
proportion of the audience.

Nigel Olifaunt was too eagerly and deeply absorbed in the interest of the scene, to be capable
of playing his part as became the place where he was seated. He felt all the magic of that
sorcerer, who had displayed, within the paltry circle of a wooden booth, the long wars of York
and Lancaster, compelling the heroes of either line to stalk across the scene in language and
fashion as they lived, as if the grave had given up the dead for the amusement and instruction
of the living. Burbage, esteemed the best Richard until Garrick arose, played the tyrant and
usurper with such truth and liveliness, that when the Battle of Bosworth seemed concluded by
his death, the ideas of reality and deception were strongly contending in Lord Glenvarloch's
imagination, and it required him to rouse himself from his reverie, so strange did the proposal
at first sound when his companion declared King Richard should sup with them at the Mermaid.

They were joined, at the same time, by a small party of the gentlemen with whom they had dined,
which they recruited by inviting two or three of the most accomplished wits and poets, who
seldom failed to attend the Fortune Theatre, and were even but too ready to conclude a day
of amusement with a night of pleasure.

CHAPTER XIII

    Let the proud salmon gorge the feather'd hook,
    Then strike, and then you have him--He will wince;
    Spin out your line that it shall whistle from you
    Some twenty yards or so, yet you shall have him--
    Marry! you must have patience--the stout rock
    Which is his trust, hath edges something sharp;
    And the deep pool hath ooze and sludge enough
    To mar your fishing--'less you are more careful.
                Albion, or the Double Kings.

It is seldom that a day of pleasure, upon review, seems altogether so exquisite as the partaker
of the festivity may have felt it while passing over him. Nigel Olifaunt, at least, did not
feel it so, and it required a visit from his new acquaintance, Lord Dalgarno, to reconcile
him entirely to himself. But this visit took place early after breakfast, and his friend's
discourse was prefaced with a question, How he liked the company of the preceding evening?

"Why, excellently well," said Lord Glenvarloch; "only I should have liked the wit better had
it appeared to flow more freely. Every man's invention seemed on the stretch, and each extravagant
simile seemed to set one half of your men of wit into a brown study to produce something which
should out-herod it."

"And wherefore not?" said Lord Dalgarno, "or what are these fellows fit for, but to play the
intellectual gladiators before us? He of them who declares himself recreant, should, d--n him,
be restricted to muddy ale, and the patronage of the Waterman's Company. I promise you, that
many a pretty fellow has been mortally wounded with a quibble or a carwitchet at the Mermaid,
and sent from thence, in a pitiable estate, to Wit's hospital in the Vintry, where they languish
to this day amongst fools and aldermen."

"It may be so," said Lord Nigel; "yet I could swear by my honour, that last night I seemed
to be in company with more than one man whose genius and learning ought either to have placed
him higher in our company, or to have withdrawn him altogether from a scene, where, sooth to
speak, his part seemed unworthily subordinate."

"Now, out upon your tender conscience," said Lord Dalgarno; "and the fico for such outcasts
of Parnassus! Why, these are the very leavings of that noble banquet of pickled herrings and
Rhenish, which lost London so many of her principal witmongers and bards of misrule. What would
you have said had you seen Nash or Green, when you interest yourself about the poor mimes you
supped with last night? Suffice it, they had their drench and their doze, and they drank and
slept as much as may save them from any necessity of eating till evening, when, if they are
industrious, they will find patrons or players to feed them. [Footnote: The condition of men
of wit and talents was never more melancholy than about this period. Their lives were so irregular,
and their means of living so precarious, that they were alternately rioting in debauchery,
or encountering and struggling with the meanest necessities. Two or three lost their lives
by a surfeit brought on by that fatal banquet of Rhenish wine and pickled herrings, which is
familiar to those who study the lighter literature of that age. The whole history is a most
melancholy picture of genius, degraded at once by its own debaucheries, and the patronage of
heartless rakes and profligates.] For the rest of their wants, they can be at no loss for cold
water while the New River head holds good; and your doublets of Parnassus are eternal in duration."

"Virgil and Horace had more efficient patronage," said Nigel.

"Ay," replied his countryman, "but these fellows are neither Virgil nor Horace; besides, we
have other spirits of another sort, to whom I will introduce you on some early occasion. Our
Swan of Avon hath sung his last; but we have stout old Ben, with as much learning and genius
as ever prompted the treader of sock and buskin. It is not, however, of him I mean now to speak;
but I come to pray you, of dear love, to row up with me as far as Richmond, where two or three
of the gallants whom you saw yesterday, mean to give music and syllabubs to a set of beauties,
with some curious bright eyes among them--such, I promise you, as might win an astrologer from
his worship of the galaxy. My sister leads the bevy, to whom I desire to present you. She hath
her admirers at Court; and is regarded, though I might dispense with sounding her praise, as
one of the beauties of the time."

There was no refusing an engagement, where the presence of the party invited, late so low in
his own regard, was demanded by a lady of quality, one of the choice beauties of the time.
Lord Glenvarloch accepted, as was inevitable, and spent a lively day among the gay and the
fair. He was the gallant in attendance, for the day, upon his friend's sister, the beautiful
Countess of Blackchester, who aimed at once at superiority in the realms of fashion, of power,
and of wit.

She was, indeed, considerably older than her brother, and had probably completed her six lustres;
but the deficiency in extreme youth was more than atoned for, in the most precise and curious
accuracy in attire, an early acquaintance with every foreign mode, and a peculiar gift in adapting
the knowledge which she acquired, to her own particular features and complexion. At Court,
she knew as well as any lady in the circle, the precise tone, moral, political, learned, or
jocose, in which it was proper to answer the monarch, according to his prevailing humour; and
was supposed to have been very active, by her personal interest, in procuring her husband a
high situation, which the gouty old viscount could never have deserved by any merit of his
own commonplace conduct and understanding.

It was far more easy for this lady than for her brother, to reconcile so young a courtier as
Lord Glenvarloch to the customs and habits of a sphere so new to him. In all civilised society,
the females of distinguished rank and beauty give the tone to manners, and, through these,
even to morals. Lady Blackchester had, besides, interest either in the Court, or over the Court,
(for its source could not be well traced,) which created friends, and overawed those who might
have been disposed to play the part of enemies.

At one time, she was understood to be closely leagued with the Buckingham family, with whom
her brother still maintained a great intimacy; and, although some coldness had taken place
betwixt the Countess and the Duchess of Buckingham, so that they were little seen together,
and the former seemed considerably to have withdrawn herself into privacy, it was whispered
that Lady Blackchester's interest with the great favourite was not diminished in consequence
of her breach with his lady.

Our accounts of the private Court intrigues of that period, and of the persons to whom they
were intrusted, are not full enough to enable us to pronounce upon the various reports which
arose out of the circumstances we have detailed. It is enough to say, that Lady Blackchester
possessed great influence on the circle around her, both from her beauty, her abilities, and
her reputed talents for Court intrigue; and that Nigel Olifaunt was not long of experiencing
its power, as he became a slave in some degree to that species of habit, which carries so many
men into a certain society at a certain hour, without expecting or receiving any particular
degree of gratification, or even amusement.

His life for several weeks may be thus described. The ordinary was no bad introduction to the
business of the day; and the young lord quickly found, that if the society there was not always
irreproachable, still it formed the most convenient and agreeable place of meeting with the
fashionable parties, with whom he visited Hyde Park, the theatres, and other places of public
resort, or joined the gay and glittering circle which Lady Blackchester had assembled around
her. Neither did he entertain the same scrupulous horror which led him originally even to hesitate
entering into a place where gaming was permitted; but, on the contrary, began to admit the
idea, that as there could be no harm done in beholding such recreation when only indulged in
to a moderate degree, so, from a parity of reasoning, there could be no objection to joining
in it, always under the same restrictions. But the young lord was a Scotsman, habituated to
early reflection, and totally unaccustomed to any habit which inferred a careless risk or profuse
waste of money. Profusion was not his natural vice, or one likely to be acquired in the course
of his education; and, in all probability, while his father anticipated with noble horror the
idea of his son approaching the gaming-table, he was more startled at the idea of his becoming
a gaining than a losing adventurer. The second, according to his principles, had a termination,
a sad one indeed, in the loss of temporal fortune--the first quality went on increasing the
evil which he dreaded, and perilled at once both body and soul.

However the old lord might ground his apprehension, it was so far verified by his son's conduct,
that, from an observer of the various games of chance which he witnessed, he came, by degrees,
by moderate hazards, and small bets or wagers, to take a certain interest in them. Nor could
it be denied, that his rank and expectations entitled him to hazard a few pieces (for his game
went no deeper) against persons, who, from the readiness with which they staked their money,
might be supposed well able to afford to lose it.

It chanced, or, perhaps, according to the common belief, his evil genius had so decreed, that
Nigel's adventures were remarkably successful. He was temperate, cautious, cool-headed, had
a strong memory, and a ready power of calculation; was besides, of a daring and intrepid character,
one upon whom no one that had looked even slightly, or spoken to though but hastily, would
readily have ventured to practise any thing approaching to trick, or which required to be supported
by intimidation. While Lord Glenvarloch chose to play, men played with him regularly, or, according
to the phrase, upon the square; and, as he found his luck change, or wished to hazard his good
fortune no farther, the more professed votaries of fortune, who frequented the house of Monsieur
le Chevalier de Saint Priest Beaujeu, did not venture openly to express their displeasure at
his rising a winner. But when this happened repeatedly, the gamesters murmured amongst themselves
equally at the caution and the success of the young Scotsman; and he became far from being
a popular character among their society.

It was no slight inducement to the continuance of this most evil habit, when it was once in
some degree acquired, that it seemed to place Lord Glenvarloch, haughty as he naturally was,
beyond the necessity of subjecting himself to farther pecuniary obligations, which his prolonged
residence in London must otherwise have rendered necessary. He had to solicit from the ministers
certain forms of office, which were to render his sign-manual effectually useful; and these,
though they could not be denied, were delayed in such a manner, as to lead Nigel to believe
there was some secret opposition, which occasioned the demur in his business. His own impulse
was, to have appeared at Court a second time, with the king's sign-manual in his pocket, and
to have appealed to his Majesty himself, whether the delay of the public officers ought to
render his royal generosity unavailing. But the Lord Huntinglen, that good old peer, who had
so frankly interfered in his behalf on a former occasion, and whom he occasionally visited,
greatly dissuaded him from a similar adventure, and exhorted him quietly to await the deliverance
of the ministers, which should set him free from dancing attendance in London.

Lord Dalgarno joined his father in deterring his young friend from a second attendance at Court,
at least till he was reconciled with the Duke of Buckingham--"a matter in which," he said,
addressing his father, "I have offered my poor assistance, without being able to prevail on
Lord Nigel to make any--not even the least--submission to the Duke of Buckingham."

"By my faith, and I hold the laddie to be in the right on't, Malcom!" answered the stout old
Scots lord.--"What right hath Buckingham, or, to speak plainly, the son of Sir George Villiers,
to expect homage and fealty from one more noble than himself by eight quarters? I heard him
myself, on no reason that I could perceive, term Lord Nigel his enemy; and it will never be
by my counsel that the lad speaks soft word to him, till he recalls the hard one."

"That is precisely my advice to Lord Glenvarloch," answered Lord Dalgarno; "but then you will
admit, my dear father, that it would be the risk of extremity for our friend to return into
the presence, the duke being his enemy--better to leave it with me to take off the heat of
the distemperature, with which some pickthanks have persuaded the duke to regard our friend."

"If thou canst persuade Buckingham of his error, Malcolm," said his father, "for once I will
say there hath been kindness and honesty in Court service. I have oft told your sister and
yourself, that in the general I esteem it as lightly as may be."

"You need not doubt my doing my best in Nigel's case," answered Lord Dalgarno; "but you must
think, my dear father, I must needs use slower and gentler means than those by which you became
a favourite twenty years ago."

"By my faith, I am afraid thou wilt," answered his father.--"I tell thee, Malcolm, I would
sooner wish myself in the grave, than doubt thine honesty or honour; yet somehow it hath chanced,
that honest, ready service, hath not the same acceptance at Court which it has in my younger
time--and yet you rise there."

"O, the time permits not your old-world service," said Lord Dalgarno; "we have now no daily
insurrections, no nightly attempts at assassination, as were the fashion in the Scottish Court.
Your prompt and uncourteous sword-in-hand attendance on the sovereign is no longer necessary,
and would be as unbeseeming as your old-fashioned serving- men, with their badges, broadswords,
and bucklers, would be at a court-mask. Besides, father, loyal haste hath its inconveniences.
I have heard, and from royal lips too, that when you stuck your dagger into the traitor Ruthven,
it was with such little consideration, that the point ran a quarter of an inch into the royal
buttock. The king never talks of it but he rubs the injured part, and quotes his 'infandum-------renovare
dolorem.' But this comes of old fashions, and of wearing a long Liddesdale whinger instead
of a poniard of Parma. Yet this, my dear father, you call prompt and valiant service. The king,
I am told, could not sit upright for a fortnight, though all the cushions in Falkland were
placed in his chair of state, and the Provost of Dunfermline's borrowed to the boot of all."

"It is a lie," said the old earl, "a false lie, forge it who list!--It is true I wore a dagger
of service by my side, and not a bodkin like yours, to pick one's teeth withal--and for prompt
service--Odds nouns! it should be prompt to be useful when kings are crying treason and murder
with the screech of a half-throttled hen. But you young courtiers know nought of these matters,
and are little better than the green geese they bring over from the Indies, whose only merit
to their masters is to repeat their own words after them--a pack of mouthers, and flatterers,
and ear-wigs.--Well, I am old and unable to mend, else I would break all off, and hear the
Tay once more flinging himself over the Campsie Linn."

"But there is your dinner-bell, father," said Lord Dalgarno, "which, if the venison I sent
you prove seasonable, is at least as sweet a sound."

"Follow me, then, youngsters, if you list," said the old earl; and strode on from the alcove
in which this conversation was held, towards the house, followed by the two young men.

In their private discourse, Lord Dalgarno had little trouble in dissuading Nigel from going
immediately to Court; while, on the other hand, the offers he made him of a previous introduction
to the Duke of Buckingham, were received by Lord Glenvarloch with a positive and contemptuous
refusal. His friend shrugged his shoulders, as one who claims the merit of having given to
an obstinate friend the best counsel, and desires to be held free of the consequences of his
pertinacity.

As for the father, his table indeed, and his best liquor, of which he was more profuse than
necessary, were at the command of his young friend, as well as his best advice and assistance
in the prosecution of his affairs. But Lord Huntinglen's interest was more apparent than real;
and the credit he had acquired by his gallant defence of the king's person, was so carelessly
managed by himself, and so easily eluded by the favourites and ministers of the sovereign,
that, except upon one or two occasions, when the king was in some measure taken by surprise,
as in the case of Lord Glenvarloch, the royal bounty was never efficiently extended either
to himself or to his friends.

"There never was a man," said Lord Dalgarno, whose shrewder knowledge of the English Court
saw where his father's deficiency lay, "that had it so perfectly in his power to have made
his way to the pinnacle of fortune as my poor father. He had acquired a right to build up a
staircase, step by step, slowly and surely, letting every boon, which he begged year after
year, become in its turn the resting-place for the next annual grant. But your fortunes shall
not shipwreck upon the same coast, Nigel," he would conclude. "If I have fewer means of influence
than my father has, or rather had, till he threw them away for butts of sack, hawks, hounds,
and such carrion, I can, far better than he, improve that which I possess; and that, my dear
Nigel, is all engaged in your behalf. Do not be surprised or offended that you now see me less
than formerly. The stag-hunting is commenced, and the prince looks that I should attend him
more frequently. I must also maintain my attendance on the duke, that I may have an opportunity
of pleading your cause when occasion shall permit."

"I have no cause to plead before the duke," said Nigel, gravely; "I have said so repeatedly."

"Why, I meant the phrase no otherwise, thou churlish and suspicious disputant," answered Dalgarno,
"than as I am now pleading the duke's cause with thee. Surely I only mean to claim a share
in our royal master's favourite benediction, Beati Pacifici."

Upon several occasions, Lord Glenvarloch's conversations, both with the old earl and his son,
took a similar turn and had a like conclusion. He sometimes felt as if, betwixt the one and
the other, not to mention the more unseen and unboasted, but scarce less certain influence
of Lady Blackchester, his affair, simple as it had become, might have been somehow accelerated.
But it was equally impossible to doubt the rough honesty of the father, and the eager and officious
friendship of Lord Dalgarno; nor was it easy to suppose that the countenance of the lady, by
whom he was received with such distinction, would be wanting, could it be effectual in his service.

Nigel was further sensible of the truth of what Lord Dalgarno often pointed out, that the favourite
being supposed to be his enemy, every petty officer, through whose hands his affair must necessarily
pass, would desire to make a merit of throwing obstacles in his way, which he could only surmount
by steadiness and patience, unless he preferred closing the breach, or, as Lord Dalgarno called
it, making his peace with the Duke of Buckingham.

Nigel might, and doubtless would, have had recourse to the advice of his friend George Heriot
upon this occasion, having found it so advantageous formerly; but the only time he saw him
after their visit to Court, he found the worthy citizen engaged in hasty preparations for a
journey to Paris, upon business of great importance in the way of his profession, and by an
especial commission from the Court and the Duke of Buckingham, which was likely to be attended
with considerable profit. The good man smiled as he named the Duke of Buckingham. He had been,
he said, pretty sure that his disgrace in that quarter would not be of long duration. Lord
Glenvarloch expressed himself rejoiced at that reconciliation, observing, that it had been
a most painful reflection to him, that Master Heriot should, in his behalf, have incurred the
dislike, and perhaps exposed himself to the ill offices, of so powerful a favourite.

"My lord," said Heriot, "for your father's son I would do much; and yet truly, if I know myself,
I would do as much and risk as much, for the sake of justice, in the case of a much more insignificant
person, as I have ventured for yours. But as we shall not meet for some time, I must commit
to your own wisdom the farther prosecution of this matter."

And thus they took a kind and affectionate leave of each other.

There were other changes in Lord Glenvarloch's situation, which require to be noticed. His
present occupations, and the habits of amusement which he had acquired, rendered his living
so far in the city a considerable inconvenience. He may also have become a little ashamed of
his cabin on Paul's Wharf, and desirous of being lodged somewhat more according to his quality.
For this purpose, he had hired a small apartment near the Temple. He was, nevertheless, almost
sorry for what he had done, when he observed that his removal appeared to give some pain to
John Christie, and a great deal to his cordial and officious landlady. The former, who was
grave and saturnine in every thing he did, only hoped that all had been to Lord Glenvarloch's
mind, and that he had not left them on account of any unbeseeming negligence on their part.
But the tear twinkled in Dame Nelly's eye, while she recounted the various improvements she
had made in the apartment, of express purpose to render it more convenient to his lordship.

"There was a great sea-chest," she said, "had been taken upstairs to the shopman's garret,
though it left the poor lad scarce eighteen inches of opening to creep betwixt it and his bed;
and Heaven knew-- she did not--whether it could ever be brought down that narrow stair again.
Then the turning the closet into an alcove had cost a matter of twenty round shillings; and
to be sure, to any other lodger but his lordship, the closet was more convenient. There was
all the linen, too, which she had bought on purpose--But Heaven's will be done--she was resigned."

Everybody likes marks of personal attachment; and Nigel, whose heart really smote him,, as
if in his rising fortunes he were disdaining the lowly accommodations and the civilities of
the humble friends which had been but lately actual favours, failed not by every assurance
in his power, and by as liberal payment as they could be prevailed upon to accept, to alleviate
the soreness of their feelings at his departure; and a parting kiss from the fair lips of his
hostess sealed his forgiveness.

Richie Moniplies lingered behind his master, to ask whether, in case of need, John Christie
could help a canny Scotsman to a passage back to his own country; and receiving assurance of
John's interest to that effect, he said at parting, he would remind him of his promise soon.--
"For," said he, "if my lord is not weary of this London life, I ken one that is, videlicet,
mysell; and I am weel determined to see Arthur's Seat again ere I am many weeks older."

CHAPTER XIV

  Bingo, why, Bingo! hey, boy--here, sir, here!--
  He's gone and off, but he'll be home before us;--
  'Tis the most wayward cur e'er mumbled bone,
  Or dogg'd a master's footstep.--Bingo loves me
  Better than ever beggar loved his alms;
  Yet, when he takes such humour, you may coax
  Sweet Mistress Fantasy, your worship's mistress,
  Out of her sullen moods, as soon as Bingo.
                       The Dominie And His Dog.

Richie Moniplies was as good as his word. Two or three mornings after the young lord had possessed
himself of his new lodgings, he appeared before Nigel, as he was preparing to dress, having
left his pillow at an hour much later than had formerly been his custom.

As Nigel looked upon his attendant, he observed there was a gathering gloom upon his solemn
features, which expressed either additional importance, or superadded discontent, or a portion
of both.

"How now," he said, "what is the matter this morning, Richie, that you have made your face
so like the grotesque mask on one of the spouts yonder?" pointing to the Temple Church, of
which Gothic building they had a view from the window.

Richie swivelled his head a little to the right with as little alacrity as if he had the crick
in his neck, and instantly resuming his posture, replied,--"Mask here, mask there--it were
nae such matters that I have to speak anent."

"And what matters have you to speak anent, then?" said his master, whom circumstances had inured
to tolerate a good deal of freedom from his attendant.

"My lord,"--said Richie, and then stopped to cough and hem, as if what he had to say stuck
somewhat in his throat.

"I guess the mystery," said Nigel, "you want a little money, Richie; will five pieces serve
the present turn?"

"My lord," said Richie, "I may, it is like, want a trifle of money; and I am glad at the same
time, and sorry, that it is mair plenty with your lordship than formerly."

"Glad and sorry, man!" said Lord Nigel, "why, you are reading riddles to me, Richie."

"My riddle will be briefly read," said Richie; "I come to crave of your lordship your commands
for Scotland."

"For Scotland!--why, art thou mad, man?" said Nigel; "canst thou not tarry to go down with me?"

"I could be of little service," said Richie, "since you purpose to hire another page and groom."

"Why, thou jealous ass," said the young lord, "will not thy load of duty lie the lighter?--Go,
take thy breakfast, and drink thy ale double strong, to put such absurdities out of thy head--I
could be angry with thee for thy folly, man--but I remember how thou hast stuck to me in adversity."

"Adversity, my lord, should never have parted us," said Richie; "methinks, had the warst come
to warst, I could have starved as gallantly as your lordship, or more so, being in some sort
used to it; for, though I was bred at a flasher's stall, I have not through my life had a constant
intimacy with collops."

"Now, what is the meaning of all this trash?" said Nigel; "or has it no other end than to provoke
my patience? You know well enough, that, had I twenty serving-men, I would hold the faithful
follower that stood by me in my distress the most valued of them all. But it is totally out
of reason to plague me with your solemn capriccios."

"My lord," said Richie, "in declaring your trust in me, you have done what is honourable to
yourself, if I may with humility say so much, and in no way undeserved on my side. Nevertheless,
we must part."

"Body of me, man, why?" said Lord Nigel; "what reason can there be for it, if we are mutually
satisfied?"

"My lord," said Richie Moniplies, "your lordship's occupations are such as I cannot own or
countenance by my presence."

"How now, sirrah!" said his master, angrily.

"Under favour, my lord," replied his domestic, "it is unequal dealing to be equally offended
by my speech and by my silence. If you can hear with patience the grounds of my departure,
it may be, for aught I know, the better for you here and hereafter--if not, let me have my
license of departure in silence, and so no more about it."

"Go to, sir!" said Nigel; "speak out your mind--only remember to whom you speak it."

"Weel, weel, my lord--I speak it with humility;" (never did Richie look with more starched
dignity than when he uttered the word;) "but do you think this dicing and card-shuffling, and
haunting of taverns and playhouses, suits your lordship--for I am sure it does not suit me?"

"Why, you are not turned precisian or puritan, fool?" said Lord Glenvarloch, laughing, though,
betwixt resentment and shame, it cost him some trouble to do so.

"My lord," replied the follower, "I ken the purport of your query. I am, it may be, a little
of a precisian, and I wish to Heaven I was mair worthy of the name; but let that be a pass-over.--I
have stretched the duties of a serving-man as far as my northern conscience will permit. I
can give my gude word to my master, or to my native country, when I am in a foreign land, even
though I should leave downright truth a wee bit behind me. Ay, and I will take or give a slash
with ony man that speaks to the derogation of either. But this chambering, dicing, and play-haunting,
is not my element--I cannot draw breath in it--and when I hear of your lordship winning the
siller that some poor creature may full sairly miss--by my saul, if it wad serve your necessity,
rather than you gained it from him, I wad take a jump over the hedge with your lordship, and
cry 'Stand!' to the first grazier we met that was coming from Smithfield with the price of
his Essex calves in his leathern pouch!"

"You are a simpleton," said Nigel, who felt, however, much conscience- struck; "I never play
but for small sums."

"Ay, my lord," replied the unyielding domestic, "and--still with reverence--it is even sae
much the waur. If you played with your equals, there might be like sin, but there wad be mair
warldly honour in it. Your lordship kens, or may ken, by experience of your ain, whilk is not
as yet mony weeks auld, that small sums can ill be missed by those that have nane larger; and
I maun e'en be plain with you, that men notice it of your lordship, that ye play wi' nane but
the misguided creatures that can but afford to lose bare stakes."

"No man dare say so!" replied Nigel, very angrily. "I play with whom I please, but I will only
play for what stake I please."

"That is just what they say, my lord," said the unmerciful Richie, whose natural love of lecturing,
as well as his bluntness of feeling, prevented him from having any idea of the pain which he
was inflicting on his master; "these are even their own very words. It was but yesterday your
lordship was pleased, at that same ordinary, to win from yonder young hafflins gentleman, with
the crimson velvet doublet, and the cock's feather in his beaver--him, I mean, who fought with
the ranting captain--a matter of five pounds, or thereby. I saw him come through the hall;
and, if he was not cleaned out of cross and pile, I never saw a ruined man in my life."

"Impossible!" said Lord Glenvarloch--"Why, who is he? he looked like a man of substance."

"All is not gold that glistens, my lord," replied Richie; "'broidery and bullion buttons make
bare pouches. And if you ask who he is--maybe I have a guess, and care not to tell."

"At least, if I have done any such fellow an injury," said the Lord Nigel, "let me know how
I can repair it."

"Never fash your beard about that, my lord,--with reverence always," said Richie,--"he shall
be suitably cared after. Think on him but as ane wha was running post to the devil, and got
a shouldering from your lordship to help him on his journey. But I will stop him, if reason
can; and so your lordship needs asks nae mair about it, for there is no use in your knowing
it, but much the contrair."

"Hark you, sirrah," said his master, "I have borne with you thus far, for certain reasons;
but abuse my good-nature no farther--and since you must needs go, why, go a God's name, and
here is to pay your journey." So saying, he put gold into his hand, which Richie told over
piece by piece, with the utmost accuracy.

"Is it all right--or are they wanting in weight--or what the devil keeps you, when your hurry
was so great five minutes since?" said the young lord, now thoroughly nettled at the presumptuous
precision with which Richie dealt forth his canons of morality.

"The tale of coin is complete," said Richie, with the most imperturbable gravity; "and, for
the weight, though they are sae scrupulous in this town, as make mouths at a piece that is
a wee bit light, or that has been cracked within the ring, my sooth, they will jump at them
in Edinburgh like a cock at a grosart. Gold pieces are not so plenty there, the mair the pity!"

"The more is your folly, then," said Nigel, whose anger was only momentary, "that leave the
land where there is enough of them."

"My lord," said Richie, "to be round with you, the grace of God is better than gold pieces.

"Laughed at!" said Nigel, who, like others of his age, was more sensible to ridicule than to
reason--"Who dares laugh at me?"

"Do they use such terms of me?" said Lord Nigel. "Death and the devil!"

"And the devil's dam, my lord," answered Richie; "they are all three busy in London.--And,
besides, Lutin and his master laughed at you, my lord, for letting it be thought that--I shame
to speak it--that ye were over well with the wife of the decent honest man whose house you
but now left, as not sufficient for your new bravery, whereas they said, the licentious scoffers,
that you pretended to such favour when you had not courage enough for so fair a quarrel, and
that the sparrow-hawk was too craven-crested to fly at the wife of a cheesemonger."--He stopped
a moment, and looked fixedly in his master's face, which was inflamed with shame and anger,
and then proceeded. "My lord, I did you justice in my thought, and myself too; for, thought
I, he would have been as deep in that sort of profligacy as in others, if it hadna been Richie's
four quarters."

"What new nonsense have you got to plague me with?" said Lord Nigel. "But go on, since it is
the last time I am to be tormented with your impertinence,--go on, and make the most of your time."

"In troth," said Richie, "and so will I even do. And as Heaven has bestowed on me a tongue
to speak and to advise----"

"Which talent you can by no means be accused of suffering to remain idle," said Lord Glenvarloch,
interrupting him.

"True, my lord," said Richie, again waving his hand, as if to bespeak his master's silence
and attention; "so, I trust, you will think some time hereafter. And, as I am about to leave
your service, it is proper that ye suld know the truth, that ye may consider the snares to
which your youth and innocence may be exposed, when aulder and doucer heads are withdrawn from
beside you.--There has been a lusty, good-looking kimmer, of some forty, or bygane, making
mony speerings about you, my lord."

"Well, sir, what did she want with me?" said Lord Nigel.

"At first, my lord," replied his sapient follower, "as she seemed to be a well-fashioned woman,
and to take pleasure in sensible company, I was no way reluctant to admit her to my conversation."

"I dare say not," said Lord Nigel; "nor unwilling to tell her about my private affairs."

"Not I, truly, my lord," said the attendant;--"for, though she asked me mony questions about
your fame, your fortune, your business here, and such like, I did not think it proper to tell
her altogether the truth thereanent."

"I see no call on you whatever," said Lord Nigel, "to tell the woman either truth or lies upon
what she had nothing to do with."

"I thought so, too, my lord," replied Richie, "and so I told her neither."

"And what did you tell her, then, you eternal babbler?" said his master, impatient of his prate,
yet curious to know what it was all to end in.

"I told her," said Richie, "about your warldly fortune, and sae forth, something whilk is not
truth just at this time; but which hath been truth formerly, suld be truth now, and will be
truth again,--and that was, that you were in possession of your fair lands, whilk ye are but
in right of as yet. Pleasant communing we had on that and other topics, until she showed the
cloven foot, beginning to confer with me about some wench that she said had a good-will to
your lordship, and fain she would have spoken with you in particular anent it; but when I heard
of such inklings, I began to suspect she was little better than --whew! "--Here he concluded
his narrative with a low, but very expressive whistle.

"And what did your wisdom do in these circumstances?" said Lord Nigel, who, notwithstanding
his former resentment, could now scarcely forbear laughing.

"I put on a look, my lord," replied Richie, bending his solemn brows, "that suld give her a
heartscald of walking on such errands. I laid her enormities clearly before her, and I threatened
her, in sae mony words, that I would have her to the ducking-stool; and she, on the contrair
part, miscawed me for a forward northern tyke--and so we parted never to meet again, as I hope
and trust. And so I stood between your lordship and that temptation, which might have been
worse than the ordinary, or the playhouse either; since you wot well what Solomon, King of
the Jews, sayeth of the strange woman--for, said I to mysell, we have taken to dicing already,
and if we take to drabbing next, the Lord kens what we may land in!" And since London pleases
you so little, I will bid you a short farewell; and you may go down to Edinburgh until I come
thither myself, when I trust you will re-enter into my service."

"Now, Heaven bless you, my lord," said Richie Moniplies, with uplifted eyes; "for that word
sounds more like grace than ony has come out of your mouth this fortnight.--I give you godd'en,
my lord."

So saying, he thrust forth his immense bony hand, seized on that of Lord Glenvarloch, raised
it to his lips, then turned short on his heel, and left the room hastily, as if afraid of showing
more emotion than was consistent with his ideas of decorum. Lord Nigel, rather surprised at
his sudden exit, called after him to know whether he was sufficiently provided with money;
but Richie, shaking his head, without making any other answer, ran hastily down stairs, shut
the street-door heavily behind him, and was presently seen striding along the Strand.

His master almost involuntarily watched and distinguished the tall raw-boned figure of his
late follower, from the window, for some time, until he was lost among the crowd of passengers.
Nigel's reflections were not altogether those of self-approval. It was no good sign of his
course of life, (he could not help acknowledging this much to himself,) that so faithful an
adherent no longer seemed to feel the same pride in his service, or attachment to his person,
which he had formerly manifested. Neither could he avoid experiencing some twinges of conscience,
while he felt in some degree the charges which Richie had preferred against him, and experienced
a sense of shame and mortification, arising from the colour given by others to that, which
he himself would have called his caution and moderation in play. He had only the apology, that
it had never occurred to himself in this light.

Then his pride and self-love suggested, that, on the other hand, Richie, with all his good
intentions, was little better than a conceited, pragmatical domestic, who seemed disposed rather
to play the tutor than the lackey, and who, out of sheer love, as he alleged, to his master's
person, assumed the privilege of interfering with, and controlling, his actions, besides rendering
him ridiculous in the gay world, from the antiquated formality, and intrusive presumption,
of his manners.

Nigel's eyes were scarce turned from the window, when his new landlord entering, presented
to him a slip of paper, carefully bound round with a string of flox-silk and sealed---it had
been given in, he said, by a woman, who did not stop an instant. The contents harped upon the
same string which Richie Moniplies had already jarred. The epistle was in the following words:

For the Right Honourable hands of Lord Glenvarloch,
 "These, from a friend unknown:--

"MY LORD,

"You are trusting to an unhonest friend, and diminishing an honest
reputation. An unknown but real friend of your lordship will speak in
one word what you would not learn from flatterers in so many days, as
should suffice for your utter ruin. He whom you think most true--I say
your friend Lord Dalgarno--is utterly false to you, and doth but seek,
under pretence of friendship, to mar your fortune, and diminish the
good name by which you might mend it. The kind countenance which he
shows to you, is more dangerous than the Prince's frown; even as to
gain at Beaujeu's ordinary is more discreditable than to lose. Beware
of both.--And this is all from your true but nameless friend,
    IGNOTO."

Lord Glenvarloch paused for an instant, and crushed the paper together--then again unfolded
and read it with attention--bent his brows--mused for a moment, and then tearing it to fragments,
exclaimed--"Begone for a vile calumny! But I will watch--I will observe--"

Thought after thought rushed on him; but, upon the whole, Lord Glenvarloch was so little satisfied
with the result of his own reflections, that he resolved to dissipate them by a walk in the
Park, and, taking his cloak and beaver, went thither accordingly.

CHAPTER XV

  Twas when fleet Snowball's head was woxen grey,
  A luckless lev'ret met him on his way.--
  Who knows not Snowball--he, whose race renown'd
  Is still victorious on each coursing ground?
  Swaffhanm Newmarket, and the Roman Camp,
  Have seen them victors o'er each meaner stamp--
  In vain the youngling sought, with doubling wile,
  The hedge, the hill, the thicket, or the stile.
  Experience sage the lack of speed supplied,
  And in the gap he sought, the victim died.
  So was I once, in thy fair street, Saint James,
  Through walking cavaliers, and car-borne dames,
  Descried, pursued, turn'd o'er again, and o'er,
  Coursed, coted, mouth'd by an unfeeling bore.
                                        &c. &c. &c,

The Park of Saint James's, though enlarged, planted with verdant alleys, and otherwise decorated
by Charles II., existed in the days of his grandfather, as a public and pleasant promenade;
and, for the sake of exercise or pastime, was much frequented by the better classes.

Lord Glenvarloch repaired thither to dispel the unpleasant reflections which had been suggested
by his parting with his trusty squire, Richie Moniplies, in a manner which was agreeable neither
to his pride nor his feelings; and by the corroboration which the hints of his late attendant
had received from the anonymous letter mentioned in the end of the last chapter.

There was a considerable number of company in the Park when he entered it, but, his present
state of mind inducing him to avoid society, he kept aloof from the more frequented walks towards
Westminster and Whitehall, and drew to the north, or, as we should now say, the Piccadilly
verge of the enclosure, believing he might there enjoy, or rather combat, his own thoughts
unmolested.

In this, however, Lord Glenvarloch was mistaken; for, as he strolled slowly along with his
arms folded in his cloak, and his hat drawn over his eyes, he was suddenly pounced upon by
Sir Mungo Malagrowther, who, either shunning or shunned, had retreated, or had been obliged
to retreat, to the same less frequented corner of the Park.

Nigel started when he heard the high, sharp, and querulous tones of the knight's cracked voice,
and was no less alarmed when he beheld his tall thin figure hobbling towards him, wrapped in
a thread-bare cloak, on whose surface ten thousand varied stains eclipsed the original scarlet,
and having his head surmounted with a well-worn beaver, bearing a black velvet band for a chain,
and a capon's feather for an ostrich plume.

Lord Glenvarloch would fain have made his escape, but, as our motto intimates, a leveret had
as little chance to free herself of an experienced greyhound. Sir Mungo, to continue the simile,
had long ago learned to run cunning, and make sure of mouthing his game. So Nigel found himself
compelled to stand and answer the hackneyed question-- "What news to-day?"

"Nothing extraordinary, I believe," answered the young nobleman, attempting to pass on.

"O, ye are ganging to the French ordinary belive," replied the knight; "but it is early day
yet--we will take a turn in the Park in the meanwhile--it will sharpen your appetite."

So saying, he quietly slipped his arm under Lord Glenvarloch's, in spite of all the decent
reluctance which his victim could exhibit, by keeping his elbow close to his side; and having
fairly grappled the prize, he proceeded to take it in tow.

Nigel was sullen and silent, in hopes to shake off his unpleasant companion; but Sir Mungo
was determined, that if he did not speak, he should at least hear.

"Ye are bound for the ordinary, my lord?" said the cynic;--"weel, ye canna do better--there
is choice company there, and peculiarly selected, as I am tauld, being, dootless, sic as it
is desirable that young noblemen should herd withal--and your noble father wad have been blithe
to see you keeping such worshipful society."

"I believe," said Lord Glenvarloch, thinking himself obliged to say something, "that the society
is as good as generally can be found in such places, where the door can scarcely be shut against
those who come to spend their money."

"Right, my lord--vera right," said his tormentor, bursting out into a chuckling, but most discordant
laugh. "These citizen chuffs and clowns will press in amongst us, when there is but an inch
of a door open. And what remedy?--Just e'en this, that as their cash gies them confidence,
we should strip them of it. Flay them, my lord--singe them as the kitchen wench does the rats,
and then they winna long to come back again.--Ay, ay--pluck them, plume them--and then the
larded capons will not be for flying so high a wing, my lord, among the goss- hawks and sparrow-hawks,
and the like."

And, therewithal, Sir Mungo fixed on Nigel his quick, sharp, grey eye, watching the effect
of his sarcasm as keenly as the surgeon, in a delicate operation, remarks the progress of his
anatomical scalpel.

Nigel, however willing to conceal his sensations, could not avoid gratifying his tormentor
by wincing under the operation. He coloured with vexation and anger; but a quarrel with Sir
Mungo Malagrowther would, he felt, be unutterably ridiculous; and he only muttered to himself
the words, "Impertinent coxcomb!" which, on this occasion, Sir Mungo's imperfection of organ
did not prevent him from hearing and replying to.

"Ay, ay--vera true," exclaimed the caustic old courtier--"Impertinent coxcombs they are, that
thus intrude themselves on the society of their betters; but your lordship kens how to gar
them as gude--ye have the trick on't.--They had a braw sport in the presence last Friday, how
ye suld have routed a young shopkeeper, horse and foot, ta'en his spolia ofima, and a' the
specie he had about him, down to the very silver buttons of his cloak, and sent him to graze
with Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon. Muckle honour redounded to your lordship thereby.--We
were tauld the loon threw himsell into the Thames in a fit of desperation. There's enow of
them behind--there was mair tint on Flodden-edge."

"You have been told a budget of lies, so far as I am concerned, Sir Mungo," said Nigel, speaking
loud and sternly.

"Vera likely--vera likely," said the unabashed and undismayed Sir Mungo; "naething but lies
are current in the circle.--So the chield is not drowned, then?--the mair's the pity.--But
I never believed that part of the story--a London dealer has mair wit in his anger. I dare
swear the lad has a bonny broom-shank in his hand by this time, and is scrubbing the kennels
in quest after rusty nails, to help him to begin his pack again.--He has three bairns, they
say; they will help him bravely to grope in the gutters. Your good lordship may have the ruining
of him again, my lord, if they have any luck in strand- scouring."

"This is more than intolerable," said Nigel, uncertain whether to make an angry vindication
of his character, or to fling the old tormentor from his arm. But an instant's recollection
convinced him, that, to do either, would only give an air of truth and consistency to the scandals
which he began to see were affecting his character, both in the higher and lower circles. Hastily,
therefore, he formed the wiser resolution, to endure Sir Mungo's studied impertinence, under
the hope of ascertaining, if possible, from what source those reports arose which were so prejudicial
to his reputation.

Sir Mungo, in the meanwhile, caught up, as usual, Nigel's last words, or rather the sound of
them, and amplified and interpreted them in his own way. "Tolerable luck!" he repeated; "yes,
truly, my lord, I am told that you have tolerable luck, and that ye ken weel how to use that
jilting quean, Dame Fortune, like a canny douce lad, willing to warm yourself in her smiles,
without exposing yourself to her frowns. And that is what I ca' having luck in a bag."

"Sir Mungo Malagrowther," said Lord Glenvarloch, turning towards him seriously, "have the goodness
to hear me for a moment."

"As weel as I can, my lord--as weel as I can," said Sir Mungo, shaking his head, and pointing
the finger of his left hand to his ear.

"I will try to speak very distinctly," said Nigel, arming himself with patience. "You take
me for a noted gamester; I give you my word that you have not been rightly informed--I am none
such. You owe me some explanation, at least, respecting the source from which you have derived
such false information."

"I never heard ye were a great gamester, and never thought or said ye were such, my lord,"
said Sir Mungo, who found it impossible to avoid hearing what Nigel said with peculiarly deliberate
and distinct pronunciation." I repeat it--I never heard, said, or thought that you were a ruffling
gamester,--such as they call those of the first head. --Look you, my lord, I call him a gamester,
that plays with equal stakes and equal skill, and stands by the fortune of the game, good or
bad; and I call him a ruffling gamester, or ane of the first head, who ventures frankly and
deeply upon such a wager. But he, my lord, who has the patience and prudence never to venture
beyond small game, such as, at most, might crack the Christmas-box of a grocer's 'prentice,
who vies with those that have little to hazard, and who therefore, having the larger stock,
can always rook them by waiting for his good fortune, and by rising from the game when luck
leaves him--such a one as he, my lord, I do not call a great gamester, to whatever other name
he may be entitled."

"And such a mean-spirited, sordid wretch, you would infer that I am," replied Lord Glenvarloch;
"one who fears the skilful, and preys upon the ignorant--who avoids playing with his equals,
that he may make sure of pillaging his inferiors?--Is this what I am to understand has been
reported of me?"

"Nay, my lord, you will gain nought by speaking big with me," said Sir Mungo, who, besides
that his sarcastic humour was really supported by a good fund of animal courage, had also full
reliance on the immunities which he had derived from the broadsword of Sir Rullion Rattray,
and the baton of the satellites employed by the Lady Cockpen. "And for the truth of the matter,"
he continued, "your lordship best knows whether you ever lost more than five pieces at a time
since you frequented Beaujeu's--whether you have not most commonly risen a winner--and whether
the brave young gallants who frequent the ordinary--I mean those of noble rank, and means conforming--are
in use to play upon those terms?"

"My father was right," said Lord Glenvarloch, in the bitterness of his spirit; "and his curse
justly followed me when I first entered that place. There is contamination in the air, and
he whose fortune avoids ruin, shall be blighted in his honour and reputation."

Sir Mungo, who watched his victim with the delighted yet wary eye of an experienced angler,
became now aware, that if he strained the line on him too tightly, there was every risk of
his breaking hold. In order to give him room, therefore, to play, he protested that Lord Glenvarloch
"should not take his free speech in malam partem. If you were a trifle ower sicker in your
amusement, my lord, it canna be denied that it is the safest course to prevent farther endangerment
of your somewhat dilapidated fortunes; and if ye play with your inferiors, ye are relieved
of the pain of pouching the siller of your friends and equals; forby, that the plebeian knaves
have had the advantage, tecum certasse, as Ajax Telamon sayeth, apud Metamorphoseos; and for
the like of them to have played with ane Scottish nobleman is an honest and honourable consideration
to compensate the loss of their stake, whilk, I dare say, moreover, maist of the churls can
weel afford."

"Be that as it may, Sir Mungo," said Nigel, "I would fain know--"

"Ay, ay," interrupted Sir Mungo; "and, as you say, who cares whether the fat bulls of Bashan
can spare it or no? gentlemen are not to limit their sport for the like of them."

"I wish to know, Sir Mungo," said Lord Glenvarloch, "in what company you have learned these
offensive particulars respecting me?"

"Dootless--dootless, my lord," said Sir Mungo; "I have ever heard, and have ever reported,
that your lordship kept the best of company in a private way.--There is the fine Countess of
Blackchester, but I think she stirs not much abroad since her affair with his Grace of Buckingham;
and there is the gude auld-fashioned Scottish nobleman, Lord Huntinglen, an undeniable man
of quality--it is pity but he could keep caup and can frae his head, whilk now and then doth'minish
his reputation. And there is the gay young Lord Dalgarno, that carries the craft of gray hairs
under his curled love-locks--a fair race they are, father, daughter, and son, all of the same
honourable family. I think we needna speak of George Heriot, honest man, when we have nobility
in question. So that is the company I have heard of your keeping, my lord, out-taken those
of the ordinary."

"My company has not, indeed, been much more extended than amongst those you mention," said
Lord Glenvarloch; "but in short--"

"To Court?" said Sir Mungo, "that was just what I was going to say-- Lord Dalgarno says he
cannot prevail on ye to come to Court, and that does ye prejudice, my lord--the king hears
of you by others, when he should see you in person--I speak in serious friendship, my lord.
His Majesty, when you were named in the circle short while since, was heard to say, 'Jacta
est alea!--Glenvarlochides is turned dicer and drinker.'--My Lord Dalgarno took your part,
and he was e'en borne down by the popular voice of the courtiers, who spoke of you as one who
had betaken yourself to living a town life, and risking your baron's coronet amongst the flatcaps
of the city."

"And this was publicly spoken of me," said Nigel, "and in the king's presence?"

"Spoken openly?" repeated Sir Mungo Malagrowther; "ay, by my troth was it--that is to say,
it was whispered privately--whilk is as open promulgation as the thing permitted; for ye may
think the Court is not like a place where men are as sib as Simmie and his brother, and roar
out their minds as if they were at an ordinary."

"A curse on the Court and the ordinary both!" cried Nigel, impatiently.

"With all my heart," said the knight; "I have got little by a knight's service in the Court;
and the last time I was at the ordinary, I lost four angels."

"May I pray of you, Sir Mungo, to let me know," said Nigel, "the names of those who thus make
free with the character of one who can be but little known to them, and who never injured any
of them?"

"Have I not told you already," answered Sir Mungo, "that the king said something to that effect--so
did the Prince too;--and such being the case, ye may take it on your corporal oath, that every
man in the circle who was not silent, sung the same song as they did."

"You said but now," replied Glenvarloch, "that Lord Dalgarno interfered in my behalf."

"In good troth did he," answered Sir Mungo, with a sneer; "but the young nobleman was soon
borne down--by token, he had something of a catarrh, and spoke as hoarse as a roopit raven.
Poor gentleman, if he had had his full extent of voice, he would have been as well listened
to, dootless, as in a cause of his ain, whilk no man kens better how to plead to purpose.--And
let me ask you, by the way," continued Sir Mungo, "whether Lord Dalgarno has ever introduced
your lordship to the Prince, or the Duke of Buckingham, either of whom might soon carry through
your suit?"

"I have no claim on the favour of either the Prince or the Duke of Buckingham," said Lord Glenvarloch.--"As
you seem to have made my affairs your study, Sir Mungo, although perhaps something unnecessarily,
you may have heard that I have petitioned my Sovereign for payment of a debt due to my family.
I cannot doubt the king's desire to do justice, nor can I in decency employ the solicitation
of his Highness the Prince, or his Grace the Duke of Buckingham, to obtain from his Majesty
what either should be granted me as a right, or refused altogether."

Sir Mungo twisted his whimsical features into one of his most grotesque sneers, as he replied--

"It is a vera clear and parspicuous position of the case, my lord; and in relying thereupon,
you show an absolute and unimprovable acquaintance with the King, Court, and mankind in general.-But
whom have we got here?--Stand up, my lord, and make way--by my word of honour, they are the
very men we spoke of--talk of the devil, and-- humph!"

It must be here premised, that, during the conversation, Lord Glenvarloch, perhaps in the hope
of shaking himself free of Sir Mungo, had directed their walk towards the more frequented part
of the Park; while the good knight had stuck to him, being totally indifferent which way they
went, provided he could keep his talons clutched upon his companion. They were still, however,
at some distance from the livelier part of the scene, when Sir Mungo's experienced eye noticed
the appearances which occasioned the latter part of his speech to Lord Glenvarloch. A low respectful
murmur arose among the numerous groups of persons which occupied the lower part of the Park.
They first clustered together, with their faces turned towards Whitehall, then fell back on
either hand to give place to a splendid party of gallants, who, advancing from the Palace,
came onward through the Park; all the other company drawing off the pathway, and standing uncovered
as they passed.

Most of these courtly gallants were dressed in the garb which the pencil of Vandyke has made
familiar even at the distance of nearly two centuries; and which was just at this period beginning
to supersede the more fluttering and frivolous dress which had been adopted from the French
Court of Henri Quatre.

The whole train were uncovered excepting the Prince of Wales, afterwards the most unfortunate
of British monarchs, who came onward, having his long curled auburn tresses, and his countenance,
which, even in early youth, bore a shade of anticipated melancholy, shaded by the Spanish hat
and the single ostrich feather which drooped from it. On his right hand was Buckingham, whose
commanding, and at the same time graceful, deportment, threw almost into shade the personal
demeanour and majesty of the Prince on whom he attended. The eye, movements, and gestures of
the great courtier were so composed, so regularly observant of all etiquette belonging to his
situation, as to form a marked and strong contrast with the forward gaiety and frivolity by
which he recommended himself to the favour of his "dear dad and gossip," King James. A singular
fate attended this accomplished courtier, in being at once the reigning favourite of a father
and son so very opposite in manners, that, to ingratiate himself with the youthful Prince,
he was obliged to compress within the strictest limits of respectful observance the frolicsome
and free humour which captivated his aged father.

It is true, Buckingham well knew the different dispositions both of James and Charles, and
had no difficulty in so conducting himself as to maintain the highest post in the favour of
both. It has indeed been supposed, as we before hinted, that the duke, when he had completely
possessed himself of the affections of Charles, retained his hold in those of the father only
by the tyranny of custom; and that James, could he have brought himself to form a vigorous
resolution, was, in the latter years of his life especially, not unlikely to have discarded
Buckingham from his counsels and favour. But if ever the king indeed meditated such a change,
he was too timid, and too much accustomed to the influence which the duke had long exercised
over him, to summon up resolution enough for effecting such a purpose; and at all events it
is certain, that Buckingham, though surviving the master by whom he was raised, had the rare
chance to experience no wane of the most splendid court-favour during two reigns, until it
was at once eclipsed in his blood by the dagger of his assassin Felton.

To return from this digression: The Prince, with his train, advanced, and were near the place
where Lord Glenvarloch and Sir Mungo had stood aside, according to form, in order to give the
Prince passage, and to pay the usual marks of respect. Nigel could now remark that Lord Dalgarno
walked close behind the Duke of Buckingham, and, as he thought, whispered something in his
ear as they came onward. At any rate, both the Prince's and Duke of Buckingham's attention
seemed to be directed by such circumstance towards Nigel, for they turned their heads in that
direction and looked at him attentively--the Prince with a countenance, the grave, melancholy
expression of which was blended with severity; while Buckingham's looks evinced some degree
of scornful triumph. Lord Dalgarno did not seem to observe his friend, perhaps because the
sunbeams fell from the side of the walk on which Nigel stood, obliging Malcolm to hold up his
hat to screen his eyes.

As the Prince passed, Lord Glenvarloch and Sir Mungo bowed, as respect required; and the Prince,
returning their obeisance with that grave ceremony which paid to every rank its due, but not
a tittle beyond it, signed to Sir Mungo to come forward. Commencing an apology for his lameness
as he started, which he had just completed as his hobbling gait brought him up to the Prince,
Sir Mungo lent an attentive, and, as it seemed, an intelligent ear, to questions, asked in
a tone so low, that the knight would certainly have been deaf to them had they been put to
him by any one under the rank of Prince of Wales. After about a minute's conversation, the
Prince bestowed on Nigel the embarrassing notice of another fixed look, touched his hat slightly
to Sir Mungo, and walked on.

"It is even as I suspected, my lord," said Sir Mungo, with an air which he designed to be melancholy
and sympathetic, but which, in fact, resembled the grin of an ape when he has mouthed a scalding
chestnut--"Ye have back-friends, my lord, that is, unfriends--or, to be plain, enemies--about
the person of the Prince."

"I am sorry to hear it," said Nigel; "but I would I knew what they accuse me of."

"Ye shall hear, my lord," said Sir Mungo, "the Prince's vera words-- 'Sir Mungo,' said he,
'I rejoice to see you, and am glad your rheumatic troubles permit you to come hither for exercise.'--I
bowed, as in duty bound--ye might remark, my lord, that I did so, whilk formed the first branch
of our conversation.--His Highness then demanded of me, 'if he with whom I stood, was the young
Lord Glenvarloch.' I answered, 'that you were such, for his Highness's service;' whilk was
the second branch.--Thirdly, his Highness, resuming the argument, said, that 'truly he had
been told so,' (meaning that he had been told you were that personage,) 'but that he could
not believe, that the heir of that noble and decayed house could be leading an idle, scandalous,
and precarious life, in the eating- houses and taverns of London, while the king's drums were
beating, and colours flying in Germany in the cause of the Palatine, his son-in- law.'--I could,
your lordship is aware, do nothing but make an obeisance; and a gracious 'Give ye good-day,
Sir Mungo Malagrowther,' licensed me to fall back to your lordship. And now, my lord, if your
business or pleasure calls you to the ordinary, or anywhere in the direction of the city--why,
have with you; for, dootless, ye will think ye have tarried lang enough in the Park, as they
will likely turn at the head of the walk, and return this way--and you have a broad hint, I
think, not to cross the Prince's presence in a hurry."

"You may stay or go as you please, Sir Mungo," said Nigel, with an expression of calm, but
deep resentment; "but, for my own part, my resolution is taken. I will quit this public walk
for pleasure of no man--still less will I quit it like one unworthy to be seen in places of
public resort. I trust that the Prince and his retinue will return this way as you expect;
for I will abide, Sir Mungo, and beard them."

"Beard them!" exclaimed Sir Mungo, in the extremity of surprise,-- "Beard the Prince of Wales--the
heir-apparent of the kingdoms!--By my saul, you shall beard him yourself then."

Accordingly, he was about to leave Nigel very hastily, when some unwonted touch of good-natured
interest in his youth and experience, seemed suddenly to soften his habitual cynicism.

"The devil is in me for an auld fule!" said Sir Mungo; "but I must needs concern mysell--I
that owe so little either to fortune or my fellow-creatures, must, I say, needs concern mysell--with
this springald, whom I will warrant to be as obstinate as a pig possessed with a devil, for
it's the cast of his family; and yet I maun e'en fling away some sound advice on him.--My dainty
young Lord Glenvarloch, understand me distinctly, for this is no bairn's-play. When the Prince
said sae much to me as I have repeated to you, it was equivalent to a command not to appear
in his presence; wherefore take an auld man's advice that wishes you weel, and maybe a wee
thing better than he has reason to wish ony body. Jouk, and let the jaw gae by, like a canny
bairn--gang hame to your lodgings, keep your foot frae taverns, and your fingers frae the dice-box;
compound your affairs quietly wi' some ane that has better favour than yours about Court, and
you will get a round spell of money to carry you to Germany, or elsewhere, to push your fortune.
It was a fortunate soldier that made your family four or five hundred years syne, and, if you
are brave and fortunate, you may find the way to repair it. But, take my word for it, that
in this Court you will never thrive."

When Sir Mungo had completed his exhortation, in which there was more of sincere sympathy with
another's situation, than he had been heretofore known to express in behalf of any one, Lord
Glenvarloch replied, "I am obliged to you, Sir Mungo--you have spoken, I think, with sincerity,
and I thank you. But in return for your good advice, I heartily entreat you to leave me; I
observe the Prince and his train are returning down the walk, and you may prejudice yourself,
but cannot help me, by remaining with me."

"And that is true,"--said Sir Mungo; "yet, were I ten years younger, I would be tempted to
stand by you, and gie them the meeting. But at threescore and upward, men's courage turns cauldrife;
and they that canna win a living, must not endanger the small sustenance of their age. I wish
you weel through, my lord, but it is an unequal fight." So saying, he turned and limped away;
often looking back, however, as if his natural spirit, even in its present subdued state, aided
by his love of contradiction and of debate, rendered him unwilling to adopt the course necessary
for his own security.

Thus abandoned by his companion, whose departure he graced with better thoughts of him than
those which he bestowed on his appearance, Nigel remained with his arms folded, and reclining
against a solitary tree which overhung the path, making up his mind to encounter a moment which
he expected to be critical of his fate. But he was mistaken in supposing that the Prince of
Wales would either address him, or admit him to expostulation, in such a public place as the
Park. He did not remain unnoticed, however, for, when he made a respectful but haughty obeisance,
intimating in look and manner that he was possessed of, and undaunted by, the unfavourable
opinion which the Prince had so lately expressed, Charles returned his reverence with such
a frown, as is only given by those whose frown is authority and decision. The train passed
on, the Duke of Buckingham not even appearing to see Lord Glenvarloch; while Lord Dalgarno,
though no longer incommoded by the sunbeams, kept his eyes, which had perhaps been dazzled
by their former splendour, bent upon the ground.

Lord Glenvarloch had difficulty to restrain an indignation, to which,
in the circumstances, it would have been madness to have given vent.
He started from his reclining posture, and followed the Prince's train
so as to keep them distinctly in sight; which was very easy, as they
walked slowly. Nigel observed them keep their road towards the Palace,
where the Prince turned at the gate and bowed to the noblemen in
attendance, in token of dismissing them, and entered the Palace,
accompanied only by the Duke of Buckingham, and one or two of his
equerries. The rest of the train, having returned in
 all dutiful humility the farewell of the Prince, began to disperse
themselves through the Park.

All this was carefully noticed by Lord Glenvarloch, who, as he adjusted his cloak, and drew
his sword-belt round so as to bring the hilt closer to his hand, muttered--"Dalgarno shall
explain all this to me, for it is evident that he is in the secret!"

CHAPTER XVI

  Give way--give way--I must and will have justice.
  And tell me not of privilege and place;
  Where I am injured, there I'll sue redress.
  Look to it, every one who bars my access;
  I have a heart to feel the injury,
  A hand to night myself, and, by my honour,
  That hand shall grasp what grey-beard Law denies me.
                                The Chamberlain.

It was not long ere Nigel discovered Lord Dalgarno advancing towards him in the company of
another young man of quality of the Prince's train; and as they directed their course towards
the south-eastern corner of the Park, he concluded they were about to go to Lord Huntinglen's.
They stopped, however, and turned up another path leading to the north; and Lord Glenvarloch
conceived that this change of direction was owing to their having seen him, and their desire
to avoid him.

Nigel followed them without hesitation by a path which, winding around a thicket of shrubs
and trees, once more conducted him to the less frequented part of the Park. He observed which
side of the thicket was taken by Lord Dalgarno and his companion, and he himself, walking hastily
round the other verge, was thus enabled to meet them face to face.

"Good-morrow, my Lord Dalgarno," said Lord Glenvarloch, sternly.

"Ha! my friend Nigel," answered Lord Dalgarno, in his usual careless and indifferent tone,
"my friend Nigel, with business on his brow?-- but you must wait till we meet at Beaujeu's
at noon--Sir Ewes Haldimund and I are at present engaged in the Prince's service."

"If you were engaged in the king's, my lord," said Lord Glenvarloch, "you must stand and answer
me."

"Hey-day!" said Lord Dalgarno, with an air of great astonishment, "what passion is this? Why,
Nigel, this is King Cambyses' vein!--You have frequented the theatres too much lately--Away
with this folly, man; go, dine upon soup and salad, drink succory-water to cool your blood,
go to bed at sun-down, and defy those foul fiends, Wrath and Misconstruction."

"I have had misconstruction enough among you," said Glenvarloch, in the same tone of determined
displeasure, "and from you, my Lord Dalgarno, in particular, and all under the mask of friendship."

"Here is a proper business!"--said Dalgarno, turning as if to appeal to Sir Ewes Haldimund;
"do you see this angry ruffler, Sir Ewes? A month since, he dared not have looked one of yonder
sheep in the face, and now he is a prince of roisterers, a plucker of pigeons, a controller
of players and poets--and in gratitude for my having shown him the way to the eminent character
which he holds upon town, he comes hither to quarrel with his best friend, if not his only
one of decent station."

"I renounce such hollow friendship, my lord," said Lord Glenvarloch; "I disclaim the character
which, even to my very face, you labour to fix upon me, and ere we part I will call you to
a reckoning for it."

"My lords both," interrupted Sir Ewes Haldimund, "let me remind you that the Royal Park is
no place to quarrel in."

"I will make my quarrel good," said Nigel, who did not know, or in his
passion might not have recollected, the privileges
 of the place, "wherever I find my enemy."

"You shall find quarelling enough," replied Lord Dalgarno, calmly, "so soon as you assign a
sufficient cause for it. Sir Ewes Haldimund, who knows the Court, will warrant you that I am
not backward on such occasions.--But of what is it that you now complain, after having experienced
nothing save kindness from me and my family?"

"Of your family I complain not," replied Lord Glenvarloch; "they have done for me all they
could, more, far more, than I could have expected; but you, my lord, have suffered me, while
you called me your friend, to be traduced, where a word of your mouth would have placed my
character in its true colours--and hence the injurious message which I just now received from
the Prince of Wales. To permit the misrepresentation of a friend, my lord, is to share in the
slander."

"You have been misinformed, my Lord Glenvarloch," said Sir Ewes Haldimund; "I have myself often
heard Lord Dalgarno defend your character, and regret that your exclusive attachment to the
pleasures of a London life prevented your paying your duty regularly to the King and Prince."

"While he himself," said Lord Glenvarloch, "dissuaded me from presenting myself at Court."

"I will cut this matter short," said Lord Dalgarno, with haughty coldness. "You seem to have
conceived, my lord, that you and I were Pylades and Orestes--a second edition of Damon and
Pythias--Theseus and Pirithoiis at the least. You are mistaken, and have given the name of
friendship to what, on my part, was mere good-nature and compassion for a raw and ignorant
countryman, joined to the cumbersome charge which my father gave me respecting you. Your character,
my lord, is of no one's drawing, but of your own making. I introduced you where, as in all
such places, there was good and indifferent company to be met with--your habits, or taste,
made you prefer the worse. Your holy horror at the sight of dice and cards degenerated into
the cautious resolution to play only at those times, and with such persons, as might ensure
your rising a winner--no man can long do so, and continue to be held a gentleman. Such is the
reputation you have made for yourself, and you have no right to be angry that I do not contradict
in society what yourself know to be true. Let us pass on, my lord; and if you want further
explanation, seek some other time and fitter place."

"No time can be better than the present," said Lord Glenvarloch, whose resentment was now excited
to the uttermost by the cold-blooded and insulting manner, in which Dalgarno vindicated himself,--"no
place fitter than the place where we now stand. Those of my house have ever avenged insult,
at the moment, and on the spot, where it was offered, were it at the foot of the throne.--Lord
Dalgarno, you are a villain! draw and defend yourself." At the same moment he unsheathed his
rapier.

"Are you mad?" said Lord Dalgarno, stepping back; "we are in the precincts of the Court."

"The better," answered Lord Glenvarloch; "I will cleanse them from a calumniator and a coward."
He then pressed on Lord Dalgarno, and struck him with the flat of the sword.

The fray had now attracted attention, and the cry went round, "Keep the peace--keep the peace--swords
drawn in the Park!--What, ho! guards!--keepers--yeomen--rangers!" and a number of people came
rushing to the spot from all sides.

Lord Dalgarno, who had half drawn his sword on receiving the blow, returned it to his scabbard
when he observed the crowd thicken, and, taking Sir Ewes Haldimund by the arm, walked hastily
away, only saying to Lord Glenvarloch as they left him, "You shall dearly abye this insult--we
will meet again."

A decent-looking elderly man, who observed that Lord Glenvarloch remained on the spot, taking
compassion on his youthful appearance, said to him, "Are you aware that this is a Star-Chamber
business, young gentleman, and that it may cost you your right hand?--Shift for yourself before
the keepers or constables come up--Get into Whitefriars or somewhere, for sanctuary and concealment,
till you can make friends or quit the city."

The advice was not to be neglected. Lord Glenvarloch made hastily towards the issue from the
Park by Saint James's Palace, then Saint James's Hospital. The hubbub increased behind him;
and several peace- officers of the Royal Household came up to apprehend the delinquent. Fortunately
for Nigel, a popular edition of the cause of the affray had gone abroad. It was said that one
of the Duke of Buckingham's companions had insulted a stranger gentleman from the country,
and that the stranger had cudgelled him soundly. A favourite, or the companion of a favourite,
is always odious to John Bull, who has, besides, a partiality to those disputants who proceed,
as lawyers term it, par wye du fait, and both prejudices were in Nigel's favour. The officers,
therefore, who came to apprehend him, could learn from the spectators no particulars of his
appearance, or information concerning the road he had taken; so that, for the moment, he escaped
being arrested.

What Lord Glenvarloch heard among the crowd as he passed along, was
sufficient to satisfy him, that in his impatient passion he had placed
himself in a predicament of considerable danger.
 He was no stranger to the severe and arbitrary proceedings of the
Court of Star-Chamber, especially in cases of breach of privilege,
which made it the terror of all men; and it was no farther back than
the Queen's time that the punishment of mutilation had been actually
awarded and executed, for some offence of the same kind which he had
just committed. He had also the comfortable reflection, that, by his
violent quarrel with Lord Dalgarno, he must now forfeit the friendship
and good offices of that nobleman's father and sister, almost the only
persons of consideration in whom he could claim any interest; while
all the evil reports which had been put in circulation concerning his
character, were certain to weigh heavily against him, in a case where
much must necessarily depend on the reputation of the accused. To a
youthful imagination, the idea of such a punishment as mutilation
seems more ghastly than death itself; and every word which he
overheard among the groups which he met, mingled with, or overtook and
passed, announced this as the penalty of his offence. He dreaded to
increase his pace for fear of attracting suspicion, and more than once
saw the ranger's officers so near him, that his wrist tingled as if
already under the blade of the dismembering knife. At length he got
out of the Park, and had a little more leisure to consider what he was
next to do.

Whitefriars, adjacent to the Temple, then well known by the cant name of Alsatia, had at this
time, and for nearly a century afterwards, the privilege of a sanctuary, unless against the
writ of the Lord Chief Justice, or of the Lords of the Privy-Council. Indeed, as the place
abounded with desperadoes of every description,--bankrupt citizens, ruined gamesters, irreclaimable
prodigals, desperate duellists, bravoes, homicides, and debauched profligates of every description,
all leagued together to maintain the immunities of their asylum,--it was both difficult and
unsafe for the officers of the law to execute warrants emanating even from the highest authority,
amongst men whose safety was inconsistent with warrants or authority of any kind. This Lord
Glenvarloch well knew; and odious as the place of refuge was, it seemed the only one where,
for a space at least, he might be concealed and secure from the immediate grasp of the law,
until he should have leisure to provide better for his safety, or to get this unpleasant matter
in some shape accommodated.

Meanwhile, as Nigel walked hastily forward towards the place of sanctuary, he bitterly blamed
himself for suffering Lord Dalgarno to lead him into the haunts of dissipation; and no less
accused his intemperate heat of passion, which now had driven him for refuge into the purlieus
of profane and avowed vice and debauchery.

"Dalgarno spoke but too truly in that," were his bitter reflections; "I have made myself an
evil reputation by acting on his insidious counsels, and neglecting the wholesome admonitions
which ought to have claimed implicit obedience from me, and which recommended abstinence even
from the slightest approach of evil. But if I escape from the perilous labyrinth in which folly
and inexperience, as well as violent passions, have involved me, I will find some noble way
of redeeming the lustre of a name which was never sullied until I bore it."

As Lord Glenvarloch formed these prudent resolutions, he entered the Temple Walks, whence a
gate at that time opened into Whitefriars, by which, as by the more private passage, he proposed
to betake himself to the sanctuary. As he approached the entrance to that den of infamy, from
which his mind recoiled even while in the act of taking shelter there, his pace slackened,
while the steep and broken stairs reminded him of the facilis descensus Averni, and rendered
him doubtful whether it were not better to brave the worst which could befall him in the public
haunts of honourable men, than to evade punishment by secluding himself in those of avowed
vice and profligacy.

As Nigel hesitated, a young gentleman of the Temple advanced towards him, whom he had often
seen, and sometimes conversed with, at the ordinary, where he was a frequent and welcome guest,
being a wild young gallant, indifferently well provided with money, who spent at the theatres
and other gay places of public resort, the time which his father supposed he was employing
in the study of the law. But Reginald Lowestoffe, such was the young Templar's name, was of
opinion that little law was necessary to enable him to spend the revenues of the paternal acres
which were to devolve upon him at his father's demose, and therefore gave himself no trouble
to acquire more of that science than might be imbibed along with the learned air of the region
in which he had his chambers. In other respects, he was one of the wits of the place, read
Ovid and Martial, aimed at quick repartee and pun, (often very far fetched,) danced, fenced,
played at tennis, and performed sundry tunes on the fiddle and French horn, to the great annoyance
of old Counsellor Barratter, who lived in the chambers immediately below him. Such was Reginald
Lowes-toffe, shrewd, alert, and well-acquainted with the town through all its recesses, but
in a sort of disrespectable way. This gallant, now approaching the Lord Glenvarloch, saluted
him by name and title, and asked if his lordship designed for the Chevalier's this day, observing
it was near noon, and the woodcock would be on the board before they could reach the ordinary.

"I do not go there to-day," answered Lord Glenvarloch. "Which way, then, my lord?" said the
young Templar, who was perhaps not undesirous to parade a part at least of the street in company
with a lord, though but a Scottish one.

"I--I--" said Nigel, desiring to avail himself of this young man's local knowledge, yet unwilling
and ashamed to acknowledge his intention to take refuge in so disreputable a quarter, or to
describe the situation in which he stood--"I have some curiosity to see Whitefriars."

"What! your lordship is for a frolic into Alsatia?" said Lowestoffe-"- Have with you, my lord--you
cannot have a better guide to the infernal regions than myself. I promise you there are bona-robas
to be found there--good wine too, ay, and good fellows to drink it with, though somewhat suffering
under the frowns of Fortune. But your lordship will pardon me--you are the last of our acquaintance
to whom I would have proposed such a voyage of discovery."

"I am obliged to you, Master Lowestoffe, for the good opinion you have expressed in the observation,"
said Lord Glenvarloch; "but my present circumstances may render even a residence of a day or
two in the sanctuary a matter of necessity."

"Indeed!" said Lowestoffe, in a tone of great surprise; "I thought your lordship had always
taken care not to risk any considerable stake--I beg pardon, but if the bones have proved perfidious,
I know just so much law as that a peer's person is sacred from arrest; and for mere impecuniosity,
my lord, better shift can be made elsewhere than in Whitefriars, where all are devouring each
other for very poverty."

"My misfortune has no connexion with want of money," said Nigel.

"Why, then, I suppose," said Lowestoffe, "you have been tilting, my lord, and have pinked your
man; in which case, and with a purse reasonably furnished, you may lie perdu in Whitefriars
for a twelvemonth--Marry, but you must be entered and received as a member of their worshipful
society, my lord, and a frank burgher of Alsatia-- so far you must condescend; there will be
neither peace nor safety for you else."

"My fault is not in a degree so deadly, Master Lowestoffe," answered Lord Glenvarloch, "as
you seem to conjecture--I have stricken a gentleman in the Park, that is all."

"By my hand, my lord, and you had better have struck your sword through him at Barns Elms,"
said the Templar. "Strike within the verge of the Court! You will find that a weighty dependence
upon your hands, especially if your party be of rank and have favour."

"I will be plain with you, Master Lowestoffe," said Nigel, "since I have gone thus far. The
person I struck was Lord Dalgarno, whom you have seen at Beaujeu's."

"A follower and favourite of the Duke of Buckingham!--It is a most unhappy chance, my lord;
but my heart was formed in England, and cannot bear to see a young nobleman borne down, as
you are like to be. We converse here greatly too open for your circumstances. The Templars
would suffer no bailiff to execute a writ, and no gentleman to be arrested for a duel, within
their precincts; but in such a matter between Lord Dalgarno and your lordship, there might
be a party on either side. You must away with me instantly to my poor chambers here, hard by,
and undergo some little change of dress, ere you take sanctuary; for else you will have the
whole rascal rout of the Friars about you, like crows upon a falcon that strays into their
rookery. We must have you arrayed something more like the natives of Alsatia, or there will
be no life there for you."

While Lowestoffe spoke, he pulled Lord Glenvarloch along with him into his chambers, where
he had a handsome library, filled with all the poems and play-books which were then in fashion.
The Templar then dispatched a boy, who waited upon him, to procure a dish or two from the next
cook's shop; "and this," he said, "must be your lordship's dinner, with a glass of old sack,
of which my grandmother (the heavens requite her!) sent me a dozen bottles, with charge to
use the liquor only with clarified whey, when I felt my breast ache with over study. Marry,
we will drink the good lady's health in it, if it is your lordship's pleasure, and you shall
see how we poor students eke out our mutton-commons in the hall."

The outward door of the chambers was barred so soon as the boy had re- entered with the food;
the boy was ordered to keep close watch, and admit no one; and Lowestoffe, by example and precept,
pressed his noble guest to partake of his hospitality. His frank and forward manners, though
much differing from the courtly ease of Lord Dalgarno, were calculated to make a favourable
impression; and Lord Glenvarloch, though his experience of Dalgarno's perfidy had taught him
to be cautious of reposing faith in friendly professions, could not avoid testifying his gratitude
to the young Templar, who seemed so anxious for his safety and accommodation.

"You may spare your gratitude any great sense of obligation, my lord," said the Templar. "No
doubt I am willing to be of use to any gentleman that has cause to sing Fortune my foe, and
particularly proud to serve your lordship's turn; but I have also an old grudge, to speak Heaven's
truth, at your opposite, Lord Dalgarno."

"May I ask on what account, Master Lowestoffe?" said Lord Glenvarloch.

"O, my lord," replied the Templar, "it was for a hap that chanced after you left the ordinary,
one evening about three weeks since--at least I think you were not by, as your lordship always
left us before deep play began--I mean no offence, but such was your lordship's custom--when
there were words between Lord Dalgarno and me concerning a certain game at gleek, and a certain
mournival of aces held by his lordship, which went for eight--tib, which went for fifteen--twenty-
three in all. Now I held king and queen, being three--a natural towser, making fifteen--and
tiddy, nineteen. We vied the ruff, and revied, as your lordship may suppose, till the stake
was equal to half my yearly exhibition, fifty as fair yellow canary birds as e'er chirped in
the bottom of a green silk purse. Well, my lord, I gained the cards, and lo you! it pleases
his lordship to say that we played without tiddy; and as the rest stood by and backed him,
and especially the sharking Frenchman, why, I was obliged to lose more than I shall gain all
the season.--So judge if I have not a crow to pluck with his lordship. Was it ever heard there
was a game at gleek at the ordinary before, without counting tiddy?--marry quep upon his lordship!--Every
man who comes there with his purse in his hand, is as free to make new laws as he, I hope,
since touch pot touch penny makes every man equal."

As Master Lowestoffe ran over this jargon of the gaming-table, Lord Glenvarloch was both ashamed
and mortified, and felt a severe pang of aristocratic pride, when he concluded in the sweeping
clause that the dice, like the grave, levelled those distinguishing points of society, to which
Nigel's early prejudices clung perhaps but too fondly. It was impossible, however, to object
any thing to the learned reasoning of the young Templar, and therefore Nigel was contented
to turn the conversation, by making some inquiries respecting the present state of White-friars.
There also his host was at home.

"You know, my lord," said Master Lowestoffe, "that we Templars are a power and a dominion within
ourselves, and I am proud to say that I hold some rank in our republic--was treasurer to the
Lord of Misrule last year, and am at this present moment in nomination for that dignity myself.
In such circumstances, we are under the necessity of maintaining an amicable intercourse with
our neighbours of Alsatia, even as the Christian States find themselves often, in mere policy,
obliged to make alliance with the Grand Turk, or the Barbary States."

"I should have imagined you gentlemen of the Temple more independent of your neighbours," said
Lord Glenvarloch.

"You do us something too much honour, my lord," said the Templar; "the Alsatians and we have
some common enemies, and we have, under the rose, some common friends. We are in the use of
blocking all bailiffs out of our bounds, and we are powerfully aided by our neighbours, who
tolerate not a rag belonging to them within theirs. Moreover the Alsatians have--I beg you
to understand me--the power of protecting or distressing our friends, male or female, who may
be obliged to seek sanctuary within their bounds. In short, the two communities serve each
other, though the league is between states of unequal quality, and I may myself say, that I
have treated of sundry weighty affairs, and have been a negotiator well approved on both sides.--But
hark-- hark--what is that?"

The sound by which Master Lowestoffe was interrupted, was that of a distant horn, winded loud
and keenly, and followed by a faint and remote huzza.

"There is something doing," said Lowestoffe, "in the Whitefriars at this moment. That is the
signal when their privileges are invaded by tipstaff or bailiff; and at the blast of the horn
they all swarm out to the rescue, as bees when their hive is disturbed.--Jump, Jim," he said,
calling out to the attendant, "and see what they are doing in Alsatia.--That bastard of a boy,"
he continued, as the lad, accustomed to the precipitate haste of his master, tumbled rather
than ran out of the apartment, and so down stairs, "is worth gold in this quarter--he serves
six masters--four of them in distinct Numbers, and you would think him present like a fairy
at the mere wish of him that for the time most needs his attendance. No scout in Oxford, no
gip in Cambridge, ever matched him in speed and intelligence. He knows the step of a dun from
that of a client, when it reaches the very bottom of the staircase; can tell the trip of a
pretty wench from the step of a bencher, when at the upper end of the court; and is, take him
all in all--But I see your lordship is anxious--May I press another cup of my kind grandmother's
cordial, or will you allow me to show you my wardrobe, and act as your valet or groom of the
chamber?"

Lord Glenvarloch hesitated not to acknowledge that he was painfully sensible of his present
situation, and anxious to do what must needs be done for his extrication.

The good-natured and thoughtless young Templar readily acquiesced, and led the way into his
little bedroom, where, from bandboxes, portmanteaus, mail-trunks, not forgetting an old walnut-tree
wardrobe, he began to select the articles which he thought best suited effectually to disguise
his guest in venturing into the lawless and turbulent society of Alsatia.

CHAPTER XVII

 Come hither, young one,--Mark me! Thou art now
 'Mongst men o' the sword, that live by reputation
 More than by constant income--Single-suited
 They are, I grant you; yet each single suit
 Maintains, on the rough guess, a thousand followers--
 And they be men, who, hazarding their all,
 Needful apparel, necessary income,
 And human body, and immortal soul,
 Do in the very deed but hazard nothing--
 So strictly is that ALL bound in reversion;
 Clothes to the broker, income to the usurer,
 And body to disease, and soul to the foul fiend;
 Who laughs to see Soldadoes and Fooladoes,
 Play better than himself his game on earth.
                                        The Mohocks.

"Your lordship," said Reginald Lowestoffe, "must be content to exchange your decent and court-beseeming
rapier, which I will retain in safe keeping, for this broadsword, with an hundredweight of
rusty iron about the hilt, and to wear these huge-paned slops, instead of your civil and moderate
hose. We allow no cloak, for your ruffian always walks in cuerpo; and the tarnished doublet
of bald velvet, with its discoloured embroidery, and--I grieve to speak it--a few stains from
the blood of the grape, will best suit the garb of a roaring boy. I will leave you to change
your suit for an instant, till I can help to truss you."

Lowestoffe retired, while slowly, and with hesitation, Nigel obeyed his instructions. He felt
displeasure and disgust at the scoundrelly disguise which he was under the necessity of assuming;
but when he considered the bloody consequences which law attached to his rash act of violence,
the easy and indifferent temper of James, the prejudices of his son, the overbearing influence
of the Duke of Buckingham, which was sure to be thrown into the scale against him; and, above
all, when he reflected that he must now look upon the active, assiduous, and insinuating Lord
Dalgarno, as a bitter enemy, reason told him he was in a situation of peril which authorised
all honest means, even the most unseemly in outward appearance, to extricate himself from so
dangerous a predicament.

While he was changing his dress, and musing on these particulars, his friendly host re-entered
the sleeping apartment--"Zounds!" he said, "my lord, it was well you went not straight into
that same Alsatia of ours at the time you proposed, for the hawks have stooped upon it. Here
is Jem come back with tidings, that he saw a pursuivant there with a privy-council warrant,
and half a score of yeomen assistants, armed to the teeth, and the horn which we heard was
sounded to call out the posse of the Friars. Indeed, when old Duke Hildebrod saw that the quest
was after some one of whom he knew nothing, he permitted, out of courtesy, the man-catcher
to search through his dominions, quite certain that they would take little by their motions;
for Duke Hildebrod is a most judicious potentate.--Go back, you bastard, and bring us word
when all is quiet."

"And who may Duke Hildebrod be?" said Lord Glenvarloch.

"Nouns! my lord," said the Templar, "have you lived so long on the town, and never heard of
the valiant, and as wise and politic as valiant, Duke Hildebrod, grand protector of the liberties
of Alsatia? I thought the man had never whirled a die but was familiar with his fame."

"Yet I have never heard of him, Master Lowestoffe," said Lord Glenvarloch; "or, what is the
same thing, I have paid no attention to aught that may have passed in conversation respecting him."

"Why, then," said Lowestoffe--"but, first, let me have the honour of trussing you. Now, observe,
I have left several of the points untied, of set purpose; and if it please you to let a small
portion of your shirt be seen betwixt your doublet and the band of your upper stock, it will
have so much the more rakish effect, and will attract you respect in Alsatia, where linen is
something scarce. Now, I tie some of the points carefully asquint, for your ruffianly gallant
never appears too accurately trussed--so."

"Arrange it as you will, sir," said Nigel; "but let me hear at least something of the conditions
of the unhappy district into which, with other wretches, I am compelled to retreat."

"Why, my lord," replied the Templar, "our neighbouring state of Alsatia, which the law calls
the Sanctuary of White-friars, has had its mutations and revolutions like greater kingdoms;
and, being in some sort a lawless, arbitrary government, it follows, of course, that these
have been more frequent than our own better regulated commonwealth of the Templars, that of
Gray's Inn, and other similar associations, have had the fortune to witness. Our traditions
and records speak of twenty revolutions within the last twelve years, in which the aforesaid
state has repeatedly changed from absolute despotism to republicanism, not forgetting the intermediate
stages of oligarchy, limited monarchy, and even gynocracy; for I myself remember Alsatia governed
for nearly nine months by an old fish-woman. 'I hen it fell under the dominion of a broken
attorney, who was dethroned by a reformado captain, who, proving tyrannical, was deposed by
a hedgeparson, who was succeeded, upon resignation of his power, by Duke Jacob Hildebrod, of
that name the first, whom Heaven long preserve."

"And is this potentate's government," said Lord Glenvarloch, forcing himself to take some interest
in the conversation, "of a despotic character?"

"Pardon me, my lord," said the Templar; "this said sovereign is too wise to incur, like many
of his predecessors, the odium of wielding so important an authority by his own sole will.
He has established a council of state, who regularly meet for their morning's draught at seven
o'clock; convene a second time at eleven for their ante- meridiem, or whet; and, assembling
in solemn conclave at the hour of two afternoon, for the purpose of consulting for the good
of the commonwealth, are so prodigal of their labour in the service of the state, that they
seldom separate before midnight. Into this worthy senate, composed partly of Duke Hildebrod's
predecessors in his high office, whom he has associated with him to prevent the envy attending
sovereign and sole authority, I must presently introduce your lordship, that they may admit
you to the immunities of the Friars, and assign you a place of residence."

"Does their authority extend to such regulation?" said Lord Glenvarloch.

"The council account it a main point of their privileges, my lord," answered Lowestoffe; "and,
in fact, it is one of the most powerful means by which they support their authority. For when
Duke Ilildebrod and his senate find a topping householder in the Friars becomes discontented
and factious, it is but assigning him, for a lodger, some fat bankrupt, or new lesidenter,
whose circumstances require refuge, and whose purse can pay for it, and the malecontent becomes
as tractable as a lamb. As for the poorer refugees, they let them shift as they can; but the
registration of their names in the Duke's entry- book, and the payment of garnish conforming
to their circumstances, is never dispensed with; and the Friars would be a very unsafe residence
for the stranger who should dispute these points of jurisdiction."

"Well, Master Lowestoffe," said Lord Glenvarloch, "I must be controlled by the circumstances
which dictate to me this state of concealment--of course, I am desirous not to betray my name
and rank."

"It will be highly advisable, my lord," said Lowestoffe; "and is a case thus provided for in
the statutes of the republic, or monarchy, or whatsoever you call it.--He who desires that
no questions shall be asked him concerning his name, cause of refuge, and the like, may escape
the usual interrogations upon payment of double the garnish otherwise belonging to his condition.
Complying with this essential stipulation, your lordship may register yourself as King of Bantam
if you will, for not a question will be asked of you.--But here comes our scout, with news
of peace and tranquillity. Now, I will go with your lordship myself, and present you to the
council of Alsatia, with all the influence which I have over them as an office-bearer in the
Temple, which is not slight; for they have come halting off upon all occasions when we have
taken part against them, and that they well know. The time is propitious, for as the council
is now met in Alsatia, so the Temple walks are quiet. Now, my lord, throw your cloak about
you, to hide your present exterior. You shall give it to the boy at the foot of the stairs
that go down to the Sanctuary; and as the ballad says that Queen Eleanor sunk at Charing Cross
and rose at Queenhithe, so you shall sink a nobleman in the Temple Gardens, and rise an Alsatian
at Whitefriars."

They went out accordingly, attended by the little scout, traversed the gardens, descended the
stairs, and at the bottom the young Templar exclaimed,--"And now let us sing, with Ovid,

'In nova fert animus mutatas dicere formas--'

Off, off, ye lendings!" he continued, in the same vein. "Via, the curtain that shadowed Borgia!--But
how now, my lord?" he continued, when he observed Lord Glenvarloch was really distressed at
the degrading change in his situation, "I trust you are not offended at my rattling folly?
I would but reconcile you to your present circumstances, and give you the tone of this strange
place. Come, cheer up; I trust it will only be your residence for a very few days."

Nigel was only able to press his hand, and reply in a whisper, "I am sensible of your kindness.
I know I must drink the cup which my own folly has filled for me. Pardon me, that, at the first
taste, I feel its bitterness."

Reginald Lowestoffe was bustlingly officious and good-natured; but, used to live a scrambling,
rakish course of life himself, he had not the least idea of the extent of Lord Glenvarloch's
mental sufferings, and thought of his temporary concealment as if it were merely the trick
of a wanton boy, who plays at hide-and-seek with his tutor. With the appearance of the place,
too, he was familiar--but on his companion it produced a deep sensation.

The ancient Sanctuary at Whitefriars lay considerably lower than the elevated terraces and
gardens of the Temple, and was therefore generally involved in the damps and fogs arising from
the Thames. The brick buildings by which it was occupied, crowded closely on each other, for,
in a place so rarely privileged, every foot of ground was valuable; but, erected in many cases
by persons whose funds were inadequate to their speculations, the houses were generally insufficient,
and exhibited the lamentable signs of having become ruinous while they were yet new.

"Semi-reducta Venus," said the Templar, pointing to one of these nymphs, who seemed afraid
of observation, and partly concealed herself behind the casement, as she chirped to a miserable
blackbird, the tenant of a wicker prison, which hung outside on the black brick wall.--"I know
the face of yonder waistcoateer," continued the guide; "and I could wager a rose-noble, from
the posture she stands in, that she has clean head-gear and a soiled night-rail.--But here
come two of the male inhabitants, smoking like moving volcanoes! These are roaring blades,
whom Nicotia and Trinidado serve, I dare swear, in lieu of beef and pudding; for be it known
to you, my lord, that the king's counter-blast against the Indian weed will no more pass current
in Alsatia than will his writ of capias."

As he spoke, the two smokers approached; shaggy, uncombed ruffians, whose enormous mustaches
were turned back over their ears, and mingled with the wild elf-locks of their hair, much of
which was seen under the old beavers which they wore aside upon their heads, while some straggling
portion escaped through the rents of the hats aforesaid. Their tarnished plush jerkins, large
slops, or trunk-breeches, their broad greasy shoulder-belts, and discoloured scarfs, and, above
all, the ostentatious manner in which the one wore a broad-sword and the other an extravagantly
long rapier and poniard, marked the true Alsatian bully, then, and for a hundred years afterwards,
a well-known character.

"Tour out," said the one ruffian to the other; "tour the bien mort twiring at the gentry cove!"
[Footnote: Look sharp. See how the girl is coquetting with the strange gallants!]

"I smell a spy," replied the other, looking at Nigel. "Chalk him across the peepers with your
cheery." [Footnote: Slash him over the eyes with your dagger.]

"Bing avast, bing avast!" replied his companion; "yon other is rattling Reginald Lowestoffe
of the Temple--I know him; he is a good boy, and free of the province."

So saying, and enveloping themselves in another thick cloud of smoke, they went on without
farther greeting.

"Grasso in aere!" said the Templar. "You hear what a character the impudent knave gives me;
but, so it serves your lordship's turn, I care not.--And, now, let me ask your lordship what
name you will assume, for we are near the ducal palace of Duke Hildebrod."

"I will be called Grahame," said Nigel; "it was my mother's name."

"Grime," repeated the Templar, "will suit Alsatia well enough--both a grim and grimy place
of refuge."

"I said Grahame, sir, not Grime," said Nigel, something shortly, and laying an emphasis on
the vowel--for few Scotsmen understand raillery upon the subject of their names.

"I beg pardon, my lord," answered the undisconcerted punster; "but Graam will suit the circumstance,
too--it signifies tribulation in the High Dutch, and your lordship must be considered as a
man under trouble."

Nigel laughed at the pertinacity of the Templar; who, proceeding to point out a sign representing,
or believed to represent, a dog attacking a bull, and running at his head, in the true scientific
style of onset,--"There," said he, "doth faithful Duke Hildebrod deal forth laws, as well as
ale and strong waters, to his faithful Alsatians. Being a determined champion of Paris Garden,
he has chosen a sign corresponding to his habits; and he deals in giving drink to the thirsty,
that he himself may drink without paying, and receive pay for what is drunken by others.--Let
us enter the ever-open gate of this second Axylus."

As they spoke, they entered the dilapidated tavern, which was, nevertheless, more ample in
dimensions, and less ruinous, than many houses in the same evil neighbourhood. Two or three
haggard, ragged drawers, ran to and fro, whose looks, like those of owls, seemed only adapted
for midnight, when other creatures sleep, and who by day seemed bleared, stupid, and only half
awake. Guided by one of these blinking Ganymedes, they entered a room, where the feeble rays
of the sun were almost wholly eclipsed by volumes of tobacco-smoke, rolled from the tubes of
the company, while out of the cloudy sanctuary arose the old chant of--

      "Old Sir Simon the King,
       And old Sir Simon the King,
       With his malmsey nose,
       And his ale-dropped hose,
       And sing hey ding-a-ding-ding."

Duke Hildebrod, who himself condescended to chant this ditty to his loving subjects, was a
monstrously fat old man, with only one eye; and a nose which bore evidence to the frequency,
strength, and depth of his potations. He wore a murrey-coloured plush jerkin, stained with
the overflowings of the tankard, and much the worse for wear, and unbuttoned at bottom for
the ease of his enormous paunch. Behind him lay a favourite bull-dog, whose round head and
single black glancing eye, as well as the creature's great corpulence, gave it a burlesque
resemblance to its master.

The well-beloved counsellors who surrounded the ducal throne, incensed
it with tobacco, pledged its occupier in thick clammy ale, and echoed
back his choral songs, were Satraps worthy of such a Soldan. The buff
jerkin, broad belt, and long sword of one, showed him to be a Low
Country soldier, whose look of scowling importance, and drunken
impudence, were designed to sustain his title to call himself a Roving
Blade. It seemed to Nigel that he had seen this fellow somewhere or
other. A hedge-parson, or buckle-beggar, as that order of priesthood
has been irreverently termed, sat on the Duke's left, and was easily
distinguished by his torn band, flapped hat, and the remnants of a
rusty cassock. Beside the parson sat a most wretched and meagre-
looking old man, with a threadbare hood of coarse kersey upon his
head, and buttoned about his neck, while his pinched features, like
those of old Daniel, were illuminated by
                            --"an eye,
 Through the last look of dotage still cunning and sly."

On his left was placed a broken attorney, who, for some malpractices, had been struck from
the roll of practitioners, and who had nothing left of his profession, except its roguery.
One or two persons of less figure, amongst whom there was one face, which, like that of the
soldier, seemed not unknown to Nigel, though he could not recollect where he had seen it, completed
the council-board of Jacob Duke Hildebrod.

The strangers had full time to observe all this; for his grace the Duke, whether irresistibly
carried on by the full tide of harmony, or whether to impress the strangers with a proper idea
of his consequence, chose to sing his ditty to an end before addressing them, though, during
the whole time, he closely scrutinized them with his single optic.

When Duke Hildebrod had ended his song, he informed his Peers that a worthy officer of the
Temple attended them, and commanded the captain and parson to abandon their easy chairs in
behalf of the two strangers, whom he placed on his right and left hand. The worthy representative
of the army and the church of Alsatia went to place themselves on a crazy form at the bottom
of the table, which, ill calculated to sustain men of such weight, gave way under them, and
the man of the sword and man of the gown were rolled over each other on the floor, amidst the
exulting shouts of the company. They arose in wrath, contending which should vent his displeasure
in the loudest and deepest oaths, a strife in which the parson's superior acquaintance with
theology enabled him greatly to excel the captain, and were at length with difficulty tranquillised
by the arrival of the alarmed waiters with more stable chairs, and by a long draught of the
cooling tankard. When this commotion was appeased, and the strangers courteously accommodated
with flagons, after the fashion of the others present, the Duke drank prosperity to the Temple
in the most gracious manner, together with a cup of welcome to Master Reginald Lowestoffe;
and, this courtesy having been thankfully accepted, the party honoured prayed permission to
call for a gallon of Rhenish, over which he proposed to open his business.

The mention of a liquor so superior to their usual potations had an instant and most favourable
effect upon the little senate; and its immediate appearance might be said to secure a favourable
reception of Master Lowestoffe's proposition, which, after a round or two had circulated, he
explained to be the admission of his friend Master Nigel Grahame to the benefit of the sanctuary
and other immunities of Alsatia, in the character of a grand compounder; for so were those
termed who paid a double fee at their matriculation, in order to avoid laying before the senate
the peculiar circumstances which compelled them to take refuge there.

The worthy Duke heard the proposition with glee, which glittered in his single eye; and no
wonder, as it was a rare occurrence, and of peculiar advantage to his private revenue. Accordingly,
he commanded his ducal register to be brought him, a huge book, secured with brass clasps like
a merchant's ledger, and whose leaves, stained with wine, and slabbered with tobacco juice,
bore the names probably of as many rogues as are to be found in the Calendar of Newgate.

Nigel was then directed to lay down two nobles as his ransom, and to claim privilege by reciting
the following doggerel verses, which were dictated to him by the Duke:--

        "Your suppliant, by name
         Nigel Grahame,
         In fear of mishap
         From a shoulder-tap;
         And dreading a claw
         From the talons of law,
          That are sharper than briers:
         His freedom to sue,
         And rescue by you--
         Thorugh weapon and wit,
         From warrant and writ,
         From bailiff's hand,
         From tipstaff's wand,
          Is come hither to Whitefriars."

As Duke Hildebrod with a tremulous hand began to make the entry, and had already, with superfluous
generosity, spelled Nigel with two g's instead of one, he was interrupted by the parson. [Footnote:
This curious register is still in existence, being in possession of that eminent antiquary,
Dr. Dryasdust, who liberally offered the author permission to have the autograph of Duke Hildebrod
engraved as an illustration of this passage. Unhappily, being rigorous as Ritson himself in
adhering to the very letter of his copy, the worthy Doctor clogged his munificence with the
condition that we should adopt the Duke's orthography, and entitle the work "The Fortunes of
Niggle," with which stipulation we did not think it necessary to comply.] This reverend gentleman
had been whispering for a minute or two, not with the captain, but with that other individual,
who dwelt imperfectly, as we have already mentioned, in Nigel's memory, and being, perhaps,
still something malecontent on account of the late accident, he now requested to be heard before
the registration took place.

"The person," he said, "who hath now had the assurance to propose himself as a candidate for
the privileges and immunities of this honourable society, is, in plain terms, a beggarly Scot,
and we have enough of these locusts in London already--if we admit such palmer- worms and caterpillars
to the Sanctuary, we shall soon have the whole nation."

"We are not entitled to inquire," said Duke Hildebrod, "whether he be Scot, or French, or English;
seeing he has honourably laid down his garnish, he is entitled to our protection."

"Word of denial, most Sovereign Duke," replied the parson, "I ask him no questions--his speech
betrayeth him--he is a Galilean--and his garnish is forfeited for his assurance in coming within
this our realm; and I call on you, Sir Duke, to put the laws in force against him!"

The Templar here rose, and was about to interrupt the deliberations of the court, when the
Duke gravely assured him that he should be heard in behalf of his friend, so soon as the council
had finished their deliberations.

The attorney next rose, and, intimating that he was to speak to the point of law, said--"It
was easy to be seen that this gentleman did not come here in any civil case, and that he believed
it to be the story they had already heard of concerning a blow given within the verge of the
Park--that the Sanctuary would not bear out the offender in such case--and that the queer old
Chief would send down a broom which would sweep the streets of Alsatia from the Strand to the
Stairs; and it was even policy to think what evil might come to their republic, by sheltering
an alien in such circumstances."

The captain, who had sat impatiently while these opinions were expressed, now sprung on his
feet with the vehemence of a cork bouncing from a bottle of brisk beer, and, turning up his
mustaches with a martial air, cast a glance of contempt on the lawyer and churchman, while
he thus expressed his opinion.

"Most noble Duke Hildebrod! When I hear such base, skeldering, coistril propositions come from
the counsellors of your grace, and when I remember the Huffs, the Muns, and the Tityretu's
by whom your grace's ancestors and predecessors were advised on such occasions, I begin to
think the spirit of action is as dead in Alsatia as in my old grannam; and yet who thinks so
thinks a lie, since I will find as many roaring boys in the Friars as shall keep the liberties
against all the scavengers of Westminster. And, if we should be overborne for a turn, death
and darkness! have we not time to send the gentleman off by water, either to Paris Garden or
to the bankside? and, if he is a gallant of true breed, will he not make us full amends for
all the trouble we have? Let other societies exist by the law, I say that we brisk boys of
the Fleet live in spite of it; and thrive best when we are in right opposition to sign and
seal, writ and warrant, sergeant and tipstaff, catchpoll, and bum-bailey."

This speech was followed by a murmur of approbation, and Lowestoffe, striking in before the
favourable sound had subsided, reminded the Duke and his council how much the security of their
state depended upon the amity of the Templars, who, by closing their gates, could at pleasure
shut against the Alsatians the communication betwixt the Friars and the Temple, and that as
they conducted themselves on this occasion, so would they secure or lose the benefit of his
interest with his own body, which they knew not to be inconsiderable. "And, in respect of my
friend being a Scotsman and alien, as has been observed by the reverend divine and learned
lawyer, you are to consider," said Lowestoffe, "for what he is pursued hither--why, for giving
the bastinado, not to an Englishman, but to one of his own countrymen. And for my own simple
part," he continued, touching Lord Glenvarloch at the same time, to make him understand he
spoke but in jest, "if all the Scots in London were to fight a Welsh main, and kill each other
to a man, the survivor would, in my humble opinion, be entitled to our gratitude, as having
done a most acceptable service to poor Old England."

A shout of laughter and applause followed this ingenious apology for the client's state of
alienage; and the Templar followed up his plea with the following pithy proposition:--"I know
well," said he, "it is the custom of the fathers of this old and honourable republic, ripely
and well to consider all their proceedings over a proper allowance of liquor; and far be it
from me to propose the breach of so laudable a custom, or to pretend that such an affair as
the present can be well and constitutionally considered during the discussion of a pitiful
gallon of Rhenish. But, as it is the same thing to this honourable conclave whether they drink
first and determine afterwards, or whether they determine first and drink afterwards, I propose
your grace, with the advice of your wise and potent senators, shall pass your edict, granting
to mine honourable friend the immunities of the place, and assigning him a lodging, according
to your wise forms, to which he will presently retire, being somewhat spent with this day's
action; whereupon I will presently order you a rundlet of Rhenish, with a corresponding quantity
of neats' tongues and pickled herrings, to make you all as glorious as George-a-Green."

This overture was received with a general shout of applause, which altogether drowned the voice
of the dissidents, if any there were amongst the Alsatian senate who could have resisted a
proposal so popular. The words of, kind heart! noble gentleman! generous gallant! flew from
mouth to mouth; the inscription of the petitioner's name in the great book was hastily completed,
and the oath administered to him by the worthy Doge. Like the Laws of the Twelve Tables, of
the ancient Cambro-Britons, and other primitive nations, it was couched in poetry, and ran
as follows:-

 "By spigot and barrel,
  By bilboe and buff;
  Thou art sworn to the quarrel
  Of the blades of the huff.
  For Whitefriars and its claims
  To be champion or martyr,
  And to fight for its dames
  Like a Knight of the Garter."

Nigel felt, and indeed exhibited, some disgust at this mummery; but, the Templar reminding
him that he was too far advanced to draw back, he repeated the words, or rather assented as
they were repeated by Duke Hildebrod, who concluded the ceremony by allowing him the privilege
of sanctuary, in the following form of prescriptive doggerel:--

 "From the touch of the tip,
  From the blight of the warrant,
  From the watchmen who skip
  On the Harman Beck's errand;
  From the bailiffs cramp speech,
  That makes man a thrall,
  I charm thee from each,
  And I charm thee from all.
  Thy freedom's complete
  As a Blade of the Huff,
  To be cheated and cheat,
  To be cuff'd and to cuff;
  To stride, swear, and swagger,
  To drink till you stagger,
  To stare and to stab,
  And to brandish your dagger
  In the cause of your drab;
  To walk wool-ward in winter,
  Drink brandy, and smoke,
  And go fresco in summer
  For want of a cloak;
  To eke out your living
  By the wag of your elbow,
  By fulham and gourd,
  And by baring of bilboe;
  To live by your shifts,
  And to swear by your honour,
  Are the freedom and gifts
  Of which I am the donor."[Footnote: Of the cant words used in this
inauguratory oration, some are obvious in their meaning, others, as
Harman Beck (constable), and the like, derive their source from that
ancient piece of lexicography, the Slang Dictionary]

This homily being performed, a dispute arose concerning the special residence to be assigned
the new brother of the Sanctuary; for, as the Alsatians held it a maxim in their commonwealth,
that ass's milk fattens, there was usually a competition among the inhabitants which should
have the managing, as it was termed, of a new member of the society.

The Hector who had spoken so warmly and critically in Nigel's behalf, stood out now chivalrously
in behalf of a certain Blowselinda, or Bonstrops, who had, it seems, a room to hire, once the
occasional residence of Slicing Dick of Paddington, who lately suffered at Tyburn, and whose
untimely exit had been hitherto mourned by the damsel in solitary widowhood, after the fashion
of the turtle-dove.

The captain's interest was, however, overruled, in behalf of the old gentleman in the kersey
hood, who was believed, even at his extreme age, to understand the plucking of a pigeon, as
well, or better, than any man in Alsatia.

This venerable personage was an usurer of notoriety, called Trapbois, and had very lately done
the state considerable service in advancing a subsidy necessary to secure a fresh importation
of liquors to the Duke's cellars, the wine-merchant at the Vintry being scrupulous to deal
with so great a man for any thing but ready money.

When, therefore, the old gentleman arose, and with much coughing, reminded the Duke that he
had a poor apartment to let, the claims of all others were set aside, and Nigel was assigned
to Trapbois as his guest.

No sooner was this arrangement made, than Lord Glenvarloch expressed to Lowestoffe his impatience
to leave this discreditable assembly, and took his leave with a careless haste, which, but
for the rundlet of Rhenish wine that entered just as he left the apartment, might have been
taken in bad part. The young Templar accompanied his friend to the house of the old usurer,
with the road to which he and some other youngsters about the Temple were even but too well
acquainted. On the way, he assured Lord Glenvarloch that he was going to the only clean house
in Whitefriars; a property which it owed solely to the exertions of the old man's only daughter,
an elderly damsel, ugly enough to frighten sin, yet likely to be wealthy enough to tempt a
puritan, so soon as the devil had got her old dad for his due. As Lowestoffe spoke thus, they
knocked at the door of the house, and the sour stern countenance of the female by whom it was
opened, fully confirmed all that the Templar had said of the hostess. She heard with an ungracious
and discontented air the young Templar's information, that the gentleman, his companion, was
to be her father's lodger, muttered something about the trouble it was likely to occasion,
but ended by showing the stranger's apartment, which was better than could have been augured
from the general appearance of the place, and much larger in extent than that which he occupied
at Paul's Wharf, though inferior to it in neatness.

Lowestoffe, having thus seen his friend fairly installed in his new apartment, and having obtained
for him a note of the rate at which he could be accommodated with victuals from a neighbouring
cook's shop, now took his leave, offering, at the same time, to send the whole, or any part
of Lord Glenvarloch's baggage, from his former place of residence to his new lodging. Nigel
mentioned so few articles, that the Templar could not help observing, that his lordship, it
would seem, did not intend to enjoy his new privileges long.

"They are too little suited to my habits and taste, that I should do so," replied Lord Glenvarloch.

"You may change your opinion to-morrow," said Lowestoffe; "and so I wish you a good even. To-morrow
I will visit you betimes."

The morning came, but instead of the Templar, it brought only a letter from him. The epistle
stated, that Lowestoffe's visit to Alsatia had drawn down the animadversions of some crabbed
old pantaloons among the benchers, and that he judged it wise not to come hither at present,
for fear of attracting too much attention to Lord Glenvarloch's place of residence. He stated,
that he had taken measures for the safety of his baggage, and would send him, by a safe hand,
his money-casket, and what articles he wanted. Then followed some sage advices, dictated by
Lowestoffe's acquaintance with Alsatia and its manners. He advised him to keep the usurer in
the most absolute uncertainty concerning the state of his funds-never to throw a main with
the captain, who was in the habit of playing dry-fisted, and paying his losses with three vowels;
and, finally, to beware of Duke Hildebrod, who was as sharp, he said, as a needle, though he
had no more eyes than are possessed by that necessary implement of female industry.

CHAPTER XVIII

Mother. What I dazzled by a flash from Cupid's mirror, With which the boy, as mortal urchins
wont, Flings back the sunbeam in the eye of passengers-- Then laughs to see them stumble!

Daughter. Mother! no--
It was a lightning-flash which dazzled me,
And never shall these eyes see true again.
              Beef and Pudding.-An Old English Comedy.

It is necessary that we should leave our hero Nigel for a time, although in a situation neither
safe, comfortable, nor creditable, in order to detail some particulars which have immediate
connexion with his fortunes.

It was but the third day after he had been forced to take refuge in the house of old Trapbois,
the noted usurer of Whitefriars, commonly called Golden Trapbois, when the pretty daughter
of old Ramsay, the watchmaker, after having piously seen her father finish his breakfast, (from
the fear that he might, in an abstruse fit of thought, swallow the salt-cellar instead of a
crust of the brown loaf,) set forth from the house as soon as he was again plunged into the
depth of calculation, and, accompanied only by that faithful old drudge, Janet, the Scots laundress,
to whom her whims were laws, made her way to Lombard Street, and disturbed, at the unusual
hour of eight in the morning, Aunt Judith, the sister of her worthy godfather.

The venerable maiden received her young visitor with no great complacency; for, naturally enough,
she had neither the same admiration of her very pretty countenance, nor allowance for her foolish
and girlish impatience of temper, which Master George Heriot entertained. Still Mistress Margaret
was a favourite of her brother's, whose will was to Aunt Judith a supreme law; and she contented
herself with asking her untimely visitor, "what she made so early with her pale, chitty face,
in the streets of London?"

"I would speak with the Lady Hermione," answered the almost breathless girl, while the blood
ran so fast to her face as totally to remove the objection of paleness which Aunt Judith had
made to her complexion.

"With the Lady Hermione?" said Aunt Judith--"with the Lady Hermione? and at this time in the
morning, when she will scarce see any of the family, even at seasonable hours? You are crazy,
you silly wench, or you abuse the indulgence which my brother and the lady have shown to you."

"Indeed, indeed I have not," repeated Margaret, struggling to retain the unbidden tear which
seemed ready to burst out on the slightest occasion. "Do but say to the lady that your brother's
god-daughter desires earnestly to speak to her, and I know she will not refuse to see me."

Aunt Judith bent an earnest, suspicious, and inquisitive glance on her young visitor, "You
might make me your secretary, my lassie," she said, "as well as the Lady Hermione. I am older,
and better skilled to advise. I live more in the world than one who shuts herself up within
four rooms, and I have the better means to assist you."

"O! no--no--no," said Margaret, eagerly, and with more earnest sincerity than complaisance;
"there are some things to which you cannot advise me, Aunt Judith. It is a case--pardon me,
my dear aunt-- a case beyond your counsel."

"I am glad on't, maiden," said Aunt Judith, somewhat angrily; "for I think the follies of the
young people of this generation would drive mad an old brain like mine. Here you come on the
viretot, through the whole streets of London, to talk some nonsense to a lady, who scarce sees
God's sun, but when he shines on a brick wall. But I will tell her you are here."

She went away, and shortly returned with a dry--"Miss Marget, the lady will be glad to see
you; and that's more, my young madam, than you had a right to count upon."

Mistress Margaret hung her head in silence, too much perplexed by the train of her own embarrassed
thoughts, for attempting either to conciliate Aunt Judith's kindness, or, which on other occasions
would have been as congenial to her own humour, to retaliate on her cross- tempered remarks
and manner. She followed Aunt Judith, therefore, in silence and dejection, to the strong oaken
door which divided the Lady Hermione's apartments from the rest of George Heriot's spacious house.

At the door of this sanctuary it is necessary to pause, in order to correct the reports with
which Richie Moniplies had filled his master's ear, respecting the singular appearance of that
lady's attendance at prayers, whom we now own to be by name the Lady Hermione. Some part of
these exaggerations had been communicated to the worthy Scotsman by Jenkin Vincent, who was
well experienced in the species of wit which has been long a favourite in the city, under the
names of cross-biting, giving the dor, bamboozling, cramming, hoaxing, humbugging, and quizzing;
for which sport Richie Moniplies, with his solemn gravity, totally unapprehensive of a joke,
and his natural propensity to the marvellous, formed an admirable subject. Farther ornaments
the tale had received from Richie himself, whose tongue, especially when oiled with good liquor,
had a considerable tendency to amplification, and who failed not, while he retailed to his
master all the wonderful circumstances narrated by Vincent, to add to them many conjectures
of his own, which his imagination had over-hastily converted into facts.

Yet the life which the Lady Hermione had led for two years, during which she had been the inmate
of George Heriot's house, was so singular, as almost to sanction many of the wild reports which
went abroad. The house which the worthy goldsmith inhabited, had in former times belonged to
a powerful and wealthy baronial family, which, during the reign of Henry VIII., terminated
in a dowager lady, very wealthy, very devout, and most unalienably attached to the Catholic
faith. The chosen friend of the Honourable Lady Foljambe was the Abbess of Saint Roque's Nunnery,
like herself a conscientious, rigid, and devoted Papist. When the house of Saint Roque was
despotically dissolved by the fiat of the impetuous monarch, the Lady Foljambe received her
friend into her spacious mansion, together with two vestal sisters, who, like their Abbess,
were determined to follow the tenor of their vows, instead of embracing the profane liberty
which the Monarch's will had thrown in their choice. For their residence, the Lady Foljambe
contrived, with all secrecy--for Henry might not have relished her interference--to set apart
a suite of four rooms, with a little closet fitted up as an oratory, or chapel; the whole apartments
fenced by a stout oaken door to exclude strangers, and accommodated with a turning wheel to
receive necessaries, according to the practice of all nunneries. In this retreat, the Abbess
of Saint Roque and her attendants passed many years, communicating only with the Lady Foljambe,
who, in virtue of their prayers, and of the support she afforded them, accounted herself little
less than a saint on earth. The Abbess, fortunately for herself, died before her munificent
patroness, who lived deep in Queen Elizabeth's time, ere she was summoned by fate.

The Lady Foljambe was succeeded in this mansion by a sour fanatic knight, a distant and collateral
relation, who claimed the same merit for expelling the priestess of Baal, which his predecessor
had founded on maintaining the votaresses of Heaven. Of the two unhappy nuns, driven from their
ancient refuge, one went beyond sea; the other, unable from old age to undertake such a journey,
died under the roof of a faithful Catholic widow of low degree. Sir Paul Crambagge, having
got rid of the nuns, spoiled the chapel of its ornaments, and had thoughts of altogether destroying
the apartments, until checked by the reflection that the operation would be an unnecessary
expense, since he only inhabited three rooms of the large mansion, and had not therefore the
slightest occasion for any addition to its accommodations. His son proved a waster and a prodigal,
and from him the house was bought by our friend George Heriot, who, finding, like Sir Paul,
the house more than sufficiently ample for his accommodation, left the Foljambe apartments,
or Saint Roque's rooms, as they were called, in the state in which he found them.

About two years and a half before our history opened, when Heriot was absent upon an expedition
to the Continent, he sent special orders to his sister and his cash-keeper, directing that
the Foljambe apartments should be fitted up handsomely, though plainly, for the reception of
a lady, who would make them her residence for some time; and who would live more or less with
his own family according to her pleasure. He also directed, that the necessary repairs should
be made with secrecy, and that as little should be said as possible upon the subject of his letter.

When the time of his return came nigh, Aunt Judith and the household were on the tenter-hooks
of impatience. Master George came, as he had intimated, accompanied by a lady, so eminently
beautiful, that, had it not been for her extreme and uniform paleness, she might have been
reckoned one of the loveliest creatures on earth. She had with her an attendant, or humble
companion, whose business seemed only to wait upon her. This person, a reserved woman, and
by her dialect a foreigner, aged about fifty, was called by the lady Monna Paula, and by Master
Heriot, and others, Mademoiselle Pauline. She slept in the same room with her patroness at
night, ate in her apartment, and was scarcely ever separated from her during the day.

These females took possession of the nunnery of the devout Abbess, and, without observing the
same rigorous seclusion, according to the letter, seemed wellnigh to restore the apartments
to the use to which they had been originally designed. The new inmates lived and took their
meals apart from the rest of the family. With the domestics Lady Hermione, for so she was termed,
held no communication, and Mademoiselle Pauline only such as was indispensable, which she dispatched
as briefly as possible. Frequent and liberal largesses reconciled the servants to this conduct;
and they were in the habit of observing to each other, that to do a service for Mademoiselle
Pauline, was like finding a fairy treasure.

To Aunt Judith the Lady Hermione was kind and civil, but their intercourse was rare; on which
account the elder lady felt some pangs both of curiosity and injured dignity. But she knew
her brother so well, and loved him so dearly, that his will, once expressed, might be truly
said to become her own. The worthy citizen was not without a spice of the dogmatism which grows
on the best disposition, when a word is a law to all around. Master George did not endure to
be questioned by his family, and, when he had generally expressed his will, that the Lady Hermione
should live in the way most agreeable to her, and that no inquiries should be made concerning
their history, or her motives for observing such strict seclusion, his sister well knew that
he would have been seriously displeased with any attempt to pry into the secret.

But, though Heriot's servants were bribed, and his sister awed into silent acquiescence in
these arrangements, they were not of a nature to escape the critical observation of the neighbourhood.
Some opined that the wealthy goldsmith was about to turn papist, and re-establish Lady Foljambe's
nunnery--others that he was going mad--others that he was either going to marry, or to do worse.
Master George's constant appearance at church, and the knowledge that the supposed votaress
always attended when the prayers of the English ritual were read in the family, liberated him
from the first of these suspicions; those who had to transact business with him upon 'Change,
could not doubt the soundness of Master Heriot's mind; and, to confute the other rumours, it
was credibly reported by such as made the matter their particular interest, that Master George
Heriot never visited his guest but in presence of Mademoiselle Pauline, who sat with her work
in a remote part of the same room in which they conversed. It was also ascertained that these
visits scarcely ever exceeded an hour in length, and were usually only repeated once a week,
an intercourse too brief and too long interrupted, to render it probable that love was the
bond of their union.

The inquirers were, therefore, at fault, and compelled to relinquish the pursuit of Master
Heriot's secret, while a thousand ridiculous tales were circulated amongst the ignorant and
superstitious, with some specimens of which our friend Richie Moniplies had been crammed, as
we have seen, by the malicious apprentice of worthy David Ramsay.

There was one person in the world who, it was thought, could (if she would) have said more
of the Lady Hermione than any one in London, except George Heriot himself; and that was the
said David Ramsay's only child, Margaret.

This girl was not much past the age of fifteen when the Lady Hermione first came to England,
and was a very frequent visitor at her godfather's, who was much amused by her childish sallies,
and by the wild and natural beauty with which she sung the airs of her native country. Spoilt
she was on all hands; by the indulgence of her godfather, the absent habits and indifference
of her father, and the deference of all around to her caprices, as a beauty and as an heiress.
But though, from these circumstances, the city-beauty had become as wilful, as capricious,
and as affected, as unlimited indulgence seldom fails to render those to whom it is extended;
and although she exhibited upon many occasions that affectation of extreme shyness, silence,
and reserve, which misses in their teens are apt to take for an amiable modesty; and, upon
others, a considerable portion of that flippancy, which youth sometimes confounds with wit,
Mistress Margaret had much real shrewdness and judgment, which wanted only opportunities of
observation to refine it--a lively, good-humoured, playful disposition, and an excellent heart.
Her acquired follies were much increased by reading plays and romances, to which she devoted
a great deal of her time, and from which she adopted ideas as different as possible from those
which she might have obtained from the invaluable and affectionate instructions of an excellent
mother; and the freaks of which she was sometimes guilty, rendered her not unjustly liable
to the charge of affectation and coquetry. But the little lass had sense and shrewdness enough
to keep her failings out of sight of her godfather, to whom she was sincerely attached; and
so high she stood in his favour, that, at his recommendation, she obtained permission to visit
the recluse Lady Hermione.

The singular mode of life which that lady observed; her great beauty, rendered even more interesting
by her extreme paleness; the conscious pride of being admitted farther than the rest of the
world into the society of a person who was wrapped in so much mystery, made a deep impression
on the mind of Margaret Ramsay; and though their conversations were at no time either long
or confidential, yet, proud of the trust reposed in her, Margaret was as secret respecting
their tenor as if every word repeated had been to cost her life. No inquiry, however artfully
backed by flattery and insinuation, whether on the part of Dame Ursula, or any other person
equally inquisitive, could wring from the little maiden one word of what she heard or saw,
after she entered these mysterious and secluded apartments. The slightest question concerning
Master Heriot's ghost, was sufficient, at her gayest moment, to check the current of her communicative
prattle, and render her silent.

We mention this, chiefly to illustrate the early strength of Margaret's character--a strength
concealed under a hundred freakish whims and humours, as an ancient and massive buttress is
disguised by its fantastic covering of ivy and wildflowers. In truth, if the damsel had told
all she heard or saw within the Foljambe apartments, she would have said but little to gratify
the curiosity of inquirers.

At the earlier period of their acquaintance, the Lady Hermione was wont to reward the attentions
of her little friend with small but elegant presents, and entertain her by a display of foreign
rarities and curiosities, many of them of considerable value. Sometimes the time was passed
in a way much less agreeable to Margaret, by her receiving lessons from Pauline in the use
of the needle. But, although her preceptress practised these arts with a dexterity then only
known in foreign convents, the pupil proved so incorrigibly idle and awkward, that the task
of needlework was at length given up, and lessons of music substituted in their stead. Here
also Pauline was excellently qualified as an instructress, and Margaret, more successful in
a science for which Nature had gifted her, made proficiency both in vocal and instrumental
music. These lessons passed in presence of the Lady Hermione, to whom they seemed to give pleasure.
She sometimes added her own voice to the performance, in a pure, clear stream of liquid melody;
but this was only when the music was of a devotional cast. As Margaret became older, her communications
with the recluse assumed a different character. She was allowed, if not encouraged, to tell
whatever she had remarked out of doors, and the Lady Hermione, while she remarked the quick,
sharp, and retentive powers of observation possessed by her young friend, often found sufficient
reason to caution her against rashness in forming opinions, and giddy petulance in expressing them.

The habitual awe with which she regarded this singular personage, induced Mistress Margaret,
though by no means delighting in contradiction or reproof, to listen with patience to her admonitions,
and to make full allowance for the good intentions of the patroness by whom they were bestowed;
although in her heart she could hardly conceive how Madame Hermione, who never stirred from
the Foljambe apartments, should think of teaching knowledge of the world to one who walked
twice a-week between Temple Bar and Lombard Street, besides parading in the Park every Sunday
that proved to be fair weather. Indeed, pretty Mistress Margaret was so little inclined to
endure such remonstrances, that her intercourse with the inhabitants of the Foljambe apartments
would have probably slackened as her circle of acquaintance increased in the external world,
had she not, on the one hand, entertained an habitual reverence for her monitress, of which
she could not divest herself, and been flattered, on the other, by being to a certain degree
the depository of a confidence for which others thirsted in vain. Besides, although the conversation
of Hermione was uniformly serious, it was not in general either formal or severe; nor was the
lady offended by flights of levity which Mistress Margaret sometimes ventured on in her presence,
even when they were such as made Monna Paula cast her eyes upwards, and sigh with that compassion
which a devotee extends towards the votaries of a trivial and profane world. Thus, upon the
whole, the little maiden was disposed to submit, though not without some wincing, to the grave
admonitions of the Lady Hermione; and the rather that the mystery annexed to the person of
her monitress was in her mind early associated with a vague idea of wealth and importance,
which had been rather confirmed than lessened by many accidental circumstances which she had
noticed since she was more capable of observation.

It frequently happens, that the counsel which we reckon intrusive when offered to us unasked,
becomes precious in our eyes when the pressure of difficulties renders us more diffident of
our own judgment than we are apt to find ourselves in the hours of ease and indifference; and
this is more especially the case if we suppose that our adviser may also possess power and
inclination to back his counsel with effectual assistance. Mistress Margaret was now in that
situation. She was, or believed herself to be, in a condition where both advice and assistance
might be necessary; and it was therefore, after an anxious and sleepless night, that she resolved
to have recourse to the Lady Hermione, who she knew would readily afford her the one, and,
as she hoped, might also possess means of giving her the other. The conversation between them
will best explain the purport of the visit.

CHAPTER XIX

  By this good light, a wench of matchless mettle!
  This were a leaguer-lass to love a soldier,
  To bind his wounds, and kiss his bloody brow,
  And sing a roundel as she help'd to arm him,
  Though the rough foeman's drums were beat so nigh,
  They seem'd to bear the burden.
                               Old Play.

When Mistress Margaret entered the Foljambe apartment, she found the inmates employed in their
usual manner; the lady in reading, and her attendant in embroidering a large piece of tapestry,
which had occupied her ever since Margaret had been first admitted within these secluded chambers.

Hermione nodded kindly to her visitor, but did not speak; and Margaret, accustomed to this
reception, and in the present case not sorry for it, as it gave her an interval to collect
her thoughts, stooped over Monna Paula's frame and observed, in a half whisper, "You were just
so far as that rose, Monna, when I first saw you--see, there is the mark where I had the bad
luck to spoil the flower in trying to catch the stitch--I was little above fifteen then. These
flowers make me an old woman, Monna Paula."

"I wish they could make you a wise one, my child," answered Monna Paula, in whose esteem pretty
Mistress Margaret did not stand quite so high as in that of her patroness; partly owing to
her natural austerity, which was something intolerant of youth and gaiety, and partly to the
jealousy with which a favourite domestic regards any one whom she considers as a sort of rival
in the affections of her mistress.

"What is it you say to Monna, little one?" asked the lady.

"Nothing, madam," replied Mistress Margaret, "but that I have seen the real flowers blossom
three times over since I first saw Monna Paula working in her canvass garden, and her violets
have not budded yet."

"True, lady-bird," replied Hermione; "but the buds that are longest in blossoming will last
the longest in flower. You have seen them in the garden bloom thrice, but you have seen them
fade thrice also; now, Monna Paula's will remain in blow for ever--they will fear neither frost
nor tempest."

"True, madam," answered Mistress Margaret; "but neither have they life or odour."

"That, little one," replied the recluse, "is to compare a life agitated by hope and fear, and
chequered with success and disappointment, and fevered by the effects of love and hatred, a
life of passion and of feeling, saddened and shortened by its exhausting alternations, to a
calm and tranquil existence, animated but by a sense of duties, and only employed, during its
smooth and quiet course, in the unwearied discharge of them. Is that the moral of your answer?"

"I do not know, madam," answered Mistress Margaret; "but, of all birds in the air, I would
rather be the lark, that sings while he is drifting down the summer breeze, than the weathercock
that sticks fast yonder upon his iron perch, and just moves so much as to discharge his duty,
and tell us which way the wind blows."

"Metaphors are no arguments, my pretty maiden," said the Lady Hermione, smiling.

"I am sorry for that, madam," answered Margaret; "for they are such a pretty indirect way of
telling one's mind when it differs from one's betters--besides, on this subject there is no
end of them, and they are so civil and becoming withal."

"Indeed?" replied the lady; "let me hear some of them, I pray you."

"It would be, for example, very bold in me," said Margaret, "to say to your ladyship, that,
rather than live a quiet life, I would like a little variety of hope and fear, and liking and
disliking--and--and-- and the other sort of feelings which your ladyship is pleased to speak
of; but I may say freely, and without blame, that I like a butterfly better than a bettle,
or a trembling aspen better than a grim Scots fir, that never wags a leaf--or that of all the
wood, brass, and wire that ever my father's fingers put together, I do hate and detest a certain
huge old clock of the German fashion, that rings hours and half hours, and quarters and half
quarters, as if it were of such consequence that the world should know it was wound up and
going. Now, dearest lady, I wish you would only compare that clumsy, clanging, Dutch-looking
piece of lumber, with the beautiful timepiece that Master Heriot caused my father to make for
your ladyship, which uses to play a hundred merry tunes, and turns out, when it strikes the
hour, a whole band of morrice dancers, to trip the hays to the measure."

"And which of these timepieces goes the truest, Margaret?" said the lady.

"I must confess the old Dutchman has the advantage in that"--said Margaret. "I fancy you are
right, madam, and that comparisons are no arguments; at least mine has not brought me through."

"Upon my word, maiden Margaret," said the lady, smiling, "you have been of late thinking very
much of these matters."

"Perhaps too much, madam," said Margaret, so low as only to be heard by the lady, behind the
back of whose chair she had now placed herself. The words were spoken very gravely, and accompanied
by a half sigh, which did not escape the attention of her to whom they were addressed. The
Lady Hermione turned immediately round, and looked earnestly at Margaret, then paused for a
moment, and, finally, commanded Monna Paula to carry her frame and embroidery into the antechamber.
When they were left alone, she desired her young friend to come from behind the chair on the
back of which she still rested, and sit down beside her upon a stool.

"I will remain thus, madam, under your favour," answered Margaret, without changing her posture;
"I would rather you heard me without seeing me."

"In God's name, maiden," returned her patroness, "what is it you can have to say, that may
not be uttered face to face, to so true a friend as I am?"

Without making any direct answer, Margaret only replied, "You were right, dearest lady, when
you said, I had suffered my feelings too much to engross me of late. I have done very wrong,
and you will be angry with me--so will my godfather, but I cannot help it--he must be rescued."

"He?" repeated the lady, with emphasis; "that brief little word does, indeed, so far explain
your mystery;--but come from behind the chair, you silly popinjay! I will wager you have suffered
yonder gay young apprentice to sit too near your heart. I have not heard you mention young
Vincent for many a day--perhaps he has not been out of mouth and out of mind both. Have you
been so foolish as to let him speak to you seriously?--I am told he is a bold youth."

"Not bold enough to say any thing that could displease me, madam," said Margaret.

"Perhaps, then, you were not displeased," said the lady; "or perhaps he has not spoken, which
would be wiser and better. Be open-hearted, my love--your godfather will soon return, and we
will take him into our consultations. If the young man is industrious, and come of honest parentage,
his poverty may be no such insurmountable obstacle. But you are both of you very young, Margaret--I
know your godfather will expect, that the youth shall first serve out his apprenticeship."

Margaret had hitherto suffered the lady to proceed, under the mistaken impression which she
had adopted, simply because she could not tell how to interrupt her; but pure despite at hearing
her last words gave her boldness at length to say "I crave your pardon, madam; but neither
the youth you mention, nor any apprentice or master within the city of London--"

"Margaret," said the lady, in reply, "the contemptuous tone with which you mention those of
your own class, (many hundreds if not thousands of whom are in all respects better than yourself,
and would greatly honour you by thinking of you,) is methinks, no warrant for the wisdom of
your choice--for a choice, it seems, there is. Who is it, maiden, to whom you have thus rashly
attached yourself?--rashly, I fear it must be."

"It is the young Scottish Lord Glenvarloch, madam," answered Margaret, in a low and modest
tone, but sufficiently firm, considering the subject.

"The young Lord of Glenvarloch!" repeated the lady, in great surprise- -"Maiden, you are distracted
in your wits."

"I knew you would say so, madam," answered Margaret. "It is what another person has already
told me--it is, perhaps, what all the world would tell me--it is what I am sometimes disposed
to tell myself. But look at me, madam, for I will now come before you, and tell me if there
is madness or distraction in my look and word, when I repeat to you again, that I have fixed
my affections on this young nobleman."

"If there is not madness in your look or word, maiden, there is infinite folly in what you
say," answered the Lady Hermione, sharply. "When did you ever hear that misplaced love brought
any thing but wretchedness? Seek a match among your equals, Margaret, and escape the countless
kinds of risk and misery that must attend an affection beyond your degree.--Why do you smile,
maiden? Is there aught to cause scorn in what I say?"

"Surely no, madam," answered Margaret. "I only smiled to think how it should happen, that,
while rank made such a wide difference between creatures formed from the same clay, the wit
of the vulgar should, nevertheless, jump so exactly the same length with that of the accomplished
and the exalted. It is but the variation of the phrase which divides them. Dame Ursley told
me the very same thing which your ladyship has but now uttered; only you, madam, talk of countless
misery, and Dame Ursley spoke of the gallows, and Mistress Turner, who was hanged upon it."

"Indeed?" answered the Lady Hermione; "and who may Dame Ursley be, that your wise choice has
associated with me in the difficult task of advising a fool?"

"The barber's wife at next door, madam," answered Margaret, with feigned simplicity, but far
from being sorry at heart, that she had found an indirect mode of mortifying her monitress.
"She is the wisest woman that I know, next to your ladyship."

"A proper confidant," said the lady, "and chosen with the same delicate sense of what is due
to yourself and others!--But what ails you, maiden--where are you going?"

"Only to ask Dame Ursley's advice," said Margaret, as if about to depart; "for I see your ladyship
is too angry to give me any, and the emergency is pressing."

"What emergency, thou simple one?" said the lady, in a kinder tone.-- "Sit down, maiden, and
tell me your tale. It is true you are a fool, and a pettish fool to boot; but then you are
a child--an amiable child, with all your self-willed folly, and we must help you, if we can.--Sit
down, I say, as you are desired, and you will find me a safer and wiser counseller than the
barber-woman. And tell me how you come to suppose, that you have fixed your heart unalterably
upon a man whom you have seen, as I think, but once."

"I have seen him oftener," said the damsel, looking down; "but I have only spoken to him once.
I should have been able to get that once out of my head, though the impression was so deep,
that I could even now repeat every trifling word he said; but other things have since riveted
it in my bosom for ever."

"Maiden," replied the lady, "for ever is the word which comes most
lightly on the lips in such circumstances, but
 which, not the less, is almost the last that we should use. The
fashion of this world, its passions, its joys, and its sorrows, pass
away like the winged breeze--there is nought for ever but that which
belongs to the world beyond the grave."

"You have corrected me justly, madam," said Margaret calmly; "I ought only to have spoken of
my present state of mind, as what will last me for my lifetime, which unquestionably may be
but short."

"And what is there in this Scottish lord that can rivet what concerns him so closely in your
fancy?" said the lady. "I admit him a personable man, for I have seen him; and I will suppose
him courteous and agreeable. But what are his accomplishments besides, for these surely are
not uncommon attributes."

