The Prince learned from their discourse that it was thought that the Princess who played so
splendidly, could certainly sing as well, and there was a suspicion that the Prime Minister,
who had governed the people so long, was afraid of her powers, and had sent her away. So Bernard
was made to feel that those were not his real friends who flattered him when all seemed to
be well with him.
"Time passed on, Bernard's health was restored, and he was able to
come down as usual. He went down to dinner the first day on a Sunday.

At this news the Prince smote his breast, and became very sad; and all that day and night,
and the next day until sundown, he hung around the palace, hoping to get in. Trumkard was with
him a great part of the time, and brought him cakes and things to keep him from starving. In
the early evening of the second day, the Prince, while walking round the palace, saw a boy
come out of a back-alley gate, to empty some ashes. Rushing at him, he seized him, and demanded
of him news of the Princess. The boy, however, was deaf and dumb, and could not answer him;
and the Prince perceiving this, and being very expert in making signs, asked him in that way
what had become of his lady-love. The boy then replied by a sign representing a heavy door,
with four locks, a big bar, and a chain; and a black eunuch with a drawn sword, asleep before it.

Then the Prince tore his hair, and groaned, and went home to Trumkard. But he could not sleep;
and when the moon arose, he got up and wandered far away beyond the walls of the city, until
he came to the borders of the sea. There he saw, roaming about upon the sands, numbers of water-women,
who every now and then blew upon conch-shells, looking about them in every direction, as if
they expected some one to answer them. When the Prince perceived them, he slipped softly from
rock to rock, keeping himself well concealed, until he came near one of them, when he made
a sudden rush and caught her, while all the others, with loud cries, dashed into the sea. The
one he had captured, struggled and cried piteously; but, in as few words as possible, he entreated
her to be quiet, and to understand that if she was looking for a Princess, he could tell her
where she was, or at least where she had been. The water-woman then became quiet, and the Prince
told her all he knew, and how anxious he was to find the beautiful Princess. The good woman
of the sea then told him that she and her companions had come up on the shore every night for
a year, hoping that the Princess would stray that way, and be induced by them to return to
her ocean home. Then she told him who the Princess really was, and thus her story ran.

When the late mighty King, Barradin, was quite young, he married a daughter of the ocean, at
which his father, much incensed, drove him from the court. He retired far from men, and a little
son was born to him. In a few years his wife died, and he was left alone with his son. When
this boy grew up, he also married a water-woman, and, having so much of their blood in his
veins, he went down to live with his wife's relations, leaving his father to do as well as
he could by himself, until he ascended the throne. When Barradin became king, he did not marry
a queen, or cut off people's heads, or go to war, or build palaces; but he took his chief delight
in music, and encouraged the love of it among his people. So it was in the hope that one of
his descendants might some day sit upon the throne, that he composed the magical music; for
he knew that no one but a descendant of the ocean-folk could sing that music, and none but
those of his blood could read it, for there was magic in his family.

When the music was finished, the King died. His mother was a sorceress, and a very wicked old
woman, who, when her son was dead, gave it out that she herself was dying; for she had now
lived so long that people had begun to suspect something, and to think that she had too much
to do with magic. So she pretended to die, and was buried in the royal vault; and at night
she came out and went far away from the city to a great cave in a lonely country where dwelt
the demons and evil spirits who were her servants. She now spent her life in wickedness. She
it was who put it into the heads of so many sensible people to contend for the crown, and it
was with joy that she saw them carried out to the asylum. Many other evil thoughts she put
into the hearts of the people, and she was forever imagining and doing mischief.

When this young Princess, her great-grandchild, was born, Mahbracca (that was the name of the
old sorceress) was very much troubled, and used all available means to destroy the infant;
but her efforts were vain, for the people of the ocean protected her from all enchantments.

As the Princess grew up, she loved to ramble on the white sands, and she was once perceived
there by a party of ladies from the palace, who had persuaded her to come with them to their
royal home, where she had now been for a year. She knew not who she was, nor did her friends
at the palace; and her relations of the ocean had always hoped that some day she would return
to them. Now the sorceress feared that some day she would happen to sing the magical music,
and be made queen; and she hated the poor girl so much, that she would not have had this happen
for all the world. Therefore it was, no doubt, that she had sent the Nimshee, in order to prevent
the Princess from ever exercising the wonderful gift she had inherited. 

It struck Mr. Evans at once that the child had set out to go to nurse's; and without losing another
minute he called Tom, ordered him to saddle the pony, and was on his way towards nurse's not
ten minutes after he had spoken to the old woman. Taking the Prince by the hand, she led him out upon a headland that projected
some distance out into the sea, and blew four times loudly upon her conch-shell. A great heaving
and swelling of the waters was presently seen, and in a few moments an elderly personage emerged
from the waves, and walked carefully up to the rock on which they stood. He was a curious-looking
individual, and, as the water-woman informed the Prince, a powerful lord of the ocean.

He was wrapped in an old-fashioned cloak, made of the finest quality of sea-weed, and drawing
this closely around him, he requested his fair cousin of the sea to be as quick as possible
in her business with him, as it was not prudent for him to be in the air much at his age. So
the water-woman briefly related to him what the Prince had told her.

When he heard this, the old sea-gentleman folded his arms and looked very grave. "Mahbracca
is at the bottom of this," said he. "The Prime Minister would never have thought of imprisoning
the Princess, if that wretched sorceress had not put it into his head. I have no doubt that
she now has the Princess in her power, and very likely shut up in her retreat."

"What!" cried the Prince, "where is it? Where is her cave? I will go instantly and rescue my
beloved Princess!" and he drew his sword of adamant and waved it over his head.

"Ah my friend!" said the old man of the water, "you could do little against the powerful Mahbracca
and her minions. But you might go there to be sure, and find out if she really has possession
of the Princess. But then you may lose your life."

"I care not!" cried the Prince. "Dead or alive, I will be with my Princess."

The two citizens of the ocean talked together a few moments, and then the old man asked him
if he was really determined to undertake this perilous enterprise, and the Prince emphatically
declared that he was.

"The distance by the sea is much the shortest; would you be willing to go in that way?" asked
the old man.

