It was the biggest screw-up of courage he had ever accomplished in his life, and to be done
out of his rewarding big feast by that purring skeleton of a king of beasts!  It was too much
even for his pessimistic philosophy.

"Yaaa-ya-ya-ya-ya!" he howled, with his nose pointed to the brazen sun, and melted away among
the accursed thorn-scrub with a look about him that said, as plainly as words, "And that's
what comes of hunting in daylight."

The jackal, after a long skirmish and a drink, retired homewards towards sunset, when suddenly,
from a tuft of grass ahead of him, a shadow shot and vanished.  He picked up the trail at once,
diagnosed it as that of a hare, and gave chase.

It was a fine chase, characterized by every aspect of first-class trailing, and carried along
at such a speed that the quarry never got a chance to stop and get its second wind.  Indeed,
the quarry never had a chance to stop at all, until it was stopped, and the manner of that
happening was strange.

Whether designedly driven, or whether by chance, one cannot tell, but the fact remains that
the hare took a "line of country" which, if persisted in, would lead her close past the jackal's
lair, or, rather, his wife's lair.  This was important--for the jackal.

Once, indeed, our hunter all but overran a small--but quite big enough--boa-constrictor, which
must have aimed to drop from a tree upon the hare passing below, and missed.  It was in an
even more evil temper, in consequence, than snakes usually are, and struck at the jackal with
its head and shut mouth.  The jackal quietly side-stepped, snapped, missed, and made off after
his quarry, and about five hundred yards farther on he came up with "puss"--dead.

The jackal sat on his bushy tail, stuck out his fore-feet straight, and stopped as quickly
as ever he could.  Then he snarled, and full right had he to snarl.

The hare was lying on her back, weakly kicking out the last of her life with her hindlegs,
and a stocky, short-nosed, evil, leering, side-striped jackal was standing over her.  He had
done the deed. And our black-back knew that side-stripe, had met him before.  The two families
lived only a few hundred yards apart, and it was Mrs. Side-stripe who was responsible for our
friend's wife's crippled condition at that moment.  This was a typical side-striper, one of
the creeping, hunting-by-surprise-and-pounce sort, and it may be that he had never run down
any prey worth speaking about in his life.  In a way, he was the very opposite from our black-back,
who was mostly legs, and a bit of a sportsman, and, I believe, really delighted in a good ringing
hunt.  Wherefore there was not much cause for surprise at the bitter blood-feud that had gradually
grown up between them, till now things had come pretty well to a head.

The other beast folded back his lean upper-lip till his teeth glistened, and grinned at him--a
menacing grin.  I don't know if he guessed that it was, by all the laws of the chase, the black-back's
hare, but he knew that he had pounced upon her as she passed--pounced like a cat, as was his
way, what time he was profiting by his enemy's absence to keep that enemy's lame wife indoors,
and from hunting even for insects or fruit, by prowling round her lair, and threatening her
with growls.  Perhaps he had designs upon her puppies.  Perhaps his wife had.  And perhaps
Mrs. Mesomelas knew that.  It is difficult to tell.

