'

This important matter being disposed of, there followed a brief silence, which was presently
broken by Harlow.

'Funny name to call a 'ouse, ain't it?' he said.  '"The Cave."  I wonder what made 'em give
it a name like that.'

'They calls 'em all sorts of outlandish names nowadays,' said old Jack Linden.

'There's generally some sort of meaning to it, though,' observed Payne. 'For instance, if a
bloke backed a winner and made a pile, 'e might call 'is 'ouse, "Epsom Lodge" or "Newmarket
Villa".'

'Or sometimes there's a hoak tree or a cherry tree in the garding,' said another man; 'then
they calls it "Hoak Lodge" or "Cherry Cottage".'

'Well, there's a cave up at the end of this garden,' said Harlow with a grin, 'you know, the
cesspool, what the drains of the 'ouse runs into; praps they called it after that.'

'Talking about the drains,' said old Jack Linden when the laughter produced by this elegant
joke had ceased.  'Talking about the drains, I wonder what they're going to do about them;
the 'ouse ain't fit to live in as they are now, and as for that bloody cesspool it ought to
be done away with.'

'So it is going to be,' replied Crass.  'There's going to be a new set of drains altogether,
carried right out to the road and connected with the main.'

Crass really knew no more about what was going to be done in this matter than did Linden, but
he felt certain that this course would be adopted.  He never missed an opportunity of enhancing
his own prestige with the men by insinuating that he was in the confidence of the firm.

'That's goin' to cost a good bit,' said Linden.

'Yes, I suppose it will,' replied Crass, 'but money ain't no object to old Sweater.  'E's got
tons of it; you know 'e's got a large wholesale business in London and shops all over the bloody
country, besides the one 'e's got 'ere.'

Easton was still reading the Obscurer; he was not about to understand exactly what the compiler
of the figures was driving at--probably the latter never intended that anyone should understand--but
he was conscious of a growing feeling of indignation and hatred against foreigners of every
description, who were ruining this country, and he began to think that it was about time we
did something to protect ourselves.  Still, it was a very difficult question: to tell the truth,
he himself could not make head or tail of it.  At length he said aloud, addressing himself
to Crass:

'Wot do you think of this 'ere fissical policy, Bob?'

'Ain't thought much about it,' replied Crass.  'I don't never worry my 'ed about politics.'

'Much better left alone,' chimed in old Jack Linden sagely, 'argyfying about politics generally
ends up with a bloody row an' does no good to nobody.'

At this there was a murmur of approval from several of the others. Most of them were averse
from arguing or disputing about politics.  If two or three men of similar opinions happened
to be together they might discuss such things in a friendly and superficial way, but in a mixed
company it was better left alone.  The 'Fissical Policy' emanated from the Tory party.  That
was the reason why some of them were strongly in favour of it, and for the same reason others
were opposed to it.  Some of them were under the delusion that they were Conservatives: similarly,
others imagined themselves to be Liberals. As a matter of fact, most of them were nothing.
They knew as much about the public affairs of their own country as they did of the condition
of affairs in the planet of Jupiter.

Easton began to regret that he had broached so objectionable a subject, when, looking up from
his paper, Owen said:

'Does the fact that you never "trouble your heads about politics" prevent you from voting at
election times?'

No one answered, and there ensued a brief silence.  Easton however, in spite of the snub he
had received, could not refrain from talking.

'Well, I don't go in for politics much, either, but if what's in this 'ere paper is true, it
seems to me as we oughter take some interest in it, when the country is being ruined by foreigners.'

'If you're going to believe all that's in that bloody rag you'll want some salt,' said Harlow.

The Obscurer was a Tory paper and Harlow was a member of the local Liberal club.  Harlow's
remark roused Crass.

'Wot's the use of talkin' like that?' he said; 'you know very well that the country IS being
ruined by foreigners.  Just go to a shop to buy something; look round the place an' you'll
see that more than 'arf the damn stuff comes from abroad.  They're able to sell their goods
'ere because they don't 'ave to pay no dooty, but they takes care to put 'eavy dooties on our
goods to keep 'em out of their countries; and I say it's about time it was stopped.'

''Ear, 'ear,' said Linden, who always agreed with Crass, because the latter, being in charge
of the job, had it in his power to put in a good--or a bad--word for a man to the boss.  ''Ear,
'ear!  Now that's wot I call common sense.'

Several other men, for the same reason as Linden, echoed Crass's sentiments, but Owen laughed
contemptuously.

'Yes, it's quite true that we gets a lot of stuff from foreign countries,' said Harlow, 'but
they buys more from us than we do from them.'

'Now you think you know a 'ell of a lot,' said Crass.  ''Ow much more did they buy from us
last year, than we did from them?'

Harlow looked foolish: as a matter of fact his knowledge of the subject was not much wider
than Crass's.  He mumbled something about not having no 'ed for figures, and offered to bring
full particulars next day. 

Eugenie and her mother had gone to a corner of the quay from which they could still see the
diligence and wave their white handkerchiefs, to which Charles made
answer by displaying his.

"Ah! mother, would that I had the power of God for a single moment,"
said Eugenie, when she could no longer see her lover's handkerchief.

* * * * *

Not to interrupt the current of events which are about to take place in the bosom of the Grandet
family, it is necessary to cast a forestalling eye upon the various operations which the goodman
carried on in Paris by means of Monsieur des Grassins. A month after the latter's departure
from Saumur, Grandet, became possessed of a certificate of a hundred
thousand francs a year from his investment in the Funds, bought at
eighty francs net.

The particulars revealed at his death by the inventory of his property threw no light upon
the means which his suspicious nature took to remit the price of the investment and receive the
certificate thereof. Maitre Cruchot was of opinion that Nanon, unknown to herself, was the trusty
instrument by which the money was transported; for about this time she was absent five days,
under a pretext of putting things to rights at Froidfond,--as if the goodman were capable of leaving
anything lying about or out of order!

In all that concerned the business of the house of Guillaume Grandet the old cooper's intentions
were fulfilled to the letter. The Bank of France, as everybody knows, affords exact information
about all the large fortunes in Paris and the provinces. The names of des Grassins and Felix
Grandet of Saumur were well known there, and they enjoyed the esteem bestowed on financial
celebrities whose wealth comes from immense and unencumbered territorial possessions. The arrival
of the Saumur banker for the purpose, it was said, of honorably liquidating the affairs of Grandet
of Paris, was enough to avert the shame of protested notes from the memory of the defunct merchant.
The seals on the property were taken off in presence of the creditors, and the notary employed
by Grandet went to work at once on the inventory of the assets. Soon after this, des Grassins
called a meeting of the creditors, who unanimously elected him, conjointly
with Francois Keller, the head of a rich banking-house and one of
those principally interested in the affair, as liquidators, with full
power to protect both the honor of the family and the interests of
the claimants.

The credit of Grandet of Saumur, the hopes he diffused by means of des Grassins in the minds of all concerned,
facilitated the transactions. Not a single creditor proved recalcitrant; no one thought of
passing his claim to his profit-and-loss account; each and all said confidently, "Grandet of
Saumur will pay."

Six months went by. The Parisians had redeemed the notes in circulation as they fell due, and held
them under lock and key in their desks. First result aimed at by the old cooper! Nine months after
this preliminary meeting, the two liquidators distributed forty-seven per cent to each creditor
on his claim. This amount was obtained by the sale of the securities, property, and possessions
of all kinds belonging to the late Guillaume Grandet, and was paid over with scrupulous fidelity.
Unimpeachable integrity was shown in the transaction. The creditors gratefully acknowledged the remarkable
and incontestable honor displayed by the Grandets.

When these praises had circulated for a certain length of time, the
creditors asked for the rest of their money.

It became necessary to write a collective letter to Grandet of Saumur.

"Here it comes!" said the old man as he threw the letter into the fire. "Patience, my good friends!"

In
answer to the proposals contained in the letter, Grandet of Saumur demanded that all vouchers
for claims against the estate of his brother should be deposited with a notary, together with
acquittances for the forty-seven per cent already paid; he made this demand under pretence
of sifting the accounts and finding out the exact condition of the estate. It roused at once
a variety of difficulties.

Generally speaking, the creditor is a species of maniac, ready to
agree to anything one day, on the next breathing fire and slaughter;
later on, he grows amicable and easy-going.

  I shan't arst your leave nor nobody
else's!  Wot the 'ell's it got do with you who I votes for?'

'It has a great deal to do with me.  If you vote for Protection you will be helping to bring
it about, and if you succeed, and if Protection is the evil that some people say is is, I shall
be one of those who will suffer.  I say you have no right to vote for a policy which may bring
suffering upon other people, without taking the trouble to find out whether you are helping
to make things better or worse.'

Owen had risen from his seat and was walking up and down the room emphasizing his words with
excited gestures.

'As for not trying to find out wot side is right,' said Crass, somewhat overawed by Owen's
manner and by what he thought was the glare of madness in the latter's eyes, 'I reads the Ananias
every week, and I generally takes the Daily Chloroform, or the Hobscurer, so I ought to know
summat about it.'

'Just listen to this,' interrupted Easton, wishing to create a diversion and beginning to read
from the copy of the Obscurer which he still held in his hand:

  'GREAT DISTRESS IN MUGSBOROUGH.
  HUNDREDS OUT OF EMPLOYMENT.
  WORK OF THE CHARITY SOCIETY.
  789 CASES ON THE BOOKS.

  'Great as was the distress among the working classes last year,
  unfortunately there seems every prospect that before the winter
  which has just commenced is over the distress will be even more
  acute.

  Already the Charity Society and kindred associations are relieving
  more cases than they did at the corresponding time last year.
  Applications to the Board of Guardians have also been much more
  numerous, and the Soup Kitchen has had to open its doors on Nov. 7th
  a fortnight earlier than usual.  The number of men, women and
  children provided with meals is three or four times greater than
  last year.'

Easton stopped: reading was hard work to him.

'There's a lot more,' he said, 'about starting relief works: two shillings a day for married
men and one shilling for single and something about there's been 1,572 quarts of soup given
to poor families wot was not even able to pay a penny, and a lot more.  And 'ere's another
thing, an advertisement:

  'THE SUFFERING POOR

  Sir: Distress among the poor is so acute that I earnestly ask you
  for aid for The Salvation Army's great Social work on their behalf.
  Some 600 are being sheltered nightly.  Hundreds are found work
  daily.  Soup and bread are distributed in the midnight hours to
  homeless wanderers in London.  Additional workshops for the
  unemployed have been established.  Our Social Work for men, women
  and children, for the characterless and the outcast, is the largest
  and oldest organized effort of its kind in the country, and greatly
  needs help.  £10,000 is required before Christmas Day.  Gifts may be
  made to any specific section or home, if desired.  Can you please
  send us something to keep the work going?  Please address cheques,
  crossed Bank of England (Law Courts Branch), to me at 101, Queen
  Victoria Street, EC.  Balance Sheets and Reports upon application.
          'BRAMWELL BOOTH.'

'Oh, that's part of the great 'appiness an' prosperity wot Owen makes out Free Trade brings,'
said Crass with a jeering laugh.

'I never said Free Trade brought happiness or prosperity,' said Owen.

'Well, praps you didn't say exactly them words, but that's wot it amounts to.'

'I never said anything of the kind.  We've had Free Trade for the last fifty years and today
most people are living in a condition of more or less abject poverty, and thousands are literally
starving.  When we had Protection things were worse still.  Other countries have Protection
and yet many of their people are glad to come here and work for starvation wages.  The only
difference between Free Trade and Protection is that under certain circumstances one might
be a little worse that the other, but as remedies for Poverty, neither of them are of any real
use whatever, for the simple reason that they do not deal with the real causes of Poverty.'

'The greatest cause of poverty is hover-population,' remarked Harlow.

'Yes,' said old Joe Philpot.  'If a boss wants two men, twenty goes after the job: ther's too
many people and not enough work.'

'Over-population!' cried Owen, 'when there's thousands of acres of uncultivated land in England
without a house or human being to be seen. Is over-population the cause of poverty in France?
Is over-population the cause of poverty in Ireland?  Within the last fifty years the population
of Ireland has been reduced by more than half.  Four millions of people have been exterminated
by famine or got rid of by emigration, but they haven't got rid of poverty.  P'raps you think
that half the people in this country ought to be exterminated as well.'

Here Owen was seized with a violent fit of coughing, and resumed his seat.  When the cough
had ceased he say wiping his mouth with his handkerchief and listening to the talk that ensued.

'Drink is the cause of most of the poverty,' said Slyme.

This young man had been through some strange process that he called 'conversion'.  He had had
a 'change of 'art' and looked down with pious pity upon those he called 'worldly' people. 
He  was not 'worldly', he did not smoke or drink and never went to the theatre. He had an extraordinary
notion that total abstinence was one of the fundamental principles of the Christian religion.
It never occurred to what he called his mind, that this doctrine is an insult to the Founder
of Christianity.

'Yes,' said Crass, agreeing with Slyme, 'an' thers plenty of 'em wot's too lazy to work when
they can get it.  Some of the b--s who go about pleading poverty 'ave never done a fair day's
work in all their bloody lives.  Then thers all this new-fangled machinery,' continued Crass.
'That's wot's ruinin' everything.  Even in our trade ther's them machines for trimmin' wallpaper,
an' now they've brought out a paintin' machine.  Ther's a pump an' a 'ose pipe, an' they reckon
two men can do as much with this 'ere machine as twenty could without it.'

'Another thing is women,' said Harlow, 'there's thousands of 'em nowadays doin' work wot oughter
be done by men.'

'In my opinion ther's too much of this 'ere eddication, nowadays,' remarked old Linden.  'Wot
the 'ell's the good of eddication to the likes of us?'

'None whatever,' said Crass, 'it just puts foolish idears into people's 'eds and makes 'em
too lazy to work.'

Barrington, who took no part in the conversation, still sat silently smoking.  Owen was listening
to this pitiable farrago with feelings of contempt and wonder.  Were they all hopelessly stupid?
Had their intelligence never developed beyond the childhood stage?  Or was he mad himself?

'Early marriages is another thing,' said Slyme: 'no man oughtn't to be allowed to get married
unless he's in a position to keep a family.'

'How can marriage be a cause of poverty?' said Owen, contemptuously. 'A man who is not married
is living an unnatural life.  Why don't you continue your argument a little further and say
that the practice of eating and drinking is the cause of poverty or that if people were to
go barefoot and naked there would be no poverty?  The man who is so poor that he cannot marry
is in a condition of poverty already.'

'Wot I mean,' said Slyme, 'is that no man oughtn't to marry till he's saved up enough so as
to 'ave some money in the bank; an' another thing, I reckon a man oughtn't to get married till
'e's got an 'ouse of 'is own.  It's easy enough to buy one in a building society if you're
in reg'lar work.'

At this there was a general laugh.

'Why, you bloody fool,' said Harlow, scornfully, 'most of us is walkin' about 'arf our time.
It's all very well for you to talk; you've got almost a constant job on this firm.  If they're
doin' anything at all you're one of the few gets a show in.  And another thing,' he added with
a sneer, 'we don't all go to the same chapel as old Misery,'

'Old Misery' was Ruston & Co.'s manager or walking foreman.  'Misery' was only one of the nicknames
bestowed upon him by the hands: he was also known as 'Nimrod' and 'Pontius Pilate'.

'And even if it's not possible,' Harlow continued, winking at the others, 'what's a man to
do during the years he's savin' up?'

'Well, he must conquer hisself,' said Slyme, getting red.

'Conquer hisself is right!' said Harlow and the others laughed again.

'Of course if a man tried to conquer hisself by his own strength,' replied Slyme, ''e would
be sure to fail, but when you've got the Grace of God in you it's different.'

'Chuck it, fer Christ's sake!' said Harlow in a tone of disgust. 'We've only just 'ad our dinner!'

'And wot about drink?' demanded old Joe Philpot, suddenly.

''Ear, 'ear,' cried Harlow.  'That's the bleedin'  talk.  I wouldn't mind 'avin 'arf a pint
now, if somebody else will pay for it.'

Joe Philpot--or as he was usually called, 'Old Joe'--was in the habit of indulging freely in
the cup that inebriates.  He was not very old, being only a little over fifty, but he looked
much older.  He had lost his wife some five years ago and was now alone in the world, for his
three children had died in their infancy.  Slyme's reference to drink had roused Philpot's
indignation; he felt that it was directed against himself.  The muddled condition of his brain
did not permit him to take up the cudgels in his own behalf, but he knew that although Owen
was a tee-totaller himself, he disliked Slyme.

'There's no need for us to talk about drink or laziness,' returned Owen, impatiently, 'because
they have nothing to do with the matter. The question is, what is the cause of the lifelong
poverty of the majority of those who are not drunkards and who DO work?  Why, if all the drunkards
and won't-works and unskilled or inefficient workers could be by some miracle transformed into
sober, industrious and skilled workers tomorrow, it would, under the present conditions, be
so much the worse for us, because there isn't enough work for all NOW and those people by increasing
the competition for what work there is, would inevitably cause a reduction of wages and a greater
scarcity of employment.  The theories that drunkenness, laziness or inefficiency are the causes
of poverty are so many devices invented and fostered by those who are selfishly interested
in maintaining the present states of affairs, for the purpose of preventing us from discovering
the real causes of our present condition.'

'Well, if we're all wrong,' said Crass, with a sneer, 'praps you can tell us what the real
cause is?'

'An' praps you think you know how it's to be altered,' remarked Harlow, winking at the others.

'Yes; I do think I know the cause,' declared Owen, 'and I do think I know how it could be altered--'

'It can't never be haltered,' interrupted old Linden.  'I don't see no sense in all this 'ere
talk.  There's always been rich and poor in the world, and there always will be.'

'Wot I always say is there 'ere,' remarked Philpot, whose principal characteristic--apart from
thirst--was a desire to see everyone comfortable, and who hated rows of any kind.  'There ain't
no use in the likes of us trubblin our 'eds or quarrelin about politics.  It don't make a dam
bit of difference who you votes for or who gets in. They're hall the same; workin the horicle
for their own benefit.  You can talk till you're black in the face, but you won't never be
able to alter it.  It's no use worrying.  The sensible thing is to try and make the best of
things as we find 'em: enjoy ourselves, and do the best we can for each other.  Life's too
short to quarrel and we'll hall soon be dead!'

At the end of this lengthy speech, the philosophic Philpot abstractedly grasped a jam-jar and
raised it to his lips; but suddenly remembering that it contained stewed tea and not beer,
set it down again without drinking.

'Let us begin at the beginning,' continued Owen, taking no notice of these interruptions. 
'First of all, what do you mean by Poverty?'

'Why, if you've got no money, of course,' said Crass impatiently.

The others laughed disdainfully.  It seemed to them such a foolish question.

'Well, that's true enough as far as it goes,' returned Owen, 'that is, as things are arranged
in the world at present.  But money itself is not wealth: it's of no use whatever.'

At this there was another outburst of jeering laughter.

'Supposing for example that you and Harlow were shipwrecked on a desolate island, and YOU had
saved nothing from the wreck but a bag containing a thousand sovereigns, and he had a tin of
biscuits and a bottle of water.'

'Make it beer!' cried Harlow appealingly.

'Who would be the richer man, you or Harlow?'

'But then you see we ain't shipwrecked on no dissolute island at all,' sneered Crass.  'That's
the worst of your arguments.  You can't never get very far without supposing some bloody ridclus
thing or other. Never mind about supposing things wot ain't true; let's 'ave facts and common
sense.'

''Ear, 'ear,' said old Linden.  'That's wot we want--a little common sense.'

'What do YOU mean by poverty, then?' asked Easton.

'What I call poverty is when people are not able to secure for themselves all the benefits
of civilization; the necessaries, comforts, pleasures and refinements of life, leisure, books,
theatres, pictures, music, holidays, travel, good and beautiful homes, good clothes, good and
pleasant food.'

Everybody laughed.  It was so ridiculous.  The idea of the likes of THEM wanting or having
such things!  Any doubts that any of them had entertained as to Owen's sanity disappeared.
The man was as mad as a March hare.

'If a man is only able to provide himself and his family with the bare necessaries of existence,
that man's family is living in poverty. Since he cannot enjoy the advantages of civilization
he might just as well be a savage: better, in fact, for a savage knows nothing of what he is
deprived.  What we call civilization--the accumulation of knowledge which has come down to
us from our forefathers--is the fruit of thousands of years of human thought and toil.  It
is not the result of the labour of the ancestors of any separate class of people who exist
today, and therefore it is by right the common heritage of all.  Every little child that is
born into the world, no matter whether he is clever or full, whether he is physically perfect
or lame, or blind; no matter how much he may excel or fall short of his fellows in other respects,
in one thing at least he is their equal--he is one of the heirs of all the ages that have gone
before.'

Some of them began to wonder whether Owen was not sane after all.  He certainly must be a clever
sort of chap to be able to talk like this. It sounded almost like something out of a book,
and most of them could not understand one half of it.

'Why is it,' continued Owen, 'that we are not only deprived of our inheritance--we are not
only deprived of nearly all the benefits of civilization, but we and our children and also
often unable to obtain even the bare necessaries of existence?'

No one answered.

'All these things,' Owen proceeded, 'are produced by those who work. We do our full share of
the work, therefore we should have a full share of the things that are made by work.'

The others continued silent.  Harlow thought of the over-population theory, but decided not
to mention it.  Crass, who could not have given an intelligent answer to save his life, for
once had sufficient sense to remain silent.  He did think of calling out the patent paint-pumping
machine and bringing the hosepipe to bear on the subject, but abandoned the idea; after all,
he thought, what was the use of arguing with such a fool as Owen?

Sawkins pretended to be asleep.

Philpot, however, had suddenly grown very serious.

'As things are now,' went on Owen, 'instead of enjoying the advantages of civilization we are
really worse off than slaves, for if we were slaves our owners in their own interest would
see to it that we always had food and--'

'Oh, I don't see that,' roughly interrupted old Linden, who had been listening with evident
anger and impatience.  'You can speak for yourself, but I can tell yer I don't put MYSELF down
as a slave.'

'Nor me neither,' said Crass sturdily.  'Let them call their selves slaves as wants to.'

At this moment a footstep was heard in the passage leading to the kitchen.  Old Misery! or
perhaps the bloke himself!  Crass hurriedly pulled out his watch.

'Jesus Christ!' he gasped.  'It's four minutes past one!'

Linden frantically seized hold of a pair of steps and began wandering about the room with them.

Sawkins scrambled hastily to his feet and, snatching a piece of sandpaper from the pocket of
his apron, began furiously rubbing down the scullery door.

Easton threw down the copy of the Obscurer and scrambled hastily to his feet.

The boy crammed the Chronicles of Crime into his trousers pocket.

Crass rushed over to the bucket and began stirring up the stale whitewash it contained, and
the stench which it gave forth was simply appalling.

Consternation reigned.

They looked like a gang of malefactors suddenly interrupted in the commission of a crime.

The door opened.  It was only Bundy returning from his mission to the Bookie.

Chapter 2

Nimrod: a Mighty Hunter before the Lord

Mr Hunter, as he was called to his face and as he was known to his brethren at the Shining
Light Chapel, where he was superintendant of the Sunday School, or 'Misery' or 'Nimrod'; as
he was named behind his back by the workmen over whom he tyrannized, was the general or walking
foreman of 'manager' of the firm whose card is herewith presented to the reader:

                            RUSHTON & CO.
                             MUGSBOROUGH
                               -------
            Builders, Decorators, and General Contractors
                         FUNERALS FURNISHED
        Estimates given for General Repairs to House Property
              First-class Work only at Moderate Charges

There were a number of sub-foremen or 'coddies', but Hunter was THE foreman.

He was a tall, thin man whose clothes hung loosely on the angles of his round-shouldered, bony
form.  His long, thin legs, about which the baggy trousers draped in ungraceful folds, were
slightly knock-kneed and terminated in large, flat feet.  His arms were very long even for
such a tall man, and the huge, bony hands were gnarled and knotted. When he removed his bowler
hat, as he frequently did to wipe away with a red handkerchief the sweat occasioned by furious
bicycle riding, it was seen that his forehead was high, flat and narrow.  His nose was a large,
fleshy, hawklike beak, and from the side of each nostril a deep indentation extended downwards
until it disappeared in the dropping moustache that concealed his mouth, the vast extent of
which was perceived only when he opened it to bellow at the workmen his exhortations to greater
exertions.  His chin was large and extraordinarily long.  The eyes were pale blue, very small
and close together, surmounted by spare, light-coloured, almost invisible eyebrows, with a
deep vertical cleft between them over the nose.  His head, covered with thick, coarse brown
hair, was very large at the back; the ears were small and laid close to the head.  If one were
to make a full-face drawing of his cadaverous visage it would be found that the outline resembled
that of the lid of a coffin.

This man had been with Rushton--no one had ever seen the 'Co.'--for fifteen years, in fact
almost from the time when the latter commenced business.  Rushton had at that period realized
the necessity of having a deputy who could be used to do all the drudgery and running about
so that he himself might be free to attend to the more pleasant or profitable matters.  Hunter
was then a journeyman, but was on the point of starting on his own account, when Rushton offered
him a constant job as foreman, two pounds a week, and two and a half per cent of the profits
of all work done.  On the face of it this appeared a generous offer.  Hunter closed with it,
gave up the idea of starting for himself, and threw himself heart and mind into the business.
When an estimate was to be prepared it was Hunter who measured up the work and laboriously
figured out the probably cost.  When their tenders were accepted it was he who superintended
the work and schemed how to scamp it, where possible, using mud where mortar was specified,
mortar where there ought to have been cement, sheet zinc where they were supposed to put sheet
lead, boiled oil instead of varnish, and three coats of paint where five were paid for.  In
fact, scamping the work was with this man a kind of mania.  It grieved him to see anything
done properly.  Even when it was more economical to do a thing well, he insisted from force
of habit on having it scamped.  Then he was almost happy, because he felt that he was doing
someone down.  If there were an architect superintending the work, Misery would square him
or bluff him.  If it were not possible to do either, at least he had a try; and in the intervals
of watching, driving and bullying the hands, his vulture eye was ever on the look out for fresh
jobs.  His long red nose was thrust into every estate agent's office in the town in the endeavour
to smell out what properties had recently changed hands or been let, in order that he might
interview the new owners and secure the order for whatever alterations or repairs might be
required.  He it was who entered into unholy compacts with numerous charwomen and nurses of
the sick, who in return for a small commission would let him know when some poor sufferer was
passing away and would recommend Rushton & Co. to the bereaved and distracted relatives.  By
these means often--after first carefully inquiring into the financial position of the stricken
family--Misery would contrive to wriggle his unsavoury carcass into the house of sorrow, seeking,
even in the chamber of death, to further the interests of Rushton & Co. and to earn his miserable
two and a half per cent.

It was to make possible the attainment of this object that Misery slaved and drove and schemed
and cheated.  It was for this that the workers' wages were cut down to the lowest possible
point and their offspring went ill clad, ill shod and ill fed, and were driven forth to labour
while they were yet children, because their fathers were unable to earn enough to support their
homes.

Fifteen years!

Hunter realized now that Rushton had had considerably the best of the bargain. Madame des Grassins
rang the changes on the peerage and the title of marquise, until, mistaking Eugenie's disdainful
smile for acquiescence, she went about proclaiming that the marriage with "Monsieur Cruchot"
was not nearly as certain as people thought.

"Though Monsieur de Froidfond is fifty," she said, "he does not look older than Monsieur Cruchot.
He is a widower, and he has children, that's true. But then he is
a marquis; he will be peer of France; and in times like these where
you will find a better match?

Fifteen years!

Hunter knew now that he had been used, but he also knew that it was too late to turn back.
He had not saved enough to make a successful start on his own account even if he had felt mentally
and physically capable of beginning all over again, and if Rushton were to discharge him right
now he was too old to get a job as a journeyman.  Further, in his zeal for Rushton & Co. and
his anxiety to earn his commission, he had often done things that had roused the animosity
of rival firms to such an extent that it was highly improbable that any of them would employ
him, and even if they would, Misery's heart failed him at the thought of having to meet on
an equal footing those workmen whom he had tyrannized over and oppressed.  It was for these
reasons that Hunter was as terrified of Rushton as the hands were of himself.

Over the men stood Misery, ever threatening them with dismissal and their wives and children
with hunger.  Behind Misery was Rushton, ever bullying and goading him on to greater excuses
and efforts for the furtherance of the good cause--which was to enable the head of the firm
to accumulate money.

Mr Hunter, at the moment when the reader first makes his acquaintance on the afternoon of the
day when the incidents recorded in the first chapter took place, was executing a kind of strategic
movement in the direction of the house where Crass and his mates were working. Philosophers
who meet the like of Nanon, of Madame Grandet, of Eugenie, have surely a right to say that irony
is at the bottom of the ways of Providence.

After the dinner at which for the first time allusion had been made to Eugenie's marriage, Nanon
went to fetch a bottle of black-currant ratafia from Monsieur Grandet's bed-chamber, and nearly
fell as she came down the stairs.

"You great stupid!" said her master;
"are you going to tumble about like other people, hey?"  There were five men altogether; three of them were standing in a group,
the other two stood each by himself, being apparently strangers to each other and the first
three. The three men who stood together were nearest to Hunter and as the latter approached,
one of them advanced to meet him.

'Good afternoon, sir.'

Hunter replied by an inarticulate grunt, without stopping; the man followed.

'Any chance of a job, sir?'

'Full up,' replied Hunter, still without stopping.  The man still followed, like a beggar soliciting
charity.

'Be any use calling in a day or so, sir?'

'Don't think so,' Hunter replied.  'Can if you like; but we're full up.'

'Thank you, sir,' said the man, and turned back to his friends.

By this time Hunter was within a few yards of one of the other two men, who also came to speak
to him.  This man felt there was no hope of getting a job; still, there was no harm in asking.
Besides, he was getting desperate.  It was over a month now since he had finished up for his
last employer.  It had been a very slow summer altogether. Sometimes a fortnight for one firm;
then perhaps a week doing nothing; then three weeks or a month for another firm, then out again,
and so on.  And  now it was November.  Last winter they had got into debt; that was nothing
unusual, but owing to the bad summer they had not been able, as in other years, to pay off
the debts accumulated in winter. It was doubtful, too, whether they would be able to get credit
again this winter.  In fact this morning when his wife sent their little girl to the grocer's
for some butter the latter had refused to let the child have it without the money.  So although
he felt it to be useless he accosted Hunter.

This time Hunter stopped: he was winded by his climb up the hill.

'Good afternoon, sir.' Hunter did not return the salutation; he had not the breath to spare,
but the man was not hurt; he was used to being treated like that.

'Any chance of a job, sir?'

Hunter did not reply at once.  He was short of breath and he was thinking of a plan that was
ever recurring to his mind, and which he had lately been hankering to put into execution. 
It seemed to him that the long waited for opportunity had come.  Just now Rushton & Co. were
almost the only firm in Mugsborough who had any work.  There were dozens of good workmen out.
Yes, this was the time.  If this man agreed he would give him a start.  Hunter knew the man
was a good workman, he had worked for Rushton & Co. before.  To make room for him old Linden
and some other full-price man could be got rid of; it would not be difficult to find some excuse.

'Well,' Hunter said at last in a doubtful, hesitating kind of way, 'I'm afraid not, Newman.
We're about full up.'

He ceased speaking and remained waiting for the other to say something more.  He did not look
at the man, but stooped down, fidgeting with the mechanism of the bicycle as if adjusting it.

'Things have been so bad this summer,' Newman went on.  'I've had rather a rough time of it.
I would be very glad of a job even if it was only for a week or so.'

There was a pause.  After a while, Hunter raised his eyes to the other's face, but immediately
let them fall again.

'Well,' said he, 'I might--perhaps--be able to let you have a day or two.  You can come here
to this job,' and he nodded his head in the direction of the house where the men were working.
'Tomorrow at seven. Of course you know the figure?' he added as Newman was about to thank him. The
roof and walls are now covered with stone crop and moss, and traveller's
joy, which gives it a variety of color.

The currant bushes are pruned, and the long rose branches are trimmed, and present a blooming
appearance.

This house, with forty acres of land, some rocky and sterile, and some rich meadow and peat,
formed the possessions of the Prestons in Westmoreland. For two hundred years this land had
been theirs. Mr. Preston and his wife were industrious and respectable people. They had two
children, Martha and John. The sister was eight years older than her brother and acted a motherly
part towards him. As her mother had to go to market, to see to the cows and dairy, and to look
after the sheep on the fell, Martha took most of the care of little
Johnny.  This morning he himself
had had no breakfast to speak of, only a cup of tea and some dry bread. These thoughts crowded
upon each other in his mind, but still he hesitated.  Hunter began to move off.

'Well,' he said, 'if you like to start you can come here at seven in the morning.'  Then as
Newman still hesitated he added impatiently, 'Are you coming or not?'

'Yes, sir,' said Newman.

'All right,' said Hunter, affably.  'I'll tell Crass to have a kit ready for you.'

He nodded in a friendly way to the man, who went off feeling like a criminal.

As Hunter resumed his march, well pleased with himself, the fifth man, who had been waiting
all this time, came to meet him.  As he approached, Hunter recognized him as one who had started
work for Rushton & Co early in the summer, but who had left suddenly of his own accord, having
taken offence at some bullying remark of Hunter's.

Hunter was glad to see this man.  He guessed that the fellow must be very hard pressed to come
again and ask for work after what had happened.

'Any chance of a job, sir?'

Hunter appeared to reflect.

'I believe I have room for one,' he said at length.  'But you're such an uncertain kind of
chap.  You don't seem to care much whether you work or not.  You're too independent, you know;
one can't say two words to you but you must needs clear off.'

The man made no answer.

'We can't tolerate that kind of thing, you know,' Hunter added.  'If we were to encourage men
of your stamp we should never know where we are.'

So saying, Hunter moved away and again proceeded on his journey.

When he arrived within about three yards of the gate he noiselessly laid his machine against
the garden fence.  The high evergreens that grew inside still concealed him from the observation
of anyone who might be looking out of the windows of the house.  Then he carefully crept along
till he came to the gate post, and bending down, he cautiously peeped round to see if he could
detect anyone idling, or talking, or smoking.  There was no one in sight except old Jack Linden,
who was rubbing down the lobby doors with pumice-stone and water. Hunter noiselessly opened
the gate and crept quietly along the grass border of the garden path.  His idea was to reach
the front door without being seen, so that Linden could not give notice of his approach to
those within.  In this he succeeded and passed silently into the house.  He did not speak to
Linden; to do so would have proclaimed his presence to the rest.  He crawled stealthily over
the house but was disappointed in his quest, for everyone he saw was hard at work.  Upstairs
he noticed that the door of one of the rooms was closed.

