History of California

By Helen Elliot Bandini

Illustrated By Roy J. Warren

B. Cal. W. P. 16

Preface

This book is an attempt to present the history of California in so simple and interesting a
way that children may read it with pleasure. It does not confine itself to the history of one
section or period, but tells the story of all the principal events from the Indian occupancy
through the Spanish and Mission days, the excitement of the gold discovery, the birth of the
state, down to the latest events of yesterday and to-day. Several chapters, also, are devoted
to the development of California's great industries. The work is designed not only for children,
but also for older people interested in the story of California, including the tourists who
visit the state by the thousand every year.

For her information the writer has depended almost entirely upon source material, seldom making
use of a secondary work. Her connection with the old Spanish families has opened to her unusual
advantages for the study of old manuscripts and for the gathering of recollections of historical
events which she has taken from the lips of aged Spanish residents, always verifying a statement
before using it. She has, also, from long familiarity with the Spanish-speaking people, been
able to interpret truly the life of the Spanish and Mission period.

The illustrator of the history, Mr. Roy J. Warren, has made a careful study of the manuscript,
chapter by chapter. He has also been a faithful student of California and her conditions; his
illustrations are, therefore, in perfect touch with the text and are as true to facts as the
history itself.

The thanks of the author are due not only to a host of writers from whom she has gained valuable
assistance, and some of whose names are among those in the references at the end of the book,
but to others to whom further acknowledgment is due. First of these is Professor H. Morse Stephens,
whose suggestions from the inception of the work until its completion have been of incalculable
advantage, and whose generous offer to read the proof sheets crowns long months of friendly
interest. Secondly, the author is indebted to the faithful and constant supervision of her
sister, Miss Agnes Elliott of the Los Angeles State Normal School, without whose wide experience
as a teacher of history and economics the work could never have reached its present plane.
The author also offers her thanks to Mr. Charles F. Lummis, to whom not only she but all students
of California history must ever be indebted; to Mrs. Mary M. Coman, Miss Isabel Frazee, to
the officers of the various state departments, especially Mr. Lewis E. Aubrey, State Mineralogist,
and Mr. Thomas J. Kirk and his assistant Mr. Job Wood of the educational department; to Miss
Nellie Rust, Librarian of the Pasadena City Library, and her corps of accommodating and intelligent
assistants, and to the librarians of the Los Angeles City Library and State Normal School.

The passages from the Century Magazine quoted in Chapters V-IX are inserted by express permission
of the publishers, the Century Company. Acknowledgment is due, also, to the publishers of the
Overland Monthly for courtesy in permitting the use of copyright material; and to D. Appleton
& Co. for permission to insert selections from Sherman's Memoirs.

Contents

Chapter

    I. The Land and the Name
   II. The Story of the Indians
  III. "The Secret of the Strait"
   IV. The Cross of Santa Fe
    V. Pastoral Days
   VI. The Footsteps of the Stranger
  VII. At the Touch of King Midas
 VIII. The Great Stampede
   IX. The Birth of the Golden Baby
    X. The Signal Gun and the Steel Trail
   XI. That Which Followed After
  XII. "The Groves Were God's First Temples"
 XIII. To All that Sow the Time of Harvest Should be Given
  XIV. The Golden Apples of the Hesperides
   XV. California's Other Contributions to the World's Bill of Fare
  XVI. The Hidden Treasures of Mother Earth
 XVII. From La Escuela of Spanish California to the Schools of the
       Twentieth Century
XVIII. Statistics

Bibliography Index

History of California

Chapter I.

The Land and the Name

Once upon a time, about four hundred years ago, there was published in old Spain a novel which
soon became unusually popular. The successful story of those days was one which caught the
fancy of the men, was read by them, discussed at their gatherings, and often carried with them
when they went to the wars or in search of adventures. This particular story would not interest
readers of to-day save for this passage: "Know that on the right hand of the Indies there is
an island called California, very near the Terrestrial Paradise, and it is peopled by black
women who live after the fashion of Amazons. This island is the strongest in the world, with
its steep rocks and great cliffs, and there is no metal in the island but gold."

There is no doubt that some bold explorer, crossing over from Spain to Mexico and enlisting
under the leadership of the gallant Cortez, sailed the unknown South Sea (the Pacific) and
gave to the new land discovered by one of Cortez's pilots the name of the golden island in
this favorite story.

This land, thought to be an island, is now known to us as the peninsula of Lower California.
The name first appeared in 1542 on the map of Domingo Castillo, and was soon applied to all
the land claimed by Spain from Cape San Lucas up the coast as far north as 441, which was probably
a little higher than any Spanish explorer had ever sailed.

"Sir Francis Drake," says the old chronicle, "was the first Englishman to sail on the back
side of America," and from that time until now California has been considered the back door
of the country. This was natural because the first settlements in the United States were along
the Atlantic seacoast. The people who came from England kept their faces turned eastward, looking
to the Mother Country for help, and watching Europe, and later England herself, as a quarter
from which danger might come, as indeed it did in the war of the Revolution and that of 1812.

During the last few years, however, various events have happened to change this attitude. Through
its success in the late Spanish war the United States gained confidence in its own powers,
while the people of the old world began to realize that the young republic of the western hemisphere,
since it did not hesitate to make war in the interests of humanity, would not be apt to allow
its own rights to be imposed upon. The coming of the Philippine and Hawaiian Islands under
the protection of the United States, the Russo-Japanese war, which opened the eyes of the world
to the strength of Japan and the wisdom of securing its trade, and the action of the United
States in undertaking the building of the Panama Canal, are indications that the Pacific will
in the future support a commerce the greatness of which we of to-day cannot estimate. With
danger from European interference no longer pressing closely upon the nation, President Roosevelt
in 1907 took a decided step in recognizing the importance of the Pacific when he sent to that
coast so large a number of the most modern vessels of the navy. In fact, the nation may now
be said to have faced about, California becoming the front door of our country.

It is well, then, to ask ourselves what we know about the state which is to form part of the
reception room of one of the leading nations of the world.

It is a long strip of territory, bounded on one side by the ocean so well named Pacific, which
gives freshness and moisture to the ever-blowing westerly winds.

On the other side is a mountain range, one thousand miles long, with many of its peaks covered
with perpetual snow, holding in its lofty arms hundreds of ice-cold lakes, its sides timbered
with the most wonderful forests of the world.

Few regions of the same size have so great a range of altitude as California, some portions
of its desert lands being below sea level, while several of its mountains are over ten thousand
feet in height. In its climate, too, there are wide differences as regards heat and cold, although
its coast lands, whether north or south, are much more temperate than the corresponding latitudes
on the Atlantic coast. The difference in the climate of the northern and southern portions
of the state is more marked in the matter of moisture. Most of the storms of California have
their beginning out in the North Pacific Ocean. They travel in a southeasterly direction, striking
the coast far to the north in summer, but in winter extending hundreds of miles farther south.
During November, December, January, and February they often reach as far south as the Mexican
line. Then, only, does southern California have rain. The water necessary for use in the summer
time is gained by irrigation from the mountain streams, which are supplied largely from the
melting snows on the Sierras.

The home lands of the state may be divided into two portions: the beautiful border country
rising from the Pacific in alternate valleys and low rolling foothills to the edge of the Coast
Range; and the great central valley or basin, which lies like a vast pocket almost entirely
encircled by mountains the high Sierras on the east, on the west the low Coast Range. Two large
rivers with their tributaries drain this valley: the San Joaquin, flowing from the south; and
the Sacramento, flowing from the north. Joining near the center of the state, they cut their
way through the narrow passage, the Strait of Carquinez, and casting their waters into the
beautiful Bay of San Francisco, finally reach the ocean through the Golden Gate.

Down from the Sierras, mighty glaciers carried the soil for this central valley, grinding and
pulverizing it as it was rolled slowly along. Many years this process continued. The rain,
washing the mountain sides, brought its tribute in the rich soil and decayed vegetation of
the higher region, until a natural seed bed was formed, where there can be raised in abundance
a wonderful variety of plants and trees. In the coast valleys the soil is alluvial, the fine
washing of mountain rocks; this is mixed in some places with a warmer, firmer loam and in others
with a gravelly soil, which is the best known for orange raising.

The state owes much to her mountains, for not only have they contributed to her fertile soil,
but they hold in their rocky slopes the gold and silver mines which have transformed the whole
region from an unknown wilderness to a land renowned for its riches and beauty. They lift their
lofty peaks high in the air like mighty strongholds, and, shutting out the desert winds, catch
the clouds as they sail in from the ocean, making them pay heavy tribute in fertilizing rain
to the favored land below. Either half is enjoyable, for in the summer, or dry season, fogs
or delightful westerly winds soon moderate a heated spell, and in nearly all parts of the state
the nights are cool; while the rainy, or winter season, changes to balmy springtime as soon
as the storm is over.

In a large portion of the state the climate is such that the inhabitants may spend much of
their time out of doors. As a rule few duties are attended to in the house which can possibly
be performed in the open air. It is growing to be more and more the custom to have, in connection
with a Californian home, a tent bedroom where the year round one or more of the members of
the family sleep, with only a wall of canvas between them and nature.

The vacation time is spent largely in summer camps, at either mountain or seashore, or, quite
often, a pleasant party of one or two families live together, very simply, under the greenwood
tree beside some spring or stream, spending a few weeks in gypsy fashion. While the young folk
grow sturdy and beautiful, the older members of the party become filled with strength and a
joy of living which helps them through the cares and struggles of the rest of the year. This
joy in outdoor life is not, however, a discovery of to-day. The old Spanish families spent
as much time as possible in the courtyard, the house being deserted save at night. When upon
journeys, men, women, and children slept in the open air. Even the clothes-washing period was
turned into a kind of merrymaking. Whole families joined together to spend days in the vicinity
of some stream, where they picnicked while the linen was being cleansed in the running water
and dried on the bushes near by.

Once before, when the world was younger, there was a land similar to this,--sea-kissed, mountain-guarded,
with such gentle climate and soft skies. Its people, who also lived much out of doors at peace
with nature, became almost perfect in health and figure, with mental qualities which enabled
them to give to the world the best it has known in literature and art. What the ancient Greeks
were, the people of California may become; but with an advancement in knowledge and loving-kindness
of man toward man which heathen Athens never knew.

What will be the result of this outdoor life cannot yet be told; climate has always had an
active influence in shaping the character and type of a people. With a climate mild and healthful,
yet bracing; with a soil so rich that the touch of irrigation makes even the sandiest places
bloom with the highest beauty of plant, tree, and vine; with an ocean warm and gentle, and
skies the kindliest in the world,--there is, if we judge by the lesson history teaches, a promise
of a future for California greater and more noble than the world has yet known.

Chapter II.

The Story of the Indians

"Run, Cleeta, run, the waves will catch you." Cleeta scudded away, her naked little body shining
like polished mahogany. She was fleet of foot, but the incoming breakers from the bosom of
the great Pacific ran faster still; and the little Indian girl was caught in its foaming water,
rolled over and over, and cast upon the sandy beach, half choked, yet laughing with the fun of it.

"Foolish Cleeta, you might have been drowned; that was a big wave. What made you go out so
far?" said Gesnip, the elder sister.

"I found such a lot of mussels, great big ones, I wish I could go back and get them," said
the little one, looking anxiously at the water.

"The waves are coming in higher and higher and it is growing late," said Gesnip; "besides,
I have more mussels already than you and I can well carry. The boys have gone toward the river
mouth for clams. They will be sure to go home the other way."

Cleeta ran to the basket and looked in.

"I should think there were too many for us to carry," she said, as she tried with all her strength
to lift it by the carry straps. "What will you do with them; throw some back into the water?"

"No, I don't like to do that," answered her sister, frowning, "for it has been so long since
we have had any. The wind and the waves have been too high for us to gather any. Look, Cleeta,
look; what are those out on the water? I do believe they are boats."

"No," said the little girl; "I see what you mean, but boats never go out so far as that."

"Not tule boats," said Gesnip, "but big thick one made out of trees; that is the kind they
have at Santa Catalina, the island where uncle lives. It has been a long time since he came
to see us, not since you were four years old, but mother is always looking for him."

The children gazed earnestly seaward at a fleet of canoes which were making for the shore.
"Do you think it is uncle?" asked Cleeta.

"Yes," replied her sister, uncertainly, "I think it may be." Then, as the sunlight struck full
on the boats "Yes, yes, I am sure of it, for one is red, and no on else has a boat of that
color; all others are brown."

"Mother said he would bring abalone when he came," cried Cleeta, dancing from one foot to the
other; "and she said they are better than mussels or anything else for soup."

"He will bring fish," said Gesnip, "big shining fish with yellow tails."

"Mother said he would bring big blue ones with hard little seams down their sides," said Cleeta.

Meantime the boats drew nearer. They were of logs hollowed out until they were fairly light,
but still seeming too clumsy for safe seagoing craft. In each were several men. One sat in
the stern and steered, the others knelt in pairs, each man helping propel the boat by means
of a stick some four feet long, more like a pole than a paddle, which he worked with great
energy over the gunwale.

"I am afraid of them," said Cleeta, drawing close to her sister. "They do not look like the
people I have seen. Their faces are the color of the kah-hoom mother weaves in her baskets.
There are only three like us, and they all have such strange clothes."

"Do not be afraid," said Gesnip. "I see uncle; he is one of the dark ones like ourselves. The
island people have yellow skins."

The time was the year 1540, and the people, the Californians of that day. The men in the boat
were mostly from the island of Santa Catalina, and were fairer, with more regular features,
than the inhabitants of the mainland, who in southern California were a short, thick-set race,
with thick lips, dark brown skin, coarse black hair, and eyes small and shining like jet-black
beads. They were poorly clothed in winter; in summer a loin cloth was often all that the men
wore, while the children went naked a large part of the year.

With wonderful skill the badly shaped boats were guided safely over the breakers until their
bows touched the sand. Then the men leaped out and, half wading, half swimming, pulled them
from the water and ran them up on the beach.

The little girls drew near and stood quietly by, waiting to be spoken to. Presently the leading
man, who was short, dark, and handsomely dressed in a suit of sealskin ornamented with abalone
shell, turned to them.

"Who are these little people?" he asked, in a kind voice.

"We are the children of Cuchuma and Macana," replied Gesnip, working her toes in and out of
the soft sand, too shy to look her uncle in the face.

"Children of my sister, Sholoc is glad to see you," said the chief, laying his hand gently
on Cleeta's head. "Your mother, is she well?"

"She is well and looking for you these many moons," said Gesnip.

The men at once began unloading the boats. The children watched the process with great interest,
Abalone in their shells, a dainty prized then as well as now, fish, yellowtail and bonito,
filled to the brim the large baskets which the men slung to their backs, carrying them by means
of a strap over the forehead. On their heads they placed ollas, or water jars, of serpentine
from quarries which may be seen in Santa Catalina to-day, the marks of the tools of workmen
of, that time still in the rocks.

There were also strings of bits of abalone shell which had been punctured and then polished,
and these Sholoc hung around his neck.

"Uncle," exclaimed Gesnip, touching one of these strings, "how much money! You have grown rich
at Santa Catalina. What will you buy?"

"Buy me a wife, perhaps," was the reply. "I will give two strings for a good wife. Do you know
any worth so much?"

"No," said the girl, stoutly. "I don't know any worth two whole strings of abalone. You can
get a good wife for much less."

The men, who had succeeded in loading the contents of the boats on their heads and backs, now
marched away, in single file, crossing the heavy sand dunes slowly, then mounting the range
of foothills beyond. The children followed. Gesnip had her basket bound to her head by a strap
round her forehead; but, though her uncle had taken out part of the contents, it was a heavy
load for the child.

As they neared the top of the hill, Sholoc, who was ahead, lifted his hand and motioned them
to stop.

"Hush," he said softly, "elk." Swiftly the men slipped off their loads and with bows in hand
each one crept flat on his belly over the hill crest. Gesnip and Cleeta peeped through the
high grass. Below them was a wide plain, dotted with clumps of bushes, and scattered over it
they could see a great herd of elk, whose broad, shining antlers waved above the grass and
bushes upon which they were feeding.

"Are those elk too?" asked Cleeta, presently, pointing toward the foothills at their left.

"No," replied her sister, "I think those are antelope. I like to see them run. How funny their
tails shake. But watch the men; they are going to shoot."

As she spoke, four of the hunters, who had crept well up toward the game, rose to their feet,
holding their bows horizontally, not perpendicularly. These weapons, which were made of cedar
wood, were about four feet in length, painted at the ends black or dark blue, the middle, which
was almost two inches broad, being wrapped with elk sinew. The strings also were of sinew.
The quiver which each man carried at his side was made from the skin of a wild cat or of a
coyote. A great hunter like Sholoc might make his quiver from the tails of lions he had killed.
Projecting from the quiver were the bright-feathered ends of the arrows, which were of reed
and were two or three feet long, with points of bone, flint, or obsidian.

The hunters, knowing how hard it was to kill large game, had chosen their arrows carefully,
taking those that had obsidian points. Almost at the same moment they let fly their shafts.
Three elk leaped into the air. One tumbled over in a somersault which broke one of its antlers,
and then lay dead, shot through the heart by Sholoc. Another took a few leaps, but a second
arrow brought it to its knees. Then it sank slowly over upon its side; but it struck so fiercely
at the hunter who ran up to kill it with his horn knife that he drew back and shot it again.

"Where is the third elk?" asked Cleeta, looking around.

"Over there," said Gesnip, pointing across the plain.

"Then they have lost it," said the child, with disappointment.

"No, I think not. It is wounded. I saw the blood on its side," said the sister. "See, one of
the men is following it, and it is half a mile behind the herd. I am sure he will get it."

"This has been a lucky day," said Gesnip. "So much food. Our stomachs will not ache with hunger
for a long time."

"That is because mother wove a game basket to Chinigchinich so he would send food," said Cleeta.

By the time the party had traveled two miles, Gesnip, with her load, and Cleeta, whose bare
brown legs were growing very tired, lagged behind.

"O dear," said the elder sister, "we shall surely be too late to go into camp with uncle."
Just then a whoop sounded behind them, and a boy of thirteen, dressed in a rabbit-skin shirt,
carrying a bow in his hand, came panting up to them.

"Payuchi," said Gesnip, eagerly, "carry my basket for me and I will tell you some good news."

"No," replied Payuchi, shaking his head, "it is a girl's place to carry the basket."

"Just this little way, and it is such good news" urged Gesnip. "It will, make your heart glad."

"Very well, then, tell it quickly," said the boy, changing the basket of mussels to his own
broad back.

"Sholoc has come from Santa Catalina with baskets of abalone and fish, and with ollas all speckled,
and strings of money. He is near the top of the grade now. Upon hearing the good news the lad
darted away at a great pace, his sisters following as fast as they could. Sholoc and his party
had stopped to rearrange their loads, so the children overtook them at the head of the trail
leading to their home.

"Below them was a valley dotted with live oaks, and along the banks of the stream that ran
through it was a thick growth of alders, sycamores, and willows. At the foot of the trail,
near the water, was a cluster of what looked like low, round straw stacks. No straw stacks
were they, however, but houses, the only kind of homes known in southern California at that time.

"It was the Indian settlement where Gesnip, Cleeta, and Payuchi lived, and of which their father,
Cuchuma, was chief. The jacals, or wigwams, were made of long willow boughs, driven into the
ground closely in a circle, the ends bent over and tied together with deer sinews. They were
covered with a thatching of grass that, when dry, made them look like straw stacks.

"Sholoc stepped to the-edge of the bluff and gave a long, quavering cry which could be heard
far in the still evening air. Instantly out of the group of jacals came a crowd of men and
boys, who gave answering cries."

"I am glad they have a fire," said Cleeta, as she saw the big blaze in the middle of the settlement,
"I am so cold."

"Take my hand and let's run," said Gesnip, and partly running and partly sliding, they followed
the men of the party, who, notwithstanding their heavy loads, were trotting down the steep trail.

They were met at the foot of the grade by a crowd which surrounded them, all chattering at
once. Sholoc told of the elk, and a number of men started off on the run to bring in the big
game. As the visitors entered camp, Macana, a kind-faced woman, better dressed than most of
her tribe, came forward. She placed her hand on Sholoc's shoulder, her face lighting up with
love and happiness.

"You are welcome, brother," she said.

"The sight of you is good to my eyes, sister," an answered Sholoc. That was all the greeting,
although the two loved each other well. Macana took the basket from Payuchi's back.

"Come," she called to Gesnip, "and help me wash the mussels." Then, as she saw the younger
girl shivering as she crouched over the fire, "Cleeta, you need not be cold any longer; your
rabbit skin dress is done. Go into the jacal and put it on." Cleeta obeyed with dancing eyes.

Gesnip followed her mother to the stream.

"Take this," said Macana, handing her an openwork net or bag, "and hold it while I empty in
some of the mussels. Now lift them up and down in the water to wash out the sand. That will
do; put them into this basket, and I will give you some more."

Meantime some of the women had taken a dozen or more fish from Sholoc's baskets, and removing
their entrails with bone knives, wrapped them in many thicknesses of damp grass and laid them
in the hot ashes and coals to bake.

When the mussels were all cleaned, Macana emptied them into a large basket half filled with
water, and threw in a little acorn meal and a handful of herbs. Then, using two green sticks
for tongs, she drew out from among the coals some smooth gray stones which had become very
hot. Brushing these off with a bunch of tules, she lifted them by means of a green stick having
a loop in the end which fitted round the stones, flinging them one by one into the basket in
which were the mussels and water. Immediately the water, heated by the stones, began to boil,
and when the soup was ready, she set the basket down beside her own jacal and called her children
to her. Payuchi, Gesnip, Cleeta, and their little four-year-old brother, Nakin, gathered about
the basket, helping themselves with abalone shells, the small holes of which their mother had
plugged with wood.

"Isn't father going to have some first?" asked Payuchi, before they began the meal.

"Not this time; he will eat with Sholoc and the men when the fish are ready," replied his mother.

"This is good soup," said Gesnip. "I am glad I worked hard before the water came up. But, Payuchi,
didn't you and Nopal get any clams?"

"Yes," said her brother, making a face; he had dipped down where the stones were hottest and
the soup thickest, and had taken a mouthful that burned him. "Yes, we got some clams, more
than I could carry; but Nopal was running races with the other boys and would not come, so
I left him to bring them. He will lose his fish dinner if he doesn't hurry."

"Mother," said Cleeta, "may we stay up to the fish bake?"

"No," answered her mother. "You and Nakin must go to bed, but I will save some for your breakfast.
You are tired, Cleeta."

"Yes, I am tired," said the little girl, leaning her head against her mother's shoulder, "but
I am warm in my rabbit-skin dress. We all have warm dresses now. Please tell me a good-night
story," she begged. "We have been good and brought in much food."

"Yes, tell us how the hawk and coyote made the sun," said Gesnip.

"Very well," said the mother, "only you must be quite still."

"It was in the beginning of all things, and a bowl of darkness, blacker than the pitch lining
of our water basket, covered the earth. Man, when he would go abroad, fell against man, against
trees, against wild animals, even against Lollah, the bear, who would, in turn, hug the unhappy
one to death. Birds flying in the air came together and fell struggling to the earth. All was
confusion."

"Once the hawk, by chance, flew in the face of the coyote. Instead of fighting about it as
naughty children might, they, like people of good manners, apologized many times. Then they
talked over the unhappy state of things and determined to remedy the evil. The coyote first
gathered a great heap of dried tules, rolled them together into a ball, and gave them to the
hawk, with some pieces of flint.

"The hawk next flew back for another ball to rule the night, but the coyote had no tule gathered,
and the hawk hurried him so that some damp stems were mixed in. The hawk flew with this ball
into the sky and set it afire but because of the green tules it burned with only a dim light;
and this, children, is our moon, ruler of the night."

"That is a fine story," said Payuchi. "I am glad I did not live when there was no light."

"Tell us how the coyote danced with the star," said Gesnip.

"No," replied the mother, "another time we shall see. Now I shall sing to coax sleep to tired
eyes, and the little ones will go to bed." And this was what she sang: "Pah-high-nui-veve,
veve, veve, shumeh, veve, veve, veve, shumeh, Pah-high-nui-veve," and so on, repeating these
words over and over until Cleeta and Nakin were sound asleep. Then she laid them on their tule
mats, which were spread on the floor of the jacal, where baby Nahal, close wrapped in his cocoon-shaped
cradle, had been a long time sleeping.

"Mother," said Gesnip, coming into the jacal, "they have brought in the elk. Don't you want
something from them?"

"Yes," replied Macana, "I will go and see about it. I want one of the skins to make your father
a warm hunting dress."

The Indians who had gone after the elk had skinned and cut them up where they lay, as they
were so large that the burden had to be distributed among a number of carriers. Macana found
Sholoc busy portioning out parts of the elk. As he had a fine seal-skin suit himself, he gladly
gave her the skin of the deer which he had shot.

"Isn't that a big one?" said Payuchi. "It will make father a fine hunting suit, it is so thick."
Gesnip was loaded down with some of the best cuts of the meat to take to her father's jacal.
Cuchuma himself began removing the tendons from the legs, to cure for bowstrings, and to wrap
a new bow he was going to make.

"Here, Nopal," said Sholoc to his oldest nephew, a lad of fifteen, "I will give you a piece
of the antler and you can grind it down and make yourself a hunting knife. It is time you ceased
to play and became a hunter. I had killed much game when I was your age."

"Will you give me some of the brains that I may finish tanning a deerskin? I have been waiting
to finish it until I could get some brains, but it has been a long time since any one has brought
in big game," said Macana.

"Yes," answered Sholoc, "you shall have them. Payuchi, hand me my elk-horn ax so that I can
split open the head, and you can take the brains to the jacal." Soon not a piece of meat, a
bit of skin, tendon, or bone, was left. All was put to use by these people of the forest. And
now the feast was ready. The women had roasted many pieces of elk's meat over the coals. The
fish had been taken from under the hot ashes, the half burned grass removed from around them,
and the fish broken into pieces and put in flat baskets shaped like platters. There were also
pieces of elk meat and cakes of acorn meal baked on hot stones.

As was the custom with the Indians, the men were served first. Payuchi watched anxiously as
his father and the other men took large helpings from the baskets.

"Do you think there will be enough for us to have any?" he asked Gesnip. "I am so hungry and
they are eating so much. If I were a man, I should remember about the women and children."

"No; you wouldn't if you were a man; men never do," answered Gesnip. "But you need not worry,
there is plenty. Mother said there would be some left for breakfast."

"Wait for that till I get through," said Payuchi, laughing. After all had eaten a hearty meal,
more than for many weeks they had been able to have at any one time, the tired women each gathered
her children together and took them to her own jacal, leaving the men sitting around the camp
fire. Payuchi, who tumbled to sleep as soon as his head touched his sleeping mat, was wakened
by some one pulling his rabbit-skin coat, which he wore nights as well as days.

"Payuchi," said a voice, "wake up."

"I have not been asleep," answered the boy, stoutly, as he rubbed his eyes to get them open.
"What do you want, Nopal?" for he saw his brother speaking to him.

"Hush, do not waken mother," said Nopal, speaking very softly. "I know that the men will make
an offering to Chinigchinich. I am going to watch them. We are old enough, at least I am. Do
you want to come?"

A star shone in at the top of the jacal, and Payuchi gazed up at it, blinking, while he pulled
his thoughts together.

"They will punish us if they find us out," said he at length.

"But we won't let them find us out, stupid one," replied his brother, impatiently.

"What if Chinigchinich should be angry with us? He does not like to have children in the ceremony
of the offering," said Payuchi.

"I will give him my humming-bird skin, and you shall give him your mountain quail head; then
he will be pleased with us," answered Nopal.

"All right," said the boy; "I do not like very well to part with that quail head, but perhaps
it is a good thing to do."

Creeping softly from the jacal, the boys crouched in the shade of a willow bush and watched
the men by the camp fire.

"They are standing up. They are just going," said Payuchi, "and every one has something in
his hand. Father has two bows; I wonder why."

"I think he is going to make an offering of the new bow to Chinigchinich," answered Nopal.
"I thought he was going to keep it and give me his old one," he added, with some disappointment.

"What are they offering for?" asked the young brother.

"For rain," said Nopal. "See, they are going now." In single file the men walked swiftly away,
stepping so softly that not a twig cracked.

After a little the boys followed, slipping from bush to bush that they might not be discovered.
They had walked about a mile, when they came to thicker woods with bigger trees and saw a light
ahead of them. Nopal laid his hand on his brother to stop him. Peeping through a scrub-oak
bush, they looked down into a little glade arched over with great live oaks. In the middle
of the opening they saw, by the light of a low fire, a small cone-shaped hut. Beside it stood
a gigantic figure painted and adorned with shells, feathers, rattlesnake skins, and necklaces
of bone.

"Come back," whispered Payuchi, his teeth chattering with fear. "It is Chinigchinich himself;
he will see us, and we shall die."

"No," answered Nopal, "it is only Nihie, the medicine man. He looks so tall because of his
headdress. It is made of framework of dried tules covered with feathers and fish bladders.
I saw it one day in his jacal, and it is as tall as I am. That jacal beside him is the vanquech
[temple], and I think there is something awful there. You see if there isn't. Hush, now! Squat
down. Here they come."

In a procession the men came into the opening, and, stalking solemnly by, each cast down at
the door of the temple an offering of some object which he prized. Cuchuma gave a bone knife
which he greatly valued, and a handsome new bow. Sholoc gave a speckled green stone olla from
Santa Catalina and a small string of money; but these were chiefs' offerings. The other gifts
were simpler--shells, acorn meal, baskets, birds' skins, but always something for which the
owner cared.

At last the medicine man, satisfied with the things offered which became his own when the ceremony
was over, stooped and drew forth the sacred emblem from the temple. It was not even an idol,
only a fetich composed of a sack made from the skin of a coyote, the head carefully preserved
and stuffed, while the body was dressed smooth of hair and adorned with hanging shells and
tufts of birds' feathers. A bundle of arrows protruded from the open mouth, giving it a fierce
appearance. While Nihie held it up, the men circled round once again, this time more rapidly,
and as they passed the medicine man, each gave a spring into the air, shooting an arrow upward
with all his force. When the last man had disappeared under the trees, Nihie replaced the skin
in the temple, put out the fire, and, singing a kind of chant, he led the men back to their
jacals. The boys stood up. Payuchi shivered and drew a long breath.

"We must get away now; Nihie will be back soon to get the offerings," said Nopal.

"But first we must offer our gifts, or Chinigchinich will be angry," said Payuchi.

"Come on, then," said the brother; so, stealing softly down the hillside, the boys cast their
offerings on the pile in front of the hut and ran away, taking a roundabout path home, that
they might not meet the medicine man returning.

"We must hurry to get in the jacal before father," said Nopal, suddenly. "I didn't think of
that. Run, Payuchi, run faster." But they were in time after all, and were stretched out on
their mats some minutes before their father and Sholoc came in.

Macana's first duty in the morning was to attend to the baby, whose wide-open black eyes gave
the only sign that it was awake. She unfastened it from the basket and unwrapped it, rubbing
the little body over with its morning bath of grease until the firm skin shone as if varnished.
When it had nursed and was comfortable, she put the little one back in its cradle basket, which
she leaned up against the side of the hut, where the little prisoner might see all that was
going on.

Instead of the usual breakfast of acorn meal mush, the children had a plentiful meal of fish
which their mother had saved from the feast of the night before.

"I didn't think any one could catch so many fish as uncle brought last night," said Cleeta,
as she helped herself to a piece of yellowtail.

"Yes, they do, though," said Payuchi. "Last night, after supper, uncle told the men some fine
stories. I think he has been in places which none of our people have ever seen.

"He told us that once he journeyed many moons toward the land of snow and ice until he came
to the country of the Klamath tribe, where he stayed a long time. He said that when they fish
they drive posts made of young trees into the bottom of the river and then weave willow boughs
in and out until there is a wall of posts and boughs clear across the stream. Then the big
red fish come up from the great water into the river. They come, uncle said, so many no one
can count them, and the ones behind push against those in front until they are all crowded
against the wall, and then the Klamath men catch them with spears and nets until there is food
enough for all, and many fish to dry."

"I should like to see that. What else did he tell you?" asked Gesnip.

"He said he visited one place where the great salt water comes into the land and is so big
it takes many days to journey round it. Here the people eat fish, clams, and mussels instead
of acorns and roots. On the shore they have their feasting ground where they go to eat and
dance and tell big stories, and; sometimes to make an offering. So many people go there, uncle
said, that the shells they have left make a hill, a hill just of shells that is many steps
high. From the top of it one may look over the water, which is so long no eye can see the end
of it."

"What else did you hear?" asked Gesnip.

"Nothing more, for mother called me," replied her brother. "I should like to hear more of those
stories, though."

"Mother," asked Gesnip, as she finished her breakfast, "when am I to begin to braid mats for
the new jacal?"

"Soon," replied Macana. "This morning you and Payuchi must gather the tule. Have a large pile
when I come home." So saying, the mother strapped the baby on her back and, accompanied by
the younger children, went out with other women of the tribe to gather the white acorns from
the oaks on the highlands pear the mountains.

The December wind, from the snow-capped peaks, chilled and cut with its icy breath their scantily
clothed bodies, but for hours they worked picking up the scattered nuts. The labors of an Indian
mother ceased only while she slept.

"Come, Payuchi," said Gesnip, "let us go down to the river and get tules."

"All right," replied the boy, readily. "Sholoc is going down too. He is going to show the men
how to make log canoes like his instead of the tule canoes our people use. But I like the tule
canoes, because I can use my feet for paddles." When they reached the river, which was really
a lagoon or arm of the sea, the children stopped to watch the men at work. A large log, washed
down from the mountains by some flood, lay on the bank. It was good hard wood, and the children
saw that it was smoking in three places.

"This is going to make two canoes, but neither one will be so big, as uncle's," said Payuchi.

"How can it make two canoes if they burn it up?" asked his sister.

"You are stupid, Gesnip," said her brother. "Don't you see they are burning it to separate
it into two parts? Then they will burn each log into the shape of a boat, finishing it up with
axes of bone or horn. Uncle told me how they did it."

"Why have they put the green bark on the top of the log?"

"I think it is to keep it from burning along the edge; don't you see? And then there are wider
pieces to protect it at the ends. See how they watch the fire and beat it out in one place
and then in another."

"Why does it burn so fast?" asked Gesnip.

"Because they have daubed it with pitch. Can't you smell it?" said the boy, sniffing.

"Yes, I can smell it," replied his sister. "But come now and help me gather tules. Father is
going to burn down our house and build a new one for winter, and I must make a tule rug for
each one of you for beds in the new home. It will take a great many tule stems."

"It is cold to wade," said Payuchi, stepping into the water at the edge of the river.

"Yes," answered Gesnip, "I don't like to gather tules in winter."

The children pulled up the long rough stems one by one until they had a large pile.

"I think we have enough," said Payuchi, after they had been working about two hours.

"Yes, I think so too," said his sister. "My back aches, my hands are sore, and my feet are
so cold." Payuchi brought some wild grapevine with which he tied the tule into two bundles,
fastening the larger upon his sister's back; for with his people the women and girls were the
burden bearers, and a grown Indian would not do any work that his wife could possibly do for him.

After they had traveled a little way on the homeward path, Gesnip stopped.

"Don't go so fast, Payuchi," she begged. "This bundle is so large it nearly tumbles me over."

"Just hurry a little until we get to the foot of the hill yonder where Nopal and the other
big boys are playing, and you can rest while I watch the game," answered her brother. Gesnip
struggled on, bending under the weight and size of her awkward burden until, with a sigh of
relief, she seated herself on a stone to rest while Payuchi, throwing his bundle on the ground,
stood up to watch the boys.

"See, Nopal is It," he said. Nopal, coming forward, stooped low and rolled a hoop along the
ground, which the boys had pounded smooth and hard for the game.

As the hoop rolled another boy stepped forward and tried to throw a stick through it, but failed.
Then all the players pointed their fingers at him and grunted in scorn. Again Nopal rolled
the hoop, and this time the boy threw through the ring, and all the boys, and Payuchi too,
gave whoops of delight.

The children watched the game until Gesnip said that they must go on, for their mother would
be home and want them. When they returned, Macana was warming herself by the fire where the
men were sitting.

"See our tule; is it not a great deal?" asked the children, showing their bundles.

"Yes, but not enough," replied their mother. "You will have to go out another day."

The women, who had been working all the morning gathering acorns, now squatted near the fire
and began grinding up the nuts which had been already dried.

"Gesnip," called her mother, "bring me the grinding stones." The girl went to the jacal and
brought two stones, one a heavy bowlder with a hollow in its top, which had been made partly
by stone axes, but more by use; the other stone fitted into this hollow.

"Now bring me the basket of roasted grasshoppers," said the mother. Taking a handful of grasshoppers,
Macana put them into the hollow in the larger stone, and with the smaller stone rubbed them
to a coarse powder. This powder she put into a small basket which Gesnip brought her.

"I am glad we caught the grasshoppers. They taste better than acorn meal mush," said Payuchi.

"How many grasshoppers there are in the fall," said Gesnip, "and so many rabbits, too."

"We had such a good time at the rabbit drive," said Payuchi.

"And such a big feast afterwards, nearly as good as last night," said Gesnip.

"Tell me about the rabbit drive," said Cleeta, squatting down beside the children in front
of the fire.

"It was in the big wash up the river toward the mountains," began Payuchi. "You have seen the
rabbits running to hide in a bunch of grass and cactus when you go with mother to the mountains
for acorns, haven't you?"

Cleeta nodded. "Not this winter, though. We saw only two to-day," she said.

"That is because of the drive," said her brother. "It was in the afternoon, with the wind blowing
from the ocean, and all the men who could shoot best with bow and arrow, or throw the spear
well, stood on the other side of the wash."

"Father was there," said Cleeta.

"Yes, and many others," said Payuchi. "Then some of the men and all of us boys got green branches
of trees and came down on this side of the wash. Nopal started the fire. It burned along in
the grass slowly at first, and when it came too near the jacals on one side or the woods on
the other, we would beat it out with the branches, but soon it ran before the wind into the
cactus and bunch grass. The rabbits were frightened out and ran from the fire as fast as they
could, and in a few minutes they were right at the feet of father and the other hunters. They
killed forty before the smoke made them run too."

"My dress was made of their skin," said the little girl, smoothing her gown lovingly. "It keeps
me so warm."

"Did the fire burn long?" asked Gesnip.

"No, we beat it out, or it would have gone up the wash into the live oaks; then we boys should
have been well punished for our carelessness."

Here their mother called to them.

"Payuchi," she said, "put away this basket of grasshopper meal. And, Gesnip, go to the jacal
and find me the coils for basket weaving."

"What shall I bring?" asked Gesnip.

"The large bundle of chippa that is soaking in a basket, and the big coil of yellow kah-hoom
and the little one of black tsuwish which are hanging up, and bring me my needle and bone awl."

"Do you want the coil of millay?"

"No, I shall need no red to-day."

Squatted on the ground, where she could feel the warmth of the fire on her back, but where
the heat could not dry her basket materials, Macana began her work. Taking a dripping chippa,
or willow bough, from the basket where it had been soaking, she dried it on leaves and wound
it tightly in a close coil the size of her thumbnail, then spatted it together until it seemed
no longer a cord, but a solid piece of wood. Thus she made the base of her basket; then, threading
her needle, which was but a horny cactus stem set in a head of hardened pitch, she stitched
in and out over the upper and under the lower layer, drawing her thread firmly each time. The
thread was the creamy, satin-like kah-hoom. Round and round she coiled the chippa, the butt
of one piece overlapping the tip of another, while with her needle she covered all with the
smoothly drawn kah-hoom. After a time she laid the kah-hoom aside for a stitch or two of the
black root of the tule, called tsuwish.

The children had watched the starting of the basket, then had begun a game of match, with white
and black pebbles. After a time Gesnip, looking up from her play, exclaimed, as she saw the
black diamond pattern the weaver was making:--

"Mother, why are you weaving a rattlesnake basket?"

"I am making it to please Chinigchinich that he may smile upon me and guard you, children,
and Cuchuma from the bite of the rattlesnake. There are so many of them here this year, and
I fear for you."

"Thank you, mother," said Gesnip. "If Titas's mother had made a black diamond basket, maybe
the snake would not have bitten her."

"I think Chinigchinich does smile upon you," said Payuchi, "for when we were so hungry in the
month of roots [October] you wove him the hunting basket with the pattern of deer's antlers,
trimmed with quail feathers, and see how much food we have had: first the rabbits, then the
grasshoppers, and now the fish and elk."

"While you work tell us how the first baby basket was made," begged Cleeta. My eyes blurred when
I read:

"Personal. Miss Peggy Talbert, Eastridge. (Kindness of Miss Alice Talbert.)"

"What shall I do with it?" I asked, controlling my agitation.

"Deliver it to her, if you please, as quickly as possible. I thought of everything else. I never
thought of this."

"Never thought of--"

"That she might not have got it."

"Now then, Mr. Goward," I ventured, still speaking very gently, "do
you mind telling me what you took that 5.40 train for?"

"Why, because I didn't get an answer from the letter!" exclaimed Harry, raising his voice for
the first time. "A man doesn't write a letter such as that more than
once in a lifetime.

It was a very important letter.

I told her everything. I explained everything. I felt I ought to have a hearing. If she wanted to
throw me over (I don't deny she had the right to) I would rather she had taken some other way
than--than to ignore such a letter. I waited for an answer to that letter until quarter-past
five. I just caught the 5.40 train and went to my aunt's house, the one--you know my uncle
died the other day--I have been there ever since. By-the-way, Mrs. Price, if anything else comes
up, and if you have any messages for me, I shall be greatly obliged if you will take my address."

He
handed me his card with an up-town street and number, and I snapped
it into the inner pocket of my wallet.

"Do you think," demanded Harry Goward, outright, "that she will ever forgive me, REALLY forgive
me?"

"That is for you to find out," I answered, smiling comfortably; for
I could not possibly have Harry think that any of us--even an unpopular
elder sister--could be there to fling Peggy at the young man's head.

"That is between you and Peggy."

"When shall you get home with that letter?" demanded Harry.

"Ask my husband.

At a guess, I should say tomorrow."

"Perhaps I had better wait until she has read the letter," mused the boy. "Don't you think so,
Mrs. Price?"

"I don't think anything about it. I will not take any responsibility about it. I have got the
letter officially addressed, and there my errand ends."

"You see, I want to do the best thing," urged Harry Goward. "And so much has happened since I wrote
that letter--and when you come to think that she has never read it--"

"I will mail it to her," I said, suddenly. "I will enclose it with a line and get it off by special
delivery this noon."

"It might not reach her," suggested Harry, pessimistically.

"Everything seems to go wrong in this affair."

"Would you prefer to send it yourself?" I asked.

Harry Goward shook his head.

"I would rather wait till she has read it. I feel, under the circumstances, that I owe that
to her."

Now, at that critical moment, a wide figure darkened the entrance of the writing-room, and, plumping
down solidly at another table, spread out a fat, ring-laden hand and began to write a laborious letter.
It was the lady with the three chins. But the girl with the poodle did not put in an appearance.
I learned afterward that the dog rule of "The Happy Family" admitted of no permits.

Harry Goward and I parted abruptly but pleasantly, and he earnestly
requested the privilege of being permitted to call upon me to-morrow
morning.

I mailed the letter to Peggy by special delivery, and just now I asked Tom if he didn't think
it was wise.

"I can tell you better, my dear, day after tomorrow," he replied.

And that was all I could get out of him.

"The Happy Family."--It is day after tomorrow, and Tom and I are going
to take the noon train home.

Our purpose, or at least my purpose, to this effect has been confirmed, if not created, by the following
circumstances:

Yesterday, a few hours after I had parted from Harry Goward in the blue writing-room of "The
Happy Family," Tom received from father a telegram which ran like this:

"Off for Washington--that Gooch business. Shall take Peggy. Child
needs change.

Will stop over from Colonial Express and lunch Happy Family. Explicitly
request no outsider present.

Can't have appearance of false position.

Shall take her directly out of New York, after luncheon. Cyrus Talbert."

Torn between filial duty and sisterly affection, I sat twirling this telegram between my troubled
fingers. Tom had dashed it there and blown off somewhere, leaving me, as he usually does,
to make my own decisions.

Should I tell Harry? Should I not tell Harry? Was it my right? Was it not his due? I vibrated
between these inexorable questions, but, like the pendulum I was, I struck no answer anywhere.
I had half made up my mind to let matters take their own course. If Goward should happen to
call on me when Peggy, flying through New York beneath her father's stalwart wing, alighted
for the instant at "The Happy Family"--was I to blame? Could I be
held responsible?

It struck me that I could not. On the other hand, father could not be more determined than I
that Peggy should not be put into the apparent position of pursuing an irresolute, however repentant,
lover.... I was still debating the question as conscientiously and philosophically as I knew
how, when the bell-boy brought me a note despatched by a district
messenger, and therefore constitutionally delayed upon the way.

The letter was from my little sister's fiance, and briefly said:

"My dear Mrs. Price,--I cannot tell you how I thank you for your sisterly sympathy and womanly
good sense. You have cleared away a lot of fog out of my mind. I don't feel that I can wait an
unnecessary hour before I see Peggy.

I should like to be with her as soon as the letter is. If you will allow me to postpone my
appointment with yourself, I shall start for Eastridge by the first
train I can catch to-day.

"Gratefully yours,

"Henry T. Goward."

IX. THE MOTHER, by Edith Wyatt

I am sure that I shall surprise no mother of a large family when I say that this hour is the first
one I have spent alone for thirty years. I count it, alone. For while I am driving back in the
runabout along the six miles of leafy road between the hospital and Eastridge with mother beside
me, she is sound asleep under the protection of her little hinged black sunshade, still held upright.
She will sleep until we are at home; and, after our anxious morning at the hospital, I am most grateful
to the fortune sending me this lucid interval, not only for thinking over what has occurred
in the last three days, but also for trying to focus clearly for myself what has happened in the
last week, since Elizabeth went on the 5.40 to New York; since Charles followed Elizabeth;
since Maria, under Dr. Denbigh's mysteriously required escort, followed
Charles; since Tom followed Maria; and since Cyrus, with my dear girl,
followed Tom.

On the warm afternoon before Elizabeth left, as I walked past her
open door, with Lena, and carrying an egg-nog to Peggy, I could not
avoid hearing down the whole length of the hall a conversation carried
on in clear, absorbed tones, between my sister and Alice.

"Did I understand you to say," said Elizabeth, in an assumption of indifference too elaborate,
I think, to deceive even her niece, "that this Mr. Wilde you mention is now living in New York?"

"Oh
yes. He conducts all the art-classes at the Crafts Settlement. He encouraged Lorraine's sisters in
their wonderful work. I would love to go into it myself."

Lorraine's sisters and her circle once entertained me at tea in their establishment when I visited
Charles before his marriage, in New York. They are extremely kind young women, ladies in every respect,
who have a workshop called "At the Sign of the Three-legged Stool." They seem to be carpenters, as
nearly as I can tell.

They wear fillets and bright, loose clothes; and they make very rough-hewn burnt-wood footstools
and odd settees with pieces of glass set about in them. It is all very puzzling. When Charles
showed me a candlestick one of the young ladies had made, and talked
to me about the decoration and the line, I could see that it was very
gracefully designed and nicely put together.

But when he noticed that in the wish to be perfectly open-minded to his point of view I was
looking very attentively at a queer, uneven wrought-iron brooch with two little pendant polished granite
rocks, he only laughed and put his hand on my shawl a minute and brought me more tea.

So that I could understand something of what Alice was mentioning as she went on: "You know Lorraine
says that, though not the most PROMINENT, Lyman Wilde is the most RADICAL and TEMPERAMENTAL
leader in the great handicraft development in this country. Even most of the persons in favor
of it consider that he goes too far.

She says, for instance, he is so opposed to machines of all sorts that he thinks it would be better
to abolish printing and return to script. He has started what they call a little movement of
the kind now, and is training two young scriveners."

Elizabeth was shaking her head reflectively as I passed the door, and saying: "Ah--no compromise.
And always, ALWAYS the love of beauty." And I heard her advising Alice never, never to be one
of the foolish women and men who hurt themselves by dreaming of beauty
or happiness in their narrow little lives; repeating sagely that this
dream was even worse for the women than for the men; and asked whether
Alice supposed the Crafts Settlement address wouldn't probably be
in the New York telephone-book.

Alice seemed to be spending a very gratifying afternoon.

My sister Elizabeth's strongest instinct from her early youth has been the passion inspiring
the famous Captain Parklebury Todd, so often quoted by Alice and Billy: "I do not think I ever knew
a character so given to creating a sensation.

Or p'r'aps I should in justice say, to what, in an Adelphi play, is known as situation." Never
has she gratified her taste in this respect more fully than she did--as I believe quite accidentally
and on the inspiration of these words with Alice--in taking the evening train to New York with
Mr. Goward.

Twenty or thirty people at the station saw them starting away together, each attempting to
avoid recognition, each in the pretence of avoiding the other, each with excited manners.
So that, as both Peggy and Elizabeth have been born and brought up here; as, during Mr. Goward's conspicuous
absence and silence, during Peggy's illness, and all our trying uncertainties and hers, in
the last weeks, my sister had widely flung to town talk many tacit insinuations concerning
the character of Mr. Goward's interest in herself; as none of the twenty or thirty people were
mute beyond their kind; and as Elizabeth's nature has never inspired
high neighborly confidence--before night a rumor had spread like the
wind that Margaret Talbert's lover had eloped with her aunt.

Billy heard the other children talking of this news and hushing themselves when he came up. Tom learned
of the occurrence by a telephone, and, after supper, told Cyrus and
myself; Maria was informed of it by telephone through an old friend
who thought Maria should know of what every one was saying.

Lorraine, walking to the office to meet Charles, was overtaken on the street by Mrs. Temple,
greatly concerned for us and for Peggy, and learned the strange story from our sympathetic
neighbor, to repeat it to Charles. At ten o'clock there was only one person in the house, perhaps
in Eastridge, who was ignorant of our daughter's singular fortune.

That person was our dear girl herself.

Since my own intelligence of the report I had not left her alone with
anybody else for a moment; and now I was standing in the hall watching
her start safely up-stairs, when to our surprise the front-door latch
clicked suddenly; she turned on the stairs; the door opened, and we
both faced Charles. From the first still glances he and I gave each
other he knew she hadn't heard. Then he said quietly that he had wished
to see Peggy for a moment before she went to sleep. He bade me a very
confiding and responsible good-night, and went out with her to the
garden where they used to play constantly together when they were
children.

Up-stairs, unable to lie down till she came back, I put
on a little cambric sack and sat by the window waiting till I should
hear her foot on the stairs again. "Charles is telling her," I said
to Cyrus. He was walking up and down the room, dumb with impatience
and disgust, too pained for Peggy, too tried by his own helplessness
to rest or even to sit still. In a way it has all been harder for
him than for any one else. His impulses are stronger and deeper than
my dear girl's, and far less cool. She is very especially precious
to him; and, whether because she looks so like him, or because he
thinks her ways like my own, her youth and her fortune have always
been at once a more anxious and a more lovely concern with him than
any one else's on earth. She is, somehow, our future to him.

While
we waited here in this anxiety up-stairs, down in the garden I could
hear not the words, but the tones of our children as they spoke together.
Charles's voice sounded first for a long time, with an air of calmness
and directness; and Peggy answered him at intervals of listening,
answered apparently less with surprise at what he told her than in
a quiet acceptance, with a little throb of control, and then in accord
with him. Then it was as though they were planning together.

In the
still village night their voices sounded very tranquil; after a little
while, even buoyant. Peggy laughed once or twice. Little by little
a breath of relief blew over both her father's solicitude and mine.
It was partly from the coolness and freshness of the out-door air,
and the half-unconscious sense it often brings, that beyond whatever
care is close beside you at the instant there is--and especially for
the young--so much else in all creation. Then, for me, there was a
deep comfort in the knowledge that in this time of need my children
had each other; that they could speak so together, in an intimate
sympathy, and were, not only superficially in name, but really and
beautifully, a brother and sister.

At last, as they parted at the
gate, Charles said, in a spirited, downright tone: "Stick to that,
cling to it, make it your answer to everything. It's all you now know
and all you need to know, and you'll be as firm on it as on a rock."

The
lamplight from the street filtering through the elm leaves glimmered
on Peggy's bright hair as she looked up at him. Her eyelashes were
wet, but she was laughing as she said: "But, of course, I HAVE to
cling to it. It's the truth. Good-night! Good-night!" And her step
on the stairs was light and even skipping.

On the next morning, when
I knocked at her door to find whether she would rather breakfast up-stairs,
I saw at once she had slept. She stood before the mirror fastening
her belt ribbon, and looking so lovely it seemed impossible misfortune
should ever touch her.

"Why, mother dear, you aren't dressed for
the library-board meeting! Isn't that this morning?"

"Yes."

She
looked at me with her little, sweet, quick smile, and we sat down
for a moment on her couch together, each with a sense that neither
would say one word too sharply pressing.

"Dear mother, why NOT go
to the board meeting? You don't need to protect me so. You CAN'T protect
me every minute. You see, of course, last night Charles--told me of
what everybody thinks." Her voice throbbed again. She stopped for
a minute. "But for weeks and weeks I had felt something like this
coming toward me.

On the 3d of January, 1543, the brave man died and was buried in the sands of Cuyler Harbor
on San Miguel Island. His men called the island Juan Rodriguez. This name was afterwards dropped,
but California should see to it that the island is rechristened in honor of the great sailor
who sleeps there.

Ferrelo later succeeded in sailing as far north as Cape Mendocino and perhaps as far as 42i,
but, though he kept as close to the shore as possible, he failed to discover the great bay
whose waters, spreading like a sheet of silver over sixty miles of country, lay hidden just
behind the Golden Gate. Near the Oregon line he was driven back by storms, and returned to
Mexico, where he published a full account of the voyage.

Drake

In the town of Offenburg, Germany, there is a statue of a man standing on the deck of a ship,
leaning against an anchor, his right hand grasping a map of America, his left, a cluster of
bulbous roots. On the pedestal is the inscription, "Sir Francis Drake, the introducer of potatoes
into Europe in the year of our Lord 1586."

While it is doubtful whether this honor really belongs to Drake, an Englishman, seeing the
statue, would be inclined to say, "Is this all that Germany has to tell of the great captain
who led our navy against the Spanish Armada; the first Englishman to sail around the world;
the most daring explorer, clever naval commander, expert seaman, brave soldier, loyal friend,
and gallant enemy of his time?" A Spaniard, on the contrary, might well exclaim, "Why did Germany
erect a statue to this terrible man whom our poets call Dragontea [Dragon], this greatest of
all pirates, this terror of the sea?" All this, and more, might be said of one man, who began
life as a ship's boy.

At the time Drake first went to sea, England and Spain were by no means friendly. Henry the
Eighth of England had ill-treated his wife, who was a Spanish princess. In addition he had
drawn the English people away from the Church of Rome. These things were most displeasing to
Spain, but there was still another reason for disagreement. The interests of the two countries
were opposed commercially, and this was the most important cause of contention.

Spain claimed by right of discovery, and gift of the Pope of Rome, all the land in the new
world except Brazil (which belonged to Portugal), and held that no explorers or tradesmen,
other than her own, had any rights on her waters or in her ports. English seamen denied much
of this claim, and so frequent were the disputes arising upon the subject that the English
sailors adopted as a maxim, "No peace beyond the line," meaning the line which was, by the
Pope's decree, the eastern boundary of the Spanish claim.

The favorite prey of the British mariners was the treasure ships carrying to Spain the precious
cargoes of gold and silver from the rich mines of the new world. With the far richer ships
of the Philippine and Indian trade, sailing on unknown waters, they had not, up to Drake's
time, been able to interfere.

Drake, when a very young man, had joined a trading expedition to Mexico. While there the English
were attacked by the Spanish in what the former considered a most treacherous manner. Drake's
brother and many of his comrades were killed, and their goods taken. After the battle he solemnly
vowed to be revenged, and so thoroughly did he carry out his resolution that he was for years
the terror of the Spanish seamen, and, by many of the superstitious common sailors, believed
to be Satan himself come to earth in human form.

Shortly after this unfortunate expedition Drake engaged in a marauding voyage to Panama, where
he captured rich stores of gold and silver and precious stones. He gained such renown for his
bravery and seamanship that upon coming home he found himself famous.

Queen Elizabeth knew that Spain was opposed to her and her religion, and was not in her heart
displeased when her brave seamen got the better of their Spanish rivals. She received Drake
privately, and help was offered him secretly from people who stood high in the government.
With this encouragement he resolved to embark on a most hazardous and daring adventure. While
in Panama he had seen, from a "high and goodlie tree" on a mountain side, the great Pacific,
and was immediately filled with a desire to sail on its waters and explore its shores. He therefore
determined to cross the Atlantic, pass through the Strait of Magellan, up the Pacific, and
to plunder the Spanish towns along the coast of South and Central America, until he should
reach the region traversed by the richly laden Spanish ships coming from India and the Philippines.
It is said that the queen herself put a thousand crowns into this venture. One thing is certain,
that he received sufficient help to fit out five small vessels, with one hundred and sixty-four
men. With these he sailed from Falmouth, England, in December of 1577. With the exception of
perhaps one or two of the rich men who had helped him, no one, not even his men, knew of his plans.

After a long and interesting voyage in which one vessel was lost and the others, though he
did not know it, had deserted him, he found himself with but one ship beating his way up the
coast of Lower California. This was his flagship Pelican, which he had rechristened the Golden
Hind. It was then so laden with rich booty, that it was like a hawk which had stolen too heavy
a chicken, driven this way and that by the winds, scarcely able to reach its nest.

In addition to a good store of Chile wines and foods of various kinds, there were packed away
in the hold of the Golden Hind, twenty-five thousand pesos of gold, eight thousand pounds of
English money, and a great cross of gold with "emeralds near as large as a man's finger." From
one vessel Drake had taken one hundred-weight of silver; from a messenger of the mines, who
was sleeping beside a spring on the Peruvian coast, thirteen bars of solid silver; off the
backs of a train of little gray llamas, the camels of the Andes, eight hundred pounds of silver;
and besides all these were large quantities of gold and silver that were not recorded in the
ship's list, and stores of pearls, diamonds, emeralds, silks, and porcelain.

The last prize taken was the Spanish treasure ship Cacafuegos. Drake had transferred its cargo
and crew to his own vessel and, for a time, manned it with some of his men. Its noble commander,
St. John de Anton, who had been wounded in the attack, received every possible attention on
the English vessel, and in the report which he afterwards made to the viceroy of Mexico, he
told of the perfect order and discipline maintained on the Golden Hind, and of the luxury which
surrounded its commander, who was treated with great reverence by his men.

Before sailing on to the northward, Drake restored St. John and his crew to their vessel. Then,
because he feared that they might fall into the hands of his fleet (having no suspicion that
the other captains had returned home), he gave the Spaniards the following letter, which shows
the great Englishman to have been more honorable than he is oftentimes represented:--

"To Master Weinter and the Masters of the Other Ships of my Fleet:

"If it pleaseth God that you should chance to meet with this ship of St. John de Anton, I pray
you use him well according to my promise given him. If you want to use anything that is in
the ship, I pray you pay him double value for it, which I will satisfy again. And command your
men not to do any harm and what agreement we have made, at my return unto England, I will,
by God's help, perform, although I am in doubt that this letter will ever come to your hand,
notwithstanding I am the man I have promised to be.

"Beseeching God, the Saviour of the world, to have us all in his keeping, to whom I give all
honor, praise, and glory,

"Your sorrowful captain, whose heart is heavy for you,

"Francis Drake."

How to get home was the problem which this daring man had now to solve. There was no possibility
of returning by the way he had come. He well knew that the news of his departure had reached
Spain, and that her war ships would be waiting for him, not only at the eastern entrance of
the Strait of Magellan, but at the Isthmus and in the Caribbean Sea.

If by sailing northward he could find the Strait of Anian, then his homeward journey would
be safe and short; but if he could not find that illusive body of water, then there was left
to him but the Pacific for a highway. However, this did not daunt him, as he felt that what
the Portuguese Magellan had done, Drake the Englishman could do.

Keeping well out from shore, the Golden Hind now sailed northward for nearly two months. Drake
passed just west of the Farallon Islands, never dreaming of the great harbor which lay so short
a distance on the other side. He traveled as far north as latitude 42i or possibly 43i, and
perhaps he even landed at one point, but he failed to find the strait. According to Fletcher,
the priest of the Church of England who kept a journal of the expedition, they were finally
forced by the extreme cold to turn southward. "Here," says Fletcher, "it pleased God on this
17th day of June, 1579, to send us, in latitude 38i, a convenient fit harbor." This is now
supposed to be Drakes Bay, which lies thirty miles northwest of San Francisco, in Marin county.

"In this bay we anchored, and the people of the country having their houses close to the waterside
showed themselves unto us and sent presents to our general. He, in return, courteously treated
them and liberally bestowed upon them things necessary to cover their nakedness.

"Their houses are digged around about with earth and have for the brim of that circle, clefts
of wood set upon the ground and joined closely together at the top like the spire of a steeple,
which by reason of this closeness are very warm. The men go naked, but the women make themselves
loose garments knit about the middle, while over their shoulders they wear the skin of a deer."

These people brought presents and seemed to want to offer sacrifices to the strangers as gods,
but Drake, hastily calling his men together, held divine services, "To which, especially the
prayers and music," says Fletcher, "they were most attentive and seemed to be greatly affected."
The Bible used by Drake in this service is still to be seen in Nut Hall House, Devonshire, England.

Presently a messenger came, saying that the king wished to visit them if they would assure
him of their peaceful intentions. Drake sent him presents, then marched his force into a kind
of fort he had had made in which to place such parts of the cargo as it was necessary to remove
in order to careen the ship for repairing. The coming of the chief is thus described:--

"He came in princely majesty. In the fore-front was a man of goodly personage who bore the
scepter whereon was hung two crowns with chains of marvelous length. The crowns were made of
knit-work wrought with feathers of divers colors, the chains being made of bony substances.

"Next came the king with his guard, all well clothed in connie skins, then the naked common
people with faces painted, each bearing some presents. After ceremonies consisting of speeches
and dances, they offered one of the crowns to Drake, who, accepting in the name of Elizabeth,
allowed it to be placed on his head."

While the men were busy cleaning and repairing the ship, the commander and his officers made
excursions into the interior, visiting many Indian towns and passing through wide plains where
vast herds of deer, often one thousand or more, all large and fat, were feeding on the rich
grasses. They also saw great numbers of what they called connies, which, from their description,
must have been ground squirrels, or else some variety of animal now extinct. The country Drake
named New Albion, partly from its white cliffs, which resembled those of his native land, and
partly in belief that it would be easier to lay claim to the country if it bore one of the
names applied to England.

"When the time came for our departure," continued Fletcher in his journal, "our general set
up a monument of our being here, so also, of her majesty's right and title to the land: namely
a plate nailed upon a fair great post, whereon was engraved her majesty's name, the day and
year of our arrival, with the giving up of the province and people into her majesty's hands,
together with her highness' picture and arms in a sixpence under the plate, whereunder was
also written the name of our general."

Fletcher seemed not to know of Cabrillo's voyage, for he claimed that no one had ever discovered
land in this region, or for many degrees to the south; while in fact Ferrelo with Cabrillo's
ships had sailed as far north as latitude 42i, although we have no reason to think that he
landed in a higher latitude than that of Point Conception and San Miguel Island.

Once again solemn religious services were held by the Englishmen on the hospitable soil that
had been their home for over a month. Then they went on board the ship, accompanied to the
shore by the grieving Indians, who would not be comforted when they saw their new friends forsaking
them. It was near the last of July in 1579 that Captain Drake with his brave men began his
wonderful homeward voyage.

It was a triumphant return they made in September, a year later. Crowds flocked to see the
famous ship and its gallant commander.

Some of the queen's statesmen strongly disapproved of Drake's attack upon Spanish towns and
vessels, and felt he should be arrested and tried for piracy; but the common people cheered
him wherever he went, and as a crowning honor, in the luxurious cabin of his good ship Golden
Hind, he was visited by the great Elizabeth herself. When the banquet was over, at the queen's
command, he bent his knee before her, and this sovereign, who, though a woman, dearly loved
such courage and daring as he had displayed, tapped him on the shoulder and bade him arise
"Sir Francis Drake."

Galli and Carmenon

In 1584 Francisco Galli, commanding a Philippine ship, returning to Mexico by way of Japan,
sighted the coast of California in latitude 37i 30'. He saw, as he reported, "a high and fair
land with no snow and many trees, and in the sea, drifts of roots, reeds, and leaves." Some
of the latter he gathered and cooked with meat for his men, who were no doubt suffering from
scurvy.

Galli wrote of the point where he first saw the coast as Cape Mendocino, which would seem to
imply that the point had been discovered and named at some previous time, of which, however,
there is no record.

In 1595 Sebastian Carmenon, commanding the ship San Agustin, coming from the Philippines, was
given royal orders to make some explorations on the coast of California, probably to find a
suitable harbor for Manila vessels. In doing so he was so unfortunate as to run his vessel
ashore behind Point Reyes, and to lighten her was obliged to leave behind a portion of his
cargo, consisting of wax and silks in boxes. There is only the briefest record of this voyage,
and no report of any discoveries.

Vizcaino

Almost sixty years after the voyage of Cabrillo, came a royal order from the king of Spain
to the viceroy of Mexico which, translated from the Spanish, ran something like this:--

"Go, search the northern coast of the Californias, until you find a good and sufficient harbor
wherein my Manila galleons may anchor safe and protected, and where may be founded a town that
my scurvy-stricken sailors may find the fresh food necessary for their relief. Furthermore,
spare no expense."

The destruction of Spanish shipping by Drake and other English seamen who followed his example,
had caused great anxiety to the Spaniards and was partly the reason for this order.

"Send for Don Sebastian," said the viceroy. "He is a brave gentleman and good sailor. He shall
carry out the order of the king." But it took time to fit out such an expedition, and it was
not until an afternoon in May, 1602, that Don Sebastian Vizcaino, on his flagship, the San
Diego, sailed out of the harbor of Acapulco into the broad Pacific. Closely following him were
his other ships, the San Thomas and Tres Reyes.

There had been solemn services at the cathedral that afternoon. Officers and men had taken
of the holy communion; and now their wives and children stood on the island at the entrance
of the harbor, watching the white sails as they grew fainter and fainter and at last disappeared
in the haze of the coming night.

Then the watchers returned to their lonely homes with heavy hearts, for in those days few came
back who sailed out on the great South Sea. Storms, battles with the natives, and scurvy made
sad havoc among the sailors.

Early in November Vizcaino entered "a famous port," which he named San Diego, finding it, as
Padre Ascension's journal says, "beautiful and very grand, and all parts of it very convenient
shelter from the winds." After leaving San Diego, the next anchoring place was the island named
by Vizcaino for Santa Catalina, on whose feast day his ships entered the pretty little harbor
of Avalon.

The Spaniards were greatly pleased with the island and also with the people, whom they described
as being a large-figured, light-complexioned race; all, men, women, and children, being well
clothed in sealskins. They had large dwellings, many towns, and fine canoes. What struck Padre
Ascension most strongly was their temple, of which he says: "There was in the temple a large
level court, and about this a circle surrounded by feather work of different colors taken from
various birds which I understand had been sacrificed to their idols. Within this circle was
the figure of a demon painted in color after the manner of the Indians of New Spain. On its
sides were figures of the sun and moon.

"It so fell out that when our soldiers came up from the ships to view the temple, there were
in the circle two immense ravens, far larger than ordinary. When the men arrived, they flew
away to some rocks that were near by, and the soldiers seeing how large they were, raised their
arquebuses and killed them both. Then did the Indians begin to weep and make great lamentation.
I understand that the devil was accustomed to speak to them, through these birds, for which
they showed great respect."

There were in the island quantities of edible roots of a variety of the yucca called gicamas,
and many little bulbs which the Spanish called "papas pequenos" (little potatoes). These, the
padre said, the Indians took in their canoes over to the mainland, thus making their living
by barter. This certainly must have been the beginning of commerce on the coast.

Vizcaino entered and named the Bay of San Pedro. To the channel islands he also gave the names
which they now bear. She diffuses around her an atmosphere of criticism--I do not think she ever
returns from a visit to the city without wishing that we should have dinner at night, and Alice
is beginning to prick up her ears and listen to her. From here the San Tomas
was sent to Mexico to carry the sick, of whom there were many, and to bring back fresh supplies.
The men who remained were at once set to work. Some supplied the two ships with wood and water;
others built a chapel of brush near the beach, under a large oak at the roots of which flowed
a spring of delicious water. In this chapel mass was said and the Te Deum chanted. For over
one hundred and fifty years this oak was known, both in New Spain and at the court of the king,
as the "Oak of Vizcaino, in the Bay of Monterey." From here Vizcaino wrote to the king of Spain
as follows:--

"Among the ports of greater consideration which I have discovered is one in 30i north latitude
which I called Monterey, as I wrote to your majesty in December. It is all that can be desired
for commodiousness and as a station for ships making the voyage from the Philippines, sailing
whence they make a landfall on this coast. It is sheltered from all winds and in the immediate
vicinity are pines from which masts of any desired size could be obtained, as well as live
oak, white oak, and other woods. There is a variety of game, great and small. The land has
a genial climate and the waters are good. It is thickly settled by a people whom I find to
be of gentle disposition, and whom I believe can be brought within the fold of the Holy Gospel
and subjugation to your majesty."

This enthusiastic praise of the harbor of Monterey by a man who was familiar with the port
of San Diego, caused much trouble later, as will be seen in the study of the founding of the
missions.

Not waiting for the return of the San Tomas, Vizcaino with his two ships soon sailed northward,
and reached a point in about latitude 42i, which was probably the northern limit reached by
Cabrillo's ships and only a little lower than the farthest explorations of Drake. Although
Vizcaino was looking for harbors, he yet passed twice outside the Bay of San Francisco, the
finest on the coast, without discovering it. After his return to Mexico, Vizcaino endeavored
to raise an expedition to found a settlement at Monterey, even going to Spain to press the
matter; but other schemes were demanding the king's attention, and he would give neither thought
nor money to affairs in the new world; and so, thoroughly disheartened Vizcaino returned to Mexico.

From this time for over one hundred and fifty years there is no record of explorations along
this coast, either by vessels from Mexico or by those coming from the Philippines. California
seemed again forgotten.

This is the story of the few voyages made to the coast of California previous to its settlement.
The first, under Cabrillo, was sent out by the viceroy Mendoza, who hoped to gain fame and
riches by the discovery of the Strait of Anian, and by finding wealthy countries and cities
which were supposed to exist in the great northwest, about which much was imagined but nothing
known.

Drake planned his voyage largely in pursuit of his revenge upon Spain, partly for the plunder
which he hoped to obtain from the Spanish towns and vessels along the Pacific coast of America,
and partly because of his desire to explore the Pacific Ocean.

Vizcaino also was expected to search for the strait, but he was especially sent out to find
a good harbor and place for settlement on the California coast. This was intended in a great
measure for the benefit of the Philippine trade, but also to aid in holding the country for Spain.

Chapter IV

The Cross of Santa Fe

The kings highway which led up from Vera Cruz, the chief port of the eastern coast of Mexico,
to the capital city of New Spain had in the eighteenth century more history connected with
it than any other road in the new world. Over it had passed Montezuma with all the splendor
of his pagan court. On it, too, had marched and counter marched his grim conqueror, the great
Cortez. Through its white dust had traveled an almost endless procession of mules and slaves,
carrying the treasures of the mines of Mexico and the rich imports of Manila and India on toward
Spain.

Over this road there was journeying, one winter day in the year 1749, a traveler of more importance
to the history of the state of California than any one who had gone before. He was no great
soldier or king, only a priest in the brownish gray cloak of the order of St. Francis. He was
slight in figure, and limped painfully from a sore on his leg, caused, it is supposed, by the
bite of some poisonous reptile. The chance companions who traveled with him begged him to stop
and rest beside a stream, but he would not. Then, as he grew more weary, they entreated him
to seek shelter in a ranch house near by and give up his journey.

"Speak not to me thus. I am determined to continue. I seem to hear voices of unconverted thousands
calling me," was all the answer he gave. So on foot, with no luggage but his prayer book, he
limped out of sight --the humble Spanish priest, Junipero Serra.

While only a schoolboy, young Serra had been more interested in the Indian inhabitants of the
new world than in boyish pleasure. As he grew older it became his greatest desire to go to
them as a missionary. At eighteen he became a priest; but it was not until his thirty-sixth
year that he gained the opportunity of which he had so long dreamed, when, in company with
a body of missionaries, among whom were his boyhood friends, Francisco Palou and Juan Crespi,
he landed at Vera Cruz.

He was too impatient to begin his new work, to wait for the government escort which was coming
to meet them. So he started out on foot, with only such companions as he might pick up by the
way, to make the long journey to the city of Mexico.

Sixteen years later, attended by a gay company of gentlemen and ladies, there traveled over
this road one of Spain's wisest statesmen, Jose de Galvez, whom the king had sent out to look
after affairs in the new world. Flourishing settlements were by this time scattered over a
large portion of Mexico, and even in the peninsula of Lower California there were a number
of missions. It was almost a hundred years before this time that two Catholic priests of the
Society of Jesus had asked permission to found mission settlements among the Indians of this
peninsula.

"You may found the missions if you like, but do not look to us for money to help you," was
the answer returned by the officers of the government. So the two Jesuit priests set about
collecting funds for the work.

They were eloquent men, and the people who heard them preach became so interested in the Indians
that they were glad to give. And so, little by little, this fund grew. As the good work went
on, greater gifts poured in. Whole fortunes were left them, and finally they had a very large
sum carefully invested in the city of Mexico. This was known as the Pius Fund. From it was
taken all the money needed for the founding of the missions of Lower California; and, many
years later, the expenses of founding the twenty-one missions of Upper California came from
the same source. This fund became the subject of a long dispute between Mexico and the United
States, of which an account is given in Chapter XI.

In 1767 all the Jesuit priests in New Spain were called back to Europe, and a large portion
of their wealth and missions on the peninsula were given over to the order of St. Francis,
with Junipero Serra at their head. It was Galvez's duty to superintend this change, and while
he was on his way to the peninsula for that purpose he was overtaken by an order from the king
of Spain to occupy and fortify the ports of San Diego and Monterey. The Spanish government
had the description of these ports furnished by Vizcaino in his account of his explorations
in Upper and Lower California over one hundred and sixty years before.

The articles of the king's order were: first, to establish the Catholic faith; second, to extend
Spanish dominion; third, to check the ambitious schemes of a foreign power; and lastly, to
carry out a plan formed by Philip the Third, as long ago as 1603, for the establishment of
a town on the California coast where there was a harbor suitable for ships of the Manila trade.

Galvez at once proceeded to organize four expeditions for the settlement of Upper California,
two by land, two by sea. Captain Portola, governor of the peninsula, was put in command, with
good leaders under him. Still, Galvez was not satisfied.

"This is all very well," he said; "these men will obey my orders, but they do not care much
whether this land is settled or not, and if discouragements arise, back they will come, and
I shall have the whole thing to do over again. I must find some one who is interested in the
work, some one who will not find anything impossible. I think I shall send for that lame, pale-faced
priest, with the beautiful eyes, who has taken up the work of these missions so eagerly."

"So you think we can make the venture a success?" asked Galvez, after he had talked over his
plans with Junipero.

"Surely," said Padre Serra, his eyes shining, his whole face glowing with enthusiasm. "It is
God's work to carry the cross of the holy faith [Santa Fe] into the wilderness, and He will
go with us; can you not hear the heathen calling us to bring them the blessed Gospel? I can
see that I have lived all my life for this glorious day."

Then they went to work, the priest and the king's counselor--down on the wharf, even working
with their own hands, packing away the cargo.

"Hurry! Hurry!" said Galvez. The word was passed along, and in a short time the four expeditions
were ready.

Many were the trials and discouragements of the various parties. Scurvy was so severe among
the sailors that one ship lost all its crew save two men, and there were a number of deaths
on another ship; while a third vessel which started later was never heard from. Padre Junipero,
who accompanied the second land party, under the charge of Governor Portola, became so ill
from the wound on his leg that the commander urged him to return; but he would not. Calling
a muleteer who was busy after the day's march, doctoring the sores on his animals, he said:--

"Come, my son, and cure my sores also."

"Padre," exclaimed the man, shocked at the idea, "I am no surgeon; I doctor only my beasts."

"Think then that I am a beast, my child," said the padre, "and treat me accordingly."

The man obeyed. Gathering some leaves of the malva, or cheese plant, he bruised them a little,
heated them on the stones of the camp fire, and spreading them with warm tallow, applied them
to the wound. The next morning the leg was so much better that the cure was thought to be a
miracle. Still the padre was very weak; and there was great rejoicing in the party  when at
last they looked down from a height on San Diego Bay, with the two ships--the San Carlos and
the San Antonio--riding at anchor, white tents on the beach, and soldiers grouped about. Salutes
were fired by the newcomers and returned by the soldiers and ships, and very soon the four
expeditions were reunited.

On the next day, Sunday, solemn thanksgiving services were held. Then for fourteen days all
were busy attending to the sick, making ready for the departure of the ship San Antonio, which
was to be sent back for supplies, and packing up food and other necessities for the journey
to Monterey. The San Antonio sailed on the 9th of July, 1769, and five days later Governor
Portola and two thirds of the well portion of the company started overland to Monterey.

Meantime Padre Junipero had been impatiently awaiting an opportunity to begin his great work--the
conversion of the heathen. He had written back in his own peculiar way to his friend Padre
Palou, whom he left in charge of the missions of Lower California.

"Long Live Jesus, Joseph, and Mary, This to Fray Francisco Palou.

"My dear friend and Sir:--

"I, thanks be to God, arrived day before yesterday at this, in truth, beautiful, and with reason
famous, port of San Diego. We find Gentiles [the name given to the wild Indians] here in great
numbers. They seem to lead temperate lives on various seeds and on fish which they catch from
their rafts of tule which are formed like a canoe."

The second day after the departure of Portola and his party, Sunday, July 16, Padre Serra felt
that the glorious moment for which he had so long prayed had at length arrived. The mission
bells were unpacked and hung on a tree, and a neophyte, or converted Indian, whom he had brought
with him from the peninsula, was appointed to ring them. As the sweet tones sounded on the
clear air, all the party who were able gathered about the padre, who stood lifting the cross
of Christ on high. All joined in solemnly chanting a hymn, and a sermon was preached. Then
with more chanting, the tolling of, the bells, and the firing of muskets, was concluded the
ceremony of the founding of the first of the California missions, that of San Diego.

Portola and his men, in spite of many discouragements, traveled steadily northward for nearly
two months until at last, one October morning, they saw what they thought to be Point Pinos,
the name given by Cabrillo to the pine-covered cape to the south of Monterey Bay. They were
right in thinking this Point Pinos, but the sad part is that when they climbed a hill and looked
down on the bay they had come so far to find, they failed to recognize it.

They tramped wearily over the sun-dried hills that bordered it, and walked on its sandy beach,
but could not believe the wide, open roadstead, encircled by bare brown heights, could be the
well-inclosed port lying at the foot of hills richly green, so warmly described by Vizcaino
in his winter voyage. It was a great disappointment, for this was the latitude in which they
had expected to find Monterey. After talking it over, they decided they must be still too far
south, so they tramped on for many days.

On the last day of October, those of the party who were well enough, climbed a high hill--(Point
San Pedro on the west coast of the peninsula)--and were rewarded by a glorious view. On their
left the great ocean stretched away to the horizon line, its waves breaking in high-tossed
foam on the rocky shore beneath them. Before them they saw an open bay, or roadstead, lying
between the point on which they stood, and one extending into the sea far to the northwest.
Upon looking at their map of Vizcaino's voyage, they rightly decided that this farther projection
was Point Reyes; the little bay sheltered by the curve of its arm was the one named on the
map St. Francis, and now known as Drakes Bay. Well out to sea they discovered a group of rocky
islands which they called Farallones; but not a man who stood on the height dreamed that only
a short distance to the right up the rocky coast there lay a bay so immense and so perfectly
inclosed that it would ever be one of the wonders of the land they were exploring.

On account of the sick of the party, among whom were the commander and his lieutenant, it was
decided to travel no further, but to camp here while Sergeant Ortega was dispatched to follow
the coast line to Point Reyes and explore the little bay it inclosed.

With a few men and three days' provisions consisting of small cakes made of bran and water,
which was the only food they had left, this brave Spanish officer marched away, little imagining
the honor which was soon to be his. Leading this expedition, he was the first white man to
explore the peninsula where now stands the guardian city of the western coast, and we must
wonder what were his thoughts when, pushing his way up some brush-covered heights, he came
out suddenly upon the great bay we call San Francisco.

What a mighty surprise was that sixty miles of peaceful water that had so long remained hidden
from European explorers, baffling the anxious gaze of Cabrillo, the faithful explorations of
Ferrelo, the eagle eyes of Drake, and the earnest search of Vizcaino!

Pushing steadily on toward Point Reyes, Ortega encountered a second surprise, when from the
Presidio hills he looked down on beautiful Golden Gate, whose rumpled waters seemed to say:--

"No farther can you come. We keep guard here."

Seeing that it was quite impossible for him to reach Point Reyes, Ortega decided to return
to Portola. He found the commander and his party so weakened by sickness and the lack of food
that it had been decided to explore no farther, but to return at once to the southern mission.
After a painful march of sixty days the party reached San Diego.

Bitter was the disappointment of Padre Junipero Serra at the failure to found the mission of
Monterey. he did not believe, as many of the party reported, that the bay was filled up with
sand. Keener still was his grief when Portola, after looking over the supply of food, announced
that unless the ship San Antonio or the sloop San Jose arrived by a certain date with provisions,
they would have to abandon Upper California and return to the peninsula.

The padre at once called the people together for a nine days' session of prayer and other church
services at which to pray for the coming of the relief boat. Portola, though he attended the
services, went steadily on with his preparations for departure. On the morning of the day before
the one set for the beginning of the march toward Lower California, the padres went to the
heights overlooking the bay, where they remained watching and praying. At sea a heavy fog hung
over the water. Hour after hour passed as they gazed out on the lovely bay. Noon came, but
they would not return to the mission to rest or eat. The afternoon wore away, the sun sank
in the clouds above the horizon, then, as all hope seemed gone, the fog was lifted by a sunset
breeze, and there, far out at sea, they saw a white sail. The good men fell on their knees
in thanksgiving, while their Indian servants ran to carry the news to camp.

This vessel, the San Antonio, brought not only abundant provisions but fresh orders from Galvez
to hurry the work at Monterey. The settlement of Upper California was now made certain.

An expedition by land and the San Antonio by sea immediately started northward. A few weeks
later Padre Junipero wrote to Padre Palou: "By the favor of God, after a month and a half of
painful navigation, the San Antonio found anchor in this port of Monterey, which we find unvarying
in circumstances and substance as described by Don Sebastian Vizcaino."

They even found Vizcaino's oak. Indeed, it is said on good authority, that the oak remained
standing until 1838, when the high tides washed the earth from its roots so that it fell.

Soon the land expedition arrived, and one June morning in 1770 the members of the two parties,
all in their best attire, were gathered on the beach for the purpose of founding the second
mission. It must have been a pretty scene,--the stanch little vessel San Antonio, gay with
bunting, swinging at anchor a short distance out, while on shore were grouped the sailors in
the bright dress of seamen of those times, the soldiers in leather uniform, the governor and
his staff in the handsome costumes of Spanish officials, and the padres in their gray robes.
Close beside the oak a brush house had been built, bells hung, and an altar erected. While
the bells tolled, the solemn service of dedication was held by Padre Junipero, and so was founded
the Mission San Carlos de Borromeo at Monterey.

Near each of the earlier coast missions there was also founded a military station called a
presidio, a name borrowed from the Roman presidium. The word meant a fort or fortified town.
These presidios were intended to guard the safety of the missions from the wild Indians, and
to defend the coast from ships of other countries.

After the religious services Governor Portola proceeded to found the presidio and take formal
possession in the name of the king of Spain by hoisting and saluting the royal banner, pulling
up bunches of grass, and casting stones, which was an ancient manner of taking possession of
a piece of land or country. The presidio of Monterey was for a long time the site of the capital
of Upper California and therefore most important in the history of the state.

For the sake of better land and water the mission site was soon removed about six miles, to
the Carmelo River. Although not so wealthy as some of the missions, it was the home of Padre
Junipero Serra, president of all the missions, and so its history is especially interesting.

The news of the settlement of San Diego and Monterey was received in Mexico with great joy,
and it was resolved to found five more missions above San Diego. Four of these were San Gabriel,
near the present site of Los Angeles; San Luis Obispo, farther north; San Antonio; and San
Francisco. Before leaving the peninsula, Padre Serra had asked Galvez, "And for Father Francisco,
head of our order, is there to be no mission for him?" To which Galvez had replied, "If Saint
Francis wants a mission, let him cause his port to be found and it will be placed there." When
the beautiful bay was discovered by Sergeant Ortega, it was thought that this might be the
harbor Saint Francis intended for himself, but before naming it for the head of the order it
was necessary that it should be explored. Although two land expeditions were sent up for this
purpose, they were unsuccessful; and it was not until August, 1775, about four months after
the eventful battle of Lexington had taken place on the Atlantic coast, that white men first
entered the Bay of San Francisco in a ship.

Lieutenant Ayala of the Spanish navy, with the San Carlos, had the honor of conducting this
expedition.

He reached the entrance to the bay just as night was coming on. Not liking to trust his vessel
in a strange harbor, he sent forward a boat to make explorations, and then, as it was a little
slow in returning, he daringly pushed on in the darkness into the unknown water. His small
craft bobbed and plunged in the rough water of the bar, darted through Golden Gate, and came
safely to anchor near North Beach. Soon after this exploration it was settled that here Saint
Francis should have his mission.

Padre Junipero Serra appointed his friend Francisco Palou, who had now joined him in his work
in Upper California, to make this settlement, and on the 9th of October, 1776, there was founded
in that portion of San Francisco known as the Mission District, at the corner of Sixteenth
and Dolores streets, the mission of San Francisco. This is often called Mission Dolores from
the name of a small lake and stream beside which it was built. To-day the name San Francisco
rests not only on the old mission building, with its white pillars, but on the beautiful city
which is the metropolis of our western coast.

As fast as possible Padre Junipero hastened the establishment of missions, choosing those places
where there were the largest native settlements. In the vicinity of Monterey Bay there were,
besides the San Carlos mission, Santa Cruz on the northern curve of the bay, and in the fertile
valley back of the Santa Cruz Mountains the missions of Santa Clara, San Jose, and San Juan
Bautista. Farther south on a lonely height stood Soledad, and much farther south, San Miguel.

The Indians along the Santa Barbara Channel, of whom there were a great many, were more intelligent
and industrious than in other portions of the country settled by the missionaries, and here
were the missions of Santa Barbara, San Buenaventura, La Purisima, and Santa Inez.

In the south, in the fertile valley where are now the great grain fields of Los Angeles county,
San Fernando was founded. Between San Gabriel and San Diego were placed San Juan Capistrano,
San Luis Rey, and the chapel of Pala. San Rafael and Solano, to the north of San Francisco
Bay, complete the list of twenty-one missions of Upper California.

It is impossible to give more than the names of most of these missions, although about each
many true and beautiful stories might be told. It would be well if those who live near one
of these noble ruins would seek out its particular history and the stories connected with it.
This would be interesting and helpful work for the students in the schools of the state.

The story of the missions seems like a fairy tale, wonderful and unreal. Into a wilderness
inhabited only by savage men and wild animals, hundreds of miles from any civilized settlement,
there came these men trained as simple priests.

Two by two they came, bringing with them, for the starting of each mission, a few soldiers,
seven to ten, a few converted Indians from the missions of Lower California, a little live
stock, some church furniture, and always the bells; yet in a little over forty years they had
succeeded in founding a chain of missions whose sweet-toned bells chimed the hours and called
to prayer from San Diego to the Bay of San Francisco.

Churches were built larger and often of a purer type of architecture than those in the civilized
well-settled portions of the land,-- buildings that have lasted for a hundred years and may
last many years longer if care is taken to preserve them. Canals of stone and cement and dams
of masonry were constructed that would do credit to our best workmen of to-day.

The little packages of wheat and other grains, seeds from Spanish oranges and olives, little
dried bundles of grapevines from Mexico, developed, under their care, into the great fields
of grain, groves of oranges and olives, and the wide-spreading vineyards of the mission ranches.
All these wonders were performed with Indian workmen trained by the padres.

But what the missionaries cared for more than their success in building and planting were the
thousands of baptized Indians at each mission. These they instructed daily for the good of
their souls in the truths of the Christian religion, while for their bodily needs they were
taught to plow the earth, to plant seed, to raise and care for domestic animals. They learned
also many useful trades; and music, frescoing, and art were taught those who seemed to have
an especial taste for such things.

At the head of this great work was gentle Padre Junipero Serra, the most interesting character
in the history of the missions. He was frail and slender and much worn by constant labor of
head and hands, but his every thought and action seemed to be for others. Back and forth from
Monterey to San Diego, from mission to mission, he traveled almost constantly, teaching, baptizing,
confirming thousands of his dusky charges. He was president of all the missions, and besides
this was bishop, doctor, judge, and architect, as well as steward of the mission products and
money.

Associated with him in his work were a group of noble men whose lives were spent in caring
for the native people with whom they worked and among whom they finally died. The inhabitants
of California may well honor the mission padres for their earnest, unselfish lives, and in
no way can this be done so fully as in the preservation of the grand old buildings they left
behind, which are indeed fitting monuments to their devotion, energy, and skill.

Beginning with San Diego, let us, in fancy, visit the missions in the early part of the nineteenth
century.

It is a winter day in the year 1813 when we ride up the broad, wind-swept road which leads
to the newly dedicated mission building of San Diego. The wide plain that surrounds it is green
with native grass and the blades of young wheat. Of the two hundred cattle, one hundred sheep,
one hundred horses, and twenty asses brought up by Padre Junipero in 1769 to be divided among
the earlier missions, San Diego had only its due share; yet under the wise management of the
padres, they have now at this mission, feeding on the green plains, thousands of cattle, horses,
and sheep, which are tended by comfortably clothed Indian herders. Near the mission are the
green and gold of orange orchards, the gray of the olive, and the bare branches of extensive
vineyards. At one side we see a large kitchen garden where young Indians are at work planting
and hoeing.

As we draw up in front of the church, Indian servants come out to take our horses. We dismount,
and a padre who is superintending work in the orchard comes and welcomes us with gentle courtesy.
He sends us a servant to show us to our room, a small square apartment with a hard earthen
floor and bare, whitewashed walls with no ornament but a cross. The beds are of rawhide stretched
over a frame. The covering consists of sheets of coarse cotton grown and woven at the southern
missions, and blankets, coarse but warm, made by the Indians from the wool of the mission sheep.

Dinner at the padre's table we find most enjoyable. There is beef and chicken, the frijole,
or red bean of Spain, and other vegetables prepared in a tasty manner peculiar to Spanish cooking,
so we do not doubt that the cook has been taught his trade by the padre himself. The Indian
boys who wait on the table also show careful training, performing their duties quickly and
quietly. Here we can find for bread the tortilla,--still the food of the Indian and Mexican
people of California. It is a thin cake made of meal or flour and water, and baked without
grease on a hot stone or griddle. Wines made at the mission, the favorite chocolate, thick
and sweet, and some fruit from the padre's garden complete the meal.

Dinner over, we visit the church and admire the striking contrast between the red tiles of
the roof and the creamy white of the walls. All the buildings are made of bricks molded from
a clay called adobe and dried slowly in the sun. Each brick is twelve inches square by four
inches thick, and the walls are laid two or three bricks deep, those of the church itself being
nearly four feet in thickness. It seems almost impossible that so large and well made a building
could have been constructed by untrained workmen. Next to the church are the rooms of the padres,
then the dining room and the quarters of the mission guard, which consists apparently of but
two men, the rest being at the presidio, several miles away. Adjoining these are the storehouses
and shops of the Indian workmen, all of which open on the great courtyard.

In the courtyard is a busy scene. Blacksmiths with hammer and anvil make sounding blows as
they work up old iron into needed farm utensils. The soap maker's caldron sends up a cloud
of ill-smelling steam. At one side carpenters are at work trimming and cutting square holes
in logs for the beams of new buildings which the padres wish to put up. Saddle makers, squatted
on the ground, are busy fashioning saddletrees, carving, and sewing leather. The shoemaker
is hard at work with needle and awl. These and many other trades are all going on at once.
These courts, which are called patios, were generally several acres in extent and at the most
flourishing period of the missions each settlement often gave shelter to over a thousand people.

Behind the central court is the home of the unmarried women. This, and the rooms for their
work, open on a separate square where there is shade from orange and fig trees and a bathing
pond supplied by the zanja, or water ditch. Here square-figured, heavy-featured Indian girls
are busy spinning and weaving thread into cloth. Others are cutting out and sewing garments.
Some, squatted on the ground, are grinding corn into a coarse meal for the atole, or mush.
At the zanja several are engaged in washing clothes. Here these girls live under the care of
an old Indian woman, and unless she accompanies them they may not, until they are married,
go outside these walls. Near the mission we visit a long row of small adobe buildings, the
homes of the families of the Christian Indians; a neat, busy settlement where the little ones,
comfortably clothed, play about attended by the older children, while the mothers work for
the padres four or five hours daily.

Leaving San Diego and traveling northward along "El Camino Real," the highway which leads from
mission to mission, we reach San Luis Rey, "King of the Missions," as it is sometimes called.
Its church is the largest of all those erected by the padres, being one hundred and sixty feet
long, fifty-eight feet wide, and sixty feet high. Its one square, two-story tower has a chime
of bells, the sweet clear tones of which reached our ears while we were yet miles from the
mission. Counting the arches of the long corridor, we find there are two hundred and fifty-six.
This mission became very wealthy. At one time it had a baptized Indian population of several
thousand, owned twenty-four thousand cattle, ten thousand horses, and one hundred thousand
sheep, and harvested fourteen thousand bushels of grain a year.

Its prosperity was due in a great measure to good Padre Peyri, who had charge of it from its
beginning. Many years afterwards, as we shall see, the padres were ordered by the Mexican government
to leave their missions, the wealth they had gathered, and the Indians they had taught and
cared for. Father Peyri, knowing how hard it would be for him to get away from his Indian children,
as he called them, slipped off by night to San Diego. In the morning the Indians missed him.
Learning what had happened, five hundred of them mounted their ponies in hot haste and galloped
all the way to San Diego, forty-five miles, to bring him back by force. They arrived just as
the ship, with Padre Peyri on board, was weighing anchor. Standing on deck with outstretched
arms, the padre blessed them amid their tears and loud cries. Some flung themselves into the
water and swam after the ship. Four reached it, and, climbing up its sides, so implored to
be taken on board that the padre consented and carried them with him to Rome, where one afterwards
became a priest.

The next link in our chain, the most beautiful of all the missions, is that of San Juan Capistrano.
It was founded in 1776, the year of our Declaration of Independence, but in 1812 it was destroyed
by an earthquake, the massive towers and noble arch falling in on the Indians, who were assembled
in the church for morning prayers. Many of them were killed. The church has never been rebuilt.

It is Christmas Day when we reach San Gabriel, the next station on El Camino Real. Inside the
great cactus fence which incloses the square about the mission we see a strangely mixed company,--Indians
in their best clothes, their faces shining from a liberal use of mission soap and water; soldiers
in their leather suits freshened up for the holiday; a few ranchmen in the gay dress of the
times, riding beautiful horses; women and girls each brilliant in a bright-colored skirt with
shawl or scarf gracefully draped over head and shoulders.

The Christmas Day morning service, held at four o'clock and known by the common people as the
Rooster Mass, is long since over. The crowd is now gathered for the Pastorel, which, like the
miracle plays of the Middle Ages, is a drama with characters taken from the Bible.

First to appear on the scene is an orchestra composed of young Indians playing violins, bass
viols, reeds, flutes, and guitars. Closely following come the actors, representing San Gabriel
and attendant angels, Satan, Blind Bartimeus, and a company of shepherds. The entertainment
is very simple. There is the announcement of the birth of the Savior, the adoration of the
babe, and the offering of gifts. The play concludes with a protracted struggle between San
Gabriel and Satan for the possession of Blind Bartimeus, in which the saint finally comes off
victor while the orchestra plays lively music. After the Pastorel there are games, dancing,
and feasting. Every one seems happy, and it is with regret that we leave the gay scene.

Through the hills to the north, across the Arroyo Seco, not dry now, but a swift stream turbulent
from the winter rains, we journey on. We pass Eagle Rock, a great bowlder high upon the green
hillside, one of the landmarks of the region, and enter the valley of the Los Angeles River.
After traveling for several hours, we come to a large plantation of trees, vines, and grainfields,
in the midst of which lies the mission of San Fernando. Its land extends for miles on every
side and is exceedingly fertile. In front of the beautiful cloisters, under tall and stately
palm trees, a fountain sends high its sparkling water, which falls back with pleasant tinkle
into a basin of carved stone.

When we reach San Buenaventura, the next mission on our route, we find priests and Indians
exceedingly busy, for word has come from Monterey that a Yankee trading vessel will soon sail
for the south, and cattle must be killed and the fat rendered into tallow for the market. As
hides and tallow are about the only commodities the padres have for sale, this is an important
event. Indians tend the caldrons of bubbling grease, and keep up the fires under the kettles.
When the tallow is slightly cooled, they pour it into sacks made from the skins of animals.
These, when filled with the hardened tallow, look as though each again held a plump beast.

Traveling up the coast we come one afternoon to

A golden bay 'neath soft blue skies Where on a hillside creamy rise The mission towers whose
patron saint Is Barbara--with legend quaint.

Here spring is merging into summer, and we are in time to see the ceremony which closes the
wheat harvest. The workmen gather the last four sheaves from the field, and, fastening them
in the form of a cross, carry them, followed by a long procession of dusky reapers, up the
ascent to the church. As they approach, the bells burst out in a joyous peal, and from the
mission doors the padres come forth, one bearing a cross, another the banner of the Virgin.
A choir of Indian boys follows, chanting a hymn. All advance slowly down the avenue to meet
the sheaf bearers, then counter march to the church, where the harvest festival is celebrated.

Passing by other missions, we must close our journey with a visit to San Carlos, the Monterey
mission, most prominent of all in the history of the church and state. It was from the first
the special charge of Padre Junipero Serra, and, at the time we see it, his monument as well;
for in it at last his weary body was laid to rest beside his friend Padre Juan Crespi, to whose
writings, next to those of Padre Francisco Palou, we are most indebted for our knowledge of
Junipero Serra and his great work. In 1813, with its graceful arched front and two towers,
San Carlos was a noble-looking building, but since that time one tower has fallen.

We are reminded, as we look, of the scene when Junipero lay dying. Ever since morning the grief-stricken
people had been waiting, listening for the news from the sick room. When the tolling of the
bell announced that the beautiful life was ended, crowds came weeping and lamenting, anxious
to see again the beloved face.

It was with great difficulty that the Indians could be kept from tearing the padre's robe from
his body, so earnestly did they desire to possess some relic of the father they had loved so long.

Here we notice the daily life of the Indian, which (in 1813) is the same at all the missions.
At sunrise comes the sound of the bells calling to the morning prayers, and we see the natives
hurrying to the church. After service they gather for breakfast of mush and tortillas. As the
flocks and herds have increased, meat forms part of the daily food, sometimes from the freshly
killed beeves, but generally in a dried state called carne seco. After breakfast the workers
go in groups to their various employments. Dinner is served at eleven, and they have a resting
period until two. Then work is again taken up and continued until an hour before sunset, when
the bells call to evening prayer. Supper follows the evening service, after which the Indians
can do as they like until bedtime. We see some engaged in a game of ball. Many are squatted
on the ground playing other games,--gambling, we suspect. In one group there is dancing to
the music of violin and guitar. There is laughter and chattering on all sides, and to us they
seem happy, at least for the time.

The life led by the Indians at the missions was not generally a hard one. No doubt when they
first came, or were brought, into the settlements, from their free wild life, they found it
harder to keep the regular hours of the missions than to perform the work, which was seldom
very heavy. When disobedient or lazy, they were punished severely, judging by the standards
of to-day, but really no harder than was at that time the custom in schools and in navies the
world over. When the soldiers came in contact with the natives, there was generally cruel treatment
for the latter. But as far as possible the padres stood between their charges and the soldiers,
always placing the mission as far from the presidio as the safety of the former would allow.

At San Diego, about five years after its settlement, wild Indians surprised the mission guard,
and killed the padre and several of the converted Indians in a most cruel manner. The Spanish
government gave orders that the murderers should be taken and executed and this mission abandoned;
but Padre Junipero begged so hard for the culprits, who, he said, knew no better, having no
knowledge of God, that he was finally allowed to have his way. Gentleness and patience won
the day; not only the Indians who made the attack were converted, but many more of their tribe,
and the mission became a flourishing settlement. There was once a rebellion among the Santa
Clara and San Jose Indians, led by a young convert from Santa Clara, which required soldiers
from Monterey to put down. Generally, however, the mission life was peaceful, the Indians being
fond of their padres.

When Mexico became free from Spain, no more money was sent up to pay the soldiers or run the
government in Upper California, and for a long time the missions advanced the money for the
expenses of the government.

After a time the new priests who came up from Mexico were not generally men of such education
and noble character as the early mission padres. They cared less for missionary work, and were
not so energetic. Their influence was not always good for the Indians, who quickly saw the
difference between them and their old padres. They had little confidence in the newcomers,
so at the few missions where such as these were in charge the Indians were disobedient, and
received harsh punishments from the padres; and trouble followed.

In 1833 the Mexican government decided to confirm the mandate issued by Spain several years
before in regard to the breaking up of the mission settlements. By this law each Indian was
to have his own piece of land to own and care for. He was to be no longer under the control
of the church, but to be his own master like any other citizen. As for the padres, they were
to give up their wealth and lands, and leave for other missionary fields. That this would create
a great change in California all realized; still it was no new idea, but the plan Spain had
in mind when the missions were first founded. The mistake was in supposing that it was possible
for a people to rise in so short a time from the wild life of the California Indian to the
position of self-supporting citizens in a civilized country.

When the Indians understood this order, some were pleased and, like children when freed from
restraint, ceased to work and became troublesome. Many, however, when they found that the padres
were to leave them, became very unhappy; some, it is said, even died from homesickness for
the mission and the padre. One committed suicide.

It was soon seen that they were not fitted to look after themselves. Only a few years had passed
since they were savages, knowing nothing of civilized life, and they still needed some one
to guide them. They not only began to drink and gamble, but were cheated and ill-treated on
all sides, until many of them became afraid of living in towns and went back to wild life.
For this they were no longer fitted, and they suffered so much from hunger and cold that great
numbers of them died.

Because the Indians were not capable of caring for themselves at the time of the secularization
of the missions, the padres are often severely blamed. It is said that they tried to keep the
natives without knowledge, in fact something like slaves. But the truth is that the padres
taught them by thousands, not only to cultivate the soil, to irrigate wisely, to raise domestic
cattle, but to work at every trade that could be of use in a new country. They were encouraged
to choose from among themselves alcaldes, or under officers of the mission. In this way every
inducement was given to the Indian showing himself capable of self-control, to rise to a prominent
position in his little world, where he generally ruled his fellow-workmen wisely and kindly.

Added to this, the Indians acquired, through the teaching and example of the padres, a religion
that has lasted through generations. The breaking up of the mission settlements scattered the
Indians through the country, many of them going back to the wild life in the forest and mountains,
where they no longer had any religious instructions. Yet to-day, after all the years that have
passed, there are few Indians from San Diego to San Francisco who do not speak the language
of the padres and follow, though it may be but feebly, the teaching of the Catholic faith,
the "Santa Fe" of the padres.

Some of the mission buildings, many of the flocks, and much of the land fell into the hands
of men who had no possible right to them. Orchards and vineyards were cut down, cattle killed
and stolen, and there was only ruin where a short time before there had been thousands of busy
people leading comfortable lives. Soon the churches were neglected and began to crumble away,
bats flew in and out of the broken arches, squirrels chattered fearlessly in the padre's dining
room, and the only human visitor was some sad-hearted Indian worshiper, slipping timidly into
the desolate building to kneel alone before the altar where once

Sweet strains from dusky neophytes Rose up to God in praise, When life centered 'round the
missions In the happy golden days.

Chapter V

Pastoral Days

For hundreds of years poets have written and singers have sung of the loveliness of a country
life, where there is no gathering together of the inhabitants in great cities, no struggle
to make money, where the people live much out of doors, are simple in their tastes, healthy
and happy.

These dreams of an ideal life the Spanish-speaking settlers of early California made real.
In this land of balmy airs, soft skies, and gentle seas there lived, in the old days, a people
who were indifferent to money, who carried their religion into their daily pleasures and sorrows,
were brotherly toward one another, contented, beautiful, joyous.

About the time that the mission of San Francisco was founded, the Spanish government decided
to lay out two towns, or pueblos, where it was thought the fertile character of the soil would
lead the settlers to raise grain and other supplies, not only for themselves but for the people
of the presidios. Up to this time a large part of the food had been brought, at a considerable
cost, from Mexico.

We know that the governor, Felipe de Neve, chose the town sites with care, for in the whole
state there are nowhere more beautiful and fertile spots than San Jose, near the southern end
of San Francisco Bay, and Los Angeles, near the famous valley of the San Gabriel River. In
founding these two pueblos, and a third which was located where Santa Cruz now stands, the
plan pursued was interesting and somewhat different from the methods of settlement on the eastern
coast of our country.

First there was chosen a spot for the plaza, or central square, care being taken that it was
not far from good grazing land suitable for the settlers' stock. Around the plaza, lots were
set apart for the courthouse, town hall, church, granaries, and jail. Next were the lots for
the settlers, who each had, besides his home spot, several acres of farming land with water,
and the right to use the pasture lands of the town. To each family was given, also, two horses,
two cows, two oxen, a mule, several goats, sheep, chickens, farming implements, and a small
sum in money.

Instead of asking tax money of the town people, some of the land was reserved as public property
to be rented out, the proceeds to be used for the expenses of the government. Many people believe
that this is the wisest plan man has yet discovered for managing the expenses of a city, town,
or country.

Los Angeles had for many years a large amount of this land near the center of the town, belonging
to the city government. Gradually it was taken up by settlers or appropriated by officials
until, when the place grew large and thriving, it was found that the land had become private
property; and finally the city had to pay large sums for parks and land for public buildings.

Each pueblo was ruled by an alcalde, or mayor, and council, chosen by the people. To advise
with these officers, there was a commissioner who represented the governor of the country.
During the first few years the pueblo was governed largely by the commissioner. Presidios,
which were, at first, forts with homes for the commander, officers, soldiers, and their families,
and were ruled by the commanding officer or comandante, gradually became towns; and then they,
too, had their alcalde  and council. There were four presidios--Monterey, San Francisco, San
Diego, and Santa Barbara.

In spite of all the gifts of free land, stock, and money, it was hard to secure a suitable
class of settlers. Many of those who came up from Mexico to live in the pueblos were idle or
dissipated, and nearly all uneducated. When, after several years, a Spanish officer was sent
down from Monterey to convey to the Los Angeles settlers full title to their lands, he found
that not one of the twenty-four heads of families could sign his name. Later a much better
class of people came into the country --men of education, brave, hardy members of good Spanish
families, who obtained grants of land from the government, bought cattle from the mission herds,
and began the business of stock raising.

This was the beginning of the pastoral or shepherd life. Each rancho was miles in extent, its
cattle and horses numbered by thousands. The homes were generally built around a court into
which all the rooms opened, and were constructed of adobe bricks such as were used at the missions.
In the better class of homes several feet of the space in the courtyard next the wall were
covered with tile roofing, forming a shaded veranda, where the family were accustomed to spend
the leisure hours. Here they received visitors, the men smoked their cigaritos, and the children
made merry. In the long summer evenings sweet strains of Spanish music from violin and guitar
filled the air, and the hard earthen floor of the courtyard resounded to the tap-tap of high-heeled
slippers, the swish of silken skirts, and the jingle of silver spurs, as the young people took
part in the graceful Spanish dances.

It was no small matter to rule one of these great households. La Patrona (the mistress) was
generally the first one up. "Before the sun had risen," said a member of one of the old families,
"while the linnets and mocking birds were sounding their first notes, my mother would appear
at our bedside. 'Up, muchachos, up, muchachas, and kneel for your Alba!' The Alba was a beautiful
prayer of thanksgiving for care during the night, with a plea for help through the dangers
and temptations of the day. No excuse for lying abed was accepted; up, and on the floor we
knelt, then she passed on to where the mayordomo, or foreman, and his men were gathering in
the courtyard. Here, too, was the cook with the Indian maids, busy making tortillas for the
morning meal. 'Your Albas, my children,' my mother would say in her clear, firm voice. Down
would drop mayordomo, vaqueros, cook, and Indian girls, all devoutly reciting the morning prayer.

"After their prayer the children might, if they chose, return to their beds, but before sleep
could again overtake them there would probably come from a distant room the voice of their
aged grandfather asking them questions from the Spanish catechism.

"'Children, who made you?' he would call in a quavering voice.

"A chorus of small voices would sing-song in response, 'El Dios' [God].

"Again he would question, 'Children, who died for you?'

"Again the reply, 'El Dios.'

"By the time the questions were all answered there was no chance for more sleep."

Nothing was taken with the morning coffee but the tortilla. This was a thin cake made of meal
from corn ground by Indian women who used for the grinding either a stone mortar and pestle,
or a metate. The metate was a three-legged stone about two feet in length and one in breadth,
slightly hollowed out in the center; grain was ground in this by rubbing with a smaller stone.
It took a great number of tortillas to serve the large household. One Indian maid, kneeling
beside a large white stone which served as table, mixed the meal, salt, and water into balls
of dough. These she handed to another girl, who spatted them flat and thin by tossing them
from one of her smooth bare arms to the other until they were but a little thicker than a knife
blade. The cook then baked them on a hot dry stone or griddle, turning them over and over to
keep them from burning.

El Patron (the master) usually rose early, and after his coffee, put on his high, wide-brimmed
sombrero, and, attended by his sons, if they were old enough, and his mayordomo, rode over
his estate, looking after the Indian vaqueros and workmen. One gentleman, a member of a fine
Spanish family which lived in the southern part of the state, used to ride out with his sixteen
sons, all of whom were over six feet in height. Generally the families were large, often comprising
twelve children or more. These made merry households for the little people.

After breakfast it was the duty of the mistress to set the host of Indian girls to their tasks.
The padres were always glad to let the young Indian girls from the mission go into white families
where there was a wise mistress, that they might be trained in both religious and domestic
duties. Going to the gate of the courtyard, the Patrona would call, "To the brooms, to the
brooms, muchachas," adding, if it were foggy, "A very fine morning for the brooms, little ones;"
and out would come running a cluster of Indian girls carrying each a broom. At the work they
would go, sweeping as clean as a floor the courtyard and ground for a large space about the house.

Next they flocked to the sewing room, often sixteen or eighteen of these girls, to take up
their day's work under the mistress's eye. Some made garments for the ranch hands, those who
were better work women attended to the making of clothing for the family, while the girls who
were the most skillful with the needle fashioned delicate, fine lace work and embroidery.

The children were seldom indoors unless it rained. There were no schools; there were few ranches
where there were teachers, and the fathers and mothers generally had their hands too full to
devote themselves to their children's education, so in the early days it was all playtime.
Later, schools were started for boys, and dreadful places they were.

As General Vallejo describes them, they were generally held in a narrow, badly lighted room,
with no adornment but a large green cross or some picture of a saint hanging beside the master's
table. The master was often an old soldier in fantastic dress, with ill-tempered visage. The
scholar entered, walked the length of the room, knelt before the cross or picture, recited
a prayer, then tremblingly approached the master, saying, "Your hand, Senor Maestro," when
with a grunt the hand would be extended to him to be kissed. Little was taught besides the
reading of the primer and the catechism.

Ranch boys early learned to ride, each having his own horse and saddle. Every year there was
a rodeo, or "round-up," held in each neighborhood, where cattle from all the surrounding ranches
were driven to one point for the purpose of counting the animals and branding the young. Each
stock owner had to be there with all the men from his ranch who could ride, nor must he forget
his branding irons. These brands were recorded in the government book of the department, and
any one changing the form of his iron in any manner without the permission of the judge was
guilty of a crime.

To the boys the rodeo was the most interesting time of the whole year. The coming of the strange
herds and vaqueros, the counting and the separating of the animals, and the branding of the
young stock made a period of excitement and fun. Here was offered a chance for the display
of good horsemanship. Sometimes as the cattle were being gradually herded into a circular mass,
an unruly cow or bull would suddenly dart from the drove and run away at full speed. A vaquero
on horseback would immediately dash after the animal, and, coming up with it, lean from the
saddle and seizing the runaway by the tail, spur his horse forward. Then by a quick movement
he would give a jerk and suddenly let go his hold, when the animal would fall rolling over
and over on the ground. By the time it was up again it was tamed. Many a boy earned his first
praise for good riding at a rodeo.

Nowhere in the world were there better and more graceful riders. Horses used for pleasure were
fine, spirited animals. The saddle and the bridle were generally handsomely inlaid with silver
or gold. A California gentleman in fiesta costume, mounted on his favorite horse, was a delight
to the eyes. His hat, wide in the brim, high and pointed in the crown, was made of soft gray
wool and ornamented with gold or silver lace and cord, sometimes embroidered with rubies and
emeralds until it was very heavy and exceedingly valuable. His white shirt was of thin, embroidered
muslin, and the white stock, too, was of thin stuff wrapped several times around the neck,
then tied gracefully in front. The jacket was of cloth or velvet, in dark colors, blue, green,
or black, with buttons and lace trimmings of silver or gold, often of a very elaborate design.
About the waist was tied a wide sash of soft material and gay color, the ends hanging down
at the side. The breeches were of velvet or heavy cloth, dark in color, save when the rider
was gay in his taste, then they might be of bright tints. They either ended at the knee, below
which were leggings of deerskin, or fitted the figure closely down to just above the ankle,
where they widened out and were slashed at the outer seam, showing thin white drawers, which
puffed prettily between the slashes. A gentleman in Los Angeles still has the trimmings for
such suit, consisting of three hundred and fifty pieces of silver filigree work.

Every one seemed to live out of doors, and though the ranchos were widely scattered, there
was much visiting and social gayety. All who could, traveled on horseback; while the mother
of the family, the children, and old people used the clumsy carreta with its squeaking wheels.

One of the prettiest sights was a wedding procession as it escorted the bride from her home
to the mission church. Horses were gayly caparisoned, and the riders richly dressed. The nearest
relative of the bride carried her before him on the saddle, across which hung a loop of gold
or silver braid for her stirrup, in which rested her little satin-shod foot. Her escort sat
behind her on the bearskin saddle blanket. Accompanying the party were musicians playing guitar
and violin, each managing horse and instrument with equal skill.

The California woman generally wore a full skirt of silk, satin, wool, or cotton, a loose waist
of thin white goods, and, in cold weather, a short bolero jacket of as rich material as could
be obtained. A bright-colored ribbon served for a sash, and a lace handkerchief or a muslin
scarf was folded over the shoulders and neck. In place of bonnet and wrap a lace or silk shawl,
or a narrow scarf called a rebosa, was gracefully draped over the head and shoulders.

Children were dressed like the older people, and very pretty were the girls in their low-necked,
short-sleeved camisas or waists, and full gay skirts, their hair in straight braids hanging
down over the shoulders. The short breeches, pretty round jackets, and gay sashes were very
becoming to the boys.

At night the daughters of the house, big and little, were locked into their rooms by their
mother, the father attending in the same manner to the boys. In the morning the mother's first
duty was to unlock these doors.

Various games were played. Blindman's buff was a great favorite for moonlight nights. There
was also a game called cuatrito, in which the players threw bits of stone at a mark drawn on
the ground at a certain distance.

"In my time," said a prominent Californian of to-day, "we used to play this game with golden
slugs instead of stones; there was always a basket of slugs sitting door. We liked them because
they carried well, and we thought it nothing unusual to use them as playthings. They were abundant
in most of the houses; my mother and her friends used them as soap dishes in, the bedrooms.

"In the spare rooms was always a little pile of money covered by a napkin, from which the visitor
was expected to help himself if he needed. We would have considered it disgraceful to count
the guest money."

"Our parents were very strict with us," said another Californian, "much more so than is the
custom to-day. Sometimes while the parents, brothers, and sisters were eating their meal, a
child who was naughty had for punishment to kneel in one corner of the dining room before a
high stool, on which was an earthen plate, a tin cup, and a wooden spoon. It was worse than
a flogging, a thousand times. As soon as the father went out, the mother and sisters hastened
to the sorrowful one and comforted him with the best things from the table."

The clothes were not laundered each week, but were saved up often for several weeks or even
a month or two, and then came a wash-day frolic. Imagine wash day looked forward to as a delightful
event! So it was, however, to many California children. Senorita Vallejo, in the Century Magazine
(Vol. 41), thus describes one of these excursions:--

"It made us children happy to be waked before sunrise to prepare for the 'wash-day expedition.'
The night before, the Indians had soaped the clumsy carreta's great wheels. Lunch was placed
in baskets, and the gentle oxen were yoked to the pole. We climbed in under the green cloth
of an old Mexican flag which was used as an awning, and the white-haired Indian driver plodded
beside with his long oxgoad. The great piles of soiled linen were fastened on the backs of
horses led by other servants, while the girls and women who were to do the washing trooped
along by the side of the carreta. Our progress was slow, and it was generally sunrise before
we reached the spring. The steps of the carreta were so low that we could climb in or out without
stopping the oxen. The watchful mother guided the whole party, seeing that none strayed too
far after flowers, or loitered too long. Sometimes we heard the howl of coyotes and the noise
of other wild animals, and then none of the children were allowed to leave the carreta.

"A great dark mountain rose behind the spring, and the broad, beautiful valley, unfenced and
dotted with browsing herds, sloped down to the bay [of San Francisco]. We watched the women
unload the linen and carry it to the spring, where they put home-made soap on the clothes,
dipped them in the spring, and rubbed them on the smooth rocks until they were white as snow.
Then they were spread out to dry on the tops of the low bushes growing on the warm, windless
southern slopes of the mountain." After a happy day in the woods came "the late return at twilight,
when the younger children were all asleep in the slow carreta and the Indians were singing
hymns as they drove the linen-laden horses down the dusky ravines."

As at the missions, soon the ranchos, little was raised for sale save hides and tallow from
the cattle. It was not the fault of the settlers that, living in so fertile a country, they
made so little use of its productiveness. Spain's laws in regard to trade were made entirely
in the interests of the mother country, the settlers of New Spain, especially of Alta California,
having no encouragement to raise more than they needed for use at home. They could not sell
their produce to ships from foreign countries, for the penalty for that was death to the foreigner
and severe punishment for the colonist. All trade had to be carried on in Spanish vessels,
and it was forbidden to ship olive oil, wine, or anything that was raised or made in the home
country. As California and Spain were much alike in climate and soil, this law really stopped
all outside trade except that arising from cattle.

After the territory became a Mexican province, the rules were not so severe in regard to foreign
trade, and finally the New England vessels freely entered the ports by paying certain duties
to the government.

To the young people upon the ranchos the arrival of a trading vessel was a great event. If
the port was not far from the house, the Patrona and the young ladies sometimes went on board
to select for themselves from the miscellaneous cargo the things they desired; but as they
were generally afraid of the water, especially of trusting themselves in the ship's boats,
the father and boys often represented the family on such occasions.

When news arrived that a ship was coming down the coast, elder sisters became very kind and
attentive to younger brothers, who accepted panocha (a coarse brown sugar cast in square or
scalloped cakes) and other gifts contentedly, knowing well they would be expected to "coax
Father" to buy the ring, sash, necklace, or fan which the good sister particularly desired.
Often a ranchero would go down to the harbor with ten or fifteen ox carts loaded with hides,
skins, and tallow, and return with ranch implements, furniture, dishes, sugar, other food,
clothes, and ornaments of all kinds. Such laughing, chattering, and excitement as there was
when the squeaking ox carts came into the courtyard! The whole household, from the Patrona
and her guests to the Indian mothers with their children from the kitchen precincts, gathered
to watch the slow unloading of the purchases. Slow, indeed, seemed the process to the eager
children of the family. Except on horseback for a short dash, the Californian never hurried.
For a journey the usual gait was a little jog trot, hardly faster than a walk.

Senorita Vallejo, in the Century Magazine, describes the loading of a ship's cargo: "The landing
place for the mission of San Jose was at the mouth of a salt water creek several miles away.
When a trading vessel entered San Francisco Bay, the large ship's boat would be sent up this
creek to collect the hides and tallow; but if the season was a wet one, the roads would be
too bad for the ox carts; then each separate hide was doubled across the middle and placed
on the head of an Indian. Sometimes long files of Indians might be seen, each carrying hides
in this manner, as they trotted across the wide, flat plains or pushed their way through the
little forest of dried mustard stalks to the creek mouth."

No such thing was known as a Californian breaking his word in regard to a debt. Yankee ship
owners trusted him freely. Once, when a ship was in port, the captain left it for a little
while in charge of the clerk whose business it was to sell the goods, but who had never been
in California before and knew nothing of its customs. Down to the shore came a ranchero attended
by servants and ox carts. He came on board and bought many things, intending to pay later with
hides and tallow which were not then ready. When he ordered the goods taken ashore with never
a word as to payment, the clerk informed him that he must either give money or else give some
writing saying that he would pay.

Now this Californian, though rich in lands and stock, could neither read nor write. When he
understood that he was being distrusted, he gravely drew from his beard a hair, and, handing
it to the clerk, said: "Give this to your master and tell him it is a hair from the beard of
Agustin Machado. You will find it sufficient guarantee." The clerk saw that he had made a mistake,
and, taking the hair, placed it in the leaves of his note book and allowed the goods to be
taken away. When the captain returned, he was mortified that there had been any distrust shown.

While California was a Spanish province its chief ruler was appointed by the home government
and was always an educated gentleman of good family, generally an officer of the army. The
coming of a new governor was a great event in the colony and was celebrated with all possible
ceremony and display.

In 1810 Mexico began its revolt against Spain. In California the people were in sympathy with
the mother country and had no doubt of her final success. For a long time they received little
news of how the war was progressing. They only knew that no more money was sent up to pay the
soldiers or the expenses of government, that the padres no longer received any income from
the Pius Fund, that even the trading vessels from Mexico upon which they depended for their
supplies had ceased to come.

Times became so hard that the local government turned for aid to the missions, which had become
largely self-supporting. Many of them were indeed wealthy communities, and the padres responded
generously to the demand for help. For several years they furnished food and clothing to the
soldiers, and money for the expenses of government, for the most of which they never received
payment.

Gradually the fine clothes of the Californians wore out, no vessels arrived from which they
could purchase more, and again it was the missions which came to the rescue. Their cotton and
woolen goods were in great demand. Indian spinners and weavers were busy from morning until
night making clothes for the "gente de razon," or "people of reason," which was the term by
which the white settlers were distinguished from the natives.

In 1822 a vessel came up from the south, bringing to the governor official notice that the
war had been decided in favor of Mexico, and that California was therefore a Mexican province.
This was disagreeable news to the Californians, but after consultation held by the governor,
his officers, the padre who was the president of the missions, and some of the leading citizens,
it was decided that they were too far away from Spain to be able to resist, and that they should
take the oath to be true to the Mexican government. For the padres, who were all Spaniards
and loyal to the home government, this was a hard thing to do, and they never became reconciled
to the change.

From this time California was not so well governed. Mexico, which was then an empire but soon
became a republic, had its hands full looking after its own affairs, and little attention was
paid its far-off province. Its best men were needed at home, and the governors sent up the
coast were not always wise or pleasing to the people. There were several revolutions with but
little bloodshed. One governor was sent back to Mexico. At one time the Californians declared
that theirs was a free state, and a young man named Alvarado was made governor. General Vallejo,
who was his uncle, was given command of the army. But soon the Californians quarreled bitterly
among themselves, so that this government did not last long and the territory went back under
the rule of Mexico. That government, in order to have peace in the province, confirmed Alvarado
and Vallejo in their positions.

During the war between Mexico and Spain a South American pirate paid a visit to the coast of
Upper California. Monterey was attacked and partly destroyed, also the mission of San Juan
Capistrano and the rancho El Refugio, the home of Captain Ortega, the discoverer of San Francisco
Bay. In the crew of the pirate ship was a young American named Chapman, who had found life
among his rough associates not so interesting as he had hoped it would be, so he deserted,
but was taken prisoner by the Californians and imprisoned in a canyon near the present site
of Pasadena. Later he was brought down to Los Angeles and set at liberty. He found the people
of the pueblo planning to build a church on the plaza, and he told them that if they would
let him have some Indian workmen he would get some large timbers down from the canyon. He accomplished
this successfully, and it was considered a wonderful work. The stumps of the trees can yet
be seen far up on the mountain side, and the timbers are still in the plaza church.

Visiting San Gabriel, young Chapman found the padres having trouble to keep the flour which
they ground in their new stone mill from being dampened by water from the mill wheel. Knowing
something of machinery, the American remedied the defect by means of a flutter wheel, and there
was no more trouble.

For years the catching of otters for their fur along the lagoons and bays about San Francisco
and Monterey brought considerable money to the northern missions. Chapman, finding that the
padres of San Gabriel were anxious to engage in this trade, built for them the first sea-going
boat ever constructed in southern California. It was a schooner, the various parts of which
he made in the workshop of the mission. They were then carried down to San Pedro, where he
put them together and successfully launched the vessel.

Finally, to close his history, it is recorded of Mr. Chapman that he fell in love with the
pretty daughter of Captain Ortega, whose home he had helped his pirate associates to attack,
that he married her and lived to a good old age. The country had few more useful citizens than
this capable man, the first American to settle in the southern part of California.

With the secularization of the missions in 1833-34 came a change in the peaceful pastoral life.
In each section all that was of interest had from the first centered around its mission. One
of the chief pleasures of the early Californians was the feast day, "La Fiesta," which celebrated
a saint's birthday. During the year there were many of these festivals. First there were religious
exercises at the mission church; then in the great square there followed dancing, games, and
feasting, in which all classes took some part. These happy church festivals ceased with the
breaking up of the mission settlements. Some of the Indians disturbed the community by disorderly
conduct, and the ill treatment and suffering of the rest of these simple people caused sorrow
and dismay in the hearts of the better portion of the settlers. There was a wild scramble for
the lands, stock, and other wealth which had been gathered by the missionaries and their Indian
workmen.

Many of the beautiful churches were sold to people who cared nothing for the faith they represented.
In some, cattle were stabled. The mission bells were silent, and many of the mission settlements,
once so busy and prosperous, were solitary and in ruins.

Life in the great ranchos still went on much as before, but it was no longer so simple and
joyous. A change had begun, and not many years later, with the coming of the Americans at the
time of the Mexican war, the peaceful, happy life of Spanish California was brought to an end.

Chapter VI

The Footsteps of the Stranger

At no point does the early history of California come in contact with that of the colonies
of the Eastern coast of the United States. The nearest approach to such contact was in the
year 1789, when Captain Arguello, commander of the presidio of San Francisco, received the
following orders from the governor of the province:--

"Should there arrive at your port a ship named Columbia, which, they say, belongs to General
Washington of the American States, you will take measures to secure the vessel with all the
people aboard with discretion, tact, cleverness, and caution." As the Columbia failed to enter
the Californian port, the Spanish commander had no chance to try his wits and guns with those
of the Yankee captain.

It would seem as though the Californians lived for a time in fear of their Eastern neighbors,
since prayers were offered at some of the missions that the people be preserved from "Los Americanos;"
but after the coming of the first two or three American ships, when trade began to be established,
there arose the kindliest feeling between the New England traders and the Californians. The
ship Otter, from Boston, which came to the coast in 1796, was the first vessel from the United
States to anchor in a California port.

La Perouse, in command of a French scientific expedition, was the first foreigner of prominence
to visit California. Of his visit, which occurred in the fall of 1786, he writes in his journal:
"The governor put into the execution of his orders in regard to, us a graciousness and air
of interest that merits from us the liveliest acknowledgments, and the padres were as kind
to us as the officers. We were invited to dine at the Mission San Carlos, two leagues from
Monterey, were received upon our arrival there like lords of a parish visiting their estates.
The president of the missions, clad in his robe, met us at the door of the church, which was
illuminated as for the grandest festival. We were led to the foot of the altar and the Te Deum
chanted in thanksgiving for the happy issue of our voyage."

La Perouse's account of the country, the people, and the missions is of great value in giving
us a picture of these times. In regard to the Indians he said that he wished the padres might
teach them, besides the principles of the Christian religion, some facts about law and civil
government, "Although," said he, "I admit that their progress would be very slow, the pains
which it would be necessary to take very hard and tiresome."

Captain Vancouver, with two vessels of the British navy, bound on an exploring voyage round
the world, was the next stranger to visit, California. So much did he enjoy the courtesy of
the Spanish officers that when his map of the coast came out it was found that he had honored
his hosts of San Francisco and Monterey by naming for them two leading capes of the territory,
one Point Arguello and the other Point Sal.

As early as 1781 Russia had settlements in Sitka and adjacent islands, for the benefit of its
fur traders, and in 1805 the Czar sent a young officer of his court to look into the condition
of these trading posts. Count Rezanof found the people suffering and saw that unless food was
brought to them promptly, they would die from starvation. San Francisco was the nearest port,
and though he knew that Spain did not allow trade with foreign countries, the Russian determined
to make the attempt to get supplies there. Loading a vessel with goods which had been brought
out for the Indian trade of the north coast, he sailed southward. The story of his visit is
well told by Bret Harte in his beautiful poem, "Concepcion de Arguello."

Rezanof was warmly welcomed and generously entertained by Commander Arguello of the presidio
of San Francisco, but in vain did he try to trade off his cargo for food for his starving people.
The governor and his officers dared not disobey the laws of Spain in regard to foreign trade.
While they were arguing and debating, however, something happened which changed their views.
The Count fell in love with the commander's beautiful daughter, Concepcion.

It seemed to the governor that the man who was to be son-in-law in the powerful family of Arguello
could not be considered as a foreigner, and therefore the law need not apply in his case. Thus
the Count got his ship load of food and sailed away, promising to return as soon as possible
for his betrothed wife. One of the most interesting pictures of early California is the poem
which tells of this pathetic love story.

Count Rezanof was so pleased with the beauty and fertility of California that his letters interested
the Czar, who decided to found a colony on the coast. An exploring expedition was sent out,
and the territory about Russian River in Sonoma County was purchased of the Indians for three
blankets, three pairs of trousers, two axes, three hoes, and some beads. Fort Ross was the
main settlement, and was the home of the governor, his officers and their families, all accomplished,
intelligent men and women. Besides the soldiers there were a number of mechanics and a company
of natives from the Aleutian Islands, who were employed by the Russians to hunt the otter.
Up and down the coast roamed these wild sea hunters, even collecting their furry game in San
Francisco Bay and defying the comandante of the presidio, who had no boats with which to pursue
them, and so could do nothing but fume and write letters of remonstrance to the governor of
Fort Ross. Spain, and later Mexico, looked with disfavor and suspicion upon the Russian settlement,
but the people of California were always ready for secret trade with their northern neighbors.

In 1816 Otto von Kotzebue, captain of the Russian ship Rurik, visited San Francisco and was
entertained by the comandante, Lieutenant Luis Arguello. With Captain Kotzebue was the German
poet, Albert von Chamisso.

The Russian captain, with brighter faith and keener insight than any other of the early visitors
to the coast, says of the country: "It has hitherto been the fate of these regions to remain
unnoticed; but posterity will do them justice; towns and cities will flourish where all is
now desert; the waters over which scarcely a solitary boat is yet seen to glide will reflect
the flags of all nations; and a happy, prosperous people receiving with thankfulness what prodigal
nature bestows for their use will dispense her treasures over every part of the world."

In the writings of Albert von Chamisso can be found a most interesting description of his visit.
To him is due the honor of giving to our Californian poppy its botanical name.

In 1841, the supply of otter having become exhausted, the Russians sold their property and
claims about Fort Ross to the Swiss emigrant, the genial John Sutter. In 1903, through the
agency of the Landmarks Society, this property and its still well-preserved buildings came
into the possession of the state of California.

As early as 1826 there were a number of foreigners settled in California. These were mostly
men from Great Britain or the United States who had married California women and lived and
often dressed like their Spanish-speaking neighbors. Captain John Sutter, the Swiss who bought
out the Russians of Fort Ross, came to California in 1839. He obtained from the Mexican government
an extensive grant of land about the present site of Sacramento, and here he erected the famous
Sutter's Fort where all newcomers, were made welcome and, if they desired, given work under
this kindest of masters. Around the fort, which was armed with cannon bought from the Russians,
he built a high stockade. He gained the good will of the Indians and had their young men drilled
daily in military tactics by a German officer.

Governor Alvarado, at the time of his revolution in 1837, had in his forces, under a leader
named Graham, a company of wandering Americans, trappers and hunters of the roughest type.
Although there was no real war, and no fighting occurred, yet when Alvarado and his party were
successful, Graham and his men demanded large rewards, and because the governor would not satisfy
them they began to persecute him in every way possible. Alvarado says: "I was insulted at every
turn by the drunken followers of Graham; when I walked in my garden they would climb on the
wall and call upon me in terms of the greatest familiarity, 'Ho, Bautista, come here, I want
to speak to you.' It was 'Bautista' here, 'Bautista' there."

To express dissatisfaction they held meetings in which they talked loudly about their country's
getting possession of the land, until Governor Alvarado, having good reason to believe that
they were plotting a revolution, expelled them from the territory and sent them to Mexico.

The United States took up the defense of the exiles and insisted on their being returned to
California. It does not seem that the better class of Americans who had been long residents
of the country sympathized with Graham and his followers, but from this time there were less
kindly relations between the Californians and the citizens of the United States who came into
the territory.

We come now to the story of the conquest. 

There were two attempts to blow up Sir Andrew Fraser's train and one, of the type with which
we are now unhappily familiar, to shoot him on a public occasion. Two attempts were made to murder
Mr. Kingsford, one of which caused the death of two English ladies. Inspector Nanda Lal Banerji, Babu
Ashutosh Biswas, the Public Prosecutor at Alipore, Sir William Curzon-Wyllie, Mr. Jackson,
and only the other day Deputy Supdt. Shams-ul-Alum have been shot in the most deliberate and
cold-blooded fashion. Of three informers two have been killed, and on the third vengeance has
been taken by the murder of his brother in the sight of his mother
and sisters.

Mr. Allen, the magistrate of Dacca, was shot through the lungs and narrowly escaped with his
life. Two picric acid bombs were thrown at His Excellency the Viceroy at Ahmedabad, and only failed
to explode by reason of their faulty construction. Not long afterwards an attempt was made
with a bomb on the Deputy Commissioner of Umballa.

These things are the natural and necessary consequence of the teachings of certain journals.
They have prepared the soil in which anarchy flourishes; they have sown the seed and they are
answerable for the crop. This is no mere general statement; the chain of causation is clear.
Not only does the campaign of violence date from the change in the tone of the Press, but specific
outbursts of incitement have been followed by specific outrages.

And now, Sir, I appeal to the Council in the name of all objects that patriotic Indians have at
heart to give their cordial approval to this Bill. It is called for in the interests of the State,
of our officers both Indian and European, and most of all of the
rising generation of young men.

In this matter, indeed, the interests of the State and the interests of the people are one and
the same. If it is good for India that British rule should continue, it is equally essential
that the relations between Government and the educated community should be cordial and intimate, and
that cannot long be the case if the organs of that community lay
themselves out to embitter those relations in every sort of way and
to create a permanent atmosphere of latent and often open hostility.

In the long run people will believe what they are told, if they are told it often enough, and
if they hear nothing on the other side. There is plenty of work in India waiting to be done,
but it will be done, if the energies of the educated classes are wasted in incessant abuse and suspicion
of Government. As regards the officers of Government the case is clear. At all costs they
must be protected from intimidation and worse. And it is our Indian officials who stand in
most need of protection, for they are most exposed to the danger. The detailed work of investigation
and detection necessarily falls upon them, and they are specially vulnerable through their
families.

They have done most admirable work during the troubles of the last few years, and have displayed
under most trying conditions courage and loyalty that are beyond all praise. We are bound in
honour to protect them from threats of murder and outrage which sooner or later bring about
their own fulfilment.

To my mind, Sir, the worst feature of the present situation is the terrible influence that the
Press exercises upon the student class. I was talking about this about a month ago with a distinguished
Indian who is in close touch with schools and colleges in Bengal. He took a most gloomy view of
the present state of things and the prospects of the immediate future.

According to him the younger generation had got entirely out of hand, and many of them had become
criminal fanatics uncontrollable by their parents or their masters.

I believe. Sir, that this Bill will prove to be a wholesome and beneficial measure of national
education, that it will in course of time prevent a number of young men from drifting into evil
courses and ruining their prospects in life, and that in passing it this Council will earn
the lasting gratitude of many thousands of Indian parents.

NOTE 2

THE SUPERIORITY OF HINDU CIVILIZATION. In an "Open Letter to his Countrymen," published at
the Sri Narayan Press in Calcutta, Mr. Arabindo Ghose has in so many words proclaimed the
superiority of Hindu to Western civilization.

"We reject," he writes, "the claim of aliens to force upon us a civilization inferior to our
own or to keep us out of our inheritance on the untenable ground of a superior fitness."

NOTE 3

SEDITIOUS PLAYS.

One of the most popular of these plays is The Killing of Kichaka (Kichaka-vadd). The author, Mr.
Khadilkar, was assistant editor of the Kesari until Tilak was arrested and convicted in 1908,
and he then took over the chief editorship. The play has been acted all over the Deccan as well
as in Bombay City to houses packed with large native audiences. The following account of it
appeared in The Times of January 18 last: Founded upon the Mahabharata,
The Killing of Kichaka seems at first sight a purely classical drama.

It will be remembered by Oriental students that Duryodhan, jealous of his cousin Yudhistira,
Emperor of Hastinapura and the eldest of the five Pandava brothers, induced him to play at
dice with a Court gambler called Sakuni. To him the infatuated monarch lost his wealth, his
kingdom, his own and his brother's freedom, and lastly that of Draupadi, the wife of all the
brothers. Eventually, at the intercession of Duryodhan's father, it was agreed that the Emperor,
in full settlement of his losses, should with his brothers and Draupadi abandon Hastinapura
to Duryodhan for 13 years. Of these 12 were to be spent in the forest
and one in disguise in some distant city.

Should, however, the disguise of any be penetrated, all would be obliged to pass a further 12
years in the forest. When the 12 years had expired, the brothers fixed on Viratnagar, the
capital of Virata, King of the Malyas, in which to spend their year of concealment. Yudhistira
took the name of Kankbhat, a professional dicer, and Bhima that of
Ballava, a professional cook.

Under their pseudonyms all five brothers obtained posts in the King's service, while Draupadi,
styling herself a sairandhri or tirewoman, entered the service of the Queen Sudeshna. Before
the year of concealment ended Kichaka, the brother of Queen Sudeshna and commander-in-chief of
the Malya forces, returned from a visit to Duryodhan at Hastinapura. Duryodhan had given him
as presents Yudhistira's regalia and Draupadi's jewels, and Kichaka
boasted that, as Duryodhan's friend, he would one after the other
kill the five Pandavas in single combat and then wed their queen.

While telling King Virata's Court of his reception, his eye fell on Draupadi, and learning that
she was a sairandhri and being struck with her beauty, he formally requested the King Virata
that she might be sent to his harem. The King consenting, Yudhistira was faced with the dilemma
of suffering his queen's dishonour or of revealing his identity. Eventually his brother Bhima
solved the difficulty by secretly killing Kichaka.

It is out of this story that Mr. Khadilkar has sought for the materials of his play. It opens
with the return of Kichaka to Viratnagar and his passion for the beautiful sairandhri. The latter
seeks in turn the protection of the King and his queen, and of Kichaka's
wife Ratnaprabha; but Kichaka, who as commander-in-chief and on account
of the number of his followers is all-powerful in Malya, becomes daily
more insistent.

He reminds the King of his past exploits, and threatens to leave his service, taking his followers
with him. Finally, Virata is driven to make a feeble compromise. He will not himself hand over
the sairandhri to Kichaka, but he will have her sent to a temple of Bairoba outside the town,
washing his hands of all responsibility as to subsequent events. All this time the rescue of
Draupadi has been repeatedly discussed between Yudhistira and his brother Bhima. The former
is all for mild methods, feeling sure that justice will ultimately
prevail.

The mighty Bhima wishes to strangle Kichaka regardless of consequences. At last Bhima and Draupadi
together extract from him a most reluctant permission. Bhima goes secretly to the Bairoba temple,
and removing from its stand the god's idol, he takes its place. So hidden, he is present when Draupadi,
abandoned by the King's guards, is seized upon by Kichaka. In vain Draupadi appeals to the
latter for mercy. He laughs alike at tears and menaces, and is about to carry her off in triumph
when the god Bairoba is seen to rise from his pedestal. It is Bhima. He seizes the terrified
Kichaka, hurls him to the floor, and strangles him at Draupadi's
feet.

ITS ALLEGORICAL MEANING.

These things are an allegory.

Although his name is nowhere uttered on the stage or mentioned in the printed play every one
in the theatre knows that Kichaka is really intended to be Lord Curzon, that Draupadi is India,
and that Yudhistira is the Moderate and Bhima the Extremist Party. Every now and again unmistakable
clues are provided. The question, indeed, admits of no doubt, for since the play first appeared in
1907 the whole Deccan has been blazoning forth the identity of the characters. Once they have been
recognized, the inner meaning of the play becomes clear.

A weak Government at home, represented by King Virata, has given the Viceroy a free hand.
He has made use of it to insult and humiliate India. Of her two champions, the Moderates advocate
gentle--that is, constitutional--measures. The Extremists, out of deference to the older party,
agree, although satisfied of the ineffectiveness of this course. Waiting until this has been
demonstrated, they adopt violent methods, and everything becomes easy. The oppressor is disposed
of without difficulty. His followers--namely, the Anglo-Indians--are, as it is prophesied in
the play and as narrated in the Mahabharata, massacred with equal ease. And the Extremists boast
that, having freed their country, they will be able to defend it against all invaders, thus
averting the calamities which, according to Lord Morley, would overtake India on the disappearance
of the British.

It may be said that all this is mere fooling. But no Englishman who has seen the play acted would
agree. All his life he will remember the tense, scowling faces of the men as they watch Kichaka's outrageous
acts, the glistening eyes of the Brahmin ladies as they listen to Draupadi's entreaties, their
scorn of Yudhistira's tameness, their admiration of Bhima's passionate protests, and the deep hum
of satisfaction which approves the slaughter of the tyrant.

NOTE 4

SHIVAJI'S EXHORTATIONS.

In the Kesari just a week before the Poona murders, the following verses were put into the mouth
of Shivaji:

"I delivered my country by establishing 'Swaraj' and saving religion. I betook myself to the
Paradise of Indra to shake off the great exhaustion that came upon me from my labours. Why, O
my beloved ones, have you awakened me? I planted in the soil of Maharashtra virtues that may
be likened to the Kalpavriksha (one of the five trees of Indra's Paradise that yields whatsoever
may be desired); sublime policy based on strong foundations, valour in the battlefield like
that of Karma, patriotism, genuine unselfishness, and unity, the best of all. ... Alas, alas!
all I see now is the ruin of my country. Those forts of mine to build which I poured out money,
to acquire which torrents of fiery blood streamed forth, from which I sallied forth to victory
roaring like a lion--all those are crumbling away. What a desolation is this! Foreigners are dragging
out Lakshmi (the goddess of Good Fortune) by the hand of persecution.

Along with her Plenty has fled, and with Plenty, Health. The wicked Akabaya (the goddess of
Misfortune) stalks with Famine at her side through the country, and relentless Death scatters foul
diseases."

"Say, where are those splendid ones who promptly shed their blood on the spot where my perspiration
fell? They eat bread once in a day, but not even enough of that.

They toil through hard times by tightening up their bellies. O People, how have you tolerated
in the sacred places the carrying off to prison of those holy preceptors, those religious teachers
of mine, those saintly Brahmans whom I protected--who, while they devoted themselves to their
religious practices in times of peace, exchanged the Darbah (sacrificial grass) in their hands
for weapons which they used manfully when occasion required.

The cow, the foster-mother of babes when their mother leaves them, the mainstay of the hard-worked
peasant, the importer of strength to my people, whom I worshipped as my mother and protected more than
my life, is taken daily to the slaughter-house and ruthlessly butchered
by the unbelievers.... How can I bear this heartrending spectacle?

Have all our leaders become like helpless figures on the chess-board? What misfortune has overtaken
the land!"

NOTE 5

TILAK IN THE CIVIL COURTS.

The Tai Maharaj case came up once more in September on the Appellate
side of the Bombay High Court on appeal against the decision of the
Lower Courts.

It was contended on behalf of Tai Maharaj, the widow, that her adoption of one Jagganath was
invalid owing to the undue influence brought to bear upon her at the time by Tilak and one of
his friends and political associates, Mr. G.S. Khaparde, who were executors under the will
of her husband, Shri Baba Maharajah. Mr. Justice Chandavarkar, in the course of his judgment reversing
the decisions of the Lower Courts, said that on the one hand they had a young inexperienced widow,
with a right of ownership but ignorant of that right, and led to
believe that she was legally subject to the control of the executors
of her husband's will as regarded the management of the estate which
she had by law inherited from her son, prevented from going to Kolhapur
even to attend a marriage in a family of relations, and anxious to
adopt a boy from Kolhapur as far as possible.

On the other hand they had two men of influence learned in the law, taking her to an out-of-the-way
place ostensibly for the selection of a boy, and then, as it were, hustling her there by representing
that everything was within, their discretion, and thereby forcing her to adopt their nominee.
In these circumstances they came to the conclusion that the adoption was not valid, because it
was brought about by means of undue influence exercised over Tai Maharaj by both Tilak and
Khaparde.

Mr. Justice Chandavarkar is a Hindu Judge of the highest reputation,
and the effect of this judgment is extremely damaging to Tilak's private
reputation as a man of honour, or even of common honesty.

NOTE 6

KHUDIRAM BOSE'S CONFESSION.

A similar confession was made by Khudiram Bose, the author of the fatal bomb outrage at Muzafferpur.
When he was brought before the District Magistrate on May 1, 1908, within twenty-four hours of
the crime, he stated: I came to Muzafferpur five or six days ago from Calcutta to kill Mr.
Kingsford. I came of my own initiative, having read in various papers things which incited me to
come to this determination. These papers were the Sandhya, Hitabadi, Jugantar and many others.
They wrote of great Zoolum done to India by the English Government. Mr. Kingsford's name was not specially
mentioned, but I determined to kill him because he put several men
in gaol.

Besides reading the papers I heard the lectures of Bpin Pal, Surendranath
Banerjee, Gisputty Kabyatirtha, and others.

There were lectures in Beadon-square and College-square [in the student
quarter of Calcutta], and they inspired me to do this.

There is also a Sanyasi who lectures in Beadon-square, who is very strong.

NOTE 7

RELIGION AND POLITICS

On this point a very important piece of evidence has been recently produced in Court in the course
of the Dacca Conspiracy trial. It is a letter, of which the authenticity is beyond dispute, written
by Mr. Surendranath Banerjee to one of the extremist leaders, in which he suggests means for
carrying out the proposed celebration of the "boycott" anniversary on August 7 in spite of the prohibition
of public meetings under the Seditious Meetings Act.

"My suggestion," writes this distinguished politician, who is also the head of Ripon College,
one of the most popular colleges in Calcutta, "is that you should organize a religious ceremony
on the 7th of August such as Shakti-puja and Kali-puja, and have
Swadeshi kalka or jatra and Swadeshi conversation by having a sort
of conference.

Give a religious turn to the movement. As for the Muhammedans, if you can get them to your side,
why not have a wuz followed by Swadeshi preaching? Kindly let me know what you do. But something
must be done." Shakti rites and the worship of Kali are associated with some of the most libidinous
and cruel of Hindu superstitions. The simultaneous attempt to attract Mahomedans by grafting "Swadeshi
preaching" on to one of their accustomed religious services betrays
Mr. Surendranath Banerjee's cynical indifference to any and every
form of religious creed so long as it can be exploited in the interest
of his political creed.

NOTE 8

THE "REMOVAL OF INFORMERS."

Shortly after the murder of Shams-ul-Alam, the following "Appeal" was printed and issued in Calcutta
with reference to the "removal of informers":

HATYA NOY JAGNA. (Not Murder but Sacrifice.) Cash price: the head of a European or the heads
of two Informers. 50th issue Calcutta, Sunday, 6th Chaitra, 1316.

Tempted
by gold, some native devils in form of men, the disgrace of India--the
police--arrested those great men Barendra Ghose and others who worked
for the freedom of their country by sacrificing their interests and
dedicating their lives in the performance of the sacred ceremony of
Jagna, preparing bombs. The greatest of these devils in human form,
Ashitosh Biswas, began to pave for these heroes the way to the gallows.
Bravo, Charu! [the murderer of Biswas] all honour to your parents.
To glorify them, to show the highest degree of courage, disregarding
the paltry short span of life, you removed the figure of that monster
from the world. Not long ago, the Whites by force and trick, filched
India from the Mahomedans. That mean wretch Shams-ul-Alam, who espoused
the cause of the enemies of Alamghir Padshah, who put a stain on the
name of his forefathers for the sake of gold--to-day you have removed
that fiend from the sacred soil of India. From Nuren Gossain to Talit
Chakravarti, all turned approvers through the machinations of that
fiendish wizard Shams-ul-Alam and by his torture. Had you not removed
that ally of the monsters, could there be any hope for India?

Many
have raised the cry that to rebel is a great sin. But what is rebellion?
Is there anything in India to rebel against? Can a Feringhee be recognized
as the King of India, whose very touch, whose mere shadow compels
Hindus to purify themselves?

These are merely Western Robbers looting
India.... Extirpate them, ye good sons of India, wherever you find
them, without mercy, and with them their spies and secret agents.
Last year 19 lakhs of men died of fever, smallpox, cholera, plague,
and other diseases in Bengal alone. Think yourselves fortunate that
you were not counted amongst those, but remember that plague and cholera
may attack you to-morrow, and is it not better for you to die like
heroes?

When God has so ordained, think ye not that at this auspicious
moment it is the duty of every good son of India to slay these white
enemies? Do not allow yourselves to die of plague and cholera, thus
polluting the sacred soil of Mother-India. Our Shastras are our guide
for discriminating between virtue and vice. Our Shastras repeatedly
tell us that the killing of these white fiends and of their aiders
and abettors is equal to a great ceremonial sacrifice (Asyamedh Jagna.)
Come, one and all.

Whoever was right in the quarrel, Fremont was the chief sufferer, for General Kearny, after
Stockton left, ordered him to return East under arrest and at Washington to undergo a military
trial or court-martial for mutiny and disobedience of orders. Although the court found him
guilty and sentenced him to be dismissed from the army, the President, remembering his services
in the exploration of the West, and quite possibly thinking him not the person most to blame,
pardoned and restored him to his position. Fremont, feeling that he had done nothing wrong,
refused the pardon and resigned from the army. The next year the new President, Taylor, showed
his opinion of the matter by appointing Fremont to conduct the important work of establishing
the boundaries between the United States and Mexico.

General Kearny, when he departed for the East, left Colonel Mason, of the regular army, as
military governor of California. Mason chose as his adjutant, or secretary, a young lieutenant
named Sherman, who, years later, in the Civil War, by his wonderful march through the heart
of the South, came to be considered one of the greatest generals of his time.

Soon after the Mexican war many settlers were gathered about Sutter's Fort and San Francisco
Bay. There were about two thousand Americans, most of them strong, hardy men, all overjoyed
that the territory was in the hands of the United States and all eager to know what would finally
be decided in regard to it. Reports kept arriving of parties of emigrants that were about to
start overland for California.

"They are as certain to come as that the sun will rise to-morrow," said genial Captain Sutter,
"and as the overland trail ends at my rancho, I must be ready to furnish them provisions. They
are always hungry when they get there, especially the tired little children, and the only thing
for me to do is to build a flour mill to grind my grain."

"Well and good," said James Marshall, one of his assistants, an American by birth, a millwright
by trade; "but to build a flour mill requires lumber, and lumber calls for a sawmill."

"We will build it, too," said Sutter. "Take a man and provisions and go up toward the mountains;
there must be good places on my land. I leave it all in your hands." The place was found on
a swift mountain stream. Near the present site of Coloma, in the midst of pine forests, on
the water soon to be so well known as the American River, the sawmill was located. Marshall
also marked out a rough wagon road forty-five miles long down to the fort. Captain Sutter was
delighted.

"Set to work as soon as you like, Marshall," he exclaimed. "This is your business." Soon the
mill was built and almost ready for use.

"You may let the water into the mill race to-night," said Marshall to his men. "I want to test
it and also to carry away some of the loose dirt in the bed."

Down came the water with a rush, carrying off before it the loose earth; all night it ran,
leaving the race with a clean, smooth bed. The next day, Monday, January 24, 1848,--wonderful
day for California--James Marshall went out to look at the mill race to see if everything was
ready to begin work.

"To-morrow," thought he, "we will commence sawing, and put things through as fast as possible.
The men are waiting, we have plenty of trees down, there is nothing to hinder;" but at that
moment as he walked beside the bed of the tail race he saw some glittering yellow particles
among its sands. He stopped and picked one up. The golden touch had come.

The following is Marshall's own description as published in the Century Magazine (Vol. 41).
"It made my heart thump, for I was certain it was gold. Yet it did not seem to be of the right
color; all the gold coin I had seen was of a reddish tinge; this looked more like brass. I
recalled to mind all the metals I had seen or heard of, but I could find none that resembled
this. Suddenly the idea flashed across my mind that it might be iron pyrites. I trembled to
think of it."

Finally, to make sure, Marshall, like Juan Lopez, mounted his horse and rode away to find some
one with more knowledge than himself. That some one was Captain Sutter, who looked in his encyclopedia,
probably the only one in the territory at that time, and by comparing the weight of the metal
with the weight of an equal bulk of water found its specific gravity, which proved it to be
gold. Still Sutter thought that he should like better authority.

About this time some of the business men who had settled in the little town of Yerba Buena,
finding that all ships that entered the harbor were sent by their owners not to Yerba Buena,
of which they knew nothing, but to San Francisco, persuaded the town council to change the
name of the settlement from Yerba Buena to San Francisco, which was already the name of the
mission and presidio.

"Gold! Gold!! Gold!!! from the American River," cried a horseman from the mines, riding down
Market Street, waving his hat in one hand, a bottle of gold dust in the other.

When words like these dropped from the lips of a messenger in any of the little communities,
the result was like a powerful explosion. Everybody scattered, not wounded and dying, however,
but full of life, ready to endure anything, risk anything, for the sake of finding the precious
metal which enables its owner to have for himself and those he loves the comfortable and beautiful
things of the world.

The result at San Francisco is thus described in one of its newspapers of 1848: "Stores are
closed, places of business vacated, a number of houses tenantless, mechanical labor suspended
or given up entirely, nowhere the pleasant hum of industry salutes the ear as of late; but
as if a curse had arrested our onward course of enterprise, everything wears a desolate, sombre
look. All through the Sundays the little church on the plaza is silent. All through the week
the door of the alcalde's office remains locked. As for the shipping, it is left at anchor;
first sailors, then officers departing for the mines."

And how was it at the logging camp where Marshall made his great discovery? The new sawmill,
built with such high hopes, was soon silent and deserted. No more logs were cut, and no lumber
hauled down for the flour mill. There were no men to be found who were willing to cut and saw
logs, build mills, or put in the spring wheat when they might be finding their fortunes at
the mines.

The newly arrived emigrants suffered no doubt from hunger; maybe the children cried for bread;
but most of the men, as soon as they had rested a little and knew what was going on, got together
money enough to buy the simple implements of knife, pan, pick, and cradle, which were all the
tools necessary for the easy placer mining of those days, and joined the endless procession
of those who were pushing up toward the streams and canyons round Sutter's famous sawmill.

As summer came on, the excitement became intense. Not only from the region around San Francisco
Bay, but from San Diego and Los Angeles, people came flocking to the mines. Reports were current
of men finding hundreds of dollars' worth of gold a day, gaining a fortune in a few weeks.
It was almost impossible to hire laborers either in San Francisco or on the ranches. Even the
soldiers caught the gold fever and deserted.

In the summer, Governor Mason and Lieutenant Sherman visited the mines. Upon their return to
Monterey, having seen for themselves that many even of the wildest rumors were true, they made
arrangements to send on to Washington official announcement of the discovery.

How this was accomplished is interesting. A lieutenant of the army was appointed by the governor
for the important office, and a can of sample gold was purchased.

The only vessel on the coast ready for departure was a boat bound for Peru. On this ship the
lieutenant with his pot of gold and the governor's report embarked at Monterey. He reached
the Peruvian port just in time to catch the British steamer back to Panama. Crossing the Isthmus
on horseback, he took a steamer for Kingston, Jamaica. There he found a vessel just leaving
for New Orleans. Reaching that city he at once telegraphed the news to Washington, trusting
it would be in time to form part of the President's message.

The certainty that the wonderful reports of the gold country were true, electrified not only
the whole country but the whole civilized world. Large numbers of people began immediate preparation
for making the overland journey as soon as the weather should permit; while others, too impatient
to wait, left for California by the way of the Isthmus.

In February, 1849, there arrived at Monterey the Panama, the first steamboat to visit the coast.
The whole population turned out to see and welcome it. The Californians as they compared it
with the stately frigates and ships they had been accustomed to see, exclaimed, "How ugly!"
Although it was not a beautiful vessel, its arrival was an event of great importance, for it
was the first of a line of steamers which were under contract to ply monthly between San Francisco
and Panama, and with its coming began such an immigration as the world has seldom known.

In 1849 nearly twenty-five thousand people came by land and almost as many more by sea, from
the States alone. There were between thirty and forty thousand from other parts of the world.

San Francisco at the time of the discovery had about seven hundred inhabitants, and shortly
after only the population of a hamlet, because so many had gone to the gold fields. Now it
suddenly found itself called upon to give shelter to thousands of people bound for the mines,
and many also returning, some successful, others penniless and eager to get work at the very
high wages offered, sometimes as much as thirty dollars a day.

There were streets to be surveyed, houses and warehouses to be built, lumber and brick to be
provided. People were living in tents, in brush houses, even in shelter made by four upright
green poles over which were spread matting and old bedding. Hundreds of ships lay helpless
in the harbor waiting for crews, often for men to unload the cargoes. No longer could the papers
complain of lack of business. The town was like a hive, but such a disorderly one as would
have driven wild any colony of bees.

All was mud flats or water where are now the water front and some of the leading business streets
of the city. On these flats old unseaworthy vessels were drawn up and did duty side by side
with rough board buildings as dwellings and stores. In the rainy seasons the streets were lakes
of mud where mules and drays were sometimes literally submerged. The arrival of the mail steamer
was the event of the month to this host of people so far away from home and loved ones. Guns
were fired, bells rang to announce the approach of the vessel, then there was a wild rush to
the post office, where the long lines of men, most of them wearing flannel shirts, wide hats,
and high boots, extended far down the street. Very high prices were sometimes paid, as high
even as one hundred dollars, by a late corner to buy from some one lucky enough to be near
the head of the line a position near the delivery window. Then if no letter came, how great
was the disappointment!

One man thus described the mines:--

"I was but a lad and my party took me along only because I had a knack at cooking and was willing
to do anything in order to see the place where such wonderful fortunes were made. It was a
hot summer afternoon when, crossing a region of low, thinly wooded hills, we looked down upon
American River; away to the east were high mountain ranges, their peaks, although it was still
August, snow-tipped.

"From them came swiftly down the already famous river. Its volume was evidently diminished
from the heat, and along its gravelly bed men were digging the sand and gravel into buckets.
As I reached them and watched them work I was greatly disappointed. It seemed like very ordinary
dirt they were handling; I saw no gleam of the yellow sands of which I had heard such stories.
I followed one of the men who carried the buckets of earth to something that looked very like
our family cradle with the footboard knocked out. Where the slats might have been there was
nailed a piece of sheet iron punched full of holes. Above this was a chute in which the dirt
was emptied. The cradle was then rocked violently while water was poured over its contents.
The lighter earth and gravel were carried away, while the gold, being heavier, rested either
on the sheet iron or between the slats on the cradle bottom.

"Some of the men had no cradle, only a large pan made of sheet iron. This pan, when half filled
with dirt, was sunk in the water and shaken sidewise until the dirt and gravel were washed
away and only heavy grains of gold remained. There were enough of these to make my eyes open
wide. The men who had the cradle were making pretty steadily from eighteen to twenty dollars
a day apiece.

"After a day or two I visited the dry diggings. Here I saw things that were more astonishing
to me than anything that I had seen at the placer mines. Some men were at work in a little
canyon, and I sat on the bowlder and watched them digging into the earth with their knives
and picking up every few minutes spoons of earth in which there were plainly visible little
lumps of gold the size of a pea. This was considered a rich find; the men were joyful over
their success. Suddenly one of the older ones, looking up at me, sang out:--

"Say, Sonny, why do you sit there idle? Out with that bread knife of yours and dig for your
fortune. Across this ridge is another ravine. It may be like this. Try your luck, anyway.'

"Somehow, until that moment, it had not entered my boyish mind, that I might join this great
mad race for wealth. I sprang to my feet. My heart began to pound faster than it did on the
glorious day when in my boyhood home I had won the mile race at the county fair. There was
a singing in my ears; for the minute I could scarcely breathe. I had heard of the gold fever,
and now I had caught it.

"I dashed up the hillside, fairly rolled down into the rocky little valley beyond, and began
to dig wildly; but I found only good honest earth, rich noble soil so like our fertile bottom
lands at home. My spirits began to sink, my heart to resume its natural beats. I worked half
an hour or so without finding any sign, as it was called, and began to feel discouraged. In
the canyon, which was very narrow, a large bowlder blocked my progress. I determined to dig
it loose. This was the work of some time, but finally I succeeded in dislodging it, and drawing
up my legs out of its way watched with a youngster's delight its wild dash down the mountain
side to the stream far below.

"Slowly I turned to resume my work, but what I saw brought me to my feet with a yell. The socket
where the stone had rested was dotted with yellow lumps of gold as big as a pea, some even
larger. Down I went upon my knees and I fell to work with a will--the strength of a man seemed
in my arms. Off came my coat, and spreading it out I scooped the rich dirt into it by the handful.
I had happened on a pocket, as it was called; a turn in the bed of some old mountain stream.
The dirt from this when washed yielded me about five hundred dollars, but it was all except
cook's wages that I ever made at the mines.

"Before I left the gold fields I saw some small attempt at hydraulic mining which later proved
so successful. From a stream up in a canyon some enterprising men had built a log flume and
connected with it a large hose and nozzle they had brought up from the coast. Turning the water
in this on a dry hill rich in gold deposit, they easily and rapidly washed the dirt down into
a sluice or trough below. This had bars nailed across, and water running through carried the
dirt away while the gold dropped into the crevices between the bars." This method of mining
and also quartz mining, that is, digging gold and other metals from rock, is described in another
chapter.

The gold-bearing earth extended along the west slope of the Sierra Nevada and their base, from
Feather River on the north to the Merced River on the south, a territory about thirty miles
wide by two hundred and fifty long. In this district are still some of the richest mines in
the world.

Chapter VIII

The Great Stampede

The rush of people to the Pacific coast after the gold discovery may well be called a stampede.
The terrible overland journey, over thousands of miles of Indian country, across high mountains
and wide stretches of desert, was often undertaken with poor cattle, half the necessary supplies
of food, and but little knowledge of the route. On the other hand, those who preferred going
by water would embark in any vessel, however unsafe, sailing from Atlantic ports to the Isthmus.

In New York the excitement was especially great. Every old ship that could be overhauled and
by means of fresh paint made to look seaworthy was gayly dressed in bunting and advertised
to sail by the shortest and safest route to California. The sea trip is thus described by an
elderly gentleman who made the journey when a boy of ten:--

"Together with the news of the discovery of gold came also reports of a warm, sunny land which
winter never visited, where life could be spent in the open air,--a favorable spot where sickness
was almost unknown. It was, I think, as much on account of my mother's health as to make his
fortune that my father decided to go to California. The water route was chosen as being easier
for her.

"The saying good-by to our relatives had been hard; but by the time we were three miles from
home we children ceased to grieve, so interested were we in new sights and experiences.

"I had never seen salt water until that morning in New York, when we boarded the gayly trimmed
brig, the Jane Dawson, which was to carry us to the Isthmus. To my sister and myself it was
a real grief that our vessel had not a more romantic name. We decided to call it the Sea Slipper,
from a favorite story, and the Sea Slipper it has always been to us.

"On the deck there were so many unhappy partings that we became again downhearted, a feeling
which was intensified in the choppy seas of the outer bay to the utter misery of mind and body.
We got ourselves somehow into our berths, where, with mother for company, we remained for many
hours. Finally the sea grew calmer and we were just beginning to enjoy ourselves when off Cape
Hatteras a severe storm broke upon us. The vessel pitched and rolled; the baggage and boxes
of freight tumbled about, threatening the lives of those who were not kept to their berths
by illness.

"Although I was not seasick I dared not go about much. One night, however, growing tired of
the misery around me, I crawled over to the end of the farther cabin, which seemed to be deserted.
Presently the captain and my father came down the stairs and I heard the officer say in a hoarse
whisper. 'I will not deceive you, Mr. Hunt; the mainmast is down, the steering gear useless,
the crew is not up to its business, and I fear we cannot weather the night!' I almost screamed
aloud in my fright, but just then a long, lanky figure rose from the floor where it had been
lying. It was one of the passengers, a typical Yankee.

"'See here, captain,' he said, 'my chum and I are ship carpenters, and the other man of our
party is one of the best sailors of the Newfoundland fleet; just give us a chance to help you,
and maybe we needn't founder yet awhile.' The chance was given, and we did not founder.

"Some days later we anchored in the harbor of Chagres. There were many vessels in the bay,
and a large number of people waiting to secure passage across the Isthmus. They crowded around
the landing place of the river canoes and fought and shouted until we children were frightened
at the uproar, and taking our hands mother retired to the shade of some trees to wait.

"It was almost night when father called to us to come quickly, as he had a boat engaged for
us. It lay at the landing, a long canoe, in one end of which our things were already stored.
Some men who were friends of father's and had joined our party stood beside it with revolvers
in hand watching to see that no one claimed the canoe or coaxed the boatmen away. Mother and
Sue were quickly tucked beneath the awning, the rest of us tumbled in where we could, and at
once our six nearly naked negro boatmen pushed out the boat and began working it up the stream
by means of long poles which they placed on the bottom of the river bed, thus propelling us
along briskly but with what seemed to me great exertion.

"To us children the voyage was most interesting. On either side the banks were covered with
such immense trees as we had never dreamed of. The ferns were more like trees than plants,
and the colors of leaves and flowers so gorgeous they were dazzling. The fruits were many and
delicious, but our father was very careful about our eating, and would not allow us to indulge
as we desired.

"The night came on as suddenly as though a great bowl had been turned over us. For an hour
or more we watched with delight the brilliant fireflies illuminating all the atmosphere except
at the end of the boat, where the red light of a torch lit the scene. After we had lain down
for the night the moon rose and I could not enough admire the beauty of the tropical foliage,
with the silvery moonlight incrusting every branch and leaf.

"The second day we left the boats and took mules for the rest of the journey. To my delight
I was allowed an animal all to myself. Sue rode in a chair strapped to the back of a native,
and our luggage was taken in the same manner, the porters carrying such heavy loads that it
did not seem possible they could make the journey.

"To my sister and me, the city of Panama was amazingly beautiful, with its pearl oyster shells
glittering on steeple and bell tower, and the dress of the people as magnificent as the costumes
described in the 'Arabian Nights.' In Panama we waited a long time for a steamer. The town
was crowded and many people were ill. My mother was constantly helping some one until my father
forbade her to visit any stranger, because cholera had broken out and many were dying.

"It was a joyful morning when we boarded the steamer California, steamed out on the blue Pacific,
and headed northward. We had more comfortable quarters and better food than when on the Atlantic;
but never on the steamer did we feel the sense of grandeur and power that came to us on the
brig when, with white sails all set, she rushed like a bird before the wind.

"Toward the close of the voyage there was so much fog that our captain did not know just whereabouts
we were, and for that reason kept well out to sea. One morning there came a rap at the stateroom
door, and a loud voice cried, 'Wake up, we shall be in San Francisco in less than an hour.'
What a time of bustle followed! The sea was rough. Sue and I fell over each other and the valises
in our eagerness to get dressed. I, being a boy, was out first. The sun was shining as though
it was making up for the days it was hidden from us. The water was blue and sparkling, the
air warm and delightful after the cold, foggy weather.

"We were steaming due east, and almost before I knew it we had passed through Golden Gate and
were in the quiet water of the bay. By the time mother and Sue were on deck, we were nearing
the wharf. I thought then that San Francisco was rather disappointing in its looks, with its
unpainted houses of all kinds of architecture, and the streets like washouts in the hills,
but soon I learned to love it with a faithfulness which was felt by many of the pioneers and
will end only with life."

Such were some of the hardships and discomforts endured by those who traveled to California
by water during the period of the gold excitement. Yet those who made the journey by land often
suffered even more.

The first immigrant train to California started in 1841.

It brought among its members a young man named Bidwell, afterward United States representative
from California. Describing this journey in the Century Magazine (Vol. 41), Mr. Bidwell says:--

"The party consisted of sixty-nine persons. Each one furnished his own supplies of not less
than a barrel of flour, sugar, and other rations in proportion. I doubt whether there was a
hundred dollars in money in the whole party, but all were anxious to go.

"Our ignorance of the route was complete. We knew that California lay west, and that was all.
Some of the maps consulted and supposed to be correct showed a lake in the vicinity of where
we now know Salt Lake to be, that was three or four hundred miles in length, with two outlets,
both running into the Pacific Ocean, either apparently larger than the Mississippi River. We
were advised to take along tools to make canoes, so that if we found the country too rough
for our wagons, we could descend one of these rivers to the Pacific." It was two years later
that Fremont, the pathfinder and roadmaker of the West, surveyed the great Salt Lake and made
a map of it. The Bidwell party after many hardships reached California in safety.

The unhappy Donner party, also home seekers, made the journey in 1848. They lost their way
and became snow-bound in the mountains. A number of them died from cold and starvation, but
the remainder were rescued by relief parties sent out from Sutter's Fort. Their sufferings
were too terrible to be told, and yet they started with fair hopes and as excellent an outfit
as any party that ever crossed the plains. The following is from an account of the journey
written by one of their number for the Century Magazine (Vol. 42):--

"I was a child," says Virginia Reed Murphy, "when we started for California, yet I remember
the journey well. Our wagons were all made to order, and I can say truthfully that nothing
like the Reed family wagon ever started across the plains. The entrance was on the side, and
one stepped into a small space like a room, in the center of the wagon. On the right and left
were comfortable spring seats, and here was also a little stove whose pipe, which ran through
the top of the wagon, was prevented by a circle of tin from setting fire to the canvas. A board
about a foot wide extended over the wheels on either side, the full length of the wagon, thus
forming the foundation of a large roomy second story on which were placed our beds; under the
spring seats were compartments where we stored the many things useful for such a journey. Besides
this we had two wagons with provisions.

"The family wagon was drawn by four yoke of choice oxen, the others by three yoke. Then we
had saddle horses and cows, and last of all my pony. He was a beauty, and his name was Billy.
The chief pleasure to which I looked forward in crossing the plains was to ride on my pony
every day. But a day came when I had no pony to ride, for the poor little fellow gave out.
He could not endure the hardships of ceaseless travel. When I was forced to part with him,
I cried as I sat in the back of the wagon watching him become smaller and smaller as we drove
on until I could not see him any more. But this grief did not come to me until I had enjoyed
many happy weeks with my pet.

"Never can I forget the morning when we bade farewell to our kindred and friends. My father,
with tears in his eyes, tried to smile as one friend after another grasped his hand in a last
farewell. My mother was overcome with grief. At last we were all in the wagon, the drivers
cracked their whips, the oxen moved slowly forward, the long journey had begun.

"The first Indians we met were the Caws, who kept the ferry and had to take us over the Caw
River. I watched them closely, hardly daring to draw my breath, feeling sure that they would
sink the boat in the middle of the stream, and very thankful I was when I found that they were
not like the Indians in grandmamma's stories.

"When we reached the Blue River, Kansas, the water was so high that the men made rafts of logs
twenty-five feet in length, united by cross timbers. Ropes were attached to both ends and by
these the rafts were pulled back and forth. The banks of the stream being steep, our heavy-laden
wagons had to be let down carefully with ropes so that the wheels might run into the hollow
between the logs. This was a dangerous task, for in the wagons were the women and children,
who could cross the rapid stream in no other way.

"After striking the great valley of the Platte the road was good, the country beautiful. Stretching
out before us as far as the eye could reach was a valley as green as emerald, dotted here and
there with flowers of every imaginable color. Here flowed the grand old Platte--a wide, shallow
stream. This part of our journey was an ideal pleasure trip. How I enjoyed riding my pony,
galloping over the plain gathering wild flowers! At night the young folks would gather about
the camp fire chattering merrily, and often a song would be heard or some clever dancer would
give us a jig on the hind door of a wagon.

"In the evening, when we rode into camp, our wagons were placed so as to form a circle or corral,
into which, after they had been allowed to graze, the cattle were driven to prevent the Indians
from stealing them. The camp fire and the tents were placed on the outside of this square.
There were many expert riflemen in the party, and we never lacked game. I witnessed many a
buffalo hunt and more than once was in the chase close behind my father. For weeks buffalo
and antelope steaks were the main article on our bill of fare, and our appetites were a marvel."
The Reed family was the only one belonging to the Donner party, it is said, who made the terrible
journey without losing a member.

To the young people and men there was often much pleasure in crossing the continent in a prairie
schooner, as the white-covered emigrant wagon was called; but to the women it was another matter,
since they had to ride constantly in a wagon, attend to the little children, and do the cooking,
often under great difficulties. Many of them learned to be experts in camp cooking, requiring
nothing more than a little hollow in the hard ground for a range; or if there were plenty of
stones, the cooking place might be built up a little. Over this simple contrivance, with the
aid of a couple of iron crossbars, a kettle, a frying pan, and coffee pot, many a delicious
meal was easily and quickly prepared.

Mrs. Hecox, in the Overland Monthly, says: "I am sure the men never realized how hard a time
the women had. Of course the men worked hard too, but after their day's travel was over they
sat around the camp fire, smoked, and told stories, while the women were tending the children,
mending clothes, and making ready for the next day's meals.

"After we crossed the Mississippi, it commenced raining, and for days we splashed through the
mud and slush. When we camped at night, we had to wade about and make some kind of shelter
for our fires, and I was obliged to keep the children cooped up in the wagons. Here let me
say that I never heard an unkind word spoken among the women all the way across the plain.
The children were good, too, and never out of humor either, unless some cross man scolded them.

"At one place a drove of buffalo ran into our train and gave us a bad scare. I was in the wagon
behind ours attending a sick woman when I saw the drove coming. I knew the children would be
frightened to death without me, so I jumped from the wagon and ran, but I was too late. Finding
that I had no time to get into the wagon, I crawled under it, where a wounded buffalo cow tried
to follow me. I kicked her in the head as I clung to the coupling pole, and somehow broke my
collar bone."

As soon as the grass began to get green in the spring of 1849, after the news of the discovery
of gold reached the States, the overland march began. In white-covered emigrant wagons, in
carts, on horses, mules, even on foot, came the eager gold seekers. How poorly prepared were
many of them, it would be hard to believe. They were a brave and hardy company of people, but
they suffered much. It is estimated that at least eight or ten thousand of the young, strong
men died before the year was over. Many of these deaths were due to overwork and exposure,
to the lack of the necessaries of life at the mines, also to the fact that a great many of
the gold seekers were clever, educated people, quite unused to extreme poverty, and therefore
lacking in the strength that comes from self-denial.

Those who remained formed the best material for the making of the state. To this class belonged
those who endowed the two great universities which are now the glory of California. For many
years the highest position in public life was held by men who came to the Golden State over
the plains or by the uncomfortable ocean route in the days of '49.

Chapter IX

The Birth of the Golden Baby

The birth of the Golden Baby, in other words, the coming of the Golden State into the Union,
was a time of struggle and uncertainty, when feelings were deeply stirred and hope deferred
caused bitter disappointment. When the treaty of peace with Mexico was ratified by Congress
it left the Pacific coast settlements in a strange position--a territory containing thousands
of people, with more coming by hundreds, but with no legally appointed rulers.

As soon as Congress accepted the treaty, the military governor ceased to have any power, for
there was then no longer a state of war; yet he was still obeyed by courtesy, until some one
with a better right took his place. The only other official was the local alcalde of each community.
This was a Mexican office, but was at that time often filled by an American who had, perhaps,
been in the territory only a few months and knew nothing of Mexican laws, but ran things as
well as he could after the Eastern fashion.

The Rev. Mr. Colton, chaplain of the warship Congress, was made alcalde of Monterey, and his
book on those times is most interesting.

"My duties," said he, "are similar to those of the mayor of an Eastern city, but with no such
aid of courts as he enjoys. I am supreme in every breach of peace, case of crime, disputed
land title, over a space of three hundred miles. Such an absolute disposal of questions affecting
property and personal liberty never ought to be confided to one man."

The country owed much to Mr. Colton's work while alcalde. He soon gained the confidence of
law-abiding residents, but was a terror to evil doers. Those he put to work quarrying stone
and building the solid structure afterward named Colton's Hall. Here one of the first of California's
schools was opened, and here was held the first convention.

Perhaps the truth that "as a man sows, so shall he reap," that a wrong action is apt to bring
its own punishment, was never more plainly shown than in the Mexican war. The war was brought
upon the United States in a great degree by those interested in slavery, not because they had
any just cause of quarrel with the people of Mexico, but because they wanted more territory
where slaves could be held.

California, which was the name generally given to all the country extending from Mexico northward
to Oregon and the Louisiana Purchase, and eastward from the Pacific Ocean to Texas, was what
they really fought for, and when they got it, it became their undoing. When a commissioner
went to Mexico to arrange for peace, he demanded California for the United States. As is usual,
the conquered had to yield to the victor, and Mexico agreed, "provided the United States would
promise not to permit slavery in the territory thus acquired."

"No," replied Mr. Trist, the American commissioner, "the bare mention of such a thing is an
impossibility. No American president would dare present such a treaty to the Senate."

The Mexican authorities persisted, saying the prospect of the introduction of slavery into
a territory gained from them excited the strongest feelings of abhorrence in the hearts of
the Mexican people, but the American commissioner made no promise.

In the summer of 1848 the President, in a special message, called the attention of Congress
to California and asked that the laws of a territory be granted to it. The South agreed, provided
half should be slave territory. The Northern people, who disliked slavery, had no commercial
interest in it, and felt it a disgrace to the nation, resisted this demand. Then began a bitter
struggle over California and the question of slavery on her soil, which lasted for two years
and called forth some of the grandest speeches of those mighty leaders, Webster, Clay, and Calhoun.

In 1849, while this fight in Congress was still going on, an amendment to tax California for
revenue, and another which would result in making her a slave state, were added to the regular
appropriation bill which provided for the expenses of government and without which the government
would stop. Congress was supposed to close its session on Saturday, March 3d, at midnight.
The new President, Taylor, was to take office on Monday.

There had been many times of excitement in that Senate chamber, but this night, it is said
by those who were present, was equal to any. Such a war of words and a battle of great minds!
Many eyes were turned to the clock as it drew near the hour of midnight. Would the stroke of
twelve dissolve the meeting and the great government of the United States be left without funds?

To many of the senators this seemed a certainty, but Mr. Webster insisted that Congress could
not end while they remained in session. So, through the long night, the struggle went on. About
four o'clock the amendment in regard to slavery was withdrawn, and the bill for the government
money was passed.

Meantime the American settlers in California were extremely dissatisfied. To be living without
suitable laws was an unnatural and dangerous state of affairs which could not be tolerated
by men who loved their country and their homes. The Spanish Californians, also, were anxious
to know what they had to expect from the laws of the United States. At last it was decided
by the people, and agreed to by the military governor, Riley, who was a man of good judgment,
that delegates should be chosen to a convention which should arrange a state constitution and
government. It was determined, however, to wait for word from Congress, which had closed in
such tumult.

News would certainly arrive by the next steamer, the Panama, which was long overdue. It was
a favorite amusement in those days for the boys of San Francisco to go upon the hill and watch
for her coming. The 4th of June they were rewarded by the sight of her. As she came into harbor
a large part of the population hurried to the wharf, eager to learn the action of Congress.
Was California to be a state or not?

The disappointment was great when it was found that nothing had been done except to pass the
revenue laws, which meant taxation without representation. In the plaza and on the streets
the crowds were loud in their disapproval. The excitement was almost as great as in Boston,
so long before, when the news of the tax on tea arrived. A mass meeting was called.

"It is plain they expect us to settle the slavery question for ourselves," said one. "We can
do it in short order," said another.

Monday, September 3, 1849, the constitutional convention met at Monterey.

"Recognizing the fact that there is need of more than human wisdom, in the work of founding
a state under the unprecedented condition of the country," says the minutes of that meeting,
"the delegates voted to open the session with prayer." It was decided to begin each morning's
work in this way, the Rev. S. H. Willey and Padre Ramirez officiating alternately.

There were present forty-eight delegates, seven of whom were Spanish Californians. Of these
Carrillo of the south and General Vallejo of Sonoma were prominent. They were able men, who
were used to governing and who understood fairly well the needs of the times. Later, in the
United States Senate, Mr. Webster quoted Mr. Carrillo of "San Angeles," as he called it. Another
delegate, Dr. Gwin, was a Southern man who had recently come to California for the purpose
of gaining the position of United States senator and of so planning things that even though
the state should be admitted as free soil, it might later be divided and part be made slave
territory.

He depended for this upon the boundaries. If the whole great section was admitted as California,
he thought division would surely follow with the southern part for slavery. The people, however,
showed themselves opposed to slavery in their new state, and Dr. Gwin soon found that he must
either forego his hopes of becoming senator or give way on this point. The constitution finally
adopted was that of a free state with its boundaries as they are to-day. The new legislature
chose Colonel Fremont and Dr. Gwin senators, and they left in January, 1850, for Washington,
taking the new constitution to offer it for the approval of Congress.

While the people of the Pacific coast had been making their constitution, Congress was in session,
and the subject of California and slavery was still troubling the nation. The discussion grew
so bitter that in January Clay brought forward his famous Omnibus Bill, so called because it
was intended to accommodate different people and parties, and contained many measures which
he thought would be so satisfactory to the senators that they would pass the whole bill, although
part of it provided for the admission of California as a free state.

At once Southerners sprang forward to resist the measure. They realized keenly that slavery
could not hold its own if the majority of the country became free soil. They must persist in
their demand for more slave territory, or give up their bondmen. Calhoun, the great advocate
of slavery, who was at that time ill and near his death, prepared a speech, the last utterance
of that brilliant mind, which was delivered March 4th. He was too ill to read it, but sat,
gaunt and haggard, with burning eyes, while his friend spoke for him. It closed with the declaration
that the admission of California as a slave or a free state was the test which would prove
whether the Union should continue to exist or be broken up by secession. If she came in free,
then the South could do no less than secede.

Three days later, March 7th, Webster delivered one of the great speeches of his life. In it
he said, "The law of nature, physical geography, and the formation of the earth settles forever
that slavery cannot exist in California."

Seward followed with a speech mighty in its eloquence. It seems to me that the perpetual unity
of the empire hangs on this day and hour. Try not the temper and fidelity of California, nor
will she abide delay. I shall vote for the admission of California directly, without conditions,
without qualifications, and without compromise."

On September 9, 1850, California was at last admitted.

From that time the country advanced steadily onward to the terrible period of 1861, when the
South put her threat into execution. The Civil War followed, and the abolition of slavery;
but from the sorrowful struggle there arose a better and happier nation, a united North and
South. There are two things to be remembered: that into the new territory gained from Mexico
slavery never entered; and that the wealth which came from the mines of California did much
toward strengthening the North in the conflict.

Over half a year the Californians had been waiting for their constitution to be adopted, and
for their representatives to be received in Congress. Sometimes it seemed as though the good
news would never come.

One October morning word came down from the lookout on Telegraph Hill: "The Oregon is coming
in covered with bunting. All her flags are flying." Almost at the same moment throughout the
city could be heard the quick booming of her guns as she entered the harbor. With shouts and
clapping of hands the people rushed to the wharf. Tears were pouring down the faces of men
who did not know what it was to cry; women were sobbing and laughing by turns. The shrill cheers
of the California boys rose high above all. There was the report of guns, the cracking of pistols,
the joyful pealing of bells. New York papers sold readily at five dollars each. No more business
that day. Joy and gayety reigned. At night the city was ablaze with fireworks and mighty bonfires,
which the boys kept going until morning.

Messengers started in every direction to carry the news. The way the word came to San Jose
was exciting. The new governor, Peter Burnett, was in San Francisco on steamer day. On the
very next morning he left for San Jose on the stage coach of Crandall, one of the famous drivers
of the West. The stage of a rival line left at the same time. There was great excitement: a
race between two six-horse teams, with coaches decorated with flags, and the governor on the
box of one of them.

They had to creep through the heavy sands to the mission, but beyond there they struck the
hard road, and away they went, horses at a gallop, passengers shouting and singing. As they
passed through a town or by a ranch house people ran out, aroused by the hubbub. Off went the
hats of all on the coaches.

"California has been admitted to the Union!" some one would shout in his loudest voice, and,
looking back, they would see men shaking hands and tossing hats on high, and small boys jigging
while shouts and cheers followed them faintly as they disappeared in the distance.

Past San Bruno, San Mateo, Mayfield, they went with a rush, then swept through Santa Clara,
then at a gallop down the beautiful Alameda to San Jose, the governor's coach but three minutes
in advance of its rival.

A few days later there was the grand ceremony of admission day, which was described in the
papers not only of this country but of England as well.

Still, after the rejoicing came a time of anxiety and sorrow. In its treatment of the land
question in California the United States made one of the gravest mistakes ever made by a civilized
nation.

The man whom the government sent out to investigate the subject, W. C. Jones, was an able Spanish
scholar, skilled in Mexican and Spanish law, and his carefully prepared report declared that
the greater part of the rancheros had perfect title to their lands, and all that was necessary
for the United States to do was to have them resurveyed.

In Congress, Senator Benton and Senator Fremont in most points supported this report as the
only just plan. Against the bill that was finally passed Senator Benton protested vigorously,
saying that it amounted to confiscation of the land instead of the protection promised by the
American government, through Larkin and Sloat.

This law made it necessary for every Californian, no matter how long he had lived on his land,
to prove his title to it, and that, too, while the United States attorney resisted his claim
inch by inch, as if he were a criminal.

Thus the Spanish American, who was seldom a man of business after the standard of the Eastern
states, was forced into the distressing necessity of fighting for what was his own, in courts,
the law and language of which he did not understand. Meantime his property was rendered hard
to sell, while taxation fell heaviest upon him because he was a large land owner. Often, too,
he would have to pay his lawyer in notes, promising to give money when he could get it, and
in the end the lawyer often got most of the land which the United States government had left
to the unhappy Californian.

The way in which unprincipled men got the better of the rancheros would fill a volume. Guadalupe
Vallejo, in the Century Magazine (Vol. 41), tells how a leading American squatter came to her
father and said:--

"There is a large piece of your land where the cattle run loose, and your vaqueros are all
gone to the mines. I will fence the field at my own expense if you will give me half of it."
Vallejo agreed, but when the American had inclosed it, he entered it on the record books as
government land and kept it all.

This article also describes the losses of the ranchmen from cattle stealing. It tells how Americans,
who were afterward prosperous citizens, were guilty of selling Spanish beef which they knew
had been stolen.

The life of the Spanish-speaking people at the mines was made miserable. The American miners
seemed to feel that the Californian had no right to be there. Of course there were some of
the lower class, many of whom were part Indian, who would lie, steal, or, if they had an opportunity,
murder; but often those who were persecuted were not of this type. A woman of refinement, who
under the title of "Shirley" wrote her experiences at the mines, says:--

"The people of the Spanish race on Indian Bar, many of whom are highly educated gentlemen,
are disposed to bear an ill opinion of our whole nation on account of the rough men here. They
think that it is a great characteristic of Columbia's children to be prejudiced, selfish, avaricious,
and unjust."

Because in a quarrel a Mexican killed a drunken miner, the men of the Bar determined to drive
away all Californians. They captured several, not the guilty one, banished some, and two they
sentenced to be flogged. Shirley from her cabin heard what was going on. She tells how one
of them, a gentlemanly young Spaniard, begged in vain to be killed rather than be disgraced
by whipping. When, finally, he was released, he swore eternal vengeance against the American race.

In San Francisco the disorderly state of affairs caused by the host of criminals gathered there
from all over the world, attracted by the discovery of gold, became unendurable. On the city
streets robbery and murder were of frequent occurrence, no one was safe, and wrongdoers went
unpunished because, frequently, the officers of the law were in league with them. At last the
best citizens felt that for the sake of their homes and families they must take matters into
their own hands, so they formed an association, seven thousand strong, which was known as the
"Vigilantes."

Those who committed crimes were taken by this organization, and, after careful trial, punished.
Several of the worst offenders were executed, many were banished from the country, and unjust
officials were removed. When law and order were restored, the Vigilantes disbanded.

The example of San Francisco was followed in various parts of the state, especially in the
mining camps, where there were many crimes; but not all the Vigilantes displayed the same care
and fairness as the people of the larger city, and sometimes terrible mistakes were made, and
innocent people suffered.

With thousands of newcomers on the Pacific coast, and the long distance between them and their
homes, it was often of the greatest importance to get their parcels and mail to them as promptly
as possible. For this reason several express companies were started and did excellent work;
but the mail route called the Pony Express was the most interesting. It is well described by
W. F. Bailey in the Century Magazine (Vol. 56).

One day in March, 1860, the following advertisement appeared in a St. Louis paper:--

"To San Francisco in eight days. The first carrier of the Pony Express will leave the Missouri
River on Tuesday, April 3d, and will run regularly weekly hereafter, carrying letter mail only.
Telegraph mail eight days, letters ten days to San Francisco."

From St. Joseph, Missouri, the first start was made. A large crowd was present to see the rider
off. The same day, the same hour, the Western mail started on the thousand-mile ride eastward.
There would be ten riders each way, with horses changed every twenty-five miles.

Both Sacramento and San Francisco were full of enthusiasm. It was planned to give the first
messenger a rousing reception when he should arrive from the East. He was received by crowds
as he galloped into Sacramento, and hurried to a swift river steamboat which immediately started
for the Bay. News of his coming was telegraphed ahead, and was announced from the stages of
the San Francisco theaters so that when he arrived at midnight a large number of people were
awaiting him, bands were playing, and bells were ringing; and a long procession escorted him
to the company's office.

In all, there were sixty riders of this express company, all young men, light in weight, accomplished
riders, coolheaded, and absolutely brave. They were held in high regard by all, and with good
reason. Each when he entered the service signed this pledge:--

"I agree not to use profane language, not to get drunk, not to gamble, not to treat animals
cruelly, and not to do anything incompatible with the conduct of a gentleman." They also had
to swear to be loyal to the Union.

The average journey of one man was seventy-five miles, this to be accomplished in one day,
but the men frequently had to double the distance, and once, when the messenger who was waiting
was killed by Indians, "Buffalo Bill" (Mr. Cody) made the long trip of three hundred and eighty-four
miles, stopping only for meals and to change horses.

By day and by night, through rain and storm, heat and cold, they rode, these brave men, one
facing east, the other west, alone, always alone, often chased by Indians, though, owing to
their watchfulness and the superiority of their horses, they were seldom caught. A number were,
however, killed by immigrants, who mistook them for Indians or robbers.

The great feat of the Pony Express was the delivering of Lincoln's inaugural address in 1861.

With the Southern states claiming to be out of the Union, people were wild to know what the
President would say. To St. Joseph, Missouri, the address was hurried. Here it was carefully
wrapped in oil skin, consigned to the saddle bags, and amid wild cheers the express was off.
Horses were waiting every ten miles. What a ride was that! "Speed, speed! faster, faster!"
was the cry. Each man tried to do a trifle better than the last, while the thousands on the
Pacific coast seemed to be straining their ears for the sound of the galloping hoof beats which
brought nearer to them the brave message of the grand new President. And when the last rider
came in, making the final ten miles in thirty-one minutes, what a cheer went up!

One thousand nine hundred and fifty miles in one hundred and eighty-five hours, the message
had traveled--at an average of a little more than ten miles an hour--straight across the continent.

When we read of the speed-breaking special trains of to-day, let us not forget what these brave
men of the first overland express accomplished in the days of '61.

Chapter X

The Signal Gun and the Steel Trail

Boom! Boom! Boom! Never in history did the firing of a gun have such a powerful effect as that
which sent the first shot at the flag of the Union, as it floated over Fort Sumter on that
memorable Friday, April 12, 1861.

Fired at a time when most people were hoping for a peaceful outcome of the sectional troubles,
it astonished the world and stirred the whole country to its depths.

Across the dry plains and rugged mountains of the West its echoes seemed to roll. The startled
people of the Pacific coast looked at each other with anxious, uncertain eyes. No one felt
quite sure of his neighbor, and they were so far from the scene of action that the government
could not help them. They must settle the great question for themselves. Who was for the Union?
Who was against it?

In Washington the President and his advisers waited with keen anxiety to learn what wealthy
California would do. Senator Gwin had often spoken in Congress and elsewhere as though it would
certainly be one of the states to secede. He and others had talked too, in a confident way,
of the "Grand Republic of the Pacific" that might be then formed out of the lands of the Western
coast. To lose this rich territory would be a terrible blow to the Union.

From the time of California's admission there had been a constant endeavor on the part of Southern
sympathizers to introduce slavery into its territory. A large number of politicians, especially
those holding prominent positions, were Southerners, some of whom, like Dr. Gwin, had come
to the Pacific coast for the express purpose of winning either the new state or some portion
of it for the South and slavery.

They had succeeded in giving it a fugitive slave law that was particularly evil. Under it a
colored man or woman could be seized, brought before a magistrate, claimed as a slave, and
taken back South without being allowed to testify in his or her own behalf. Neither could a
colored person give testimony in a criminal case against one who was white.

Opposed to this strong Southern party one man stood almost alone as the friend of free labor
and free soil. This man was David C. Broderick. For years he fought the slavery interests inch
by inch in San Francisco, in the state legislature, and finally in the United States Senate.

When he went to Washington he found the same state of affairs as in California--President Buchanan
yielding to the Southern demands, Southern members ruling and often terrifying Congress. Broderick
at once joined Stephen A. Douglas in the struggle he was then making for free soil in Kansas
and the territories, and his speeches were clear and often fierce.

In reply to a speech from a Carolina senator in regard to the disgrace of belonging to the
working class, Mr. Broderick said (Congressional Globe, 1857-58), "I represent a state where
labor is honorable, where the judge has left his bench, the doctor and lawyer their offices,
the clergyman his pulpit, for the purpose of delving in the earth, where no station is so high,
no position so great, that its occupant is not proud to boast that he has labored with his
own hands. There is no state in the Union, no place on earth, where labor is so honored, so
well rewarded, as in California." Mr. Broderick died in the midst of his bright career, murdered
in a duel by one of the leading members of the slavery party.

When he died, those of his fellow-citizens who believed much as he did, yet had let him fight
secession and slavery lone-handed, recognized what he had done for them--their "brave young
senator," as Seward called him, who had kept the evil of slavery from their soil. His work,
stopped by the bullet of his enemy, was taken up by the people, and his name became a rallying
cry for the lovers of the Union, of honest labor, and of free soil.

News that the war had really begun brought forth the strongest Union sentiments from many of
those who had before been careless or indifferent. A mass meeting of the people of San Francisco
was held-- business was suspended, flags were flying everywhere, while eager-faced people listened
to earnest Union speeches. A few days later the legislature, by an almost unanimous vote, declared
in the strongest terms for the Union, offering to give any aid the government might require.
No one could longer have any doubt of the loyalty of the state of California.

There were certainly many people from the South who were deeply in sympathy with secession;
but these, if honorable men who were able to fight, hurried east to join the Confederate army,
or if they chose to remain under the protection of the flag, were generally wise enough to
keep their feelings to themselves.

Some there were, however, who, while they enjoyed the law and order of the peaceful state,
still spoke, plotted, and schemed for secession. To keep such as these in order it was found
necessary to retain most of the California troops in the state for home defense. Those who
did reach Eastern battlefields fought well and nobly.

One of San Francisco's ministers was unwise enough frequently to express disloyal views in
the pulpit, until one Sunday morning he found the banner he would dishonor floating over his
church, and hanging to a post in front of the door a figure intended to represent himself,
with his name and the word "traitor" pinned to it. The next day he left for Europe, where he
stayed until the close of the war.

Another minister, Thomas Starr King, was one of the most earnest supporters of the government.
He organized the California division of the Sanitary Commission for the assistance of sick
and wounded soldiers. Chiefly through his influence California gave over a million and a half
to that cause, which was one third of the whole expenditure of the Commission.

In 1862 Leland Stanford became governor. He was devoted to the Union, always striving to influence
his state to give liberally of its wealth to help the government; and its record in that line
was second to none. "A good leader, energetic and long-headed," the governor was called; but
no one dreamed that long before he was an old man, he would give for the cause of education
in California the mightiest gift ever bestowed by any one man for the benefit of humanity.

During the war, California furnished 16,000 men, two regiments of which were among the best
of the Union cavalry. One regiment of infantry was composed of trappers and mountaineers, from
whom were taken many "sharpshooters" so famous in assisting the advance of the Northern troops.

In the southern part of the state there was a body of volunteers known as the California Column,
also the California Lancers, who, far off though they were, found enough to do. They drove
the Southern forces out of Arizona and New Mexico, fought the Apache Indians in several battles,
met and defeated the Texas Rangers, and took various military posts in Texas.

Great was the excitement in San Francisco when one morning the United States marshall captured,
just as she was leaving the wharf, a schooner fully fitted out as a privateer. She was filled
with armed men, and in her cabin was a commission signed by Jefferson Davis in the name of
the Confederate States, also a plan for capturing the forts of the harbor, the Panama mail
steamer, then en route north, and a treasure steamer soon to, sail for Panama.

In Los Angeles disloyalty was more outspoken and unrebuked by public opinion. Sometimes the
surrounding ranchmen, many of whom were in sympathy with the South, on the news of a Southern
victory would come into Los Angeles to celebrate with disloyal banners and transparencies.
Living on Main Street there was a Yankee, one of the leading citizens, who upon such an occasion
would take his rifle and, promenading the flat roof of his wide-spreading adobe, hurl down
defiance at the enemy, calling them "rebels" and "traitors" and defying them to come up and
fight him man to man. But there must have been a feeling of good fellowship through it all,
since no stray bullet was ever sent to put a stop to the taunts of the fiery old Unionist.

Some Spanish soldiers of the California Column, however, grew weary of such open disloyalty,
and one night, when off duty, captured two of the Southern ranchmen and proposed to hang them
to the oaks in the pasture near where the city of Pasadena now stands. The American officers
of the troops, hearing of the affair, hurried out from Los Angeles and begged their men to
give up so disorderly and unsoldier-like an idea. "Yes, sirs, it is true, all that you say;
but they are rebels, they talk too much; why suffer them to cumber Union ground?" This seemed
the only reply they could obtain; but finally the captives were liberated, though advised in
the future to guard well their tongues and actions.

The desire for war news from the Eastern states led to the completion of a telegraph line between
the Missouri River and San Francisco, and on all sides the need of an overland railroad was
also being recognized. Plans for such a road had been frequently presented to Congress, but
straightway slavery entered into the question. The South wanted the road, but it must be through
Southern territory, while the North favored the middle or northern route; and they could not agree.

On one such occasion Senator Benton spoke in favor of a line that had just been surveyed by
Captain Fremont. He was told by those who had other plans that his route was not possible,
that only scientific men could lay out a railroad and determine the most practicable ways and
easiest passes. But Senator Benton's answer is worth remembering. They are the first engineers
to lay out a road; the Indian follows. Hence the buffalo road becomes the war path. The white
hunter follows the same trail in the pursuit of game; after that the buffalo road becomes the
wagon road of the emigrant, and, lastly, the railroad of the scientific man."

Through her senators and representatives California spent several years in pushing this matter.
In vain they called attention to the fact that the distance from Washington to San Francisco
by the way of Cape Horn was 19,000 miles, or more than the entire distance round the earth
in the latitude of San Francisco; and that by Panama it was as far as from Washington to Peking
in a direct line.

In 1859-60 there appeared in Washington a young engineer named Judah, who had been sent by
the people of the Pacific coast to urge the immediate building of the road by the middle route
that which was finally chosen. Mr. Judah knew more about the matter than any other man, east
or west, and he failed in his mission only because the troubles over slavery and the prospect
of immediate secession took up the whole attention of Congress.

However, he came back in no way discouraged, and continued to urge the matter in his cheerful,
hopeful way. That he should be hopeful does not seem strange to us who know that the road was
built and that it was a great success, but then conditions were different.

"What, build a railroad over those mountains, with their terrible winter snows and landslides,
across the desert, where there is absolutely no water? It is impossible, and these men know
it; they only want to get the people's money." Such was the type of article one might read
at any time in the papers of the day.

Still, Mr. Judah's talk had its results. One June day in 1861, Leland Stanford, a young lawyer,
who was at that time Sacramento's chief grocer, Mark Hopkins and Collis P. Huntington, hardware
merchants, and Charles Crocker, proprietor of the leading dry-goods store, met and organized
the Central Pacific Railroad Company, with Stanford as president, Huntington as vice-president,
Hopkins as treasurer, Judah as engineer, and Crocker as one of the directors.

This action seems sensible enough as we write of it, but it was one of the most daring undertakings
ever attempted by any body of men. None of the four was rich, all had worked hard for the little
they had; but they felt that the country must have the railroad, that without it California
could never become a great state. But if they could only push forward, as soon as they had
themselves accomplished something, help would come to them from the East and their success
would be assured.

Again Mr. Judah went to Washington, and this time he was successful. The war had made the government
feel the need of the railway, not only to bind the Pacific coast closer to the eastern half
of the continent, but to transport troops to defend its western shores. There were many now
ready to vote for the road, and in July, 1862, the bill, having been passed by both houses,
was signed by Abraham Lincoln.

It provided for the building of two roads, one from the Missouri River westward, the Union
Pacific, and one from the Pacific coast eastward, the Central Pacific, the two to be continued
till they met and formed one long line.

On the day that Leland Stanford was inaugurated governor of California, he had the further
satisfaction of beginning the construction of the overland railroad by digging and casting
the first shovelful of earth. This took place in Sacramento, in the presence of a large gathering
of the leading people of the state; and from that time the work went speedily on. It was estimated
that the road would cost an average of eighty thousand dollars a mile, though in the mountains
the cost was nearer one hundred and fifty thousand.

Not only the right of way, but a large portion of the near-by public lands, were granted by
the government to each road, and at the completion of each forty miles of track there was to
be further aid. The state of California, the city of San Francisco, and the counties through
which the railroad passed, each gave generously to the Central Pacific; but all this did not
bring in enough ready money. Huntington in the East and Stanford in the West almost worked
miracles in getting funds to begin the work.

In the death of Mr. Judah, which occurred at this time, the company suffered a great loss.
Although the enterprise went on to a successful ending, his name dropped out of sight; but
those who know, feel that to him California owes a great debt of gratitude. Though she was
sure to have the overland sometime, it might have been years later in its accomplishment, but
for the faith, energy, and perseverance of Theodore D. Judah.

Charles Crocker now took charge of the building of the road; to accomplish the work he imported
Chinese, whom he found peaceable, industrious, and quick to learn. They were arranged in companies
moving at the word of command like drilled troops--"Crocker's battalions" they were called.
There was need of the greatest haste to get the different portions completed in the time allowed.

"Why," said Crocker, "I used to go up and down that road in my car like a mad bull, stopping
along where there was anything wrong, raising Cain with the men that were not up to time."

Neither Mr. Crocker nor Mr. Stanford ever recovered from the strain of that time. It is said
that it eventually caused the death of both men.

Meantime the Union Pacific was pushing overland westward as fast as possible. Each road was
aiming for the rich plains of Utah. If the Central stopped at the eastern base of the mountains,
it would make this road of little value except for Pacific coast traffic; but if it could reach
Ogden, the line would pay well.

It was a mighty race all through the winter of 1868 and 1869, Crocker and his men working like
giants. What he accomplished then was scarcely less wonderful than Napoleon's passage of the Alps.

All the supplies for his thousands of workmen, all the materials and iron for the road, even
the locomotives, he had to have hauled on sledges over the mountains through the winter snows.

Ogden was finally made the place where the two roads joined; but they first met, and the last
work was done, at Promontory, a point fifty miles northwest of Ogden. There in May, 1869, the
last tie was laid. It was made of California laurel, handsomely polished, and on it was a silver
plate with an inscription and the names of the officers of the two roads.

It was an eventful meeting on that grassy plain, under the blue Western sky, while all around
rose the rugged peaks that had at last been conquered by man's energy. The telegraph at this
spot was, for the occasion, connected with all the offices along the line and in the leading
cities of the country, where crowds were in waiting to hear that the great work was finished.

Two trains were there with their engines, as Bret Harte describes them, "facing on the single
track, half a world behind each back." Around stood the guests and officers of the roads waiting
for the final ceremony. "Hats off," clicked the telegraph. Prayer was offered, and then the
four gold and silver spikes, presented by California, Nevada, Idaho, and Montana, were put
in place by President Stanford of the Central Pacific and Dr. Durant of the Union Pacific.

As the silver hammers fell on the golden spikes, in all the telegraph offices along the line
and in the Eastern cities the hammer of the magnet struck the bell--"tap, tap, tap." "Done,"--flashed
the message to the eager crowds.

All over the land the event was celebrated with great rejoicing. In Buffalo, as the news came,
hundreds of voices burst out in the singing of "The Star-Spangled Banner." In Boston, services
were held at midday in Trinity Church, where the popular pastor offered "thanks to God for
the completion of the greatest work ever undertaken by men."

To the four men who were the builders of the Central Pacific, the public and particularly the
state of California owes much. They not only built the road, but made it a grand, complete
success in all its departments. Without it, California would still be a remote province, little
known. With it she is one of the chief states of the Union, and in the great business world
she is known and felt as a power.

Later the corporation became very wealthy and powerful. Then it was that it began to abuse
its power, working often against the best interests of the inhabitants of the Pacific slope.
In some cases, as in the eviction of the people who were settlers in the Mussel Slough District,
it was guilty of extreme cruelty and injustice, such as is almost certain to bring its own
punishment. But in reckoning with the Southern Pacific, for so the company is now called, the
people of California should be careful to look on both sides of the question, remembering the
terrible struggles of those early days, when the building of the Overland, that greatest achievement
America had ever seen, was to them like the miraculous gift of some fairy godmother, seemingly
beyond the possibility of nature.

Chapter XI

That Which Followed After

About the time that the people of California were beginning to feel the trouble arising from
the unlimited wealth and power of the great railroad corporation, they discovered what they
felt was danger coming from another quarter. This was in the large number of Chinese pouring
into the state. Already every town of importance had its quaint Chinese quarter, bits of Asia
transplanted to the western hemisphere. Yet these sons of Asia, with their quiet, gliding motions
and oriental dress, had been of great service in the development of the new land. Many of the
most helpful improvements were rendered possible by their labor, and for years they were almost
the only servants for house or laundry work to be obtained. Never did the housewives of the
Pacific coast join in the outcry against the Chinese.

Although all this was true, it was also a fact that an American workingman could not live and
support his family on the wages a Chinaman would take; and when the white man saw the Chinese
given the jobs because they could work cheaply, he became discouraged and angry. Was he to
be denied a living in his own country because of these strangers? For this reason the working
people became very bitter toward the Chinese.

Their complaints were carried to Washington, and because of them the government finally arranged
with China for the restriction of immigration, but not, however, before the matter caused much
trouble in California.

During the years 1876-77 times were rightly called "hard" along the Pacific slope. Often laboring
men could not get work, and their families suffered. The blame for all this was unjustly given
to the Chinese, who were several times badly treated by mobs. The general discontent led at
last to a demand for a new state constitution, which many people thought would remedy the evils
of which they complained. For twenty-five years the old constitution had done good service.
On the day it had been signed, Walter Colton, alcalde of Monterey, wrote thus of it in his
diary: "It is thoroughly democratic; its basis, political and social equality, is the creed
of the thousands who run the plow, wield the plane, the hammer, the trowel, the spade." Still
it had its faults, the greatest of which was the power given the legislature over public moneys
and lands, as well as the chance it allowed for dishonesty in voting.

Unfortunately many of the delegates to the convention which was to make the new constitution
were foreigners who knew very little of American manners, customs, and laws, and few of them
were among the deeper thinkers of the state, men who had had experience in lawmaking. That
the new constitution is not much better than the old, many who helped in the making of it will
agree. It was adopted in May, 1879. Since that time it has received a number of changes by
means of amendments voted for by the people, and in spite of whatever errors it has contained,
the state under it has gone forward to a high degree of prosperity.

In 1875, during the administration of Governor Pacheco, the first native state governor, an
invitation was extended to native-born boys of San Francisco to take part in the Fourth of
July celebration. A fine body of young men were thus assembled, of whom Hittell in his story
of San Francisco says, "They were unparalleled in physical development and mental vigor, and
unsurpassed in pride and enthusiasm for the land that gave them birth." This gathering led
to the founding of the "Native Sons of the Golden West," an organization which now numbers
many thousands and of which the great state may well be proud. Later there was organized a
sister society of native daughters, and this also has a large membership. As stated in their
constitution, one of the main objects of these sons and daughters of the West is "to awaken
and strengthen patriotism and keep alive and glowing the sacred love of California."

An event of the utmost importance to the southern part of the state was the completion of the
railroad between San Francisco and Los Angeles, which occurred in 1879. Its route lay through
the rich valley of the San Joaquin. Work had been carried on from each end of the line, and
it was a very happy assembly which gathered to witness the junction of the two divisions, the
event taking place at the eastern end of the San Fernando tunnel. This road was afterward extended
from Los Angeles eastward by the way of Yuma and Tucson, and is to-day the Southern Pacific
Overland. Later the Santa Fe Company built its popular road between Los Angeles and the Eastern
states. Both these companies now have lines from Los Angeles to San Diego, and the Southern
Pacific has a coast road the length of the state, along which the scenery is of great beauty.

Indians

In the history of the state the most pathetic portion is that which relates to the Indians.
Bancroft says, "The California valley cannot grace her annals with a single Indian war bordering
upon respectability. It can boast, however, a hundred or two of as brutal butcherings on the
part of our honest miners and brave pioneers as any area of equal extent in our republic."
Miners and settlers coming into the country would take up the waters where the natives fished,
the land where they hunted, driving them back to rocky soil, where there was nothing but acorns
and roots to support life. As a result the poor, unhappy creatures, driven by hunger, would
steal the newcomers' horses and cattle. It is true that the white men depended, in a great
measure, upon their animals for the support of their families; but they thought only of their
own wrongs, and would arm in strong parties, chase the wretched natives to their homes, and
tear down their miserable villages, killing the innocent and guilty alike. The government was
the most to blame, because it did not in the first place enact laws for the protection of the
Indians in their rights.

About the towns, many of the natives gathered for work. In some places the authorities had
the right to arrest them as vagabonds and hire them out as bondmen to the highest bidder, for
a period often of as many as two or three months at a time, with no regard to family ties.
Little seems to have been done to assist them to a better kind of life. In Los Angeles, when
working in the vineyards as grape pickers, they were paid their wages each Saturday night,
and immediately they were tempted on all sides by sellers of bad whisky and were really hurried
into drunkenness. Their shrieks and howls would, for a time, make the night hideous, when they
were driven by the officers of the law into corrals, like so many pigs or cattle, and left
there till Monday morning, when they were handed over to whoever chose to pay the officers
for the right to own them for the next week.

Near the Oregon line lived some of the most warlike and troublesome Indians of California.
Here there were one or two severe fights, the worst of which was with the Modocs, in the northern
lava beds. It was here that General Canby was killed. To-day the Modocs are still suffering
keenly. In the upper part of the state the Indians have no lands of any kind, and noble men
and women of California are working to secure for them their rights from the government. In
the south, whole villages have been found living on nothing but ground acorn meal, from which
miserable diet many children die and older people cannot long sustain life.

The Sequoya League, an association for the betterment of the Indians of the Southwest, has
done much toward opening the eyes of the public and of the government officials to the unhappy
condition of these first owners of the soil. Congress, in 1906, appropriated $100,000 to be
used in buying land and water for those Indian reservations or settlements where the suffering
was greatest. This was a good beginning, but as the needy Indians are scattered all over the
state, much more is required before they can be so placed that they can earn a living by their
labors.

Sheep Industry

Gradually the cattle industry, which was for so long a time the leading business of the country,
gave way to sheep raising. During summer and fall large flocks of grayish white merinos could
be seen getting a rich living on the brown grasses, the yellow stubble of old grain fields,
and the tightly rolled nuts of the bur clover; while in winter and spring, hills and plains
with their velvet-like covering of green alfileria offered the best and juiciest of food. This
was the time of the coming of the lambs. As soon as they were old enough to be separated from
their mothers they were put during the day in companies by themselves. A band of five or six
hundred young lambs, playing and skipping over the young green grass they were just learning
to eat, was a beautiful sight to everybody save to the man or boy who had them to herd. They
led him such a chase that by the time he had them safely corralled for the night, every muscle
in his body would be aching with fatigue.

Shearing time was the liveliest portion of the herder's life, which was generally very lonely.
First came the shearing crew with their captain; next arrived the venders of hot coffee, tamales,
tortillas, and other Mexican dainties; brush booths were erected and a brisk trade began. The
herds were driven up and into a corral where several shearers could work at a time. Snip, snip,
snip, went the shears hour after hour. It was the boast of a good shearer that he could clip
a sheep in seven minutes and not once bring blood. As fast as cut, the wool was packed in a
long sack suspended from a framework. The dust was dreadful, and the man or boy whose duty
it was, when the bag was partly full, to jump in and tramp the wool down so that the bag might
hold more, would nearly choke before he emerged into the clear daylight.

The passage of the no-fence law by the legislature of 1873, while it was opposed by the sheep
and cattle men, was one of the greatest aids to the growth of agriculture, especially in the
southern part of the state. It provided that cattle and sheep should not be allowed to run
loose without a herder to keep them from trespassing. This saved the farmer from the necessity
of fencing his grain fields, a most important help in a country where fence material was so
scarce and expensive.

Colony Days

For some time after California's admission to the Union most of the events of importance in
its history took place around the Bay of San Francisco and the junction of the Sacramento and
San Joaquin; but early in the seventies the south land awoke from its long sleep and took part
in history making, not in such stirring incidents as those of the days of '49, but in a quieter
growth that was yet of importance in the making of the state. People in the East had begun
to find out that southern California had a mild, healthful climate and that, though the sands
of her rivers and rocks of her mountains were not of gold, still her oranges, by aid of irrigation,
could be turned into a golden harvest, and that all her soil needed was water in order to yield
most bountiful crops.

As little land could be bought in small ranches, those wishing to settle in the country chose
the colony plan. A number of families would contribute to a common sum, with which would be
purchased a large piece of land of several thousand acres with its water right. Each man received
from this a number of acres in proportion to the amount of money he had invested. The first
colony formed was that of Anaheim; then followed Westminster, Riverside, Pasadena, and many
others, and by that time people began to come into southern California in large numbers.

The overland journey was much longer, then than now, but quite as pleasant. At twenty-two miles
an hour the country could be seen and enjoyed, acquaintance made with the plump little prairie
dogs of the Nebraska plains, and their neighbors the ground owls, which bobbed grave salutes
as the train passed by. Bands of galloping deer, groups of grave Indian warriors sitting on
their ponies watching the train from afar, an occasional buffalo lumbering along, shaking his
shaggy head, were the things that interested the traveler who took the overland trains in '74
and '75.

At that time between San Francisco and Los Angeles there were two forms of travel: a hundred
miles of railroad, with the rest of the distance by stage; and the steamship line. Families
chose the ship. From San Pedro to Los Angeles was the only railroad of the southern country.
In Los Angeles the flat-roofed adobe buildings, where people could walk about on the tops of
the houses, were a wonder to the Eastern strangers. Beautiful homes some of them were, where
glimpses could be had of stately senoras in silks and laces, and beautiful senoritas whose
dark eyes made havoc with the hearts of the colony young men. The young Californian, who seemed
a very part of his fiery steed, was at once the admiration and envy of the Yankee boy.

Queer sights were to be seen at every turn. Creaking carretas, whose squeaking wheels announced
their coming a block away, filled the streets, some loaded with grapes, others with rounded
shaggy grease-wood roots or sacks of the red Spanish bean and great branches of flaming red
peppers. The oxen, with yoke on the horns, seemed as if out of some Bible picture.

Life in the different colonies was much the same. The newcomers had many things to learn, but
they made the best of their mistakes, and days of hard work, such as many of them had never
known, were often ended with social or literary meetings, where minds were brightened and hearts
warmed by friendly intercourse.

When the rains were heavy, the swift mountain streams could not be crossed, and often provisions
gave out; then with neighborly kindness those who had, loaned to those who had not, until fresh
supplies could be obtained. To this day the smell of new redwood lumber, the scent of burning
grease-wood brush, will bring back those times to the colonists with a painful longing for
the happy days of their new life in the new land. Many never gained wealth, while some lost
lands and savings; but it was these earnest, intelligent men and women who developed the rich
valleys of the south land and to whom we are indebted for the bloom and beauty found there to-day.

The result of the land laws and the ill-treatment of the Mexican population at the mines was
a period of highway robbery by bands of outlaws, each under the leadership of some especially
daring man. The story of some of their adventures reminds the hearer of the tales of Robin
Hood. Not so mild as Robin's were their lives, however. Often their passage was marked by a
trail of blood, where bitter revenge was taken because of bitter wrongs. Last of these bands
was that of Vasquez, who robbed the colony folk gently with many apologies. He was finally
captured and executed, and with him the bandits passed from the page of state history.

Alaska

One night in 1867 there took place in Washington an event that was to be of great importance
to the western part of the United States. This was the signing of the treaty for the purchase
of Alaska. As early as 1860 Mr. Seward, in a speech delivered at St. Paul, said:

"Looking far off into the northwest I see the Russian as he occupies himself establishing seaports,
towns, and fortifications, on the verge of this continent, and I say, 'Go on and build up your
posts all along the coast up even to the Arctic Ocean, they will yet become the outposts of
my own country.'" So long ago did the desire for Alaska, or Russian America as it was then
called, possess the mind of the great statesman. But it was not until seven years later that
he found the chance to win the government to his views. One evening, while the matter was under
discussion between the two countries, the Russian minister called upon Mr. Seward at his home,
to inform him that he had just received the Czar's sanction for the sale.

"Good, we will sign the treaty to-night," said the American statesman.

"What, so late as this, and your department closed, your clerks scattered?" remonstrated the
Russian.

"It can be done," replied Mr. Seward; and it was. At midnight the treaty was signed. The price
paid for Alaska was less than the cost of two of our modern battleships. Every year has proved
more and more the wisdom of the purchase. The discovery of gold in particular has immensely
increased its value and has brought to California an enlarged commerce.

Spanish-American War

In 1898 came the war with Spain. The tidings of the 15th of February, 1898, filled the hearts
of the people of California with indignation and grief. Printed by Francis Bailey, 1792." 8vo, 31
pp.

This tract contains the memorials which were presented to the House of Representatives, December 8,
1791, and which were read and referred. The Rhode Island memorial is signed by David Howell,
President, and dated December 28, 1790. Connecticut--by Ezra Stiles, President; Simon Baldwin,
Secretary; January 7, 1791. New York--by Matthew Clarkson, Vice-President; December 14, 1790.
Pennsylvania--by James Pemberton, President; John McCrea and Joseph P. Norris, Secretaries; October
3, 1791. Washington (Pa.)--by Andrew Swearingen, Vice-President. Maryland, in Baltimore--"Signed
by the members generally;" but the names of no members are given.

Chester-town, Maryland--by James M. Anderson, President; Daniel McCurtin, Secretary; November 19,
1791. Caroline County, Maryland--by Edward White, Vice-President; Charles Emery, Secretary; September
6, 1791.

Of the sixteen Abolition Societies existing in the United States during
this decade, it appears that six were in States which, at the outbreak
of the late rebellion, were non-slaveholding; and ten were in slaveholding
States.

FOOTNOTES:

[35] The "Dwight" to whom, with others, Bishop Grégoire inscribed
his "Literature of Negroes," was probably Theodore Dwight, and not
President Timothy Dwight, as stated on page 31.

DR. GEORGE BUCHANAN'S

ORATION ON SLAVERY,

BALTIMORE, July 4, 1791.

Extract from the Minutes. JOSEPH TOWNSEND, Secretary.

President, SAMUEL STERETT, Vice President, ALEXr McKIM.

ORATION

CITIZENS and FELLOW-MEMBERS,

SUMMONED by your voice, I appear before you with diffidence; the arduous task you have imposed
upon me, would have been better executed by some one of greater abilities and information, and
one more versed in public speaking.

However, my feeble executions shall not be wanting to promote the intentions of so laudable an
institution; and while I endeavour to fulfil the purport of this meeting, I shall hope not to
fail in proving its utility.

Too much cannot be offered against the unnatural custom that pervades the greatest part of the
world, of dragging the human race to slavery and bondage, nor of
exposing the ignominy of such barbarity.

Let an impartial view of man be taken, so far as it respects his existence, and in the chain
of thought, the white, swarthy and black, will be all linked together, and at once point out
their equality.

In the first rudiment of society, when simplicity characterised the
conduct of man, slavery was unknown, every one equally enjoyed that
peace and tranquility at home, to which he was naturally born: But
this equality existed but for a time; as yet no laws, no government
was established check the ambitious, or to curb the crafty; hence
reprisals were made upon the best by the strong and robust, and finally
subjected the weak and indigent to poverty and want.

Here then arose a difference in the circumstances of men, and the poor and weak were obliged to
submit themselves to the control of the rich and powerful; but although the authority exercised
was at first mild, and ensured to the bondsmen almost the same privileges with their masters,
yet the idea of power soon crept in upon the mind, and at length lenity was converted into
rigidity, and the gall of servitude became insupportable; the oppressed, soon found that that
liberty, which they had just given up, was an inalienable privilege of man, and sought means
to regain it: this was effected,--but not until a time when ignorance began to decline, when improvements
were made in the arts, commerce and governments, and when men could seek protection from the law,
or by industry could ward off the bitterness of poverty, and ensure
to themselves an independence.

Happy circumstance! To feel oneself emancipated from the chains of slavery, must awaken every
delicate sensation of the soul, and transport the gloomy mind into a region of bliss; for what
is life, without an enjoyment of those privileges which have been given to us by nature? It
is a burden, which if not awed by Divine Providence, would be speedily
cast off, by all who sweat under the yoke of slavish servitude, and
know no alternative but an unceasing submission to the goads of a
brutal master.

Ages have revolved since this happy condition of human affairs; and although mankind have been
gradually verging from a state of simplicity to a more social refinement, yet the governments of those
primitive times laid open an analogy for licentiousness; and we find, by pursuing the history
of man, that slavery was again introduced, and stained the annals of all the powers of Europe.

The
idea of possessing, as property, was too lucrative to be totally eradicated; it diffused itself
into Egypt and Cyprus, which became the first and most noted markets for the sale and purchase
of slaves, and soon became the cause of rapine and bloodshed in Greece
and Rome: there it was an established custom to subject to slavery
all the captives in time of war; and not only the Emperors, but the
nobility, were in possession of thousands--to them they served as
instruments of diversion and authority.

To give an idea only of the amphitheatrical entertainments, so repugnant
to humanity, would make the most obdurate heart feel with keen sensibility.

For to hear with patience of voracious animals being turned loose among human beings, to give
sport to the rich and great, when upon reflection, he may be assured, that the merciless jaw
knew no restraint but precipitately charged upon its prey whom it
left, without remorse, either massacred or maimed.

Such was the practice among the ancients, and to charge the modern with like enormities, would
by many be deemed criminal.

But I fear not to accuse them--the prosecution of the present barbarous and iniquitous slave
trade affords us too many instances of cruelties exercised against the harmless Africans. A
trade, which, after it was abolished in Europe by the general introduction of Christianity,
was again renewed about the fourteenth century by the mercenary Portuguese, and now prosecuted by
the Spaniards, French and British, in defiance of every principle
of justice, humanity and religion.

Ye moderns, will you not blush at degenerating into ancient barbarity, and at wearing the garb
of Christians, when you pursue the practices of savages?

Hasten to reform, and put an end to this unnatural and destructive trade--Do you not know that
thousands of your fellow-mortals are annually entombed by it? and
that it proves ruinous to your government?

You go to Africa to purchase slaves for foreign markets, and lose
the advantages of all the proper articles of commerce, which that
country affords.

You bury your seamen upon the pestiferous shores; and, shocking to humanity! make monsters of
all you engage in the traffic.

Who are more brutal than the Captains of vessels in the slave trade?

Not even the tawny savage of the American wilds, who thirsts after the blood of the Christian,
and carries off his scalp the trophy of splendid victory!

They even countenance the practice of the ancients, in seeing a sturdy mastiff tear in pieces
some poor wretch of their hateful cargoes, or in viewing their wreathes and tortures, when smarting
under the lash of a seasoned cat.[36]

It is time to abolish these enormities, and to stay such repeated insults from being offered
to Divine Providence: Some dreadful curse from heaven may be the effect of them, and the innocent
be made to suffer for the guilty.

But, are these the only crimes you are guilty of in pursuing the trade? No--you stir up the harmless
Africans to war, and stain their fields with blood: you keep constant hostile ferment in their territories,
in order to procure captives for your uses; some you purchase with
a few trifling articles, and waft to distant shores to be made the
instruments of grandeur, pride and luxury.

You commit also the crime of kidnapping others, whom you forcibly drag from their beloved country,
from the bosoms of their dearest relatives; so leave a wife without a husband, a sister without
a brother, and a helpless infant to bemoan the loss of its indulgent
parent.

Could you but see the agonizing pangs of these distressed mortals, in the hour of their captivity,
when deprived of every thing that is dear to them, it would make even the heathenish heart
to melt with sorrow; like a noble Senator of old, death is their choice in preference to lingering
out their lives in ignominious slavery--and often do we see them meet it with a smile.

The horrors of the grave intimidate not even the delicate females; too many melancholy instances
are recorded of their plunging into the deep, and carrying with them
a tender infant at their breast; even in my own recollection, suicide
has been committed in various forms by these unhappy wretches, under
the blind infatuation of revising the land of their nativity.

Ye mercenary Portuguese, ye ambitious French, and ye deceitful Britons, I again call upon you to
take these things into your consideration; it is time, a remorse of conscience had seized upon
you; it is time, you were apprised of your danger: Behold the thousands that are annually
lost to your governments, in the prosecution of an unlawful and iniquitous
trade.

View the depredations that you commit upon a nation, born equally free with yourselves; consider
the abyss of misery into which you plunge your fellow-mortals, and reflect upon the horrid crimes
you are hourly committing under the bright sunshine of revealed religion.--Will you not then find
yourselves upon a precipice, and protected from ruin, only because
you are too wicked to be lost?

What Empire, or what State can have the hope of existing, which prosecutes a trade, that proves
a sinking fund to her coffers, and to her subjects, tramples the
human species under foot, with as much indifference as the dirt, and
fills the world with misery and woe?

Let not a blind hardness of opinion any longer bias your judgments, and prevent you from acting
like Christians.

View the Empires amongst the ancients; behold Egypt in the time of Secostris, Greece in the time
of Cyrus, and Rome in the reign of Augustus; view them all, powerful as enemies, patterns of
virtue and science, bold and intrepid in war, free and independent; and now see them sacrificed
at the shrine of luxury, and dwindled into insignificance. When in power, they usurped the
authority of God, they stretched out their arms to encompass their enemies, and bound their
captives in iron chains of slavery.

Vengeance was then inflicted, their spoils became the instruments
of pride, luxury and dissipation, and finally proved the cause of
their present downfall.

Then look back at home; view your degeneracy from the times of Louis the 14th and Charles the 2d,
and if a universal blush don't prevail, it will argue a hardness of heart, tempered by a constant
action of wickedness upon the smooth anvil of religion.

What a distressing scene is here before us. America, I start at your situation!

Emancipated from the shackles of despotism, you know no superior; free and independent, you stand
equally respected among your foes, and your allies.--Renowned in history, for your valour, and
for your wisdom, your way is left open to the highest eminence of human perfection.

But while with pleasing hopes you may anticipate such an event, the echo of expiring freedom cannot
fail to assail the ears, and pierce the heart with keen reproach.

In despotic governments, says Montesque, where they are already in a state of political slavery,
civil slavery is more tolerable than in other governments; for there
the minds of masters and servants are equally degenerate and act in
unison.--But in America, this cannot be the case; here the pure forms
of Republicanism are established, and hold forth to the world the
enjoyment of Freedom and Independence.

Her citizens have thrown off the load of oppression, under which they formerly laboured; and
elated with their signal victories, have become oppressors in their turn.

They have slaves, over whom they carry the iron rod of subjection, and fail not to exercise it with
cruelty, hence their situations become insupportable, misery inhabits their cabins, and persecution
pursues them in the field.

I would wish to be partial to my country, and carry a hand of lenity; it is more pleasing to
celebrate than to detract, but whoever takes a view of the situation of its slaves, will find
it even worse than this description.

Naked and starved, they often fall victims to the inclemencies of
the weather, and inhumanly beaten; sacrifices to the turbulent tempers
of their cruel masters.

Unfortunate Africans! born in freedom and subjected to slavery! How long will you remain the spoils
of despotism, and the harbinger of human calamities?

Cannot your distresses awaken the heart of sensibility, and excite her pity? Cannot your unlawful treatment
call forth the voice of humanity to plead your cause?

Americans! step forward; you have already diffused a spirit of Liberty throughout the world; you
have set examples of heroism; and now let me intreat you to pave
the way to the exercise of humanity: an opportunity is offered to
raise yourselves to the first eminence among mankind.

Rouse then from your lethargy, and let not such torpid indifference prevail in your councils.--Slavery,
the most implacable enemy to your country, is harboured amongst you; it makes a rapid progress,
and threatens you with destruction.

Already has it disturbed the limpid streams of liberty, it has polluted the minds of your youth,
sown the seeds of despotism, and without a speedy check to her ravages,
will sink you into a pit of infamy, where you shall be robbed of all
the honours you have before acquired.

Let it viewed either morally or politically, and no one argument can
be adduced in its favour.

The savage mind may perhaps be reconciled to it, but the heart of the Christian must recoil at
the idea.--He sees it forbidden in Holy Writ, and his conscience dictates to him, that it
is wrong.

"He that stealeth a man," says Exodus, "and selleth him, of if he
be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death."

Oh my countrymen! are there any of you who can con over this elegant passage of Scripture, without
trembling; or can you stand before the great Author of your existence, with an arm uplifted
to subject his creatures to slavery, without dreading an execution of this divine threat.

"The nation, to whom they shall be in bondage, will I judge, said
God"--and what that judgment may be, is beyond the suggestion of mortals.

We may be hurled amidst the elements of woe to expiate the guilt, for he who holdeth men in slavery
liveth in sin.

In a civilized country, where religion is tolerated in all its purity,
it must be the fault of ignorance, stubborn indifference to Christianity,
to rebel against divine sentiments; and considering slavery in a political
view, it must appear equally as destructive to our terrestrial happiness,
as it endangers our enjoyment of heavenly bliss.

For who is there, unless innured to savage cruelties, that hear of the inhuman punishments daily
afflicted upon the unfortunate Blacks, without feeling for their situations? Or can any one
be an eye witness to such enormities, without at the same time being deeply persuaded of its guilt?

I
fear these questions may be answered in the affirmative, but I hope by none of this respectable
audience; for such men must be monsters, not of the regular order of nature, and equally prone
to murder, or to less cruelties.

But independent of these effects, which the existence of slavery in
any country has over the moral faculty of man, it is highly injurious
to its natural oeconomy; it debars the progress of agriculture, and
gives origin to sloth and luxury.

View the fertile fields of Great Britain, where the hand of freedom conducts the plowshare, then
look back upon your own, and see how mean will be the comparison.

But this, the prejudiced mind is scarce able to scan, the pride of holding men as property is too flattering
to yield to the dictates of reason, and blindly pushes on man to his destruction.

What a pity is it, that darkness should so obscure us, that America
with all her transcending glory, should be stigmatized with the infamous
reproach of oppression, and her citizens be called Tyrants.

Then will the tongues of slander be silenced, the shafts of criticism blunted, and America enter
upon a new theatre of glory.

But unless these things shall be done, unless the calamitous situation
of the slaves shall at least be alleviated, what is America to expect?
Can she think that the repeated insults to Divine Authority will pass
off with impunity? Or can she suppose, that men, who are naturally
born free, shall forever sweat under the yoke of ignominious slavery,
without making one effort to regain their liberty? Moreover, the number
of slaves, that are harboured amongst you holds forth an alarm; in
many parts of the continent they exceed the whites, and are capable
of ransacking the country. Would they fly in clouds, until their numbers
became tremendous, and threaten the country with devastation and ruin?--It
would not be the feeble efforts of an undisciplined people, that could
quell their fury.

Why then is there not some step to be taken to
ward off the dreadful catastrophe?

Fellow countrymen, will you stand
and see your aged parents, your loving wives, your dutiful children
butchered by the merciless hand of the enthusiast, when you have it
in your power to prevent it?

In this enlightened period, when the
Rights of Man is the topick of political controversy, and slavery
is considered not only unnatural but unlawful, why do you not step
forward and compleat the glorious work you have begun, and extend
the merciful hand to the unfortunate Blacks? Why do you not form some
wise plan to liberate them, and abolish slavery in your country?

If
it should be deemed injudicious or impolitic to effect it at once,
let it be done gradually; let the children for one or two generations
be liberated at a certain age, and less than half a century will the
plague be totally rooted out from amongst you--then will you begin
to see your consequence--thousands of good citizens will be added
to your number, and your arms will become invincible: Gratitude will
induce them to become your friends; for the PROMISE alone of freedom
to a slave ensures his loyalty; witness their conduct in the second
Punic war which the Senate of Rome carried on against Hannibal; not
a man disgraced himself, but all with an intrepidity peculiar to veterans
met their foes, fought and conquered.

Witness also the valour of
a few Blacks in South-Carolina, who under the promise of freedom,
joined the great and good Colonel JOHN LAURENS; and in a sudden surprised
the British, and distinguished themselves as heroes.

I remember it
was said, they were foremost in the ranks, and nobly contended for
their promised reward.

At this critical juncture, when savage cruelties
threatened to invade your peaceful territories, and murder your citizens,
what great advantage might be derived from giving freedom to the Africans
at once. Would they not all became your Allies; would they not turn
out hardy for the wilderness, to drive the blood-thirsty savage to
his den, and teach him it were better to live peaceably at home, than
to come under the scourge of such newly liberated levies.

Americans
arouse--It is time to hear the cause of the wretched sons of Africa,
enslaved in your country; they plead not guilty to every charge of
crime, and unmeritedly endure the sufferings you impose upon them.

Yet,
like haughty Despots, or corrupt judges, you forbid a trial. Justice
however to yourselves and humanity toward your fellow mortals, loudly
demand it of you, and you ought not to hesitate in obeying their sacred
mandates.

A few years may be sufficient to make you repent of your
unrelenting indifference, and give a stab to all your boasted honors;
then may you, pitiable citizens, be taught wisdom, when it will be
too late; then may you cry out, Abba Father, but mercy will not be
found, where mercy was refused.

Let all the social feelings of the
soul, let honour, philanthropy, pity, humanity, and justice, unite
to effect their emancipation.

For eternal will be the disgrace of
keeping them much longer in the iron fetters of slavery, but immortal
the honour of accomplishing their FREEDOM.

* * * * *

To the SOCIETY.

Such
were the sentiments, my friends, that first induced you to form yourselves
into this Society.

Yours is the business of mercy and compassion,
not of oppression. You forcibly rescue from the hands of no man his
property, but by your examples and precepts you promote the Abolition
of Slavery, and give relief to free Negroes, and others unlawfully
held in bondage.

You have shown an anxiety to extend a portion of
that freedom to others, which GOD in his Providence hath extended
unto you, and a release from that thraldom to which yourselves and
your country were so lately tyrannically doomed, and from which you
have been but recently delivered. You have evinced to the world your
inclination to remove as much as possible the sorrows of those who
have lived in undeserved bondage, and that your hearts are expanded
with kindness toward men of all colours, conditions and nations; and
if you did not interest yourselves in their behalf, how long might
their situations remain hard and distressing.

Numbers might passively
remain for life in abject slavery from an ignorance of the mode of
acquiring their emancipation, notwithstanding they may be justly entitled
to their freedom by birth and by the law. Scarcely
half of the standing timber of a tract is taken by the loggers and what is left is often burned
or totally neglected. Replanting is unthought of and the young trees are treated as a nuisance.

Three fourths of the forests of California grow upon side hills, generally with an incline
of from fifteen to thirty degrees. When the trees are gone, therefore, the rain soon washes
away the soil, leaving the rocks bare. When the next rainy season comes, the water, not being
able to sink into the earth, and so gradually find its way to the streams, rushes down the
hillsides in torrents, flooding the smaller water courses. Then the rivers rise and overflow,
causing great damage to property; but their waters quickly subside, and when the dry season
comes they have not sufficient depth for the passage of ships of commerce. The total destruction
of the forests would soon destroy the navigability of the principal water highways of the state,
while another serious result would be the lessening of the water supply for irrigation.

The second variety of the Sequoia, the gigantea, or "big tree," as it is called, grows much
farther inland than the redwood, being found on the western slopes of the Sierras. There are
ten separate groves of these trees, from the little company of six in southern Placer County
to the southernmost Sequoia, two hundred and sixty miles away on the Tule River. The whole
put together would not make more than a few hundred thousand of extra-sized trees, and of the
giants themselves not more than five hundred. These rise as high as three hundred and fifty
feet, and are from twenty to thirty feet through. Near the Yosemite the stage road passes through
the hollow center of one of those monsters. In a grove owned by the government some cavalry
men, with their horses, lined up on a "big tree" log, and it easily held fourteen, each horse's
nose touching the next one's tail.

How old these trees may be is yet unsettled, but Mr. John Muir, their intimate friend and companion,
tells of one which was felled which showed by its rings that it was 2200 years old. Another
which had blown down was fully 4000 years old. Later investigation makes it seem not unlikely
that some have existed for even 5000 years. It seems a sin to destroy a living thing of that age.

The great basin of the Santa Cruz Mountains, which contains a large collection of the Sequoia
sempervirens, belongs to the United States government. So, too, do the Mariposa grove of Sequoia
gigantea, and the General Grant park, and Tuolumne grove, each of which contains a small number
of fine specimens of the big trees. These properties will be protected, but all other groves,
in which are the giant Sequoias, are in great danger. There has recently been a movement by
the government toward purchasing the Calaveras grove, which has the finest collection of the
big trees known, but nothing decided has been done. Meantime there are a number of mills engaged
in devouring this noble forest.

Unless the people of California take up the matter with earnestness and energy, the state and
the United States will stand disgraced before mankind for letting these wonders of the world,
these largest and oldest of all living things, be destroyed for the lumber they will make.
They should be purchased by the government and protected, then some movement should be started
in all lumber districts by which waste in logging may be done away with, young trees protected
and cleared, and forest land replanted with suitable trees. The law excluding cattle and sheep
from the forests is already proving its wisdom by the new growth of young trees. Only among
the giant Sequoias of the Tule and King's River district are there to be found baby trees of
that species.

The lumber trade is one of the most interesting and necessary industries of the state. Work
in the camp is healthful and well paid. Many a delicate boy or young man in the city would
grow strong and healthy and live a much longer time if he would cast his lot with the hardy
choppers and cutters of the great forest of the Pacific slope. A logging crew consists of thirty
men, including two cooks. The discipline is as rigid as that of a military system; each man
knows his own particular duties, and must attend to them promptly and faithfully. Trees are
not chopped down, as used to be the custom; with the exception of a little chopping on either
edge, a saw run by two men does the work. Oxen are seldom used, as in early days on the Atlantic
coast, to haul out the logs, for they have given way to "donkeys,"--not the long-eared, loud-voiced
little animals, but the powerful, compact donkey-engines.

Lumber schooners and steamers are the chief features of our coast traffic. Almost all the large
cities of the Pacific coast owe their foundation and prosperity to this trade. San Francisco
and Eureka in Humboldt County are the principal ports of the trade. Mendocino has a rock-bound
coast, with no harbors, but she has fine forests. Here the lumber steamer secures its cargo
by means of suspended wire chutes as trolleys. The outer end of the trolley wire is anchored
in the ocean, the wire crosses the deck of the moored steamer, the slack being taken up to
the ship's gaff, thus making a tight wire up and down which the trolley car with its load is sent.

Sometimes a great raft made of lumber is taken in tow by a steamer loaded with the same material
and they start on a voyage down the coast, but this is a dangerous venture. If the sea becomes
rough the raft may break loose from the steamer and go plunging over the waves, no one knows
where. The brave captains of our coasting vessels fear nothing so much as a timber raft adrift
which may crash into a vessel at any moment and against which there is no way of guarding.

Chapter XIII

To All that Sow the Time of Harvest Should be Given

In all but savage countries, wheat is the most important product of the soil, A large proportion
of human beings living on the earth to-day are so poverty-stricken as to make the question
of food a matter of anxiety for every day. The prayer for bread unites more voices than any other.

The padres who settled California understood this well. A number of bushels of wheat, snugly
incased in leather sacks, formed a precious part of the cargo of the San Carlos, that stout
Spanish vessel which in 1769 brought the first settlers to California. This seed-wheat was
divided among the early missions and as soon as possible was planted-- not with success at
first. For a time the padres made little progress in crop raising. They had to learn by their
failures. In San Diego the first wheat planted was sown in the river bottom and the seed was
carried entirely away by the rising of the stream in the winter; and the next year, which proved
to be a dry one, it was planted so far from the water that it was almost all destroyed by drought.
At San Gabriel the first crop was drowned out, but the second, planted on the plain where it
could be irrigated, was a success. San Gabriel was chief among the missions for wheat raising,
and was called the "mother of agriculture."

Grain planting and harvesting, in the days of the padres, differed widely from the methods
which prevail to-day. Then the ground was plowed once or twice, but in what manner? A yoke
of oxen, guided by an Indian, dragged a plow with an iron point made by an Indian blacksmith.
If iron could not be obtained, the point was of oak. Seed, which had been first soaked in lye,
was sown by hand, broadcast, and harrowed in with branches of trees. The grain was cut by the
Indians with knives and sickles. It was afterward placed on the hardened floor of a circular
corral made for the purpose, and into it was turned a band of horses which were urged to a
run by the shouts and whips of the Indian vaqueros. After running one way they were frightened
into turning and going the other. In this manner the grain was trampled out of the husks. It
was freed from the chaff by being thrown high in the air by the shovelful, when the wind was
blowing hard enough to carry away the light straw.

Next, the grain was washed and dried, then ground, generally between two stones bolted together.
A pole for a handle was also fastened by the bolt, and the stone was turned, sometimes by mules,
sometimes by Indians. La Perouse, the French scientist who visited the coast in 1786 and gave
to the padres of San Carlos a handmill for grinding grain, said that it would enable four Indian
women to do the work of a hundred by the old way. Before many years the padres at San Gabriel
built a water mill of stone and adobe which ground grain in large quantities, but not with
entire success, until Chapman, the first American in that region, gave them his assistance
to perfect the machinery. This interesting building has been restored by Mr. H. E. Huntington
and is an object of interest to those who visit San Gabriel.

In 1815 the missions raised enough wheat to supply the whole population, and there was even
an attempt to ship grain to Mexico. This was a failure, but a little grain was sold to the
Russians at Fort Ross. At the time of the change in the mission settlements, when the padres
were sent away, all agriculture declined. "The medallion is gold, and the work on the miniature
is exquisite. It is a master-piece--the colour equals the design. The mouth is marvellously
rendered. Mengs or Liotard could not have done better. At what do you value this work of art?"

"You
are more of a connoisseur than I. I will leave it to your own valuation."

"I will let you have the trinket for five thousand francs; it is almost
nothing."

Camille began to draw out the five thousand francs from his porte-monnaie. "How prompt you are!"
remarked Samuel.

"The portrait has not only a value as a work of art; I am sure you attach a sentimental value to
it, for I suspect you of being head and ears in love with the original."

"I find you too greedy," replied Camille, casting on him a crushing glance.

"Do not be angry. I am accustomed to exercise methodical precision in business affairs. My father
always sold at a fixed price, and I, too, never lower my charges.

You will readily understand that what is worth five thousand francs to a friend is worth double
to a lover. This gem is worth ten thousand francs. You can take it or leave it."

"I will take it," replied M. Langis.

"Since we agree," continued Samuel, "I possess still other articles which might suit you."

"Why, do you think of selling me your clothing?"

"Let us come to
an understanding. I have other articles of the same lot."

And he
brought from a closet the red hood, which he spread out on the table.

"Here
is an article of clothing--to use your own words--that may be of interest
to you. Its colour is beautiful; if you saw it in the sunshine, it
would dazzle you. I grant that the stuff is common--it is very ordinary
cashmere--but if you deign to examine it closely, you will be struck
by the peculiar perfume that it exhales. The Italians call it 'l'odor
femminino.'"

"And what is your rate of charge for the 'odor femminino?'"

"I
will be moderate. I will let you have this article and its perfume
for five thousand francs. It is actually giving it away." How the padres would wonder if they could see it working!

The grain of the California wheat is white and soft, and contains much gluten. No matter what
hard red or yellow varieties are brought from other countries and planted here, in a year or
two they change to the California type. It is not certainly known what causes this peculiarity.
The grain most in favor through the state is called "club wheat" from the form of the head,
which is blockshaped, instead of long and slender. The "club wheat" holds fast its grain so
that it can be harvested without falling to the ground, which, in so dry a climate, is a great
point in its favor.

Wheat is raised all over the state, both on high and on low land. Some of the largest grain
ranches are along the tule lands around Stockton. These were marshes once, but have been drained,
and now are choice grain fields. Wheat was first sent out of the state to England as ballast
for returning ships, but the trade gradually increased until there are now over one hundred
of the finest sailing vessels engaged in it. Unfortunately, few of these vessels are American,
perhaps but one fourth. It is a pity that our countrymen should not benefit more by this trade.
During the grain season at most of the Pacific ports the flag of nearly every nation on earth
is represented. All styles of shipping, from the largest modern steamer to the smallest ocean
sailing vessel, are then to be found in the harbors of the coast.

Grain is carried to the docks in barges, schooners, or on cars, and is seldom shipped except
in sacks. Wheat, unless it needs to be cleaned or graded, is kept in the sack in which it leaves
the home field. To watch the grain being loaded in the ship is a sight well worth seeing. If
the wharf, or car, or warehouse where it lies is higher than the deck of the vessel on which
it is to be shipped, the sacks are placed on an inclined chute down which they descend to the
hold of the ship. If the deck of the vessel is the higher, sometimes an endless belt, run by
electricity, is placed in a chute, the sacks are laid on the belt, and so carried to their
resting place.

In loading wheat for export, a number of sacks in each row are bled; that is, a slit is made
in the sack which allows a small quantity of grain to escape and fill the spaces round the
corners and sides of the sack, thus making a compact cargo which is not liable to shift. At
Port Costa is located a grader, where, when necessary wheat can be cleaned and graded; here
also are many large warehouses.

For a long time about two thirds of the wheat crop of the state was sent to Ireland, but now
our new lands in the Pacific take much of it. California has an immense trade in wheat that
has been ground into flour. Over six million dollars' worth of flour is shipped each year,
nearly three fourths of it going to China, Japan, and the islands of the Pacific.

It is believed by scientific agriculturists that better results will be obtained in wheat raising
as smaller ranches become the rule, where the farmer can give more attention to the needs of
the grain, adding what is necessary to the soil. Often the alternation of crops increases the
yield--wheat doing much better if planted where beans or other legumes were raised the year
before. Where the grain fields are not so large, irrigation can be depended upon instead of
the rainfall, and crops then are sure and more even in quantity.

Barley is the grain next in importance to wheat in California. It can be raised where wheat
can not, as it needs less moisture for its development; and if the rains fail, it can be cut
for hay which always brings a good price. Barley hay, with the heads on, is in California the
chief food of horses, and in many cases of cattle. A horse for ordinary work fed on barley
hay gets all the grain necessary. If on account of heavier work, stronger food is required,
rolled barley is given in addition. A large quantity of the better graded barley grain raised
in the state is used by the brewers for malt.

Corn does not do so well through the state in general, but in some locations it is justly claimed
that a man can ride on horseback down the rows of corn without being seen over the tops. This,
too, the padres brought into the state. The tortilla, the common food of the Spanish settlers,
was made of coarse-ground or pounded corn.

Alfalfa, the wonderful forage plant of dry regions of the West, is a member of the clover family.
Throughout the southern and middle portion of California are large ranches devoted to its culture
for hay. It is also raised extensively for green feed for horses and cattle. It produces from
three to six crops a year according to location and care given it, and is treated for the market
much the same as barley hay, except that it is generally made into smaller bales. Alfalfa is
raised by irrigation, the best method being from flumes opening into indentations, not so deep
as furrows, from which the water spreads, flooding the whole surface.

Many a California young man from high school gets his first taste of work away from home in
the harvest fields. Generally this is a good experience for him. He receives some pretty hard
knocks, and sees the rough side of life, but if he has self-control and good principles, he
will be the better for the venture, returning more manly, earnest, and self-reliant.

Chapter XIV

The Golden Apples of the Hesperides

The orange, like many other of California's most valuable products, was brought into the country
by the patient, far-seeing padres. Orange, lemon, and citron, those three gay cousins of royal
blood, traveled together, and soon were to be found in many of the mission gardens. The most
extensive of that early planting was an orchard at San Gabriel, set out by Padre Sanchez in
1804. In the height of its prosperity, this mission is recorded as having two thousand three
hundred and thirty-three fruit trees, a large proportion of which were orange trees. San Fernando
had sixteen hundred trees. San Diego had its orange orchard: how many trees is not recorded,
but its olive grove numbered five hundred and seventeen flourishing trees. Santa Inez had nearly
a thousand trees. As early as 1800 Santa Barbara and San Buenaventura also had valuable orchards.

Outside the missions the first orange trees in any number were planted in 1834, the famous
Wolfskill grove in 1841. By 1862 there were about twenty-five thousand trees of this variety
in the state, and two thirds of these belonged to Wolfskill, of Los Angeles. A little later
several large orchards were planted in the region around the Mission San Gabriel. In Riverside,
often called the mother of orange culture in the state, the first seeds were planted in 1870,
the first trees from these seeds in 1873, and from that period is dated the beginning of extensive
planting. This was largely the work of colonists. About the time the orchards came into bearing,
the Southern Pacific and the Santa Fe Overland were completed, so that an Eastern market was
gained for the fruit, with the result that the new industry fairly bounded forward. So much
was sometimes made from an acre of trees that it seemed as though people could not get land
and plant fast enough. Occasionally an income was reported of three thousand dollars from an
acre, and eight hundred to one thousand dollars per acre was not an uncommon crop.

Although at this time there were a few orange trees in the middle and northern parts of the
state, for many years it was supposed that only the southern country could raise this fruit
suitable for the market, but to-day people know better. Excellent oranges are grown as far
north as Shasta, and Butte County, which leads in the northern orange culture, has a number
of large and valuable orchards. From Tulare County and other parts of the valley of the San
Joaquin, choice fruit is being shipped to the markets of the East. From San Diego all the way
up the state one may find trees of the citrus family flourishing; still, whether north or south,
in planting an orange orchard, the greatest care has to be taken in the choice of location.
Jack Frost is the enemy to be avoided, and generally in any strip of country the lower lands
are the ones he visits first. So the highlands are preferred, and even here the currents of
air must be studied. A strong, uninterrupted, downward sweep of air from the snowcovered mountains
will often, at night, drive away the needed warmth gathered during the day, so that land protected
by some mountain spur which makes an eddy in the current is the best for this heat-loving fruit.

There are several popular varieties of the orange. The Valencia late is being planted by many
in preference to others because, besides being a fine fruit, it keeps well, ripening when the
days begin to be long and hot, and is therefore doubly welcome. The sweet orange from the Mediterranean
country, and the St. Michael, with its paper rind, are also favorites, as are the delicious
little Mandarin and Tangerine varieties, with their thin skin and high flavor; but the king
of them all is the Washington navel, which has gained for the state its high position as an
orange-raising territory. This is not a new variety, though many may believe it so. A book
published in Rome over three hundred years ago gives an interesting description and pictures
of this and other kinds of oranges and the way they should be raised. The title of this rare
old volume is "Hesperides, or about the Golden Apples, their Culture and Use." Among its many
fine illustrations is one of Hercules receiving the golden apples. Another shows the bringing
of the fruit to Italy by a body of nymphs and goddesses in Neptune's car. Mr. Charles F. Lummis
has translated portions of the book in the California magazine Out West.

On its travels the navel orange finally reached Bahia, Brazil, and there, sometime during the
Civil War in the United States, a lady who, it is said, was the wife of the American consul,
discovered the deliciousness of this fruit. So pleased was she that she determined to share
her enjoyment with others; so upon her return to her own country, she described this orange
to Mr. Saunders, head of the government's experimental farm at Washington. He became interested
in the subject, sent to Bahia, and had twelve navel trees propagated by budding. These were
shipped to Washington, where they arrived safely, and were placed in the orangery there. They
all grew, and from them a large number of trees were budded.

Still they had not reached California. Bringing them to the Pacific coast was also the work
of a woman. Mrs. Tibbetts, wife of a fruit grower of Riverside, was visiting in Washington
and to her Mr. Saunders presented two navel orange trees, which she brought home with her.
They were planted beside her doorstep in Riverside. The trees grew rapidly, and when they bore
fruit it did not take the California orange growers long to discover that here they had a treasure
of more value than the largest nugget of gold ever found in the state.

It was at a citrus fair in Riverside in 1879 that this golden king first appeared before the
world. Then from all over southern California came orange men to get buds from these trees.
Back home they went with the precious bits of life. Acres of seedling oranges were quickly
shorn of their green crowns. Cut, cut, went knife and shears till only the stock was left,
and then into a carefully made slit in the bark was placed the navel bud. It soon sprouted,
and everywhere one could see the stranger growing sturdily on its adopted stem. Thousands of
buds were sold from the two parent trees until there were hundreds of thousands of their beautiful
children growing all over the state, giving golden harvests.

If we owe to two ladies the success of orange culture in California, it was a third who saved
the industry when ruin threatened it. For a while all went merrily with the orange grower;
then in some way, from Australia, there came into the country an insect pest called the cushiony
scale, which settled on the orange trees and seemed likely to destroy them. The first is that disaffection
of a virulent and articulate character is a new phenomenon in India; the second is that the
existing: disaffection represents a genuine, if precocious and misdirected, response on the part
of the Western educated classes to the democratic ideals of the modern Western world which
our system of education has imported into India. It is easy to account for the prevalence of both
these misconceptions. We are a people of notoriously short memory, and, when a series of sensational
dastardly crimes, following on a tumultuous agitation in Bengal and a campaign of incredible violence
in the native Press, at last aroused and alarmed the British public,
the vast majority of Englishmen were under the impression that since
the black days of the Mutiny law and order had never been seriously
assailed in India, and they therefore rushed to the conclusion that,
if the pax Britannica had been so rudely and suddenly shaken, the
only possible explanation lay in some novel wave of sentiment or some
grievous administrative blunder which had abruptly disturbed the harmonious
relations between the rulers and the ruled.

People had forgotten that disaffection in varying forms and degrees of intensity has existed
at all times amongst certain sections of the population, and under the conditions of our rule
can hardly be expected to disappear altogether. Whether British statesmanship has always sufficiently
reckoned with its existence is another question.

More than 30 years ago, for instance, the Government of India had to pass a Bill dealing with
the aggressive violence of the vernacular Press on precisely the same grounds that were alleged
in support of this year's Press Bill, and with scarcely less justification, whilst just 13
years ago two British officials fell victims at Poona to a murderous conspiracy, prompted
by a campaign of criminal virulence in the Press, closely resembling those which have more recently
robbed India of many valuable lives

.


In the history of the growth of southern California, and especially of its orange culture,
the use of water on the soil plays a prominent part. It was the discovery that the most sandy
and unpromising-looking land became a miracle of fertility when subjected to the irrigating
stream, that caused the wonderful prosperity of the dry portions of the state.

Irrigation, which means the turning of water from a well, spring, or stream, upon land to promote
the growth of plant life, has been used by mankind for thousands of years. In Colorado, Arizona,
and New Mexico, there are remains of irrigation canals made by people who lived so long ago
that we know nothing of their history.

The padres who settled California were adepts in this science. In founding a mission they always
chose its site near some stream, the water of which could be turned upon the cultivated fields;
and the dams, canals, and reservoirs which the padres constructed were so well built that many
of them have lasted until the present time.

It will seem strange to many people to learn that the highest-priced, most fertile farm lands
in the United States are not to be found in the rich valleys of the Eastern states or the prairies
of the middle West, but in the dry region between the Rocky Mountains and the Pacific Ocean.
Colorado, which belongs to the land of little rain, has in proportion to its size the richest
mines of any state in the Union, yet the product of its farms, all irrigated, equals the output
of its mineral wealth.

All the flourishing towns of southern California depend for their wonderful prosperity upon
the fertility of the irrigated country surrounding them.

Trees and plants require water for their growth, but they do not all need it in like quantity,
nor at the same time; therefore, the scientific farmer on arid lands, where there is an abundance
of water for irrigation, has an immense advantage over his Eastern brother who depends for
water upon the rainfall alone.

While the valuable raisin crop of the Californian is drying in the sun and the slightest shower
would damage, or perhaps ruin it, just beyond lies the orange orchard, the trees of which are
suffering for water. The fruit, the size of a large walnut, is still hard and green, and must
have an abundance of the life-giving liquid if it is to develop into the rich yellow orange,
filled with delicious juice, which adorns the New Year's market. How would our ranchman prosper
if he depended upon rain? As it is, he furrows his orchard from its highest to its lowest level;
then into the flume which runs parallel with the highest boundary of the grove he turns the
water from pipe or reservoir, and opening the numerous little slide-doors or sluice-gates of
the flume, soon has the satisfaction of seeing each furrow the bed of a running stream, the
water of which sinks slowly, steadily, down to the roots of the thirsty trees. After the water
has been flowing in this manner for some hours, it is shut off, for it has done enough work.
In a day or two the ranchman runs the cultivator over the ground of the orchard, leaving the
soil fine and crumbly and the trees in perfect condition for another six or eight weeks of growth.

The first attempts of the American immigrant at irrigation were very simple--just the making
of a furrow turning the water of a stream upon his land. Then, as he desired to cultivate more
land and raise larger crops, his ditches had to be longer, often having branches. Soon neighbors
came in and settled above and below him. They too used of the stream; there was no law to control
selfishness, so there were disagreements and bitter quarrels over the water. Lawsuits followed
and sometimes even fighting and murders. The remedy for this state of things was found to be
in a company ditch, flume, or reservoir, with the use of water controlled by fixed laws.

There are some crops, notably grapes, which are grown without irrigation. The grapevine, instead
of being treated as a climber, is each year trimmed back to the main stem, which thus becomes
a strong woody stalk, often a foot or more in circumference, quite capable of withstanding
the heat and dryness of the atmosphere and of drawing from the soil all the nourishment needed
for the fruit.

Wheat, barley, and oats, both as grain and as hay, are largely raised without irrigation. Olives,
and many deciduous trees, by careful cultivation may flourish without water other than the
rainfall; yet notwithstanding this, for a home in southern California, land without a good
water-right is of little value.

The wealth of the region is in a great measure in its expensive water system, which, by means
of reservoirs, dams, ditches, flumes, and pipes, gathers the water from the mountain streams
and conveys it to the thirsty land below.

Chapter XV

California's other Contributions to the World's Bill of Fare

By 1874 people in the Eastern states had begun to talk of California canned fruits. Apricots
and the large white grape found ready sale, but California raisins, though on the market, were
not in demand. That line from the old game "Malaga raisins are very fine raisins and figs from
Smyrna are better," represented the idea of the public; and figs, raisins, and prunes eaten
in the United States all came from abroad. But how is it to-day?

Thanksgiving and Christmas dinners of our Eastern friends owe much to California. She sends
the seedless raisins, candied orange and lemon peel, the citron and beet sugar for the mince
pies and plum puddings. Her cold-storage cars carry to the winter-bound states the delicious
white celery of the peat lands, snow-white heads of cauliflower, crisp string beans, sweet
young peas, green squash, cucumbers, and ripe tomatoes. For the salads are her olives and fresh
lettuce dressed with the golden olive oil of the Golden State. Of ripe fruits, she sends pears,
grapes, oranges, pomegranates. For desserts, she supplies great clusters of rich sugary raisins,
creamy figs, stuffed prunes, and soft-shelled almonds and walnuts. All these and other delicacies
California gives toward the holiday making in the East.

But it is not only to the homes of the wealthy that she carries good cheer; to people who have
very little money to spend, and those who are far away from civilization, as soldiers, surveyors,
woodmen, and road-builders, California's products go to help make palatable fare. To these
her canned meats, fish, and vegetables, and canned and dried fruits, are very welcome.

The canneries and fruit-packing establishments of the state bring in many millions of dollars
each year and give employment to a host of people, a large number of whom are women and young
girls.

Most of the fruits California now raises came into the country with the padres. Captain Vancouver
tells us that he found at the Santa Clara mission, at the time of his visit in 1792, a fine
orchard consisting of apples, pears, peaches, plums, apricots; and at San Buenaventura all
these with the addition of oranges, grapes, and pomegranates. Alfred Robinson describes the
orchards and vineyards of San Gabriel mission as very extensive. Wine and brandy were made
at most of the missions, San Fernando being especially noted for its brandy. Guadalupe Vallejo
tells of bananas plantains, sugar cane, citrons, and date palms growing at the southern missions.
Palm trees were planted "for their fruit, for the honor of St. Francis, and for use on Palm
Sunday."

Not only did the padres enjoy fresh fruits from their gardens, but raisins were dried from
the grapes, citron, orange, and lemon peel were candied, and much fruit was preserved. It is
not recorded that they had pumpkin pie in those days, but a small, fine-grained pumpkin was
raised extensively for preserves. It is still a favorite dainty among the native Californians,
and no Spanish dinner is complete without this dulce, as it is called. Spanish-American housewives
excel their American sisters in the art of preserving. Pumpkin, peach, pear, fig, are all treated
in the same manner, being first soaked in lye, then thoroughly washed and scalded in abundance
of fresh water, and then cooked in a very heavy sirup. The result of this treatment is that
the outside of the fruit is crisp and brittle, while the inside is creamy and delicious.

The first of California's dried fruits to come before the public was the raisin. Raisins are
merely the proper variety of grapes suitably dried. He treated familiarly the shade of the true
Abel Larinski; it was precisely as we treat a partner that has transacted business with us
in the same firm.

"It is very true, my dear Abel," he continued, "that the principle of partnership accomplishes
wonders; one man alone is a small affair. But, of all partnerships, the most useful and convenient
is the one that we have made together.

The living and the dead can render each other important services, and they never quarrel. You
should be satisfied; you play a fine role; you are the signature of the house. We will not speak
of your gun; that was a poor speculation, for which I scarcely can pardon you. It was the fault
of your disordered brain that we wandered off on that bypath, but,
thanks be to Heaven! we have at last gained the highway.

Five weeks ago we met a woman, and what a woman! She has velvety-brown eyes, whence glances well
forth like fresh and living waters. This thy stature is like to a palm-tree. Thou art all fair,
my love; there is no spot in thee. I presented myself before her, and my presence did not
displease her. I related to her your history, as you would have related it yourself, with
delicacy and simplicity, neither adding nor omitting. Her heart was touched; her heart was
taken captive. You will wed her--she will bear your name; but you will marry her by proxy,
and I shall be your proctor. I promise to consider myself your mandatory, or, to express it better,
you will own the property and I will have the usufruct. Never fear that I shall forget what
I owe to you, or the modesty proper to my estate."

At these words, he made a grand gesture, as if to banish the phantom that he had conjured up,
and that fled away trembling with sorrow, shame, and indignation. The peacock cried anew a
mournful shriek. "Stupid bird!" thought Samuel Brohl, quaking with sudden dread.

He looked at his watch, and reflected that the hour was advancing--that he was losing time with
the spirits. He rose hastily, and wended his way toward Cormeilles; thence he wished to come
upon a sunny path that led to the banks of the Seine, and Sartrouville, the belfry of which
was plainly visible. When he reached the foot of the declivity, he turned his head and saw, on
the summit of the hill, through the space left by the crooked branches of two plantains, a
white wall, that seemed to laugh amid the verdure, and a little higher
the pointed roof of the dove-cote, where Mlle. Moriaz's doves had
their nests.

With all fruits the drying process is much the same, though peaches, apples, and pears are
first peeled. California figs, when dried, sell well. This is a fruit which is growing in favor,
whether fresh, preserved, or dried. Fruit canning is an interesting process. The fruit is not
boiled in sirup and then placed in cans, as is frequently the custom in home preserving, but
when peeled it is placed directly in the cans, in which it receives all its cooking and in
which it is finally marketed.

The raising of beets and the converting of them into sugar form an industry which is growing
rapidly, and is of the utmost importance to the people of the Pacific slope.

The canning of fresh vegetables is a new industry which is bringing into the state a steady
stream of money, and in addition is proving a double blessing to thousands of people, both
those who gain from it their living, and those who could not otherwise have vegetables for
food. A sailor said recently that if he could not be a sailor he would do the next best thing--can
vegetables for other sailors. When Galvez received the order from the king of Spain to found
settlements in Upper California, one of the chief reasons for so doing was that fresh vegetables
might be raised for the sailors engaged in the Philippine trade. To-day the Philippines use
a large portion of California's canned goods.

In the southern counties olive orchards are being extensively planted. Near San Fernando is
the largest in the world, covering thirteen hundred acres. Doctors have said that a liberal
use of California olive oil will do much to promote the good health of mankind, and it is thought
by many that the manufacture of olive oil will be one of the greatest industries the state
has known.

Nut raising is keeping pace with fruit in importance. To an Eastern person it seems strange
to see nut-bearing trees cultivated in orchards; though profitable, this method does away with
the pleasures of nutting parties.

California's crystallized fruits are in constant demand, especially for the Christmas trade.
This crystallizing is a process in which the juice is extracted and replaced with sugar sirup,
which hardens and preserves the fruit from decay while still keeping the shape.

One sometimes reads the saying, "Fresno for raisins, Santa Clara for cherries and prunes, and
the northern counties and mountain-ranches for apples." But in fact, California's fruit industries
are well distributed over the state, and the really excellent work which is being done in all
sections will still advance as the people learn more of the necessary details and methods.

In spite of mistakes and experiments the steady progress on the California ranches is being
recognized. Of one of our leading fruit growers, Mr. Eliwood Cooper of Santa Barbara, the Marquis
of Lorne writes in the Youth's Companion: "He has shown that California can produce better
olive oil than France, Spain, or Italy, and English walnuts and European almonds in crops of
which the old country hardly even dreams."

A history of California's products would be incomplete without a reference to him who is called
the "Wonder Worker of Santa Rosa." "Magician! Conjurer!" are terms frequently applied to Mr.
Luther Burbank, the man who is acknowledged by the scientists of the world to have done more
with fruits and flowers than any other man. Mr. Burbank waves his wand, and the native poppy
turns to deepest crimson, the white of the calla lily becomes a gorgeous yellow, rose and blackberry
lose their thorns, the cactus its spines. The meat of the walnut and almond become richer in
quality, while their shells diminish to the thinness of a knife blade.

Yet in these seeming miracles there is nothing of "black art" or sleight of hand. The experiments
of this wonderful man, the surprising results he gains, are obtained, first by a close study
of the laws of nature, then, where he desires change and improvement, by assisting her process,
often through years of closest application and unceasing toil. He is a man of whom it is truthfully
said, "He has led a life of hardships, has sacrificed self at every point, that he might glorify
and make more beautiful the world around him." Any boy or girl who knows something of how plants
grow and reproduce themselves will find great pleasure in following Mr. Burbank's simple methods.

It is only recently that his countrymen have begun to appreciate the work of this great naturalist.
A short time ago a resident of Berkeley, a student and book-lover, one who knew Mr. Burbank
but had given little attention to his productions, was in Paris. While there he had the good
fortune to be present at a lecture delivered before a gathering of the most eminent scientists
of Europe. In the course of his address the speaker had occasion to mention the name of Luther
Burbank. Instantly every man in the audience arose and stood a moment in silence, giving to
the simple mention of Mr. Burbank's name the respect usually paid to the presence of royalty.
It is a name now known in all the languages of the civilized world, and numbers of the wisest
of the world's citizens cross the ocean solely to visit the busy plant-grower of Santa Rosa.

Luther Burbank was born in Worcester, Massachusetts, in 1849, and while yet a lad his strongest
desire was to produce new plants better than the old ones. His first experiment was with a
vegetable. For the sake of getting seed, he planted some Early Rose potatoes in his mother's
garden. In the whole patch only one seed-ball developed, and this he watched with constant
care. Great was his disappointment, therefore, when one morning, just as it was ready to be
picked, he found that it had disappeared. A careful search failed to recover the missing ball,
but as he thought the matter over, while at work, it struck Luther that perhaps a dog had knocked
it off in bounding through the garden. Looking more carefully for it, he found the ball twenty
feet away from the vine on which it had hung. In it were twenty-three small, well-developed
seeds. These he planted with great care, and from one of them came the first Burbank potatoes.
The wealth of the country was materially increased by this discovery; the wealth of the boy
only to the amount of one hundred and twenty-five dollars, which he used in attending a better
school than he had before been able to enjoy. 

Go on then, my friends, pursue the dictates of an unsullied conscience, and cease not until you
have finished your work--but let prudence guide you in all your undertakings, and let not
an enthusiastic heat predominate over reason.
 During the next twenty years, however, Mr. Burbank was
able to give nearly his whole time to his nature-studies. His energy is tireless, and his aim
is to supply to humanity something for beauty, sustenance, or commerce better than it has possessed.

Perhaps among all his productions the greatest good to the world will arise from the spineless
cactus. The scourge of the American desert is the cactus, commonly known as the prickly pear,
the whole surface of which is covered with fine, needlelike spines, while its leaves are filled
with a woody fiber most hurtful to animal life. When eaten by hunger-crazed cattle it causes
death. After years of labor Mr. Burbank has succeeded in developing from this most unpromising
of plants a perfected cactus which is truly a storehouse of food for man and beast. Spines
and woody fiber have disappeared, leaving juicy, pear-shaped leaves, weighing often twenty-five
or fifty pounds, which, when cooked in sirup, make a delicious preserve, and in their natural
state furnish a nourishing, thirst-quenching food for domestic animals. The fruit of this immense
plant is aromatic and delicate, and its seeds are at present worth far more than their weight
in gold, since from them are to spring thousands of plants by means of which it is believed
the uninhabitable portions of the desert may be made to support numberless herds of cattle.

Another of Mr. Burbank's achievements is the evergreen crimson rhubarb, which is not only far
less acid than the old variety, but richer in flavor and a giant in size.

The pomato, a tomato grown on a potato plant, is most interesting. The plant is a free bearer,
having a white, succulent, delicious fruit, admirable when cooked, used in a salad, or eaten
fresh as our other fruit.

The experiments with prunes conducted at the Santa Rosa ranch have been of the greatest value
to the state. For forty years the prune growers of the Pacific slope had been searching for
a variety of this fruit which would be as rich in sugar and as abundant a bearer as the little
California prune of commerce, and yet of a larger size, and earlier in its time of ripening.
Mr. Burbank with his famous sugar prune filled all these requirements, and revolutionized the
prune industry of the state. Besides this triumph he has succeeded in obtaining a variety of
this fruit having a shell-less kernel, so that the fruit when dried much resembles those which
are artificially stuffed.

The flowers which Mr. Burbank has evolved by his methods, and those which he has simply enlarged
and glorified, are far too numerous to be named here.

In 1905 a grant of ten thousand dollars a year was bestowed upon Mr. Burbank by the Carnegie
Institution of Washington, D.C., for the purpose of assisting him in his experiments. Seldom
has money been better placed.

Chapter XVI

The Hidden Treasures of Mother Earth

Thousands of years ago, before the time of which we have any history, there were rivers in
California,--rivers now dead,--whose sides were steeper and whose channels were wider than
those of the rivers in the same part of the world to-day. Rapid streams they were, and busy,
too; washing away from the rocks along their sides the gold held there, dropping the yellow
grains down into the gravelly beds below. After a time there came down upon these rivers a
volcanic outflow; great quantities of ashes, streams of lava and cement, burying them hundreds
of feet deep, until over them mountain ridges extended for miles and miles.

Other changes in the earth's surface took place, and in the course of time our streams of to-day
were formed. As they cut their way through the mountain ranges, some of them crossed the channels
of old dead rivers, and finding the gold hidden there, carried some of it along, rolling it
over and over, mixed with sand and gravel, down into the lower lands under the bright sunlight.
Here it was found by Marshall and the gold hunters who followed him. These were the placer
mines of which we read in Chapter VII.

Gradually the best placer mines were taken up and the newcomers to the gold fields traced the
precious metal up the streams into the gravel of the hillsides. Then was begun hydraulic mining,
where water did the work. In the canons great dams were constructed to catch the flow from
the melting snows of the mountains, and miles of flumes were built to carry the water to the
mining grounds. Immense pipes were laid and altogether millions of dollars were invested in
hydraulic mining. The water coming down under heavy pressure from the mountain reservoirs passed
through giant hose which would carry a hundred miner's inches, and, striking the mountain side
with terrific force, washed away the earth from the rocks. Down fell the sand and gravel into
sluices or boxes of running water where cleats and other arrangements caught and held the gold,
which was heavy, while the lighter mixture was carried out into the canyon.

The material thus dumped on the mountain side was called debris, and to any one living in the
mining region of the state that word means trouble --means fighting, lawsuits, ruin. For the
debris did not stay up in the canyon, but was washed down into the rivers, overflowing farm
lands, spoiling crops and orchards, and making the streams shallow, their waters muddy. So
great was the destruction this process caused that, in 1893, the Congress of the United States
enacted a law which provided for the creation of a Debris Commission to regulate the business
of hydraulic mining in California. The result of the investigations of this commission was
to put a stop to all hydraulic mining in territory drained by the San Joaquin and Sacramento
rivers, or any other territory where the use of this form of mining should injure the river
systems or lands adjacent. Thus, almost in a moment, the important industry was stopped.

It is estimated that over one hundred million dollars were invested in hydraulic mining. Much
of this was entirely lost, as the expensive machinery rusted and the water system fell into
ruins. It was very hard for the miners, as well as for the commerce of the state, but the act
of the government was based upon the principle that one man's business must not damage another
man's property. Clever engineers in the pay of the government are still trying to find some
way by which the debris can be safely disposed of in order that this valuable system may resume
operation.

Deprived of the use of water as their agent, gold hunters next tried mining by drifts; that
is, by tunneling into the mountain's side until the bed of a buried river is reached. These
tunnels are often five thousand to eight thousand feet long. The gold is brought out of the
ground before it is washed clean of the gravel. Sometimes it is mixed with cement, when it
has to be crushed in rollers before it can be cleared of other material. The counties where
drift mining is most in operation are Placer, Nevada, and Sierra.

Quartz mining is the most expensive manner of getting out gold, and a great deal of valuable
and complicated machinery has been invented for this branch of the business. The quartz mines
of California are among the richest in the world, and some of the greatest fortunes of modern
times have been made from them.

In a mine of this kind there is generally a shaft, or opening, extending straight down into
the earth, from which, at different levels, passageways branch out where the veins of gold
are richest. The openings must be timbered to prevent caving in, and there must be pumps to
remove the water as well as hoisting works to take out the material. Then on the surface, as
near as possible to the mouth of the mine, must be located the quartz mill. When possible,
a tunnel is used in this mining, which makes the handling of ore less expensive, for then there
need be no hoisting works or pumps, since the tunnel drains itself.

Gold in quartz rock is generally in ledges or veins, one to three feet in width. Digging it
out is not very hard, save where there is not enough room to stand upright and use the pick,
or when, in a shaft deep in the ground, the heat makes it difficult to work. A California boy
at the mines wrote recently: "Mining is not so bad; that is, if I could get along without the
occasional whack I bestow upon my left hand. Last week I started a little tunnel and pounded
my hand so that it swelled up considerably. And in Asia the disease is necessarily much more virulent,
because the transition has been more sudden, and the contrast between
old ideas of life and new aspirations is far sharper.

From the report of an able French official upon the Indo-Chinese Colonies we may learn that
the existing system of educating the natives has proved to be mischievous, needing radical reform.
Of the Levantine youths in the Syrian towns, the product of European schools, a French traveller
writes (1909), "C'est une tourbe de déclassés"; while in China some leaders of agitation for democratic
changes in the oldest of all Empires are said to be those who have
qualified by competitive examination for public employ, and have failed
to obtain it.

In every country the crowd of expectants far outnumbers the places available. If, indeed,
the Government which introduced Western education into Bengal had been native instead of foreign,
it would have found itself entangled in difficulties no less grave than those which now confront
the British rulers; and there can be little doubt that it would probably have broken down under
them.

The phases through which the State's educational policy in India have passed during the last fifty
years are explained at length in this volume. The Government was misled in the wrong direction
by the reports of two Commissions between 1880 and 1890, whose mistakes were discerned at the time
by those who had some tincture of political prudence. The problem is now to reconstruct on a better
plan, to try different lines of advance. But some of us have heard of an enterprising pioneer
in a difficult country, who confidently urged travellers to take a new route by assuring them
that it avoided the hills on the old road. Whether the hills were equally steep on his other
road he did not say.

And in the present instance it may not be easy to strike out a fresh path which may be clear
from the complications that have been suffered to grow up round our system of Indian education; while
no one proposes to turn back. The truth is that in India the English have been throughout obliged
to lay out their own roads, and to feel their way, without any precedents to guide them. No other
Government, European or Asiatic, has yet essayed to administer a great Oriental population,
alien in race and religion, by institutions of a representative type, reckoning upon free discussion
and an unrestricted Press for reasonable consideration of its measures and fair play, relying
upon secular education and absolute religious neutrality to control the unruly affections of
sinful men. It is now seen that our Western ideas and inventions, moral and material, are being
turned against us by some of those to whom we have imparted an elementary aptitude for using them.
And thus we have the strange spectacle, in certain parts of India, of a party capable of resorting
to methods that are both reactionary and revolutionary, of men who
offer prayers and sacrifices to ferocious divinities and denounce
the Government by seditious journalism, preaching primitive superstition
in the very modern form of leading articles.

The mixture of religion with politics has always produced a highly explosive compound, especially
in Asia.

These agitations are in fact the symptoms of what are said by Shakespeare to be the "cankers of
a calm world"; they are the natural outcome of artificial culture in an educational hothouse,
among classes who have had for generations no real training in rough
or hazardous politics. In the midst of the flying dirt, great heat,
bad air, dripping slush, and slippery mud he worked side by side with the grimy, half-naked
miners, thus showing himself capable not only of planning a great work, but of seeing personally
that it was well done, no matter with what sacrifice to his own ease and comfort.

After the tunnel was completed, Mr. Sutro sold his interest in it for several millions of dollars.
How that money was expended, any visitor to San Francisco well knows. With it were built the
great Sutro baths, with their immense tanks of pure and constantly changing, tempered ocean
water, their many dressing rooms, their grand staircases, adorned with rare growing plants,
their tiers of seats rising in rows, one above another, with room for thousands of spectators,
and their galleries of pictures and choice works of art. Over all is a roof of steel and tinted
glass. Nowhere else in America is there so fine a bathing establishment.

Besides this there are the lovely gardens of Sutro Heights, developed by Mr. Sutro's money
and genius from the barren sand-hills of the San Miguel rancho. In addition to these is the
choice library of about two hundred thousand volumes, which is of great use to the people of
San Francisco. Perhaps neither San Francisco nor California has yet quite appreciated the value
of the work of Adolph Sutro.

Since 1848 the state of California has sent to the United States Mint over one billion dollars
in gold. Of this, little Nevada County, which seems to be worth literally her weight in gold,
has sent over two hundred and forty million. The Empire Mine is the leading producer of California,
but there are others nearly as rich. Nevada City is in the center of this mining country. The
streets are very hilly, and after a heavy rain people may be seen searching the city gutters
and newly-formed rivulets for gold, and they are sometimes rewarded by finding fair-sized nuggets
washed down from the hills above.

A visitor to one of the deep mines of California says:--

"We descended to the seven hundred foot level, where the day before a pile of ore had been
blasted down. A little piece of the quartz, crushed in a mortar panned out four dollars in
gold. I picked out one piece of rock, not larger than a peach, and the manager, after weighing
and testing it, announced that it contained ten dollars in free gold. The kick of a boot would
reveal ore which showed glittering specks of pure gold."

In the estimate of many people all very valuable mines are supposed to be of gold, but this
is a mistake. While gold is king in California, copper mining is rapidly becoming of great
importance. A continuous copper belt, the largest yet discovered in the world, exists under
her soil, and while a comparatively small depth has been so far attained, the profit has been
considerable. One of the largest quicksilver mines in the world is at New Almaden. The value
of the output of the borax mines is over a million dollars a year. There were mined in California
in 1907 over fifty different materials, most of them at a value of several thousand dollars
a year, with some as high as a million and over.

The mineral product of California outranking gold in value is petroleum, which has added greatly
to the wealth of the state. Natural gas and mineral waters are also valuable commercial products.

To many, the most interesting class among minerals is the gems, of which California yields
a variety. The beautiful lilac stone, Kunzite, was discovered near Pala, San Diego County.
This county has also some fine specimens of garnets, and beautiful tourmalines are being mined
at a profit. San Bernardino County yields a superior grade of turquoise from which has been
realized as much as eleven thousand dollars a year. Chrysoprase is being mined in Tulare County,
also the beautiful new green gem something like clear jade, called Californite. Topaz, both
blue and white, is being found, and besides these, many diamonds of good quality have been
collected, principally from the gravels of the hydraulic mines. In 1907 there was discovered
in the mountains of San Benito County a beautiful blue stone closely resembling sapphire, more
brilliant but less durable. It was named, by professors of mineralogy in the state university,
Benitite, from the place where it was discovered.

Perhaps the most valuable of all the products of California is its water supply, either visible
as in springs and streams, or underground as in artesian water. Of its use in irrigation, we
have already spoken. In the production of electricity it is coming to be of the greatest importance,
making possible the most stupendous works of modern times. Such is the undertaking of the Edison
Electric Company in bringing down to Los Angeles, over many miles of the roughest country,
power from the Kern River, tapping the tumultuous stream far up in the Sierras. The taking
of the necessary machinery to those heights was in itself a wonderful labor. The power thus
created is a blessing to a wide region. In the early settlements there were no educated people
but the priests at the missions and the Spanish officers with their families at the presidios.
Later, clever men of good families came into the territory, took up land, and made their homes
on the great ranchos, but among these there were few who would take the time or trouble to
teach the children; so life to the young people was a long holiday. The sad result was that
they grew up so ignorant as to astonish the educated strangers who visited the coast.

At the missions the padres had schools where they taught the young Indians something of reading
and writing, religious services and songs, and the trades necessary for life. This, with their
duties in the church and the extensive building and planting of the mission settlements, took
all the time of the hard-working priests. Occasionally, an educated woman would teach her own
children and those of her relatives, but like most attempts at home education, it was so interrupted
as to amount to little.

In 1794 a new governor came from Spain who was so shocked at this state of affairs that he
at once ordered three schools opened. The first, December, 1794, was held in a granary at San
Jose and was in charge of a retired sergeant of the Spanish army. The children had been so
long free from all restraint that they did not like to go to school, and their parents did
not always take the trouble to insist. There were some reasons for this, as the masters did
not know much about what they were trying to teach, and the use of the ferule and scourge (the
latter a whip of cords tipped with iron) was frequent and cruel. There were no books but primers,
and these were hard to obtain. The writing, paper was furnished by the military authorities
and had to be returned when the child was through with it, that it might be used in making
cartridges. These schools were for boys only, girls not being expected to learn anything except
cooking, sewing, and embroidery.

Slowly the state of things improved, and in 1829 in the yearly report to the Mexican government,
it was stated that there were eleven primary schools in the province with three hundred and
thirty-nine boys and girls. One of the best of these schools was that of Don Ignacio Coronel
of Los Angeles.

In 1846 the first American school was opened at Santa Clara by Mrs. Oliver Mann Isbell. It
provided for children from about twenty emigrant families and was held in a room of the Santa
Clara mission on the great patio. The floor was of earth, the seats boxes; an opening in the
tiled roof over the center of the room allowing the smoke to escape when, on rainy days, a
fire was built on a rude platform of stones set in the middle of the floor. Wherever the Americans
lived, they would have schools, although their first buildings were bare and inconvenient,
with no grace or adornment either inside or out. In some out-of-the-way places, whole terms
of school were spent most happily under spreading live oaks.

In the making of the first constitution, educational matters were not forgotten; one section
providing that there should be a common school system supported by money from the sale of public
lands. On account of the minerals the lands so allotted were supposed to contain, it was believed
that they would sell for such vast amounts that the state would have money sufficient for the
grandest public schools that ever existed. In fact these lands brought in altogether, after
a number of years, less than a quarter of a million dollars. The act provided also that the
schools be kept open three months in the year. An effort was made to extend this period to
six months, but was defeated by Senator Gwin.

Considering the state of the country when the public schools were begun, and the short time
in which they have been developed, the California free schools are a credit to the state and
to the men and women who have helped to make them what they are. No community is so poor and
remote but that it may have its school if the inhabitants choose to organize for the purpose.
Hardly can the settler find a ranch from which his children may not attend a district school
over which floats the stars and stripes.

Money for educational purposes is now raised by state and county taxes on property, this sum,
in cities, being largely increased by the addition of the city taxes. High schools have only
recently been given state aid, and that moderately; the larger ones still depending, in a great
measure, upon the special tax of the city, district, or county, according to the class to which
the school belongs. The state supports one Polytechnic school, that at San Luis Obispo, where
there are three courses, agriculture, mechanics, and domestic science.

About 1878, in the endeavor to teach the children of the worst parts of San Francisco a right
way of living, the free kindergartens were begun. Perhaps their success cannot be better shown
than in the fact that in the first year of the work along "Barbary coast," one of the most
turbulent districts of the city, the Italian fruit and vegetable dealers who lived there, brought
the teachers a purse of seventy-five dollars, because the children had been taught not to steal
their fruits and vegetables or to break their windows. The first free kindergarten was started
on Silver Street in "Tar Flats" and had for its teacher a pretty young girl, with beautiful
eyes and a mass of bronze-colored hair, whom the ragged little urchins soon learned to adore.
That little school was the beginning of one of the best kindergarten systems in the country,
and the pretty young teacher is now Kate Douglas Wiggin, one of America's best loved writers,
the author of those delightful books, "The Birds' Christmas Carol," "Timothy's Quest" and others
equally interesting. There have been many gifts to these kindergartens. In memory of their
only son, Mr, and Mrs. Leland Stanford gave one hundred thousand dollars, while Mrs. Phoebe
Hearst supported entirely three of the schools. Kindergartens may now form part of the primary
department in the school system of any community so desiring, and are to be found in most of
the cities.

Nothing in the educational work of California is of more importance than the five normal schools,
which graduate each year hundreds of teachers thoroughly prepared in all branches for the important
work of training the children of the state.

As the crown of the free school system, stands the state university at Berkeley. Many an interesting
story might be told of the noble men, who as early as 1849 began their long struggle to gain
for the youth of California the chance for higher education. Peggy's feeling pretty sick now to
dress up for parties, but I know a thing or two that the rest don't know. Wouldn't Alice be
hopping! She always thinks she's wise to everything, and to have a thick-headed boy-person
know a whacking secret that they'd all be excited about would make her mad enough to burst. She thinks
she can read my ingrown soul too--but I rather think I have my own interior thoughts that Miss Alice
doesn't tumble to. For instance, Dr. Denbigh.

Golly, I forgot. Lorraine said she'd cut down the cookies if things weren't told orderly the
way they happened. So I've got to begin back. First then, I've had the best time since Peggy
got engaged that I've ever had in my own home. Not quite as unbossed as when they sent me on the
Harris farm last summer, and I slept in the stable if I wanted to, and nobody asked if I'd taken
a bath. That was a sensible way to live, but yet it's been unpecked
at and pleasant even at home lately.

You see, with such a lot of fussing about Peggy and Harry Goward, nobody has noticed what I
did, and that, to a person with a taste for animals, is one of the best states of living. I've gone
to the table without brushing my hair, and the puppy has slept in my bed, and I've kept a
toad behind the wash-basin for two weeks, and though Lena, the maid,
knew about it, she shut up and was decent because she didn't want
to worry mother.

A toad is such an unusual creature to live with. I've got a string to his hind leg, but yet
he gets into places where you don't expect him, and it's very interesting. Lena seemed to think
it wasn't nice to have him in the towels in the wash-stand drawer, but I didn't care. It doesn't
hurt the towels and it's cosey for the toad.

I had a little snake--a stunner--but Lena squealed when she found him in my collars, so I had
to take him away. He looked awfully cunning inside the collars, but Lena wouldn't stand for
him, so I let well enough alone and tried to be contented with the toad and the puppy and
some June-bugs I've got in boxes in the closet, and my lizard--next
to mother, he's my best friend--I've had him six months.

I'm not sure I wouldn't rather lose mother than him, because you can get a step-mother, but
it's awfully difficult to replace a lizard like Diogenes.
 In this noble movement Mr. and Mrs. Stanford were as one. Their only son
died in 1884, and the university is a memorial of him, a grand example of the way in which
those who are dead may yet live, through the good done in their names. Although entirely a
private benefaction, its doors are open to students absolutely free of all tuition charges.

This university started with a large endowment, but after the death of Mr. Stanford, a lawsuit
with the United States, and a shrinkage in the value of the properties it owned, ran the finances
so low that for a short time it was found necessary to charge a small entrance fee. Even then,
the college was kept open only through the economy and self-sacrifice of Mrs. Stanford and
the members of the faculty, who stood by the institution with noble unselfishness. By the year
1906 the financial condition had become satisfactory and the attendance had materially increased.
Two handsome new buildings, one for the library and the other for the gymnasium, were about
completed when, on April 18, an earthquake, the most destructive ever experienced on the Pacific
coast, shook all the region around San Francisco Bay. Stanford suffered severely: the two new
buildings were ruined; so, too, was the museum and a portion of the chemistry building. Both
the noble arch and the mosaics in the front of the memorial chapel were destroyed. Beyond this,
comparatively little damage was done to the college buildings. The graduating exercises were
postponed until the fall term; otherwise the disaster did not interfere seriously with the
routine of study, neither did it affect the attendance in 1906-7, which was unusually large.
In the fall of 1907 President Jordan stated that he was empowered to announce that Thomas Weldon
Stanford, brother of Senator Leland Stanford, had decided to give the university his own large
fortune of several millions.

It is generally recognized that the university owes a great part of its present success to
the splendid talents and faithfulness of President Jordan, who has given the hardest labor
of the best years of his busy life to helping it onward and upward. Its educational work is
thorough, and its requirements are being steadily raised. It stands for the highest education
that is possible. Addition is constantly being made to its group of noble buildings. Beautiful
Stanford is the sparkling jewel in California's diadem.

Not far from the University of California in the suburbs of Oakland is situated Mills College,
which for many years was the only advanced school for girls of which the state could boast.
This institution had its beginning as a seminary in Benicia, but was moved to its present situation
in 1871. In 1885 it became a college with a state charter. In plan of studies and high Christian
aim, it resembles Mount Holyoke, from which many of its leading instructors have been graduated.

There is no place here to speak of all the leading private schools of the state. Throop Polytechnic
in Pasadena, the Thatcher School in the valley of the Ojai, and Belmont Military Academy are
among the best. A word, however, must be said in tribute to Santa Clara College, without which
the California youth of from twenty to forty years ago would have been lacking in that higher
education which stands for so much in the making of a state. Incorporated in 1851, it was opened
with funds amounting to but one hundred and fifty dollars, yet it grew steadily. With a clever
Jesuit faculty, this college has done admirable work of so thorough a character as to win the
praise of all those who have come in contact with its results. From it have been graduated
such men as Stephen M. White, Reginaldo del Valle, and many other of our leading professional
and business men.

Chapter XVIII

Statistics

The state of California lies between the parallels 32i and 42i north latitude, extending over
a space represented on the eastern coast by the country between Edisto Inlet, South Carolina,
and the northern point of Cape Cod, Massachusetts. Its northern third lies between 120i and
124i 26' west longitude. From Cape Mendocino, its most westerly point, the coast trends southeastward
to San Diego Bay. The total coast line on the Pacific is 1200 miles.

The state's greatest width is 235 miles, which is between Point Conception and the northern
end of the Amaragosa Range on the Nevada line. It is narrowest between Golden Gate and the
southern end of Lake Tahoe. Its area is 158,297 sq. miles, second only to Texas of all the states.

The population of California, according to the United States census of 1920, is 3,426,861,
which has since been greatly increased. The following table shows the counties of the State:--

Counties of California

Area      Population   Valuation Name            Origin and Meaning of Name               
Sq. Mi.    1920    1910 of Property County Seat

Alameda         Sp., Shaded promenade 764 344,127 246,131 128,681,766 Oakland Alpine 710  
243     309     422,063 Markleeville Amador          Sp., Sweetheart 632   7,793   9,086  
4,918,908 Jackson Butte           Fr., Rounded, detached hill 1,660  30,030  27,301  16,057,766
Oroville Calaveras       Sp., Skul's (from Indian battle ground) 1,080   6,183   9,171   6,177,285
San Andreas Colusa          Ind. 1,088   9,290   7,732  12,188,096 Colusa Contra Costa    Sp.,
Opposite coast 728  53,889  31,674  21,753,956 Martinez Del Norte       Sp., Of the North 992
2,759   2,417   2,882,445 Crescent City Eldorado        Sp., The gilded (name given to fabled
land of gold) 1,796   6,426   7,492   4,668,840 Placerville Fresno          Sp., Ash tree 6,152
128,779  75,657  34,302,205 Fresno Glenn 1,270  11,853   7,172  10,645,524 Willow Humboldt
(named for Baron von Humboldt) 3,496  37,413  33,857  24,911,492 Eureka Imperial 4,200  43,383
13,591             El Centro Inyo 10,294   7,031   6,974   2,316,319 Independence Kern 8,050
54,843  37,715  24,050,871 Bakersfield Kings 1,176  22,032  16,230   7,883,009 Hanford Lake
1,328   5,402   5,526   3,258,020 Lakeport Lassen 4,520   8,507   4,802   4,590,748 Susanville
Los Angeles     Sp., The angels 4,200 936,438 504,132 169,268,166 Los Angeles Madera      
Sp., Timber 2,062  12,203   8,368   6,732,495 Madera Marin           Ind. 549  27,342  25,114
14,489,582 San Rafael Mariposa        Sp., Butterfly 1,510   2,775   3,956   2,270,246 Mariposa
Mendocino       Sp., (from Mendoza, viceroy of Mexico) 3,626  24,116  23,929  13,131,995 Ukiah
Merced          Sp., Mercy 1,932  24,579  15,148  14,877,086 Merced Modoc           Ind. 3,741
5,425   6,191   4,076,680 Alturas Mono            Sp., Monkey, or pretty 3,020     960   2,042
1,151,109 Bridgeport Monterey        Sp., King's forest 3,340  27,980  24,146  18,962,554 Salinas
Napa            Ind. 780  20,678  19,800  13,840,291 Napa Nevada          Sp., Heavy fall of
snow 972  10,850  14,955   7,203,349 Nevada City Orange          (named for its chief product)
750  61,375  34,436      13,812 Santa Ana Placer          Sp., Loose (from placer mines) 1,365
18,584  18,237   9,677,724 Auburn Plumas          Sp., Feathers 2,694   5,681   5,259   2,792,091
Quincy Riverside 7,323  50,297  34,696  16,373,296 Riverside Sacramento      Sp., The Sacrament
1,000  90,978  67,806  41,333,337 Sacramento San Benito      Sp., St. Benedict 1,388   8,995
8,041   6,499,068 Hollister San Bernardino  Sp., St. Bernard 19,947  73,401  56,706  21,392,228
San Bernardino San Diego       Sp., St. James 4,278 112,248  61,665  20,807,594 San Diego San
Francisco   Sp., St. Francis (of Assisi) 47 506,676 416,912 564,070,301 San Francisco San Joaquin
Sp., name of a saint 1,396  79,905  50,732  34,740,353 Stockton San Luis Obispo Sp., St. Louis
the Bishop 3,310  21,893  19,383  13,680,235 San Luis Obispo San Mateo       Sp., St. Matthew
434  36,781  26,585  18,999,564 Redwood City Santa Barbara   Sp., St. Barbara 2,632  41,097
27,738  18,849,976 Santa Barbara Santa Clara     Sp., name of a saint 1,286 100,588  83,539
61,390,817 San Jose Santa Cruz      Sp., Holy Cross 424  26,269  26,240  12,560,071 Santa Cruz
Shasta          Fr., Chaste, pure 3,876  13,311  18,920  10,902,036 Redding Sierra        
Sp., Sawtoothed Ridge 960   1,783   4,098   1,844,560 Downieville Siskiyou 5,991  13,545  18,801
10,560,650 Treks Solano          Sp., name of a mission 900  40,602  27,559  20,195,481 Fairfield
Sonoma          Ind., Valley of the Moon 1,620  51,990  48,394  30,380,419 Santa Rosa Stanislaus
1,456  43,557  22,522  12,834,108 Modesto Sutter          (named for J. A. Sutter) 622  10,115
6,328   6,621,047 Yuba City Tehama 3,008  12,882  11,401  11,674,562 Red Bluff Trinity 3,282
2,552   3,301   1,651,362 Weaverville Tulare          Sp., Reed-covered 4,952  59,032  35,440
17,447,042 Visalia Tuolumne        Ind., Stone wigwams 2,208   7,768   9,979   7,089,725 Sonora
Ventura         Sp. I could, if she only would let me, help her a great deal more around the
house; although Ada is a very good housekeeper, I am constantly seeing little things that
need doing.

I do my best to prevent the awful waste of soap that goes on, and
there are a great many little ways Ada could let me save for her if
she would.

When I suggest this to her she laughs and says, "Wait till we need to save as badly as that, mother,"
which doesn't seem to me good reasoning at all. "Waste not, want not," say I, and when it comes to
throwing out perfectly good glass jars, as the girls would do if I didn't see to it they saved
them, why, I put my foot down.

If Ada doesn't want them herself to put things up in, why, some poor
woman will.

I don't believe in throwing things away that may come in handy sometime.

When I kept house nobody ever went lacking strings or a box of whatever
size, to send things away in, or paper in which to do it up, and I
can remember in mother's day there was never a time she hadn't pieces
put by for a handsome quilt.

Machinery has put a stop to many of our old occupations, and the result is a generation of nervous
women who haven't a single thing in life to occupy themselves with but their own feelings,
while girls like Peggy, who are active and useful, have nothing to do but to go to school
and keep on going to school. If one wanted to dig into the remote cause of things, one might
find the root of our present trouble in these changed conditions,
for Cyrus's sister, Elizabeth, is one of these unoccupied women.

Formerly in a family like ours there would have been so much to do
that, whether she liked it or not, and whether she had married or
not, Elizabeth would have had to be a useful woman--and now the less
said the better.

It is hard, I say, to see the causes for unhappiness set in action and yet do nothing, or,
if one speaks, to speak to deaf ears.

Oh, it is very hard to do this, and this has been the portion of older
   women always. Our children sometimes won't
even let us dry their tears for them, but cry by themselves, as I
   know Ada
has been doing lately--though in the
end she came to me, or rather I went
to her, for, after all, I am living in the same
world with the rest of them. I have not
passed over to the other side yet, and while
I stay I am not going to be treated as if I were a disembodied spirit.
   I have eyes
of my own, and ears too, and I can see as
well as the next man when things go wrong.

I have always known that no good would
come of sending Peggy to a coeducational college. I urged Ada to set
   her foot down, for Ada didn't wish
to send Peggy there, naturally enough,
but she wouldn't.

"Well," said I, "I'M not afraid to speak my
mind to your husband." Now I very seldom open my mouth to Cyrus, or to
   any one else
in this house, for it is more than ever
the fashion for people to disregard the
advice of others, and the older I get the
more I find it wise to save my breath to
cool my porridge--there come times, however,
when I feel it my duty to speak.
   
"Mark my words, Cyrus," I said. "You'll be sorry you sent Peggy off to
   a boys' school.

Girls at her age are impressionable, and if they aren't under their
mothers' roofs, where they can be protected and sheltered, why, then
send them to a seminary where they will see as few young men as possible."

Cyrus

only laughed and said:

"Well, mother, you can say
'I told you so' if anything
bad comes of it."
 I, II, Ill, IV, V, VI, VII.
Bancroft--"California Pastoral."
Bancroft--"History of North Mexican States."
Hittell--"History of California," vols. I, II, III, IV.
Royce--"History of California."
Blackmar--"Spanish Institutions of the Southwest."
Montalvo--"Sergas of Esplandian." Translator, E. E. Hale, Atlantic
Monthly, Vol. XIII, p. 265.
Vancouver--"Voyage of Discovery to the Pacific Ocean," vol. III.
Geronimo Boscano--"Chinigchinich," "History of Mission Indians."
   Translator,
Alfred Robinson--"Life in California."
Francisco Palou--"Life of Fray Junipero Serra."
Junipero Serra--"Diary." Translated in magazine Out West, March-July,
   1902.
Hakluyt--"Drake's Voyages."
Vanegas--"History of California."
Davis--"Sixty Years in California."
Colton--"Three Years in California."
Fremont--"Memoirs."
Sherman--"Memoirs." Century Magazine, vols. 41-42.
Stoddard--"In the Footsteps of the Padres."
Lummis--"The Right Hand of the Continent." Series, Out West Magazine,
   1903.
Lummis--" Spanish Pioneers."
Jackson--"A Century of Dishonor."
Jackson--"Ramona."
California Book of Louisiana Purchase Exposition.

Index

Abalone, 22 Acapulco, 68 Admission to the Union, 179-182 Adobe, 93 Alameda, 182 Alaska, 214
Alba, 110 Alcalde, 104, 108, 173, 174 Alfalfa, 244 Afileria, 209 Alta, 86 Alvarado, 125, 133,
134, 136 American government of California, 173-179 American River, 150 Americans in California,
129, 134, 140-146, 149 Anaheim, settled, 212 Anian, Strait of, 53, 62 Apricots, 256 Area, 289
Arguello, Captain Lulls, 128, 131, 132 Arguello family, 145 Arroyo Seco, 97, 146 Ascension,
Padre, 8, 670 Atole, 94 Avalon, 68 Ayala, Lieutenant, 88 Bahia, 249 Bailey, W. F., quoted,
185 Bananas, 257 Bancroft, quoted, 206 Bandini, aids Americans, 145 Bandini, Dona Arcadia,
quoted, 137 Bandini, Mrs., makes flag, 146 Barley, 255 Bautista, 134 Bear Flag Republic, 142
Beets, 260 Belmont Military Academy, 287 Benitite, 277 Benton, Senator, 182, 195 Berkeley,
State University at, 283 Bidwell, quoted, 166 Bolero, 116 Bonito, 22 Borax, 276 British, visit
California, 130 Broderick, David C., 190, 191 Buffalo Bill, 186 Burbank, Luther, 262-266 Burnett,
Peter, 181 Butte County, oranges in, 247 Cable, Pacific, 225 Cabo de Pinos, 55 Cabrillo, Juan
Rodriguez, 48-56, 72 Cacafuegos, 60 Cactus, 265 Cahuenga, treaty of, 146, 148 Calaveras grove,
235 Calhoun, 179 California, area of, 289 California, climate of, 13-18 California, geography
of, 13,14 California, name, origin of, 11, 12 California Column, 198 California Lancers, 193
Californite, 276 Camisa, 116 Canneries, 257, 260, 261 Cape Mendocino, 67 Capitol, 204 Carmelo
River, 71, 87 Carmenon, Sebastin, explorations of, 67 Carne seco, 101 Carquinez, Strait of,
14 Carreta, 116, 118, 213 Carrillo, in convention, 177 Castillo, Domingo, map of, 12 Castro,
General, 139, 140, 142 Cattle raising, 108, 113 Celery, 256 Central Pacific Railroad, 197-201
Chagres, Panama, 163 Chamisso, Albert von, 182 Chapman, 125, 126 Cherries, 262 China, war with
Japan, 223 Chinese, in California, 202, 203 Chinese, work on railroad, 198 Chinigchinich, 25,
33-36, 45, 47 Chippa, 43-45 Cholos, 138 Cigaritos, 109 Citron, 246, 256 Civil War, 180, 189-194
Clay, Henry, 178 Cleeta, 19-29, 45-47 Climate, 13-18 Club wheat, 242 Cody, Mr., 186 Coloma,
mill near, 150 Columbia, and Panama Canal, 222 Colony days, 211-214 Colton, Rev. Walter, 173,
174 Colton, quoted, 203 Comandante, 136 Comstock mine, 271 Concepcion de Arguello, 130, 131
Conquest of California, 139-146 Constitution of 1849, 178 Constitution of 1879, 203 Constitutional
Convention of 1849, 177 Cooper, Ellwood, 262 Copper mining, 276 Corn, 244 Coronel, Don Ignacio,
school of, 280 Cortez, Hernando, 12, 53, 74 Cotopacnic, 46 Counties, 290, 291 Cradle, used
in mining, 158 Crespi, Juan, 75, 100 Crocker, Charles, 197-199 Cuatrito, 117 Cuchuma, 22, 26,
32, 35, 45 Cushiony scale, 250 Day, Sherman, 284 Debris, 268 Del Valle, Reginaldo, 288 Dewey,
Commodore, in Spanish war, 217 Dios, 110 Dolores mission, 88 Donner party, 167 Dragontea, 57
Drake, Sir Francis, 57-66, 12, 73 Drakes Bay, 63 Dress of early Californians, 115, 116 Dried
fruits, 260 Drift mining, 269 Dulce, 258. Earthquake (1906), 225-228 El Camino Real, 95 El
Refugio, 125 Empire mine, 274 England, explorations, 59-66 Escuela, 279 Explorations, 48-73,
81-83 Farallones, 81 Farmer's Institute, 285 Ferrelo, 56, 57, 85 Festivals, 126 Fiesta, 126
Figs, 260 Flores, General, 146 Flour trade, 243 Forests, 229-236 Forty-niners, 156, 172 Fremont,
Captain, 139-143, 146 Fremont, dispute with Kearny, 148, 149 Fremont, elected senator, 178
Fremont, explorations, 139, 107, 195 Fremont, on land question, 182 French, visit California,
129 Frijoles, 98 Fruit, 246-263 Fruit, canned, 257, 260 Fruit, crystallized, 261 Fruit, dried,
260 Fruit, preserved, 258 Fugitive Slave Law, 190 Galli, Francisco, 66 Galvez, Jose de, 75-78,
84, 87 Gems, 276 Gente de razon, 124 Gentiles, 80 Gesnip, 19-33, 38-47 Gicamas, 70 Gigantea,
234 Gillespie, 140, 143, 146 Gold, discovered, 147, 151, 155 Gold, early mining, 154-160 Gold,
modern mines, 267-271, 274 Golden Hind, ship, 66 Governors, list of, 292 Graham, 133, 134 Grain,
238-245 Grape fruit, 252 Grapes, 254, 258-260 Guam, 225 Gwin, in convention, 177 Gwin, senator,
178, 189, 190, 281 Hague, 220, 221 Harte, Bret, 180, 200 Harvester, 240 Hawaii, 218-220, 225
Hearst, Mrs. Phoebe, 283, 285 Hecox, Mrs., quoted, 171 Hittell, quoted, 205 Hopkins, Mark,
197 Huntington, Collis P., 197, 198 Huntington, H. E., 239 Hydraulic mining, 160, 268, 269
Ide, 141. Immigration after 1848, 156, 161-172 Indian Bar, 184 Indians, aborigines, 19-47,
54, 63, 64 Indians, baskets, 43-45 Indians, boats, 39 Indians, clothing, 21, 31, 32, 33, 43,
63 Indians, food, 28, 29, 38, 42, 45-47 Indians, houses, 26 Indians, hunting, 23-25, 42, 43
Indians, myths, 80, 45 Indians, worship, 33-36 Indians in Santa Catalina, 70 Indians, mission,
91-105, 127 Indians, on ranches, 110-112 Indians, recent history, 206-208 Irrigation, 245,
252-255 Isadora, 138 Isbell, Mrs. Oliver Mann, 280 Jacal, 26 Japan, 223-225 Jesuits in New
Spain, 76 Jiminez, 53 Jones, Commodore, 136, 137 Jones, W. C., 182 Jordan, President, 287 Juan,
48, 51, 52, 56 Judah, Theodore D., 196-198. Kahhoom, 43-45 Kearny, General Stephen, 145, 148,
149 Kern River, electric power from, 278 Kindergartens, 282 King, Thomas Starr, 192 Klamath,
37, 38 Korea, 223 Kotzebue, Otto von, 132 Kunzite, 276 Ladybird, 250 La Fiesta, 126 Laguna
rancho, battle of, 146 Laguna rancho, sheep on, 210 Land question, 182, 183 La Perouse, 129
La Posesion, 55 La Purisima mission, 89 Larkin, consul, 136, 137,139, 284 Leland Stanford Junior
University, 285-287 Lemons, 245, 251 Lick Observatory, 284 Lollah, 30 Lopez, Juan, 147 Lorne,
Marquis of, quoted, 262 Los Angeles, beginnings of, 107, 108. Los Angeles, captured by Americans,
143 Los Angeles, church built by Chapman, 125 Los Angeles, during Civil War, 194 Los Angeles,
in colony days, 213 Los Angeles, Kern River power, 278 Los Angeles, old palms in, 144 Los Angeles,
State Normal School, 283 Lumber, 229-236 Lummis. Charles F., author, 249 Macana, 22, 27, 28,
31, 32, 37, 38, 41, 42, 44, 46 Machado, Agustin, 122 McKinley, President, 218, 220 Maestro,
113 Mahan, Captain, quoted, 220 Malaga, 256 Manchuria, 223 Mandarin orange, 248 Manila, cable
to, 225 Manila, trade, 67, 74, 77 Manila Bay, battle, 217 Marin County, 226 Mariposa grove,
234 Marshall, James, 150-153 Mason, Colonel, 149, 154 Mayor domo, 110 Mendocino, Cape, 67 Mendoza,
72 Merced River, 160. On the other hand, I am bound to say that there are also many Mahomedans who,
though professing similar apprehensions, show no disposition towards fatalistic resignation.
For they believe that, whatever may be the fate of the British raj, the future must belong to
the more virile peoples of India, and certainly those who do not merely put their trust in
the fighting traditions of a conquering race may find a good deal of encouragement for the faith
within them from the vital statistics of Hindus and Mahomedans respectively in India.

Whilst it is most important that nothing should be done to give colour to the idea sedulously promoted
by the Hindu politician that Government intend to favour, or, as he generally puts it, to "pamper,"
the Mahomedans at the expense of the Hindus, it is equally important that Government should
do nothing to strengthen the apprehensions entertained by so many intelligent and educated Mahomedans.
Those apprehensions are no doubt exaggerated, and may even be quite unfounded; but they correspond
exactly with what I have been told were Tilak's hopes and anticipations, and if we will only
take the trouble to try to see things as they may well strike an Indian Mahomedan we can hardly
dismiss them as wholly unreasonable.

The antagonism between the two communities is not the creation or the result of British rule. It
is the legacy of centuries of conflict before British rule was ever heard of in India. It has
been and must be one of the chief objects of British statesmanship to compose this conflict,
and the Mahomedans do not deny that their British rulers have always desired to deal as fairly
with them as with the Hindus. They hold, however, that, as a matter of fact, British rule has
in many ways worked out to the relative detriment of Mahomedan influence and to the greater advantage
of the Hindus. Nor is that fact rendered any more palatable to the Mahomedans because it is mainly
due to the greater adaptability and suppleness displayed by the Hindus ever since India has been
brought into contact with Western education and Western methods. The establishment of English
as the official language of the Law Courts and of all public Departments necessarily favoured
the Hindus by displacing Persian and the vernaculars in which the Mahomedans were most proficient.
At the present day the vast majority of Indians employed in every branch of the Government service
are Hindus, and this majority is entirely out of proportion to the numerical preponderancy
of the Hindu community at large[11]. According to the last Census Report the Hindus of Bengal (which
was then unpartitioned), though only twice as numerous as the Mahomedans, held 1,235 higher appointments
under Government in Bengal, as against only 141 held by Mahomedans. In the Bombay Presidency
the Hindus held 266 such appointments, as against 23 held by Mahomedans; and in the Central
Provinces 339, as against 75. Of the provinces in reference to which the report furnishes detailed
statistics the United Provinces alone failed to show the same disparity, the number of posts held
by the Mahomedans, 453, against 711 held by Hindus, being actually and very largely in excess
of their proportion to population. The Mahomedans, moreover, complain that where Mahomedans are employed
as clerks in Government Departments the head clerks, who are almost always Hindus and alone have
direct access to the English superior officers, use their influence with the latter to prejudice
them against their Mahomedan subordinates. Education has passed very largely from our own hands into
those of Hindu teachers. In all the liberal professions, at the Bar, in the Press, the preponderance
of Hindus is greatly out of proportion even to the numerical preponderance of the Hindu population
as a whole. Intelligent Mahomedans are conscious that all this is to a great extent the result
of the backwardness of their community, but hardships are none the less hardships because they
are largely of one's own making. Again, the principal seat of the Government of India and those
of the two great Presidency Governments are in centres of Hindu life where the voice of the Mahomedan
element does not make itself easily heard.

Then Mahomedans who watch public opinion in England note that one of the two great parties
in the State has for many years past professed to recognize in the views of Hindu politicians a
commendable affinity to its own political principles, whilst the memory of its greatest leader,
Mr. Gladstone, is chiefly associated in India with a violent hostility to Turkey, which, at any
rate amongst many of his followers, degenerated into violent denunciations of Islam in general. By
his personal qualities Lord Ripon, the most pronounced Liberal ever sent out in our time as Viceroy,
endeared himself to many Mahomedans as well as to the Hindus, but he never made any secret of
his political sympathies with Hindu aspirations.
 T., 149, 151, 164 "Shirley," quoted, 184 Sholoc, 22-82,
85, 36, 89, 46, 47 Shumeh, 31 Sierra Nevada, 14, 16, 56, 100, 282 Slavery struggle, 175-179,
190 Sloat, Commodore, 142, 148 Soil, 16, 18 Solano mission, 89 Soledad mission, 89 Sombrero,
111 Sonoma, captured, 141 South Sea, 58 Southern Pacific Railroad, 201,290 Spain, colonies,
75, 77 Spain, colonies, explorations, 48-57, 66-73, 81-83 Spain, colonies, revolt against,
122, 124 Spain, colonies, trade laws, 119-122 Spanish government of California, 77, 122 Spanish-American
War, 215-219 Stampede of 1849, 161 Stanford, Leland, gifts for education, 283, 286 Stanford,
Leland, governor, 193 Stanford, Leland, railroad work, 197-200 Stanford, Mrs. Leland, 283,
286 Stanford, Thomas Weldon, 287 Stanford University, 285-287 Steamboat, first in California,
155 Stearns, Don Abel, 137, 147, 148 Stock raising, 108, 113 Stockton, Commodore, 143, 146,
148 Stockton, grain center, 242 Sugar, 260 Sultana grape, 239 Sutro, Adolph, 271-274 Sutro
baths, 273, 274 Sutter, Captain John, 133, 150-152 Sutter's Fort, 133 Sutter's mill, 150, 153
Tamales, 209 Tangerine orange, 248 Telegraph, 195 Texas, 134, 135 Thatcher School, 287 Throop
Polytechnic School, 287 Tibbetta, Mrs., and navel oranges, 249 Titas, 45 Tomales, 226 Tortilla,
93,111, 244 Trade, early, 119-122 Tres Re yes, ship, 68, 82, 83 Trist, 175 Tsuwish, 43, 45
Tuscon, 206 Tulare County, products, 247, 276 Tules, 30, 31, 35, 39, 40 Tuolumne grove, 284
Union Pacific Railroad, 197-201 United States, conquers California, 134-146 University of California,
283-285 Valencia late orange, 248 Vallejo, General, 125 Vallejo, General, captured, 141 Vallejo,
General, in convention, 177 Vallejo, General, loses land, 183 Vallejo, General, quoted, 118,
148 Vallejo, Senorita Guadalupe, quoted 118, 121, 183, 257 Vancouver, Captain, 130 Vancouver,
Captain, quoted, 257 Vanquech, 35 Vaquero, 111 Vasques, 214 Vegetables, 256, 257, 261 Ventura,
Cabrillo at, 54 Vera Cruz, 74, 75 Vigilantes, 184, 185 Vizcaino, Don Sebastian,  explorations
of, 68-73 Wash-day expedition, 118 Webster, Daniel, 176, 179 Westminster, settled, 212 Wheat,
237-245, 255 Wheeler, Benjamin Ide, 284 White, Stephen M., 288 Whitman, Walt, quoted, 219 Wiggin,
Kate Douglas, 282 Willey, Rev. Samuel, 284 Wolfskill grove, 246 Yerba Buena, 152 Yosemite,
238 Zanja, 94
 "I don't know," said Aunt Elizabeth, shortly. "I didn't have ten words
with him. I told him he had put me in a position I should never forgive.
Then he told me I had put him in a worse. We quarrelled, and he went
into the smoker.