The offenses against the neutrality of the United States which were instigated and financed
by the Potsdam gang were enumerated by the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives
in the first week of April, 1917, and amounted to at least twenty-one distinct crimes or unfriendly
acts, including the furnishing of bogus passports to German reservists and spies, the incitement
of rebellion in India and in Mexico, the preparation of dynamite outrages against Canada, the
placing of bombs in ships sailing from American ports, and many other ill-judged pleasantries
of a similar character.

The crown was put on this series of blundering misdeeds by the note of January 19, 1917, sent
from the German Foreign Office (under cover of our diplomatic privilege, of course) to the
German Minister in Mexico, directing him to prepare an alliance with that country against the
United States in the event of war, urging him to use Mexico as an agent to draw Japan into
that alliance, and offering as a bribe to the Mexicans the possession of American territory
in Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona. (See War Message and Facts Behind It, p. 13. Published by
the Committee on Public Information, Washington, Government Printing Office, 1917.)

The fact is, we have only just begun to understand the real nature of the German secret service,
which works with, and either under or over, the diplomatic service.

It is certainly the most highly organized, systematic, and expensive, and at the same time
probably the most bone-headed and unscrupulous, secret service in the world.

Its powers of falsification and evasion are only exceeded by its capacity for making those
mistakes which spring from a congenital contempt for other people.

At The Hague I had numerous opportunities of observing and noting the workings of this peculiar
system. The story of many of them cannot be publicly told without violating that reserve which
I prefer to maintain in regard to confidential communications and private affairs in which
the personal reputation of individuals is involved. But there are two or three experiences
of which I may write freely without incurring either self-reproach or a just reproach from
others. They are not at all sensational. But they seemed at the time, and they seem still,
to have a certain significance as indications of the psychology of the people with whom we
were then in nominal friendship.

Three requests were made to me for the forwarding of important communications to Brussels under
cover of the diplomatic privilege of the American Legation. The memoranda of the dates and
so on are in the Chancellery at The Hague, so I cannot refer to them. But it is certain that
the requests came shortly after the beginning of the war, in the first or second week of August,
1914, and the content and purport of them are absolutely clear in my memory.

The first request was from Berlin for the transmission of a note to the Belgian Government,
renewing the proposition which the Potsdam gang had made on August 2: namely, that Belgium
should permit the free passage of German troops through her neutral ground on condition that
Germany would pay for all damage done and that Belgian territory would not be annexed. (Off.
Dip. Doc., p. 402.) King Albert had already replied, on August 3, to this proposition, saying
that to permit such a passage of hostile troops against France would be "a flagrant violation
of international law" and would "sacrifice the honor of the nation." (Off. Dip. Doc., p. 421.)
After such an answer it did not seem to me that the renewal of the dishonorable proposal was
likely to have a good effect. Yet the Berlin note was entirely correct in form. It merely offered
a chance for Belgium to choose again between peace with the friendship of Germany and dishonor
attached, and war in defense of the neutrality to which she was bound by the very treaties
(1831, 1839) which brought her into being. I had no right to interpose an obstacle to the repetition
of Belgium's first heroic choice. I pointed out that, not being accredited to the Belgian Government,
I was not in a position to transmit any communication to it. But I was willing to forward the
note to my colleague the American Minister in Brussels, absolutely without recommendation,
but simply for such disposal as he thought fit. Accordingly the note was transmitted to him.
[Footnote 7]

[Footnote 7: My colleague, Honorable James W. Gerard, Ex-Ambassador to Germany, has referred
to this in his very interesting book, "My Four Years in Germany," p. 136.]

What Whitlock did with it I do not know. What answer, if any, Belgium made I do not know. But
I do know that she stood to her guns and kept her honor intact and immortal.

The second request was of a different quality. It came to me from the Imperial German Legation
at The Hague. It was a note for transmission to the Belgian Government, beginning with a reference
to the fall of Liege and the hopeless folly of attempting to resist the German invasion, and
continuing with an intimation of the terrible consequences which would follow Belgium's persistence
in her mad idea of keeping her word of honor. In effect the note was a curious combination
of an insult and a threat. I promptly and positively refused to transmit it or to have anything
to do with it.

"But why," said the German counsellor, sitting by my study fire---a Prussian of the Prussians--"why
do you refuse? You are a neutral, a friend of both parties. Why not simply transmit the note
to your colleague in Brussels as you did before? You are not in any way responsible for its
contents."

"Quite so," I answered, "and thank God for that! But suppose you had a quarrel with a neighbor
in the Rheinland, who had positively declined a proposition which you had made to him. And
suppose, the ordinary post-boy services being interrupted, you asked me to convey to your neighbor
a note which began by addressing him as a 'silly s-- of a b----,' and ended by telling him
that if he did not agree you would certainly grind him to powder. Would you expect me to play
the post-boy for such a billet-doux on the ground that I was not responsible for its contents
and was a friend of both parties?"

"Well," replied the counsellor, laughing at the North American directness of my language, "probably
not." So he folded up the note and took it away. What became of it I do not know nor care.

The third request was of still another quality. It came from the Imperial Austro-Hungarian
Legation, which very politely asked me to transmit a message in the American diplomatic code
to my colleague in Brussels for delivery to the Austro-Hungarian Legation, which still lingered
in that city. The first and last parts of the message were in plain language, good English,
quite innocent and proper. But the kernel of the despatch was written in the numerical secret
cipher of Vienna, which of course I was unable to read. I drew attention to this, and asked
mildly how I could be expected to put this passage into our code without knowing what the words
were. The answer was that it would not be necessary to code this passage; it could be transmitted
in numbers just as it stood; the Austro-Hungarian charge d'affaires at Brussels would understand
it.

"Quite so," I answered, "but you see the point is that I do not understand it. My dear count,
you are my very good friend, and it grieves me deeply to decline any requests of yours. But
the simple fact is that our instructions explicitly forbid us to send any message in two codes."

The count--who, by the way, was an excellent and most amiable man-- blushed and stammered that
he was only carrying out the instructions of his chief, but that my point was perfectly clear
and indisputable. I was glad that he saw it in that light, and we parted on the most friendly
terms. What became of the message I do not know nor care.

It was about the 1st of September, 1915, that I came into brief contact with the case of Mr.
J. F. J. Archibald. This gentleman was an American journalist, and a very clever and agreeable
man. We had met some months before, when he was on his way back to America from his professional
work in Germany, and he had been a welcome guest at my table. But the second meeting was different.

This time Mr. Archibald was returning toward Germany on the Holland-America steamship Rotterdam.
When the boat touched at Falmouth, on August 30, the British authorities examined his luggage
and found that he was carrying private letters and official despatches from Doctor Dumba the
Austrian Ambassador at Washington, from Count Bernstorff the German Ambassador, and from Captain
von Papen his military attache. Not only was the carrying of these letters by a private person
on a regular mail route a recognized offense against the law, but the documents themselves
contained matter of an incriminating and seditious nature, most unfriendly to the United States.
The egregious Doctor Dumba, for example, described how it would be possible to "disorganize
and hold up for months if not entirely prevent," the work of American factories; and the colossal
Captain von Papen, in a letter referring to the activities of German secret agents in America,
gave birth to his eloquent and unforgettable phrase, "these idiotic Yankees." The papers, of
course, were taken from Mr. Archibald at Falmouth, but he was allowed to continue his voyage
to Rotterdam en route for Berlin.

Before his arrival, however, a cablegram came from the Department of State at Washington instructing
me to take up his regular passport which was made out to cover travel in Germany; to give him
an emergency passport valid for one month and good only for the return to the United States;
and to use all proper means to get him back to New York at the earliest possible date.

Having found out that he was lodged at a certain hotel I sent him a courteous invitation to
call at the Legation on business of importance. He came promptly and we sat down in the library
for a conversation which you will admit had its delicate points.

He began by saying that he supposed I had seen the newspaper accounts of what happened to him
at Falmouth; that he was greatly surprised and chagrined about the matter; that he had been
entirely ignorant of the contents of the documents found in his possession; that he had imagined--indeed
he had been distinctly told--that they were innocent private letters relating to personal and
domestic affairs; that he did not know there was any impropriety in conveying such letters;
that if he had suspected their nature or known that they included official despatches he would
never have taken them.

I replied that his personal statement was enough for me on that point, but that it seemed to
throw rather a dark shadow on the character and conduct of his friends in the German and Austrian
Embassies who had knowingly exposed his innocence to such a risk. I added that it was probably
with a view to obtaining his help in clearing up the matter that the Department of State had
instructed me to take up his passport.

"But have you the legal right to do that?"

"Under American law, yes, unquestionably."

"But under Dutch law?"

"Probably not. But I hope it will not be necessary to invoke that law. Simply to inform the
Dutch Foreign Minister of the presence of an American whose passport had been revoked but who
refused to give it up, would be sufficient for my purpose."

He reflected for a moment, and then said, smiling:

"I don't refuse to give it up. Here it is. Now tell me what I shall do without a  passport.

"Thank you. Fortunately I have authority to give you an emergency passport, good for a month,
and covering the return voyage to America."

"But I don't want to go there. I want to go on to Berlin."

"Unfortunately I fear that will be impossible. Your old passport is invalid and will not carry
you over the Dutch border. Your new passport cannot be made out for Germany. Your best course
is to return home."

"I see. But have you any right to arrest me and send me to America?"

"None whatever, my dear sir. Please don't misunderstand me. This is just a bit of friendly
advice. 'Your country needs you.' You naturally want an early chance to tell Washington what
you have told me. The Rotterdam is a very comfortable ship, and she sails for New York the
day after to-morrow. I have already bespoken an excellent room for you. Do you accept?"

"Yes, and thank you for the way you have put the matter. But do you think they will arrest
me when I get to New York?"

"Probably not. But to help in forestalling that unpleasant possibility I will cable Washington
that you are coming at once, of your own free will, and anxious to tell the whole story."

So he went, and I saw him off on the Rotterdam, a pallid and downcast figure. I pitied him.
It seemed strange that any one should ever trust that unscrupulous, callous, thick-pated diplomatic-secret-service
machine which is always ready to expose a too confiding and admiring friend to danger or disgrace
in order to serve its imperious necessities.

Holland, of course, owing to its geographical situation, was a regular nest of German espionage.
Other spies were there, too, but they were much less in evidence than the Germans. Of the tricks
and the manners of the latter I had some picturesque experiences which I do not feel at liberty
to narrate. The Department of State has been informed of them, and has no doubt put the information
safely away with a lot of other things which it knows but does not think it expedient or necessary
to tell until the proper time.

But there is no reason why the simple little tale of the futile attempt to plant two German
spies in my household at The Hague should not be told. One of the men in our domestic service,
a Hollander, had been obliged to leave and we wanted to fill his place. This was difficult
because the requirements of the Dutch army service claimed such a large number of the younger men.

The first who applied for the vacant place professed to be a Belgian. Perhaps he was. On demand
he produced his "papers"--birth-certificate, baptismal registry, several Passier-scheine, and
so forth. But down in a corner on the back of one of the papers was a dim blue stamp--"Imperial
German Marine." What was the meaning of this? What had the Potsdam High-Sea Fleet to do with
this peaceable overland traveller from Belgium? Voluble excuses, but no satisfactory explanation.
I told him that I feared he was too experienced for the place.

The second who applied was an unquestionable Dutchman, young, good- looking, intelligent. Papers
in perfect order. Present service with a well-known pro-German family.  Previous service of
one year with a lady who was one of my best friends--the wife of a high government official.
I rang her up on the telephone and asked if she could tell me anything about A. B., who had
been in service with her for a year. A second of silence, then the answer: "Yes, a good deal,
but not on the telephone, please. Come around to tea this afternoon." Madame L. then told me
that while the young man was clean, sober, and industrious, he had been found rummaging among
her husband's official papers, in a room which he was forbidden to enter, and had been caught
several times listening at the keyhole of doors while private conferences were going on.

It seemed to me that a young man with such an uncontrollable thirst for knowledge would not
be suited for the very simple service which would be required of him in our household.

Afterward, traces of both of these men were found which led unmistakably to the lair of the
chief spider of the German secret service at The Hague. The incident was a very small one.
But, after all, life is made up of small incidents with a connected meaning.

At the time when I am writing this (September 24, 1917) the moral character of the tools of
the Potsdam gang has again been stripped naked by the disclosure of the treachery by which
the German Legation in Argentina has utilized the Swedish Legation in that country to transmit,
under diplomatic privilege, messages inciting to murder on the high seas. Argentina has already
taken the action to be expected from an American Republic by dismissing the German Minister.
What Sweden will do to vindicate her honor remains to be seen. Her attitude may affect our
opinion of her as a victim or a vassal of Potsdam.

There are two points in the disclosures made on September 23 by the Department of State which
bear directly upon this simple narrative of experiences at The Hague.

The fetching female comic-opera star, Ray Beveridge, discreetly alluded to in the third chapter
(p. 71), was secretly paid three thousand dollars by the Imperial German Embassy in Washington
to finance her artistic activities. So, you see, I was not far wrong in forwarding her divorce
papers to Germany and refusing to transmit her newspaper correspondence to America. She was
a paid soubrette in the Potsdam troupe.

The affable and intelligent Mr. Archibald, alluded to in this chapter (p. 169), received on
April 21, 1915, according to these disclosures, five thousand dollars from the Imperial German
Embassy in Washington for "propaganda" services. If I had known this when he came to me in
September, it is possible that I should have been less careful to spare his feelings.

III

The record of the German submarine warfare on merchant shipping is one of the most extraordinary
chapters in history. Americans have read it with appropriate indignation, but not always with
clear understanding of the precise issues involved. Let me try to make those issues plain,
since the submarine campaign was one of the causes which forced this war upon the United States.
(President's Message to Congress, April 2, 1917, paragraphs 2-10.)

In war all naval vessels, including of course submarines, have the right to attack and destroy,
by any means in their power, any war-ship of the enemy. In regard to merchant-ships the case
is different, according to international law. (See G. G. Wilson, International Law, paragraphs
1l4, 136, New York, 1901-1909.)

The war-vessel has the right of "visit and search" on all merchant-ships, enemy or neutral.
It has also the right, in case the cargo of the merchant-ship appears to include more than
a certain percentage of contraband, to capture it and take it into a port for adjudication
as a prize. The war-vessel has also the right to sink a presumptive prize under conditions
(such as distance, stress of weather, and so forth) which make it impossible to take it into port.

But here the right of the war-vessel stops. It has absolutely no right to sink the merchant-ship
without warning and without making efficient provision for the safety of the passengers and
crew. That is the common law of civilized nations. To break it is to put one's self beyond
the pale.

Some Germanophile critics have faulted me for calling the Teutonic submarines "Potsdam pirates."
A commissioned vessel, these critics say, which merely executes the orders of its government,
cannot properly be called a pirate.

Why not? Take the definition of piracy given in the New Oxford Dictionary: "The crime of robbery
or depredation on the sea by persons not holding a commission from an established civilized state."

