When I observed, that he must have read a vast number of books to be able to discourse on such
a variety of subjects, he declared he had read little or nothing, and asked how he should find
books among the woods of America, where he had spent the greatest part of his life. My nephew
remarking that the Scots in general were famous for their learning, he denied the imputation,
and defied him to prove it from their works -- 'The Scots (said he) have a slight tincture
of letters, with which they make a parade among people who are more illiterate than themselves;
but they may be said to float on the surface of science, and they have made very small advances
in the useful arts.' 'At least (cried Tabby), all the world allows that the Scots behaved gloriously
in fighting and conquering the savages of America.' 'I can assure you, madam, you have been
misinformed (replied the lieutenant); in that continent the Scots did nothing more than their
duty, nor was there one corps in his majesty's service that distinguished itself more than
another. -- Those who affected to extol the Scots for superior merit, were no friends to that
nation.'

Though he himself made free with his countrymen, he would not suffer any other person to glance
a sarcasm at them with impunity. One of the company chancing to mention lord B--'s inglorious
peace, the lieutenant immediately took up the cudgels in his lordship's favour, and argued
very strenuously to prove that it was the most honourable and advantageous peace that England
had ever made since the foundation of the monarchy. -- Nay, between friends, he offered such
reasons on this subject, that I was really confounded, if not convinced. -- He would not allow
that the Scots abounded above their proportion in the army and navy of Great-Britain, or that
the English had any reason to say his countrymen had met with extraordinary encouragement in
the service. 'When a South and North-Briton (said he) are competitors for a place or commission,
which is in the disposal of an English minister or an English general, it would be absurd to
suppose that the preference will not be given to the native of England, who has so many advantages
over his rival. -- First and foremost, he has in his favour that laudable partiality, which,
Mr Addison says, never fails to cleave to the heart of an Englishman; secondly, he has more
powerful connexions, and a greater share of parliamentary interest, by which those contests
are generally decided; and lastly, he has a greater command of money to smooth the way to his
success. For my own part (said he), I know no Scotch officer, who has risen in the army above
the rank of a subaltern, without purchasing every degree of preferment either with money or
recruits; but I know many gentlemen of that country, who, for want of money and interest, have
grown grey in the rank of lieutenants; whereas very few instances of this ill-fortune are to
be found among the natives of South-Britain. -- Not that I would insinuate that my countrymen
have the least reason to complain. Preferment in the service, like success in any other branch
of traffic, will naturally favour those who have the greatest stock of cash and credit, merit
and capacity being supposed equal on all sides.'

But the most hardy of all this original's positions were these: That commerce would, sooner
or later, prove the ruin of every nation, where it flourishes to any extent -- that the parliament
was the rotten part of the British constitution -- that the liberty of the press was a national
evil -- and that the boasted institution of juries, as managed in England, was productive of
shameful perjury and flagrant injustice. He observed of the parliament, that the practice of
buying boroughs, and canvassing for votes, was an avowed system of venality, already established
on the ruins of principle, integrity, faith, and good order, in consequence of which the elected
and the elector, and, in short, the whole body of the people, were equally and universally
contaminated and corrupted. He affirmed, that of a parliament thus constituted, the crown would
always have influence enough to secure a great majority in its dependence, from the great number
of posts, places, and pensions it had to bestow; that such a parliament would (as it had already
done) lengthen the term of its sitting and authority, whenever the prince should think it for
his interest to continue the representatives, for, without doubt, they had the same right to
protect their authority ad infinitum, as they had to extend it from three to seven years. --
With a parliament, therefore, dependent upon the crown, devoted to the prince, and supported
by a standing army, garbled and modelled for the purpose, any king of England may, and probably
some ambitious sovereign will, totally overthrow all the bulwarks of the constitution; for
it is not to be supposed that a prince of high spirit will tamely submit to be thwarted in
all his measures, abused and insulted by a populace of unbridled ferocity, when he has it in
his power to crush all opposition under his feet with the concurrence of the legislature. He
said, he should always consider the liberty of the press as a national evil, while it enabled
the vilest reptile to soil the lustre of the most shining merit, and furnished the most infamous
incendiary with the means of disturbing the peace and destroying the good order of the community.
He owned, however, that under due restrictions, it would be a valuable privilege; but affirmed,
that at present there was no law in England sufficient to restrain it within proper bounds.

With respect to juries, he expressed himself to this effect: -- juries are generally composed
of illiterate plebeians, apt to be mistaken, easily misled, and open to sinister influence;
for if either of the parties to be tried, can gain over one of the twelve jurors, he has secured
the verdict in his favour; the juryman thus brought over will, in despight of all evidence
and conviction, generally hold out till his fellows are fatigued, and harassed, and starved
into concurrence; in which case the verdict is unjust, and the jurors are all perjured: but
cases will often occur, when the jurors are really divided in opinion, and each side is convinced
in opposition to the other; but no verdict will be received, unless they are unanimous, and
they are all bound, not only in conscience, but by oath, to judge and declare according to
their conviction. -- What then will be the consequence? -- They must either starve in company,
or one side must sacrifice their conscience to their convenience, and join in a verdict which
they believe to be false. This absurdity is avoided in Sweden, where a bare majority is sufficient;
and in Scotland, where two thirds of the jury are required to concur in the verdict.

You must not imagine that all these deductions were made on his part, without contradictions
on mine. -- No -- the truth is, I found myself piqued in point of honour, at his pretending
to be so much wiser than his neighbours. -- I questioned all his assertions, started innumerable
objections, argued and wrangled with uncommon perseverance, and grew very warm, and even violent,
in the debate. -- Sometimes he was puzzled, and once or twice, I think, fairly refuted; but
from those falls he rose again, like Antaeus, with redoubled vigour, till at length I was tired,
exhausted, and really did not know how to proceed, when luckily he dropped a hint, by which
he discovered he had been bred to the law; a confession which enabled me to retire from the
dispute with a good grace, as it could not be supposed that a man like me, who had been bred
to nothing, should be able to cope with a veteran in his own profession. I believe, however,
that I shall for some time continue to chew the cud of reflection upon many observations which
this original discharged.

Whether our sister Tabby was really struck with his conversation, or is resolved to throw at
every thing she meets in the shape of a man, till she can fasten the matrimonial noose, certain
it is, she has taken desperate strides towards the affection of Lismahago, who cannot be said
to have met her half way, though he does not seem altogether insensible to her civilities.
-- She insinuated more than once how happy we should be to have his company through that part
of Scotland which we proposed to visit, till at length he plainly told us, that his road was
totally different from that which we intended to take; that, for his part, his company would
be of very little service to us in our progress, as he was utterly unacquainted with the country,
which he had left in his early youth, consequently, he could neither direct us in our enquiries,
nor introduce us to any family of distinction. He said, he was stimulated by an irresistible
impulse to revisit the paternus lar, or patria domus, though he expected little satisfaction,
inasmuch as he understood that his nephew, the present possessor, was but ill qualified to
support the honour of the family. -- He assured us, however, as we design to return by the
west road, that he will watch our motions, and endeavour to pay his respects to us at Dumfries.
-- Accordingly he took his leave of us at a place half way betwixt Morpeth and Alnwick, and
pranced away in great state, mounted on a tall, meagre, raw-boned, shambling grey gelding,
without e'er a tooth in his head, the very counter-part of the rider; and, indeed, the appearance
of the two was so picturesque, that I would give twenty guineas to have them tolerably presented
on canvas.

Northumberland is a fine county, extending to the Tweed, which is a pleasant pastoral stream;
but you will be surprised when I tell you that the English side of that river is neither so
well cultivated nor so populous as the other. -- The farms are thinly scattered, the lands
uninclosed, and scarce a gentleman's seat is to be seen in some miles from the Tweed; whereas
the Scots are advanced in crowds to the very brink of the river, so that you may reckon above
thirty good houses, in the compass of a few miles, belonging to proprietors whose ancestors
had fortified castles in the same situations, a circumstance that shews what dangerous neighbours
the Scots must have formerly been to the northern counties of England.

Our domestic oeconomy continues on the old footing. -- My sister Tabby still adheres to methodism,
and had the benefit of a sermon at Wesley's meeting in Newcastle; but I believe the Passion
of love has in some measure abated the fervour of devotion both in her and her woman, Mrs Jenkins,
about whose good graces there has been a violent contest betwixt my nephew's valet, Mr Dutton,
and my man, Humphry Clinker. -- Jery has been obliged to interpose his authority to keep the
peace, and to him I have left the discussion of that important affair, which had like to have
kindled the flames of discord in the family of

Yours always, MATT. BRAMBLE TWEEDMOUTH, July 15.

To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. at Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

In my two last you had so much of Lismahago, that I suppose you are glad he is gone off the
stage for the present. -- I must now descend to domestic occurrences. -- Love, it seems, is
resolved to assert his dominion over all the females of our family. -- After having practised
upon poor Liddy's heart, and played strange vagaries with our aunt Mrs Tabitha, he began to
run riot in the affections of her woman, Mrs Winifred Jenkins, whom I have had occasion to
mention more than once in the course of our memoirs. Nature intended Jenkins for something
very different from the character of her mistress; yet custom and habit have effected a wonderful
resemblance betwixt them in many particulars. Win, to be sure, is much younger and more agreeable
in her person; she is likewise tender-hearted and benevolent, qualities for which her mistress
is by no means remarkable, no more than she is for being of a timorous disposition, and much
subject to fits of the mother, which are the infirmities of Win's constitution: but then she
seems to have adopted Mrs Tabby's manner with her cast cloaths. -- She dresses and endeavours
to look like her mistress, although her own looks are much more engaging. -- She enters into
her scheme of oeconomy, learns her phrases, repeats her remarks, imitates her stile in scolding
the inferior servants, and, finally, subscribes implicitly to her system of devotion. -- This,
indeed, she found the more agreeable, as it was in a great measure introduced and confirmed
by the ministry of Clinker, with whose personal merit she seems to have been struck ever since
he exhibited the pattern of his naked skin at Marlborough.

Nevertheless, though Humphry had this double hank upon her inclinations, and exerted all his
power to maintain the conquest he had made, he found it impossible to guard it on the side
of vanity, where poor Win was as frail as any female in the kingdom. In short, my rascal Dutton
professed himself her admirer, and, by dint of his outlandish qualifications, threw his rival
Clinker out of the saddle of her heart. Humphry may be compared to an English pudding, composed
of good wholesome flour and suet, and Dutton to a syllabub or iced froth, which, though agreeable
to the taste, has nothing solid or substantial. The traitor not only dazzled her, with his
second-hand finery, but he fawned, and flattered, and cringed -- he taught her to take rappee,
and presented her with a snuff-box of papier mache -- he supplied her with a powder for her
teeth -- he mended her complexion, and he dressed her hair in the Paris fashion -- he undertook
to be her French master and her dancing-master, as well as friseur, and thus imperceptibly
wound himself into her good graces. Clinker perceived the progress he had made, and repined
in secret. -- He attempted to open her eyes in the way of exhortation, and finding it produced
no effect had recourse to prayer. At Newcastle, while he attended Mrs Tabby to the methodist
meeting his rival accompanied Mrs Jenkins to the play. He was dressed in a silk coat, made
at Paris for his former master, with a tawdry waistcoat of tarnished brocade; he wore his hair
in a great bag with a huge solitaire, and a long sword dangled from his thigh. The lady was
all of a flutter with faded lutestring, washed gauze, and ribbons three times refreshed; but
she was most remarkable for the frisure of her head, which rose, like a pyramid, seven inches
above the scalp, and her face was primed and patched from the chin up to the eyes; nay, the
gallant himself had spared neither red nor white in improving the nature of his own complexion.
In this attire, they walked together through the high street to the theatre, and as they passed
for players ready dressed for acting, they reached it unmolested; but as it was still light
when they returned, and by that time the people had got information of their real character
and condition, they hissed and hooted all the way, and Mrs Jenkins was all bespattered with
dirt, as well as insulted with the opprobrious name of painted Jezabel, so that her fright
and mortification threw her into an hysteric fit the moment she came home.

Clinker was so incensed at Dutton, whom he considered as the cause of her disgrace, that he
upbraided him severely for having turned the poor woman's brain. The other affected to treat
him with contempt, and mistaking his forbearance for want of courage, threatened to horse-whip
him into good manners. Humphry then came to me, humbly begging I would give him leave to chastise
my servant for his insolence -- 'He has challenged me to fight him at sword's point (said he);
but I might as well challenge him to make a horse-shoe, or a plough iron; for I know no more
of the one than he does of the other. -- Besides, it doth not become servants to use those
weapons, or to claim the privilege of gentlemen to kill one another when they fall out; moreover,
I would not have his blood upon my conscience for ten thousand times the profit or satisfaction
I should get by his death; but if your honour won't be angry, I'll engage to gee 'en a good
drubbing, that, may hap, will do 'en service, and I'll take care it shall do 'en no harm.'
I said, I had no objection to what he proposed, provided he could manage matters so as not
to be found the aggressor, in case Dutton should prosecute him for an assault and battery.

Thus licensed, he retired; and that same evening easily provoked his rival to strike the first
blow, which Clinker returned with such interest that he was obliged to call for quarter, declaring,
at the same time, that he would exact severe and bloody satisfaction the moment we should pass
the border, when he could run him through the body without fear of the consequence. -- This
scene passed in presence of lieutenant Lismahago, who encouraged Clinker to hazard a thrust
of cold iron with his antagonist. 'Cold iron (cried Humphry) I shall never use against the
life of any human creature; but I am so far from being afraid of his cold iron, that I shall
use nothing in my defence but a good cudgel, which shall always be at his service.' In the
mean time, the fair cause of this contest, Mrs Winifred Jenkins, seemed overwhelmed with affliction,
and Mr Clinker acted much on the reserve, though he did not presume to find fault with her conduct.

The dispute between the two rivals was soon brought to a very unexpected issue. Among our fellow-lodgers
at Berwick, was a couple from London, bound to Edinburgh, on the voyage of matrimony. The female
was the daughter and heiress of a pawnbroker deceased, who had given her guardians the slip,
and put herself under the tuition of a tall Hibernian, who had conducted her thus far in quest
of a clergyman to unite them in marriage, without the formalities required by the law of England.
I know not how the lover had behaved on the road, so as to decline in the favour of his inamorata;
but, in all probability, Dutton perceived a coldness on her side, which encouraged him to whisper,
it was a pity she should have cast affections upon a taylor, which he affirmed the Irishman
to be. This discovery completed her disgust, of which my man taking the advantage, began to
recommend himself to her good graces, and the smooth-tongued rascal found no difficulty to
insinuate himself into the place of her heart, from which the other had been discarded -- Their
resolution was immediately taken. In the morning, before day, while poor Teague lay snoring
a-bed, his indefatigable rival ordered a post-chaise, and set out with the lady for Coldstream,
a few miles up the Tweed, where there was a parson who dealt in this branch of commerce, and
there they were noosed, before the Irishman ever dreamt of the matter. But when he got up at
six o'clock, and found the bird was flown, he made such a noise as alarmed the whole house.
One of the first persons he encountered, was the postilion returned from Coldstream, where
he had been witness to the marriage, and over and above an handsome gratuity, had received
a bride's favour, which he now wore in his cap -- When the forsaken lover understood they were
actually married, and set out for London; and that Dutton had discovered to the lady, that
he (the Hibernian) was a taylor, he had like to have run distracted. He tore the ribbon from
the fellow's cap, and beat it about his ears. He swore he would pursue him to the gates of
hell, and ordered a post-chaise and four to be got ready as soon as possible; but, recollecting
that his finances would not admit of this way of travelling, he was obliged to countermand
this order.

For my part, I knew nothing at all of what had happened, till the postilion brought me the
keys of my trunk and portmanteau, which he had received from Dutton, who sent me his respects,
hoping I would excuse him for his abrupt departure, as it was a step upon which his fortune
depended. Before I had time to make my uncle acquainted with this event, the Irishman burst
into my chamber, without any introduction, exclaiming, -- 'By my soul, your sarvant has robbed
me of five thousand pounds, and I'll have satisfaction, if I should be hanged tomorrow.' --
When I asked him who he was, 'My name (said he) is Master Macloughlin but it should be Leighlin
Oneale, for I am come from Tir-Owen the Great; and so I am as good a gentleman as any in Ireland;
and that rogue, your sarvant, said I was a taylor, which was as big a lie as if he had called
me the pope -- I'm a man of fortune, and have spent all I had; and so being in distress, Mr
Coshgrave, the fashioner in Shuffolk-street, tuck me out, and made me his own private shecretary:
by the same token, I was the last he bailed; for his friends obliged him to tie himself up,
that he would bail no more above ten pounds; for why, becaase as how, he could not refuse any
body that asked, and therefore in time would have robbed himself of his whole fortune, and,
if he had lived long at that rate, must have died bankrupt very soon and so I made my addresses
to Miss Skinner, a young lady of five thousand pounds fortune, who agreed to take me for better
nor worse; and, to be sure, this day would have put me in possession, if it had not been for
that rogue, your sarvant, who came like a tief, and stole away my property, and made her believe
I was a taylor; and that she was going to marry the ninth part of a man: but the devil burn
my soul, if ever I catch him on the mountains of Tulloghobegly, if I don't shew him that I'm
nine times as good a man as he, or e'er a bug of his country.'

When he had rung out his first alarm, I told him I was sorry he had allowed himself to be so
jockied; but it was no business of mine; and that the fellow who robbed him of his bride, had
likewise robbed me of my servant -- 'Didn't I tell you then (cried he) that Rogue was his true
Christian name. -- Oh if I had but one fair trust with him upon the sod, I'd give him lave
to brag all the rest of his life.'

My uncle hearing the noise, came in, and being informed of this adventure, began to comfort
Mr Oneale for the lady's elopement; observing that he seemed to have had a lucky escape, that
it was better she should elope before, than after marriage -- The Hibernian was of a very different
opinion. He said, 'If he had been once married, she might have eloped as soon as she pleased;
he would have taken care that she should not have carried her fortune along with her -- Ah
(said he) she's a Judas Iscariot, and has betrayed me with a kiss; and, like Judas, she carried
the bag, and has not left me money enough to bear my expences back to London; and so I'm come
to this pass, and the rogue that was the occasion of it has left you without a sarvant, you
may put me in his place; and by Jasus, it is the best thing you can do.' -- I begged to be
excused, declaring I could put up with any inconvenience, rather than treat as a footman the
descendant of Tir-Owen the Great. I advised him to return to his friend, Mr Cosgrave, and take
his passage from Newcastle by sea, towards which I made him a small present, and he retired,
seemingly resigned to his evil fortune. I have taken upon trial a Scotchman, called Archy M'Alpin,
an old soldier, whose last master, a colonel, lately died at Berwick. The fellow is old and
withered; but he has been recommended to me for his fidelity, by Mrs Humphreys, a very good
sort of a woman, who keeps the inn at Tweedmouth, and is much respected by all the travellers
on this road.

Clinker, without doubt, thinks himself happy in the removal of a dangerous rival, and he is
too good a Christian, to repine at Dutton's success. Even Mrs Jenkins will have reason to congratulate
herself upon this event, when she cooly reflects upon the matter; for, howsoever she was forced
from her poise for a season, by snares laid for her vanity, Humphry is certainly the north-star
to which the needle of her affection would have pointed at the long run. At present, the same
vanity is exceedingly mortified, upon finding herself abandoned by her new admirer, in favour
of another inamorata. She received the news with a violent burst of laughter, which soon brought
on a fit of crying; and this gave the finishing blow to the patience of her mistress, which
had held out beyond all expectation. She now opened all those floodgates of reprehension, which
had been shut so long. She not only reproached her with her levity and indiscretion, but attacked
her on the score of religion, declaring roundly that she was in a state of apostacy and reprobation;
and finally, threatened to send her a packing at this extremity of the kingdom. All the family
interceded for poor Winifred, not even excepting her slighted swain, Mr Clinker, who, on his
knees, implored and obtained her pardon.

There was, however, another consideration that gave Mrs Tabitha some disturbance. At Newcastle,
the servants had been informed by some wag, that there was nothing to eat in Scotland, but
oat-meal and sheep's-heads; and lieutenant Lismahago being consulted, what he said served rather
to confirm than to refute the report. Our aunt being apprised of this circumstance, very gravely
advised her brother to provide a sumpter horse with store of hams, tongues, bread, biscuit,
and other articles for our subsistence, in the course of our peregrination, and Mr Bramble
as gravely replied, that he would take the hint into consideration: but, finding no such provision
was made, she now revived the proposal, observing that there was a tolerable market at Berwick,
where we might be supplied; and that my man's horse would serve as a beast of burthen -- The
'squire, shrugging his shoulders, eyed her askance with a look of ineffable contempt: and,
after some pause, 'Sister (said he), I can hardly persuade myself you are serious.' She was
so little acquainted with the geography of the island, that she imagined we could not go to
Scotland but by sea; and, after we had passed through the town of Berwick, when he told her
we were upon Scottish ground, she could hardly believe the assertion -- If the truth must be
told, the South Britons in general are woefully ignorant in this particular. What, between
want of curiosity, and traditional sarcasms, the effect of ancient animosity, the people at
the other end of the island know as little of Scotland as of Japan.

If I had never been in Wales, I should have been more struck with the manifest difference in
appearance betwixt the peasants and commonalty on different sides of the Tweed. The boors of
Northumberland are lusty fellows, fresh complexioned, cleanly, and well cloathed; but the labourers
in Scotland are generally lank, lean, hard-featured, sallow, soiled, and shabby, and their
little pinched blue caps have a beggarly effect. The cattle are much in the same stile with
their drivers, meagre, stunted, and ill equipt. When I talked to my uncle on this subject,
he said, 'Though all the Scottish hinds would not bear to be compared with those of the rich
counties of South Britain, they would stand very well in competition with the peasants of France,
Italy, and Savoy -- not to mention the mountaineers of Wales, and the red-shanks of Ireland.'

We entered Scotland by a frightful moor of sixteen miles, which promises very little for the
interior parts of the kingdom; but the prospect mended as we advanced. Passing through Dunbar,
which is a neat little town, situated on the sea-side, we lay at a country inn, where our entertainment
far exceeded our expectation; but for this we cannot give the Scots credit, as the landlord
is a native of England. Yesterday we dined at Haddington, which has been a place of some consideration,
but is now gone to decay; and in the evening arrived at this metropolis, of which I can say
very little. It is very romantic, from its situation on the declivity of a hill, having a fortified
castle at the top, and a royal palace at the bottom. The first thing that strikes the nose
of a stranger, shall be nameless; but what first strikes the eye, is the unconscionable height
of the houses, which generally rise to five, six, seven, and eight stories, and, in some places
(as I am assured), to twelve. This manner of building, attended with numberless inconveniences,
must have been originally owing to want of room. Certain it is, the town seems to be full of
people: but their looks, their language, and their customs, are so different from ours, that
I can hardly believe myself in Great-Britain.

The inn at which we put up (if it may be so called) was so filthy and disagreeable in all respects,
that my uncle began to fret, and his gouty symptoms to recur -- Recollecting, however, that
he had a letter of recommendation to one Mr Mitchelson, a lawyer, he sent it by his servant,
with a compliment, importing that we would wait upon him next day in person; but that gentleman
visited us immediately, and insisted upon our going to his own house, until he could provide
lodgings for our accommodation. We gladly accepted, of his invitation, and repaired to his
house, where we were treated with equal elegance and hospitality, to the utter confusion of
our aunt, whose prejudices, though beginning to give way, were not yet entirely removed. To-day,
by the assistance of our friend, we are settled in convenient lodgings, up four pair of stairs,
in the High-street, the fourth story being, in this city, reckoned more genteel than the first.
The air is, in all probability, the better; but it requires good lungs to breathe it at this
distance above the surface of the earth. -- While I do remain above it, whether higher or lower,
provided I breathe at all,

I shall ever be, Dear Phillips, yours, J. MELFORD July 18.

To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS,

That part of Scotland contiguous to Berwick, nature seems to have intended as a barrier between
two hostile nations. It is a brown desert of considerable extent, that produces nothing but
heath and fern; and what rendered it the more dreary when we passed, there was a thick fog
that hindered us from seeing above twenty yards from the carriage -- My sister began to make
wry faces, and use her smelling-bottle; Liddy looked blank, and Mrs Jenkins dejected; but in
a few hours these clouds were dissipated; the sea appeared upon our right, and on the left
the mountains retired a little, leaving an agreeable plain betwixt them and the beach; but,
what surprised us all, this plain, to the extent of several miles, was covered with as fine
wheat as ever I saw in the most fertile parts of South Britain -- This plentiful crop is raised
in the open field, without any inclosure, or other manure than the alga marina, or seaweed,
which abounds on this coast; a circumstance which shews that the soil and climate are favourable;
but that agriculture in this country is not yet brought to that perfection which it has attained
in England. Inclosures would not only keep the grounds warm, and the several fields distinct,
but would also protect the crop from the high winds, which are so frequent in this part of
the island.

Dunbar is well situated for trade, and has a curious bason, where ships of small burthen may
be perfectly secure; but there is little appearance of business in the place -- From thence,
all the way to Edinburgh, there is a continual succession of fine seats, belonging to noblemen
and gentlemen; and as each is surrounded by its own parks and plantation, they produce a very
pleasing effect in a country which lies otherwise open and exposed. At Dunbar there is a noble
park, with a lodge, belonging to the Duke of Roxburgh, where Oliver Cromwell had his head-quarters,
when Lesley, at the head of a Scotch army, took possession of the mountains in the neighbourhood,
and hampered him in such a manner, that he would have been obliged to embark and get away by
sea, had not the fanaticism of the enemy forfeited the advantage which they had obtained by
their general's conduct -- Their ministers, by exhortation, prayer, assurance, and prophecy,
instigated them to go down and slay the Philistines in Gilgal, and they quitted their ground
accordingly, notwithstanding all that Lesley could do to restrain the madness of their enthusiasm
-- When Oliver saw them in motion, he exclaimed, 'Praised be the Lord, he hath delivered them
into the hands of his servant!' and ordered his troops to sing a psalm of thanksgiving, while
they advanced in order to the plain, where the Scots were routed with great slaughter.

In the neighbourhood of Haddington, there is a gentleman's house, in the building of which,
and the improvements about it, he is said to have expended forty thousand pounds: but I cannot
say I was much pleased with either the architecture or the situation; though it has in front
a pastoral stream, the banks of which are laid out in a very agreeable manner. I intended to
pay my respects to Lord Elibank, whom I had the honour to know at London many years ago.

This place is but four miles from Edinburgh, towards which we proceeded along the sea-shore,
upon a firm bottom of smooth sand, which the tide had left uncovered in its retreat -- Edinburgh,
from this avenue, is not seen to much advantage -- We had only an imperfect view of the Castle
and upper parts of the town, which varied incessantly according to the inflexions of the road,
and exhibited the appearance of detached spires and turrets, belonging to some magnificent
edifice in ruins. The palace of Holyrood house stands on the left, as you enter the Canon-gate
-- This is a street continued from hence to the gate called Nether Bow, which is now taken
away; so that there is no interruption for a long mile, from the bottom to the top of the hill
on which the castle stands in a most imperial situation -- Considering its fine pavement, its
width, and the lofty houses on each side, this would be undoubtedly one of the noblest streets
in Europe, if an ugly mass of mean buildings, called the Lucken-Booths, had not thrust itself,
by what accident I know not, into the middle of the way, like Middle-Row in Holborn. The city
stands upon two hills, and the bottom between them; and, with all its defects, may very well
pass for the capital of a moderate kingdom. -- It is full of people, and continually resounds
with the noise of coaches and other carriages, for luxury as well as commerce. As far as I
can perceive, here is no want of provisions -- The beef and mutton are as delicate here as
in Wales; the sea affords plenty of good fish; the bread is remarkably fine; and the water
is excellent, though I'm afraid not in sufficient quantity to answer all the purposes of cleanliness
and convenience; articles in which, it must be allowed, our fellow-subjects are a little defective
-- The water is brought in leaden pipes from a mountain in the neighbourhood, to a cistern
on the Castle-hill, from whence it is distributed to public conduits in different parts of
the city. From these it is carried in barrels, on the backs of male and female porters, up
two, three, four, five, six, seven, and eight pairs of stairs, for the use of particular families
-- Every story is a complete house, occupied by a separate family; and the stair being common
to them all, is generally left in a very filthy condition; a man must tread with great circumspection
to get safe housed with unpolluted shoes -- Nothing can form a stronger contrast, than the
difference betwixt the outside and inside of the door, for the good-women of this metropolis
are remarkably nice in the ornaments and propriety of their apartments, as if they were resolved
to transfer the imputation from the individual to the public. You are no stranger to their
method of discharging all their impurities from their windows, at a certain hour of the night,
as the custom is in Spain, Portugal, and some parts of France and Italy -- A practice to which
I can by no means be reconciled; for notwithstanding all the care that is taken by their scavengers
to remove this nuisance every morning by break of day, enough still remains to offend the eyes,
as well as other organs of those whom use has not hardened against all delicacy of sensation.

The inhabitants seem insensible to these impressions, and are apt to imagine the disgust that
we avow is little better than affectation; but they ought to have some compassion for strangers,
who have not been used to this kind of sufferance; and consider, whether it may not be worth
while to take some pains to vindicate themselves from the reproach that, on this account, they
bear among their neighbours. As to the surprising height of their houses, it is absurd in many
respects; but in one particular light I cannot view it without horror; that is, the dreadful
situation of all the families above, in case the common staircase should be rendered impassable
by a fire in the lower stories -- In order to prevent the shocking consequences that must attend
such an accident, it would be a right measure to open doors of communication from one house
to another, on every story, by which the people might fly from such a terrible visitation.
In all parts of the world, we see the force of habit prevailing over all the dictates of convenience
and sagacity.

The public inns of Edinburgh are still worse than those of London; but by means of a worthy
gentleman, to whom I was recommended, we have got decent lodgings in the house of a widow gentlewoman
of the name of Lockhart; and here I shall stay until I have seen every thing that is remarkable
in and about this capital. I now begin to feel the good effects of exercise -- I eat like a
farmer, sleep from mid-night till eight in the morning without interruption, and enjoy a constant
tide of spirits, equally distant from inanition and excess; but whatever ebbs or flows my constitution
may undergo, my heart will still declare that I am,

Dear Lewis, Your affectionate friend and servant, MATT. BRAMBLE EDR. July 18.

To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MARY,

The 'squire has been so kind as to rap my bit of nonsense under the kiver of his own sheet
-- O, Mary Jones! Mary Jones! I have had trials and trembulation. God help me! I have been
a vixen and a griffin these many days -- Sattin has had power to temp me in the shape of van
Ditton, the young 'squire's wally de shamble; but by God's grease he did not purvail -- I thoft
as how, there was no arm in going to a play at Newcastle, with my hair dressed in the Parish
fashion; and as for the trifle of paint, he said as how my complexion wanted touch, and so
I let him put it on with a little Spanish owl; but a mischievous mob of colliers, and such
promiscous ribble rabble, that could bare no smut but their own, attacked us in the street,
and called me hoar and painted Issabel, and splashed my close, and spoiled me a complete set
of blond lace triple ruffles, not a pin the worse for the ware -- They cost me seven good sillings,
to lady Griskin's woman at London.

When I axed Mr Clinker what they meant by calling me Issabel, he put the byebill into my hand,
and I read of van Issabel a painted harlot, that vas thrown out of a vindore, and the dogs
came and licked her blood. But I am no harlot; and, with God's blessing, no dog shall have
my poor blood to lick: marry, Heaven forbid, amen! As for Ditton, after all his courting, and
his compliment, he stole away an Irishman's bride, and took a French leave of me and his master;
but I vally not his going a farting; but I have had hanger on his account -- Mistriss scoulded
like mad; thof I have the comfit that all the family took my part, and even Mr Clinker pleaded
for me on his bended knee; thof, God he knows, he had raisins enuff to complain; but he's a
good sole, abounding with Christian meekness, and one day will meet with his reward.

And now, dear Mary, we have got to Haddingborrough, among the Scots, who are civil enuff for
our money, thof I don't speak their lingo -- But they should not go for to impose upon foreigners;
for the bills in their houses say, they have different easements to let; and behold there is
nurro geaks in the whole kingdom, nor any thing for poor sarvants, but a barrel with a pair
of tongs thrown a-cross; and all the chairs in the family are emptied into this here barrel
once a-day; and at ten o'clock at night the whole cargo is flung out of a back windore that
looks into some street or lane, and the maids calls gardy loo to the passengers which signifies
Lord have mercy upon you! and this is done every night in every house in Haddingborrough; so
you may guess, Mary Jones, what a sweet savour comes from such a number of profuming pans;
but they say it is wholesome, and, truly, I believe it is; for being in the vapours, and thinking
of Issabel and Mr Clinker, I was going into a fit of astericks, when this fiff, saving your
presence, took me by the nose so powerfully that I sneezed three times, and found myself wonderfully
refreshed; and this to be sure is the raisin why there are no fits in Haddingborrough.

I was likewise made believe, that there was nothing to be had but oatmeal and seeps-heads;
but if I hadn't been a fool, I mought have known there could be no heads without kerkasses
-- This very blessed day I dined upon a delicate leg of Velsh mutton and cully-flower; and
as for the oat-meal, I leave that to the sarvants of the country, which are pore drudges, many
of them without shoes or stockings -- Mr Clinker tells me here is a great call of the gospel;
but I wish, I wish some of our family be not fallen off from the rite way -- O, if I was given
to tailbaring, I have my own secrets to discover -- There has been a deal of huggling and flurtation
betwixt mistress and an ould Scotch officer, called Kismycago. He looks for all the orld like
the scare-crow that our gardener has set up to frite away the sparrows; and what will come
of it, the Lord knows; but come what will, it shall never be said that I menchioned a syllabub
of the matter -- Remember me kindly to Saul and the kitten -- I hope they got the horn-buck,
and will put it to a good yuse, which is the constant prayer of,

Dear Molly, Your loving friend, WIN. JENKINS ADDINGBOROUGH, July 18. The people here are so
social and attentive in their civilities to strangers, that I am insensibly sucked into the
channel of their manners and customs, although they are in fact much more different from ours
than you can imagine -- That difference, however, which struck me very much at my first arrival,
I now hardly perceive, and my ear is perfectly reconciled to the Scotch accent, which I find
even agreeable in the mouth of a pretty woman -- It is a sort of Doric dialect, which gives
an idea of amiable simplicity -- You cannot imagine how we have been caressed and feasted in
the good town of Edinburgh of which we are become free denizens and guild brothers, by the
special favour of the magistracy.

I had a whimsical commission from Bath, to a citizen of this metropolis. Quin, understanding
our intention to visit Edinburgh, pulled out a guinea, and desired the favour I would drink
it at a tavern, with a particular friend and bottle-companion of his, Mr R-- C--, a lawyer
of this city -- I charged myself with the commission, and, taking the guinea, 'You see (said
I) I have pocketed your bounty.' 'Yes (replied Quin, laughing); and a headake into the bargain,
if you drink fair.' I made use of this introduction to Mr C--, who received me with open arms,
and gave me the rendezvous, according to the cartel. He had provided a company of jolly fellows,
among whom I found myself extremely happy; and did Mr C-- and Quin all the justice in my power;
but, alas, I was no more than a tiro among a troop of veterans, who had compassion upon my
youth and conveyed me home in the morning by what means I know not -- Quin was mistaken, however,
as to the head-ake; the claret was too good to treat me so roughly.

While Mr Bramble holds conferences with the graver literati of the place, and our females are
entertained at visits by the Scotch ladies, who are the best and kindest creatures upon earth,
I pass my time among the bucks of Edinburgh; who, with a great share of spirit and vivacity,
have a certain shrewdness and self- command that is not often found among their neighbours,
in the high-day of youth and exultation -- Not a hint escapes a Scotchman that can be interpreted
into offence by any individual in the company; and national reflections are never heard --
In this particular, I must own, we are both unjust and ungrateful to the Scots; for, as far
as I am able to judge, they have a real esteem for the natives of South-Britain; and never
mention our country, but with expressions of regard -- Nevertheless, they are far from being
servile imitators of our modes and fashionable vices. All their customs and regulations of
public and private oeconomy, of business and diversion, are in their own stile. This remarkably
predominates in their looks, their dress and manner, their music, and even their cookery. Our
'squire declares, that he knows not another people upon earth, so strongly marked with a national
character -- Now we are upon the article of cookery, I must own, some of their dishes are savoury,
and even delicate; but I am not yet Scotchman enough to relish their singed sheep's-head and
haggice, which were provided at our request, one day at Mr Mitchelson's, where we dined --
The first put me in mind of the history of Congo, in which I had read of negroes' heads sold
publickly in the markets; the last, being a mess of minced lights, livers, suet, oat-meal,
onions, and pepper, inclosed in a sheep's stomach, had a very sudden effect upon mine, and
the delicate Mrs Tabby changed colour; when the cause of our disgust was instantaneously removed
at the nod of our entertainer. The Scots, in general, are attached to this composition, with
a sort of national fondness, as well as to their oat-meal bread; which is presented at every
table, in thin triangular cakes, baked upon a plate of iron, called a girdle; and these, many
of the natives, even in the higher ranks of life, prefer to wheaten-bread, which they have
here in perfection -- You know we used to vex poor Murray of Baliol college, by asking, if
there was really no fruit but turnips in Scotland? -- Sure enough, I have seen turnips make
their appearance, not as a desert, but by way of hors d'oeuvres, or whets, as radishes are
served betwixt more substantial dishes in France and Italy; but it must be observed, that the
turnips of this country are as much superior in sweetness, delicacy, and flavour, to those
in England, as a musk-melon is to the stock of a common cabbage. They are small and conical,
of a yellowish colour, with a very thin skin and, over and above their agreeable taste, are
valuable for their antiscorbutic quality -- As to the fruit now in season, such as cherries,
gooseberries, and currants, there is no want of them at Edinburgh; and in the gardens of some
gentlemen, who live in the neighbourhood, there is now a very favourable appearance of apricots,
peaches, nectarines, and even grapes: nay, I have seen a very fine shew of pineapples within
a few miles of this metropolis. Indeed, we have no reason to be surprised at these particulars,
when we consider how little difference there is, in fact, betwixt this climate and that of London.

All the remarkable places in the city and its avenues, for ten miles around, we have visited,
much to our satisfaction. In the Castle are some royal apartments, where the sovereign occasionally
resided; and here are carefully preserved the regalia of the kingdom, consisting of a crown,
said to be of great value, a sceptre, and a sword of state, adorned with jewels -- Of these
symbols of sovereignty, the people are exceedingly jealous -- A report being spread during
the sitting of the union-parliament, that they were removed to London, such a tumult arose,
that the lord commissioner would have been torn to pieces, if he had not produced them for
the satisfaction of the populace.

The palace of Holyrood-house is an elegant piece of architecture, but sunk in an obscure, and,
as I take it, unwholesome bottom, where one would imagine it had been placed on purpose to
be concealed. The apartments are lofty, but unfurnished; and as for the pictures of the Scottish
kings, from Fergus I. to king William, they are paultry daubings, mostly by the same hand,
painted either from the imagination, or porters hired to sit for the purpose. All the diversions
of London we enjoy at Edinburgh, in a small compass. Here is a well conducted concert, in which
several gentlemen perform on different instruments -- The Scots are all musicians -- Every
man you meet plays on the flute, the violin, or violoncello; and there is one nobleman, whose
compositions are universally admired -- Our company of actors is very tolerable; and a subscription
is now on foot for building a new theatre; but their assemblies please me above all other public
exhibitions.

We have been at the hunters' ball, where I was really astonished to see such a number of fine
women -- The English, who have never crossed the Tweed, imagine erroneously, that the Scotch
ladies are not remarkable for personal attractions; but, I can declare with a safe conscience,
I never saw so many handsome females together, as were assembled on this occasion. At the Leith
races, the best company comes hither from the remoter provinces; so that, I suppose, we had
all the beauty of the kingdom concentrated as it were into one focus; which was, indeed, so
vehement, that my heart could hardly resist its power. Between friends, it has sustained some
damage from the bright eyes of the charming miss R[ento]n, whom I had the honour to dance with
at the ball -- The countess of Melville attracted all eyes, and the admiration of all present
-- She was accompanied by the agreeable miss Grieve, who made many conquests; nor did my sister
Liddy pass unnoticed in the assembly -- She is become a toast at Edinburgh, by the name of
the Fair Cambrian, and has already been the occasion of much wine-shed; but the poor girl met
with an accident at the ball, which has given us great disturbance.

A young gentleman, the express image of that rascal Wilson, went up to ask her to dance a minuet;
and his sudden appearance shocked her so much, that she fainted away -- I call Wilson a rascal,
because, if he had been really a gentleman, with honourable intentions, he would have, ere
now, appeared in his own character -- I must own, my blood boils with indignation when I think
of that fellow's presumption; and Heaven confound me if I don't -- But I won't be so womanish
as to rail -- Time will, perhaps, furnish occasion -- Thank God, the cause of Liddy's disorder
remains a secret. The lady directress of the ball, thinking she was overcome by the heat of
the place, had her conveyed to another room, where she soon recovered so well, as to return
and join in the country dances, in which the Scotch lasses acquit themselves with such spirit
and agility, as put their partners to the height of their mettle. I believe our aunt, Mrs Tabitha,
had entertained hopes of being able to do some execution among the cavaliers at this assembly.
She had been several days in consultation with milliners and mantua-makers, preparing for the
occasion, at which she made her appearance in a full suit of damask, so thick and heavy, that
the sight of it alone, at this season of the year, was sufficient to draw drops of sweat from
any man of ordinary imagination -- She danced one minuet with our friend Mr Mitchelson, who
favoured her so far, in the spirit of hospitality and politeness; and she was called out a
second time by the young laird of Ballymawhawple, who, coming in by accident, could not readily
find any other partner; but as the first was a married man, and the second payed no particular
homage to her charms, which were also over-looked by the rest of the company, she became dissatisfied
and censorious -- At supper, she observed that the Scotch gentlemen made a very good figure,
when they were a little improved by travelling; and therefore it was pity they did not all
take the benefit of going abroad. She said the women were awkward, masculine creatures; that,
in dancing, they lifted their legs like so many colts; that they had no idea of graceful motion,
and put on their clothes in a frightful manner; but if the truth must be told, Tabby herself
was the most ridiculous figure, and the worst dressed of the whole assembly. The neglect of
the male sex rendered her malcontent and peevish; she now found fault with every thing at Edinburgh,
and teized her brother to leave the place, when she was suddenly reconciled to it on a religious
consideration -- There is a sect of fanaticks, who have separated themselves from the established
kirk, under the name of Seceders -- They acknowledge no earthly head of the church, reject
lay-patronage, and maintain the methodist doctrines of the new birth, the new light, the efficacy
of grace, the insufficiency of works, and the operations of the spirit. Mrs Tabitha, attended
by Humphry Clinker, was introduced to one of their conventicles, where they both received much
edification; and she has had the good fortune to come acquainted with a pious Christian, called
Mr Moffat, who is very powerful in prayer, and often assists her in private exercises of devotion.

I never saw such a concourse of genteel company at any races in England, as appeared on the
course of Leith -- Hard by, in the fields called the Links, the citizens of Edinburgh divert
themselves at a game called golf, in which they use a curious kind of bats, tipt with horn,
and small elastic balls of leather, stuffed with feathers, rather less than tennis balls, but
of a much harder consistence -- This they strike with such force and dexterity from one hole
to another, that they will fly to an incredible distance. Of this diversion the Scots are so
fond, that when the weather will permit, you may see a multitude of all ranks, from the senator
of justice to the lowest tradesman, mingled together in their shirts, and following the balls
with the utmost eagerness. Among others, I was shewn one particular set of golfers, the youngest
of whom was turned of fourscore -- They were all gentlemen of independent fortunes, who had
amused themselves with this pastime for the best part of a century, without having ever felt
the least alarm from sickness or disgust; and they never went to bed, without having each the
best part of a gallon of claret in his belly. Such uninterrupted exercise, co-operating with
the keen air from the sea, must, without all doubt, keep the appetite always on edge, and steel
the constitution against all the common attacks of distemper. They are particularly famous
for their dexterity in executing one of the functions of Mercury; though, for my own part,
I never employed them in this department of business -- Had I occasion for any service of this
nature, my own man, Archy M'Alpine, is as well qualified as e'er a cawdie in Edinburgh; and
I am much mistaken, if he has not been heretofore of their fraternity. Be that as it may, they
resolved to give a dinner and a ball at Leith, to which they formally invited all the young
noblemen and gentlemen that were at the races; and this invitation was reinforced by an assurance
that all the celebrated ladies of pleasure would grace the entertainment with their company.
-- I received a card on this occasion, and went thither with half a dozen of my acquaintance.
-- In a large hall the cloth was laid on a long range of tables joined together, and here the
company seated themselves, to the number of about fourscore, lords, and lairds, and other gentlemen,
courtezans and cawdies mingled together, as the slaves and their masters were in the time of
the Saturnalia in ancient Rome. -- The toast master, who sat at the upper end, was one Cawdie
Fraser, a veteran pimp, distinguished for his humour and sagacity, well known and much respected
in his profession by all the guests, male and female, that were here assembled. -- He had bespoke
the dinner and the wine: he had taken care that all his brethren should appear in decent apparel
and clean linen; and he himself wore a periwig with three tails in honour of the festival.
-- I assure you the banquet was both elegant and plentiful, and seasoned with a thousand sallies,
that promoted a general spirit of mirth and good humour. -- After the desert, Mr Fraser proposed
the following toasts, which I don't pretend to explain. 'The best in Christendom.' -- 'Gibbs'
contract.' -- 'The beggar's benison,' -- 'King and kirk.' -- 'Great Britain and Ireland.' Then,
filling a bumper, and turning to me, 'Mester Malford (said he), may a' unkindness cease betwixt
John Bull and his sister Moggy.' -- The next person he singled out, was a nobleman who had
been long abroad. -- 'Ma lord (cried Fraser), here is a bumper to a' those noblemen who have
virtue enough to spend their rents in their ain countray.' -- He afterwards addressed himself
to a member of parliament in these words: -- 'Meester -- I'm sure ye'll ha' nae objection to
my drinking, disgrace and dule to ilka Scot, that sells his conscience and his vote.' -- He
discharged a third sarcasm at a person very gaily dressed, who had risen from small beginnings,
and made a considerable fortune at play. -- Filling his glass, and calling him by name, 'Lang
life (said he), to the wylie loon that gangs a-field with a toom poke at his lunzie, and comes
hame with a sackful of siller.' -- All these toasts being received with loud bursts of applause,
Mr Fraser called for pint glasses, and filled his own to the brim: then standing up, and all
his brethren following his example, 'Ma lords and gentlemen (cried he), here is a cup of thanks
for the great and undeserved honour you have done your poor errand-boys this day.' -- So saying,
he and they drank off their glasses in a trice, and quitting their seats, took their station
each behind one of the other guests; exclaiming, 'Noo we're your honours cawdies again.'

The nobleman who had bore the first brunt of Mr Fraser's satire, objected to his abdication.
He said, as the company was assembled by invitation from the cawdies, he expected they were
to be entertained at their expense. 'By no means, my lord (cried Fraser), I wad na he guilty
of sic presumption for the wide warld -- I never affronted a gentleman since I was born; and
sure at this age I wonnot offer an indignity to sic an honourable convention.' 'Well (said
his Lordship) as you have expended some wit, you have a right to save your money. You have
given me good counsel, and I take it in good part. As you have voluntarily quitted your seat,
I will take your place with the leave of the good company, and think myself happy to be hailed,
Father of the Feast.' He was forthwith elected into the chair, and complimented in a bumper
in his new character.

The claret continued to circulate without interruption, till the glasses seemed to dance upon
the table, and this, perhaps, was a hint to the ladies to call for music -- At eight in the
evening the ball began in another apartment: at midnight we went to supper; but it was broad
day before I found the way to my lodgings; and, no doubt, his Lordship had a swinging bill
to discharge.

In short, I have lived so riotously for some weeks, that my uncle begins to be alarmed on the
score of my constitution, and very seriously observes, 'that all his own infirmities are owing
to such excesses indulged in his youth -- Mrs Tabitha says it would be more to the advantage
of my soul as well as body, if, instead of frequenting these scenes of debauchery, I would
accompany Mr Moffat and her to hear a sermon of the reverend Mr M'Corkindale. -- Clinker often
exhorts me, with a groan, to take care of my precious health; and even Archy M'Alpine, when
he happens to be overtaken (which is oftener the case than I could wish), reads me a long lecture
upon temperance and sobriety; and is so very wise and sententious, that, if I could provide
him with a professor's chair, I would willingly give up the benefit of his amonitions and service
together; for I was tutor-sick at alma mater.

I am not, however, so much engrossed by the gaieties of Edinburgh, but that I find time to
make parties in the family way. We have not only seen all the villas and villages within ten
miles of the capital, but we have also crossed the Firth, which is an arm of the sea seven
miles broad, that divides Lothian from the shire, or, as the Scots call it, the kingdom of
Fife. There is a number of large open sea-boats that ply on this passage from Leith to Kinghorn,
which is a borough on the other side. In one of these our whole family embarked three days
ago, excepting my sister, who, being exceedingly fearful of the water, was left to the care
of Mrs Mitchelson. We had an easy and quick passage into Fife, where we visited a number of
poor towns on the sea-side, including St Andrew's, which is the skeleton of a venerable city;
but we were much better pleased with some noble and elegant seats and castles, of which there
is a great number in that part of Scotland. Yesterday we took boat again on our return to Leith,
with fair wind and agreeable weather; but we had not advanced half-way when the, sky was suddenly
overcast, and the wind changing, blew directly in our teeth so that we were obliged to turn,
or tack the rest of the way. In a word, the gale increased to a storm of wind and rain, attended
with such a fog, that we could not see the town of Leith, to which we were bound, nor even
the castle of Edinburgh, notwithstanding its high situation. It is not to be doubted but that
we were all alarmed on this occasion. And at the same time, most of the passengers were seized
with a nausea that produced violent retchings. My aunt desired her brother to order the boatmen,
to put back to Kinghorn, and this expedient he actually proposed; but they assured him there
was no danger. Mrs Tabitha finding them obstinate, began to scold, and insisted upon my uncle's
exerting his authority as a justice of the peace. Sick and peevish as he was, he could not
help laughing at this wise proposal, telling her, that his commission did not extend so far,
and, if it did, he should let the people take their own way; for he thought it would be great
presumption in him to direct them in the exercise of their own profession. Mrs Winifred Jenkins
made a general clearance with the assistance of Mr Humphry Clinker, who joined her both in
prayer and ejaculation. -- As he took it for granted that we should not be long in this world,
he offered some spiritual consolation to Mrs Tabitha, who rejected it with great disgust, bidding
him keep his sermons for those who had leisure to hear such nonsense. -- My uncle sat, collected
in himself, without speaking; my man Archy had recourse to a brandy-bottle, with which he made
so free, that I imagined he had sworn to die of drinking any thing rather than sea-water: but
the brandy had no more effect upon him in the way of intoxication, than if it had been sea-water
in good earnest. -- As for myself, I was too much engrossed by the sickness at my stomach,
to think of any thing else. Meanwhile the sea swelled mountains high, the boat pitched with
such violence, as if it had been going to pieces; the cordage rattled, the wind roared; the
lightning flashed, the thunder bellowed, and the rain descended in a deluge -- Every time the
vessel was put about, we ship'd a sea that drenched us all to the skin. -- When, by dint of
turning, we thought to have cleared the pier head, we were driven to leeward, and then the
boatmen themselves began to fear that the tide would fail before we should fetch up our lee-way:
the next trip, however, brought us into smooth water, and we were safely landed on the quay,
about one o'clock in the afternoon. -- 'To be sure (cried Tabby, when she found herself on
terra firma), we must all have perished, if we had not been the particular care of Providence.'
'Yes (replied my uncle), but I am much of the honest highlander's mind -- after he had made
such a passage as this: his friend told him he was much indebted to Providence; -- "Certainly
(said Donald), but, by my saul, mon, I'se ne'er trouble Providence again, so long as the brig
of Stirling stands."' -- You must know the brig, or bridge of Stirling, stands above twenty
miles up the river Forth, of which this is the outlet -- I don't find that our 'squire has
suffered in his health from this adventure; but poor Liddy is in a peaking way -- I'm afraid
this unfortunate girl is uneasy in her mind; and this apprehension distracts me, for she is
really an amiable creature.

We shall set out to-morrow or next day for Stirling and Glasgow; and we propose to penetrate
a little way into the Highlands, before we turn our course to the southward -- In the mean
time, commend me to all our friends round Carfax, and believe me to be, ever yours,

EDINBURGH, Aug. 8. J. MELFORD

To Dr LEWIS.

I should be very ungrateful, dear Lewis, if I did not find myself disposed to think and speak
favourably of this people, among whom I have met with more kindness, hospitality, and rational
entertainment, in a few weeks, than ever I received in any other country during the whole course
of my life. -- Perhaps, the gratitude excited by these benefits may interfere with the impartiality
of my remarks; for a man is as apt to be prepossessed by particular favours as to be prejudiced
by private motives of disgust. If I am partial, there is, at least, some merit in my conversion
from illiberal prejudices which had grown up with my constitution.

The first impressions which an Englishman receives in this country, will not contribute to
the removal of his prejudices; because he refers every thing he sees to a comparison with the
same articles in his own country; and this comparison is unfavourable to Scotland in all its
exteriors, such as the face of the country in respect to cultivation, the appearance of the
bulk of the people, and the language of conversation in general. -- I am not so far convinced
by Mr Lismahago's arguments, but that I think the Scots would do well, for their own sakes,
to adopt the English idioms and pronunciation; those of them especially, who are resolved to
push their fortunes in South-Britain -- I know, by experience, how easily an Englishman is
influenced by the ear, and how apt he is to laugh, when he hears his own language spoken with
a foreign or provincial accent -- I have known a member of the house of commons speak with
great energy and precision, without being able to engage attention, because his observations
were made in the Scotch dialect, which (no offence to lieutenant Lismahago) certainly gives
a clownish air even to sentiments of the greatest dignity and decorum. -- I have declared my
opinion on this head to some of the most sensible men of this country, observing, at the same
time, that if they would employ a few natives of England to teach the pronunciation of our
vernacular tongue, in twenty years there would be no difference, in point of dialect, between
the youth of Edinburgh and of London.

The civil regulations of this kingdom and metropolis are taken from very different models from
those of England, except in a few particular establishments, the necessary consequences of
the union. -- Their college of justice is a bench of great dignity, filled with judges of character
and ability. -- I have heard some causes tried before this venerable tribunal; and was very
much pleased with the pleadings of their advocates, who are by no means deficient either in
argument or elocution. The Scottish legislation is founded, in a great measure, on the civil
law; consequently, their proceedings vary from those of the English tribunals; but, I think,
they have the advantage of us in their method of examining witnesses apart, and in the constitution
of their jury, by which they certainly avoid the evil which I mentioned in my last from Lismahago's
observation.

The university of Edinburgh is supplied with excellent professors in all the sciences; and
the medical school, in particular, is famous all over Europe. -- The students of this art have
the best opportunity of learning it to perfection, in all its branches, as there are different
courses for the theory of medicine and the practice of medicine; for anatomy, chemistry, botany,
and the materia medica, over and above those of mathematics and experimental philosophy; and
all these are given by men of distinguished talents. What renders this part of education still
more complete, is the advantage of attending the infirmary, which is the best instituted charitable
foundation that I ever knew. Now we are talking of charities, here are several hospitals, exceedingly
well endowed, and maintained under admirable regulations; and these are not only useful, but
ornamental to the city. Among these, I shall only mention the general work-house, in which
all the poor, not otherwise provided for, are employed, according to their different abilities,
with such judgment and effect, that they nearly maintain themselves by their labour, and there
is not a beggar to be seen within the precincts of this metropolis. These acquaintances I owe
to the friendship of Dr Carlyle, who wants nothing but inclination to figure with the rest
upon paper. The magistracy of Edinburgh is changed every year by election, and seems to be
very well adapted both for state and authority. -- The lord provost is equal in dignity to
the lord mayor of London; and the four bailies are equivalent to the rank of aldermen. -- There
is a dean of guild, who takes cognizance of mercantile affairs; a treasurer; a town-clerk;
and the council is composed of deacons, one of whom is returned every year, in rotation, as
representative of every company of artificers or handicraftsmen. Though this city, from the
nature of its situation, can never be made either very convenient or very cleanly, it has,
nevertheless, an air of magnificence that commands respect. -- The castle is an instance of
the sublime in scite and architecture. -- Its fortifications are kept in good order, and there
is always in it a garrison of regular soldiers, which is relieved every year; but it is incapable
of sustaining a siege carried on according to the modern operations of war. -- The castle hill,
which extends from the outward gate to the upper end of the high street, is used as a public
walk for the citizens, and commands a prospect, equally extensive and delightful, over the
county of Fife, on the other side of the Frith, and all along the sea-coast, which is covered
with a succession of towns that would seem to indicate a considerable share of commerce; but,
if the truth must be told, these towns have been falling to decay ever since the union, by
which the Scots were in a great measure deprived of their trade with France. -- The palace
of Holyrood-house is a jewel in architecture, thrust into a hollow where it cannot be seen;
a situation which was certainly not chosen by the ingenious architect, who must have been confined
to the site of the old palace, which was a convent. Edinburgh is considerably extended on the
south side, where there are divers little elegant squares built in the English manner; and
the citizens have planned some improvements on the north, which, when put in execution, will
add greatly to the beauty and convenience of this capital.

The sea-port is Leith, a flourishing town, about a mile from the city, in the harbour of which
I have seen above one hundred ships lying all together. You must know, I had the curiosity
to cross the Frith in a passage boat, and stayed two days in Fife, which is remarkably fruitful
in corn, and exhibits a surprising number of fine seats, elegantly built, and magnificently
furnished. There is an incredible number of noble houses in every part of Scotland that I have
seen. -- Dalkeith, Pinkie, Yester, and lord Hopton's [Hopetoun's], all of them within four
or five miles of Edinburgh, are princely palaces, in every one of which a sovereign might reside
at his case. -- I suppose the Scots affect these monuments of grandeur. -- If I may be allowed
to mingle censure with my remarks upon a people I revere, I must observe, that their weak side
seems to be vanity. -- I am afraid that even their hospitality is not quite free of ostentation.
I think I have discovered among them uncommon pains taken to display their fine linen, of which,
indeed, they have great plenty, their furniture, plate, housekeeping, and variety of wines,
in which article, it must be owned, they are profuse, if not prodigal -- A burgher of Edinburgh,
not content to vie with a citizen of London, who has ten times his fortune, must excel him
in the expence as well as elegance of his entertainments.

Though the villas of the Scotch nobility and gentry have generally an air of grandeur and state,
I think their gardens and parks are not comparable to those of England; a circumstance the
more remarkable, as I was told by the ingenious Mr Phillip Miller of Chelsea, that almost all
the gardeners of South-Britain were natives of Scotland. The verdure of this country is not
equal to that of England. -- The pleasure-grounds are, in my opinion, not so well laid out
according to the genius loci; nor are the lawns, and walks, and hedges kept in such delicate
order. -- The trees are planted in prudish rows, which have not such an agreeable natural effect,
as when they are thrown into irregular groupes, with intervening glades; and firs, which they
generally raise around their houses, look dull and funereal in the summer season. -- I must
confess, indeed, that they yield serviceable timber, and good shelter against the northern
blasts; that they grow and thrive in the most barren soil, and continually perspire a fine
balsam of turpentine, which must render the air very salutary and sanative to lungs of a tender
texture.

Tabby and I have been both frightened in our return by sea from the coast of Fife -- She was
afraid of drowning, and I of catching cold, in consequence of being drenched with sea-water;
but my fears as well as hers, have been happily disappointed. She is now in perfect health;
I wish I could say the same of Liddy -- Something uncommon is the matter with that poor girl;
her colour fades, her appetite fails, and her spirits flag -- She is become moping and melancholy,
and is often found in tears -- Her brother suspects internal uneasiness on account of Wilson,
and denounces vengeance against that adventurer. -- She was, it seems, strongly affected at
the ball by the sudden appearance of one Mr Gordon, who strongly resembles the said Wilson;
but I am rather suspicious that she caught cold by being overheated with dancing. -- I have
consulted Dr Gregory, an eminent physician of an amiable character, who advises the highland
air, and the use of goat-milk whey, which, surely, cannot have a bad effect upon a patient
who was born and bred among the mountains of Wales -- The doctors opinion is the more agreeable,
as we shall find those remedies in the very place which I proposed as the utmost extent of
our expedition -- I mean the borders of Argyle.

Mr Smollett, one of the judges of the commissary court, which is now sitting, has very kindly
insisted upon our lodging at his country-house, on the banks of Lough-Lomond, about fourteen
miles beyond Glasgow. For this last city we shall set out in two days, and take Stirling in
our way, well provided with recommendations from our friends at Edinburgh, whom, I protest,
I shall leave with much regret. I am so far from thinking it any hardship to live in this country,
that, if I was obliged to lead a town life, Edinburgh would certainly be the headquarters of

Yours always, MATT. BRAMBLE EDIN., August 8. These last are now lying before me, to the amount
of some hundreds, scattered up and down the Deucalidonian sea, affording the most picturesque
and romantic prospect I ever beheld -- I write this letter in a gentleman's house, near the
town of Inverary which may be deemed the capital of the West Highlands, famous for nothing
so much as for the stately castle begun, and actually covered in by the late duke of Argyle,
at a prodigious expence -- Whether it will ever be completely finished is a question. --

But, to take things in order -- We left Edinburgh ten days ago; and the further North we proceed,
we find Mrs Tabitha the less manageable; so that her inclinations are not of the nature of
the loadstone; they point not towards the pole. What made her leave Edinburgh with reluctance
at last, if we may believe her own assertions, was a dispute which she left unfinished with
Mr Moffat, touching the eternity of hell torments. That gentleman, as he advanced in years,
began to be sceptical on this head, till, at length, he declared open war against the common
acceptation of the word eternal. He is now persuaded, that eternal signifies no more than an
indefinite number of years; and that the most enormous sinner may be quit for nine millions,
nine hundred thousand, nine hundred and ninety-nine years of hell- fire; which term or period,
as he very well observes, forms but an inconsiderable drop, as it were, in the ocean of eternity
-- For this mitigation he contends, as a system agreeable to the ideas of goodness and mercy,
which we annex to the supreme Being -- Our aunt seemed willing to adopt this doctrine in favour
of the wicked; but he hinted that no person whatever was so righteous as to be exempted entirely
from punishment in a future state; and that the most pious Christian upon earth might think
himself very happy to get off for a fast of seven or eight thousand years in the midst of fire
and brimstone. Mrs Tabitha revolted at this dogma, which filled her at once with horror and
indignation -- She had recourse to the opinion of Humphry Clinker, who roundly declared it
was the popish doctrine of purgatory, and quoted scripture in defence of the fire everlasting,
prepared for the devil and his angels -- The reverend master Mackcorkendal, and all the theologists
and saints of that persuasion were consulted, and some of them had doubts about the matter;
which doubts and scruples had begun to infect our aunt, when we took our departure from Edinburgh.

We passed through Linlithgow, where there was an elegant royal palace, which is now gone to
decay, as well as the town itself -- This too is pretty much the case with Stirling, though
it still boasts of a fine old castle in which the kings of Scotland were wont to reside in
their minority -- But Glasgow is the pride of Scotland, and, indeed, it might very well pass
for an elegant and flourishing city in any part of Christendom. There we had the good fortune
to be received into the house of Mr Moore, an eminent surgeon, to whom we were recommended
by one of our friends at Edinburgh; and, truly, he could not have done us more essential service
-- Mr Moore is a merry facetious companion, sensible and shrewd, with a considerable fund of
humour; and his wife an agreeable woman, well bred, kind, and obliging. Kindness, which I take
to be the essence of good-nature and humanity, is the distinguishing characteristic of the
Scotch ladies in their own country -- Our landlord shewed us every thing, and introduced us
to all the world at Glasgow; where, through his recommendation, we were complimented with the
freedom of the town. Considering the trade and opulence of this place, it cannot but abound
with gaiety and diversions. Here is a great number of young fellows that rival the youth of
the capital in spirit and expence; and I was soon convinced, that all the female beauties of
Scotland were not assembled at the hunters ball in Edinburgh -- The town of Glasgow flourishes
in learning as well as in commerce -- Here is an university, with professors in all the different
branches of science, liberally endowed, and judiciously chosen -- It was vacation time when
I passed, so that I could not entirely satisfy my curiosity; but their mode of education is
certainly preferable to ours in some respects. The students are not left to the private instruction
of tutors; but taught in public schools or classes, each science by its particular professor
or regent.

My uncle is in raptures with Glasgow -- He not only visited all the manufactures of the place,
but made excursions all round to Hamilton, Paisley, Renfrew, and every other place within a
dozen miles, where there was any thing remarkable to be seen in art or nature. I believe the
exercise, occasioned by those jaunts, was of service to my sister Liddy, whose appetite and
spirits begin to revive -- Mrs Tabitha displayed her attractions as usual, and actually believed
she had entangled one Mr Maclellan, a rich inkle-manufacturer, in her snares; but when matters
came to an explanation, it appeared that his attachment was altogether spiritual, founded upon
an intercourse of devotion, at the meeting of Mr John Wesley; who, in the course of his evangelical
mission, had come hither in person -- At length, we set out for the banks of Lough-Lomond,
passing through the little borough of Dumbarton, or (as my uncle will have it) Dunbritton,
where there is a castle, more curious than any thing of the kind I had ever seen. It is honoured
with a particular description by the elegant Buchanan, as an arx inexpugnabilis, and, indeed,
it must have been impregnable by the antient manner of besieging. It is a rock of considerable
extent, rising with a double top, in an angle formed by the confluence of two rivers, the Clyde
and the Leven; perpendicular and inaccessible on all sides, except in one place where the entrance
is fortified; and there is no rising ground in the neighbourhood from whence it could be damaged
by any kind of battery.

From Dumbarton, the West Highlands appear in the form of huge, dusky mountains, piled one over
another; but this prospect is not at all surprising to a native of Glamorgan -- We have fixed
our headquarters at Cameron, a very neat country-house belonging to commissary Smollet, where
we found every sort of accommodation we could desire -- It is situated like a Druid's temple,
in a grove of oak, close by the side of Lough-Lomond, which is a surprising body of pure transparent
water, unfathomably deep in many places, six or seven miles broad, four and twenty miles in
length, displaying above twenty green islands, covered with wood; some of them cultivated for
corn, and many of them stocked with red deer -- They belong to different gentlemen, whose seats
are scattered along the banks of the lake, which are agreeably romantic beyond all conception.
My uncle and I have left the women at Cameron, as Mrs Tabitha would by no means trust herself
again upon the water, and to come hither it was necessary to cross a small inlet of the sea,
in an open ferry-boat -- This country appears more and more wild and savage the further we
advance; and the People are as different from the Low-land Scots, in their looks, garb, and
language, as the mountaineers of Brecknock are from the inhabitants of Herefordshire.

When the Lowlanders want to drink a chearupping-cup, they go to the public house, called the
Change-house, and call for a chopine of two-penny, which is a thin, yeasty beverage, made of
malt; not quite so strong as the table-beer of England, -- This is brought in a pewter stoop,
shaped like a skittle, from whence it is emptied into a quaff; that is, a curious cup made
of different pieces of wood, such as box and ebony, cut into little staves, joined alternately,
and secured with delicate hoops, having two cars or handles -- It holds about a gill, is sometimes
tipt round the mouth with silver, and has a plate of the same metal at bottom, with the landlord's
cypher engraved. -- The Highlanders, on the contrary, despise this liquor, and regale themselves
with whisky; a malt spirit, as strong as geneva, which they swallow in great quantities, without
any signs of inebriation. They are used to it from the cradle, and find it an excellent preservative
against the winter cold, which must be extreme on these mountains -- I am told that it is given
with great success to infants, as a cordial in the confluent smallpox, when the eruption seems
to flag, and the symptoms grow unfavourable -- The Highlanders are used to eat much more animal
food than falls to the share of their neighbours in the Low-country -- They delight in hunting;
have plenty of deer and other game, with a great number of sheep, goats, and black-cattle running
wild, which they scruple not to kill as vension, without being much at pains to ascertain the
property.

Inverary is but a poor town, though it stands immediately under the protection of the duke
of Argyle, who is a mighty prince in this part of Scotland. The peasants live in wretched cabins,
and seem very poor; but the gentlemen are tolerably well lodged, and so loving to strangers,
that a man runs some risque of his life from their hospitality -- It must be observed that
the poor Highlanders are now seen to disadvantage. They have been not only disarmed by act
of parliament, but also deprived of their ancient garb, which was both graceful and convenient;
and what is a greater hardship still, they are compelled to wear breeches; a restraint which
they cannot bear with any degree of patience: indeed, the majority wear them, not in the proper
place, but on poles or long staves over their shoulders -- They are even debarred the use of
their striped stuff called Tartane, which was their own manufacture, prized by them above all
the velvets, brocades, and tissues of Europe and Asia. They now lounge along in loose great
coats, of coarse russet, equally mean and cumbersome, and betray manifest marks of dejection
-- Certain it is, the government could not have taken a more effectual method to break their
national spirit.

We have had princely sport in hunting the stag on these mountains. I was not a little surprised,
when asking a Highlander one day, if he knew where we should find any game? he replied, 'hu
niel Sassenagh', which signifies no English: the very same answer I should have received from
a Welchman, and almost in the same words. The Highlanders have no other name for the people
of the Low-country, but Sassenagh, or Saxons; a strong presumption, that the Lowland Scots
and the English are derived from the same stock -- The peasants of these hills strongly resemble
those of Wales in their looks, their manners, and habitations; every thing I see , and hear,
and feel, seems Welch -- The mountains, vales, and streams; the air and climate; the beef,
mutton, and game, are all Welch -- It must be owned, however, that this people are better Provided
than we in some articles -- They have plenty of red deer and roebuck, which are fat and delicious
at this season of the year. Their sea teems with amazing quantities of the finest fish in the
world. and they find means to procure very good claret at a very small expence.

Our landlord is a man of consequence in this part of the country; a cadet from the family of
Argyle and hereditary captain of one of his castles -- His name, in plain English, is Dougal
Campbell; but as there is a great number of the same appellation, they are distinguished (like
the Welch) by patronimics; and as I have known an antient Briton called Madoc ap-Morgan ap-Jenkin,
ap-Jones, our Highland chief designs himself Dou'l Mac-amish mac-'oul ichian, signifying Dougal,
the son of James, the son of Dougal, the son of John. He has travelled in the course of his
education, and is disposed to make certain alterations in his domestic oeconomy; but he finds
it impossible to abolish the ancient customs of the family; some of which are ludicrous enough
-- His piper for example, who is an hereditary officer of the household, will not part with
the least particle of his privileges. He has a right to wear the kilt, or ancient Highland
dress, with the purse, pistol, and durk -- a broad yellow ribbon, fixed to the chanter-pipe,
is thrown over his shoulder, and trails along the ground, while he performs the function of
his minstrelsy; and this, I suppose, is analogous to the pennon or flag which was formerly
carried before every knight in battle. -- He plays before the laird every Sunday in his way
to the kirk, which he circles three times, performing the family march which implies defiance
to all the enemies of the clan; and every morning he plays a full hour by the clock, in the
great hall, marching backwards and forwards all the time, with a solemn pace, attended by the
laird's kinsmen, who seem much delighted with the music -- In this exercise, he indulges them
with a variety of pibrochs or airs, suited to the different passions, which he would either
excite or assuage.

Mr Campbell himself, who performs very well on the violin, has an invincible antipathy to the
sound of the Highland bagpipe, which sings in the nose with a most alarming twang, and, indeed,
is quite intolerable to ears of common sensibility, when aggravated by the echo of a vaulted
hall -- He therefore begged the piper would have some mercy upon him, and dispense with this
part of the morning service -- A consultation of the clan being held on this occasion, it was
unanimously agreed, that the laird's request could not be granted without a dangerous encroachment
upon the customs of the family -- The piper declared, he could not give up for a moment the
privilege he derived from his ancestors; nor would the laird's relations forego an entertainment
which they valued above all others -- There was no remedy; Mr Campbell, being obliged to acquiesce,
is fain to stop his ears with cotton; to fortify his head with three or four night-caps and
every morning retire into the penetralia of his habitation, in order to avoid this diurnal
annoyance. When the music ceases, he produces himself at an open window that looks into the
courtyard, which is by this time filled with a crowd of his vassals and dependents, who worship
his first appearance, by uncovering their heads, and bowing to the earth with the most humble
prostration. As all these people have something to communicate in the way of proposal, complaint,
or petition, they wait patiently till the laird comes forth, and, following him in his walks,
are favoured each with a short audience in his turn. Two days ago, he dispatched above an hundred
different sollicitors, in walking with us to the house of a neighbouring gentleman, where we
dined by invitation. Our landlord's housekeeping is equally rough and hospitable, and savours
much of the simplicity of ancient times: the great hall, paved with flat stones, is about forty-five
feet by twenty-two, and serves not only for a dining-room, but also for a bedchamber, to gentlemen-dependents
and hangers-on of the family. At night, half a dozen occasional beds are ranged on each side
along the wall. These are made of fresh heath, pulled up by the roots, and disposed in such
a manner as to make a very agreeable couch, where they lie, without any other covering than
the plaid -- My uncle and I were indulged with separate chambers and down beds which we begged
to exchange for a layer of heath; and indeed I never slept so much to my satisfaction. It was
not only soft and elastic, but the plant, being in flower, diffused an agreeable fragrance,
which is wonderfully refreshing and restorative.

Yesterday we were invited to the funeral of an old lady, the grandmother of a gentleman in
this neighbourhood, and found ourselves in the midst of fifty people, who were regaled with
a sumptuous feast, accompanied by the music of a dozen pipers. In short, this meeting had all
the air of a grand festival; and the guests did such honour to the entertainment, that many
of them could not stand when we were reminded of the business on which we had met. The company
forthwith taking horse, rode in a very irregular cavalcade to the place of interment, a church,
at the distance of two long miles from the castle. On our arrival, however, we found we had
committed a small oversight, in leaving the corpse behind; so we were obliged to wheel about,
and met the old gentlewoman half way, being carried upon poles by the nearest relations of
her family, and attended by the coronach, composed of a multitude of old hags, who tore their
hair, beat their breasts, and howled most hideously. At the grave, the orator, or senachie,
pronounced the panegyric of the defunct, every period being confirmed by a yell of the coronach.
The body was committed to the earth, the pipers playing a pibroch all the time; and all the
company standing uncovered. The ceremony was closed with the discharge of pistols; then we
returned to the castle, resumed the bottle, and by midnight there was not a sober person in
the family, the females excepted. This morning we got up by four, to hunt the roebuck, and,
in half an hour, found breakfast ready served in the hall. The hunters consisted of Sir George
Colquhoun and me, as strangers (my uncle not chusing to be of the party), of the laird in person,
the laird's brother, the laird's brother's son, the laird's sister's son, the laird's father's
brother's son, and all their foster brothers, who are counted parcel of the family: but we
were attended by an infinite number of Gaelly's, or ragged Highlanders without shoes or stockings.

The following articles formed our morning's repast: one kit of boiled eggs; a second, full
of butter; a third full of cream; an entire cheese, made of goat's milk; a large earthen pot
full of honey; the best part of a ham; a cold venison pasty; a bushel of oat meal, made in
thin cakes and bannocks, with a small wheaten loaf in the middle for the strangers; a large
stone bottle full of whisky, another of brandy, and a kilderkin of ale. There was a ladle chained
to the cream kit, with curious wooden bickers to be filled from this reservoir. The spirits
were drank out of a silver quaff, and the ale out of hems: great justice was done to the collation
by the guest in general; one of them in particular ate above two dozen of hard eggs, with a
proportionable quantity of bread, butter, and honey; nor was one drop of liquor left upon the
board. Finally, a large roll of tobacco was presented by way of desert, and every individual
took a comfortable quid, to prevent the bad effects of the morning air. We had a fine chace
over the mountains, after a roebuck, which we killed, and I got home time enough to drink tea
with Mrs Campbell and our 'squire. To-morrow we shall set out on our return for Cameron. We
propose to cross the Frith of Clyde, and take the towns of Greenock and Port-Glasgow in our
way. This circuit being finished, we shall turn our faces to the south, and follow the sun
with augmented velocity, in order to enjoy the rest of the autumn in England, where Boreas
is not quite so biting as he begins already to be on the tops of these northern hills. But
our progress from place to place shall continue to be specified in these detached journals of

Yours always, J. MELFORD ARGYLSHIRE, Sept. 3.

To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

About a fortnight is now elapsed, since we left the capital of Scotland, directing our course
towards Stirling, where we lay. The castle of this place is such another as that of Edinburgh,
and affords a surprising prospect of the windings of the river Forth, which are so extraordinary,
that the distance from hence to Alloa by land, is but forty miles, and by water it is twenty-four.
Alloa is a neat thriving town, that depends in a great measure on the commerce of Glasgow,
the merchants of which send hither tobacco and other articles, to be deposited in warehouses
for exportation from the Frith of Forth. In our way hither we visited a flourishing iron-work,
where, instead of burning wood, they use coal, which they have the art of clearing in such
a manner as frees it from the sulphur, that would otherwise render the metal too brittle for
working. Excellent coal is found in almost every part of Scotland.

The soil of this district produces scarce any other grain but oats, lid barley; perhaps because
it is poorly cultivated, and almost altogether uninclosed. The few inclosures they have consist
of paultry walls of loose stones gathered from the fields, which indeed they cover, as if they
had been scattered on purpose. When I expressed my surprize that the peasants did not disencumber
their grounds of these stones; a gentleman, well acquainted with the theory as well as practice
of farming, assured me that the stones, far from being prejudicial, were serviceable to the
crop. This philosopher had ordered a field of his own to be cleared, manured and sown with
barley, and the produce was more scanty than before. He caused the stones to be replaced, and
next year the crop was as good as ever. The stones were removed a second time, and the harvest
failed; they were again brought back, and the ground retrieved its fertility. The same experiment
has been tried in different parts of Scotland with the same success--Astonished at this information,
I desired to know in what manner he accounted for this strange phenomenon; and he said there
were three ways in which the stones might be serviceable. They might possibly restrain an excess
in the perspiration of the earth, analogous to colliquative sweats, by which the human body
is sometimes wasted and consumed. They might act as so many fences to protect the tender blade
from the piercing winds of the spring; or, by multiplying the reflexion of the sun, they might
increase the warmth, so as to mitigate the natural chilness of the soil and climate -- But,
surely this excessive perspiration might be more effectually checked by different kinds of
manure, such as ashes, lime, chalk, or marl, of which last it seems there are many pits in
this kingdom: as for the warmth, it would be much more equally obtained by inclosures; the
cultivation would require less labour; and the ploughs, harrows, and horses, would not suffer
half the damage which they now sustain.

These north-western parts are by no means fertile in corn. The ground is naturally barren and
moorish. The peasants are poorly lodged, meagre in their looks, mean in their apparel, and
remarkably dirty. This last reproach they might easily wash off, by means of those lakes, rivers,
and rivulets of pure water, with which they are so liberally supplied by nature. Agriculture
cannot be expected to flourish where the farms are small, the leases short, and the husbandman
begins upon a rack rent, without a sufficient stock to answer the purposes of improvement.
The granaries of Scotland are the banks of the Tweed, the counties of East and Mid-Lothian,
the Carse of Gowrie, in Perthshire, equal in fertility to any part of England, and some tracts
in Aberdeenshire and Murray, where I am told the harvest is more early than in Northumberland,
although they lie above two degrees farther north. I have a strong curiosity to visit many
places beyond the Forth and the Tay, such as Perth, Dundee, Montrose, and Aberdeen, which are
towns equally elegant and thriving; but the season is too far advanced to admit of this addition
to my original plan.

I am so far happy as to have seen Glasgow, which, to the best of my recollection and judgment,
is one of the prettiest towns in Europe; and, without all doubt, it is one of the most flourishing
in Great Britain. In short, it is a perfect bee-hive in point of industry. It stands partly
on a gentle declivity; but the greatest part of it is in a plain, watered by the river Clyde.
The streets are straight, open, airy, and well paved; and the houses lofty and well built of
hewn stone. At the upper end of the town, there is a venerable cathedral, that may be compared
with York-minster or West-minster; and, about the middle of the descent from this to the Cross,
is the college, a respectable pile of building, with all manner of accommodation for the professors
and students, including an elegant library, and a observatory well provided with astronomical
instruments. The number of inhabitants is said to amount to thirty thousand; and marks of opulence
and independency appear in every quarter of this commercial city, which, however, is not without
its inconveniences and defects. The water of their public pumps is generally hard and brackish,
an imperfection the loss excusable, as the river Clyde runs by their doors, in the lower part
of the town; and there are rivulets and springs above the cathedral, sufficient to fill a large
reservoir with excellent water, which might be thence distributed to all the different parts
of the city. It is of more consequence to consult the health of the inhabitants in this article
than to employ so much attention in beautifying their town with new streets, squares, and churches.
Another defect, not so easily remedied, is the shallowness of the river, which will not float
vessels of any burthen within ten or twelve miles of the city; so that the merchants are obliged
to load and unload their ships at Greenock and Port-Glasgow, situated about fourteen miles
nearer the mouth of the Frith, where it is about two miles broad.

The people of Glasgow have a noble spirit of enterprise -- Mr Moore, a surgeon, to whom I was
recommended from Edinburgh, introduced me to all the principal merchants of the place. Here
I became acquainted with Mr Cochran, who may be stiled one of the sages of this kingdom. He
was first magistrate at the time of the last rebellion. I sat as member when he was examined
in the house of commons, upon which occasion Mr P-- observed he had never heard such a sensible
evidence given at that bar. I was also introduced to Dr John Gordon, a patriot of a truly Roman
spirit, who is the father of the linen manufacture in this place, and was the great promoter
of the city workhouse, infirmary, and other works of public utility. Had he lived in ancient
Rome, he would have been honoured with a statue at the public expence. I moreover conversed
with one Mr G--ssf--d, whom I take to be one of the greatest merchants in Europe. In the last
war, he is said to have had at one time five and twenty ships with their cargoes, his own property,
and to have traded for above half a million sterling a-year. The last war was a fortunate period
for the commerce of Glasgow -- The merchants, considering that their ships bound for America,
launching out at once into the Atlantic by the north of Ireland, pursued a track very little
frequented by privateers, resolved to insure one another, and saved a very considerable sum
by this resolution, as few or none of their ships were taken -- You must know I have a sort
of national attachment to this part of Scotland -- The great church dedicated to St Mongah,
the river Clyde, and other particulars that smack of our Welch language and customs, contribute
to flatter me with the notion, that these people are the descendants of the Britons, who once
possessed this country. Without all question, this was a Cumbrian kingdom: its capital was
Dumbarton (a corruption of Dunbritton) which still exists as a royal borough, at the influx
of the Clyde and Leven, ten miles below Glasgow. The same neighbourhood gave birth to St Patrick,
the apostle of Ireland, at a place where there is still a church and village, which retain
his name. Hard by are some vestiges of the famous Roman wall, built in the reign of Antonine,
from the Clyde to the Forth, and fortified with castles, to restrain the incursions of the
Scots or Caledonians, who inhabited the West-Highlands. In a line parallel to this wall, the
merchants of Glasgow have determined to make a navigable canal betwixt the two Firths which
will be of incredible advantage to their commerce, in transporting merchandize from one side
of the island to the other.

From Glasgow we travelled along the Clyde, which is a delightful stream, adorned on both sides
with villas, towns, and villages. Here is no want of groves, and meadows, and corn-fields interspersed;
but on this side of Glasgow, there is little other grain than oats and barley; the first are
much better, the last much worse, than those of the same species in England. I wonder, there
is so little rye, which is a grain that will thrive in almost any soil; and it is still more
surprising, that the cultivation of potatoes should be so much neglected in the Highlands,
where the poor people have not meal enough to supply them with bread through the winter. On
the other side of the river are the towns of Paisley and Renfrew. The first, from an inconsiderable
village, is become one of the most flourishing places of the kingdom, enriched by the linen,
cambrick, flowered lawn, and silk manufactures. It was formerly noted for a rich monastery
of the monks of Clugny, who wrote the famous Scoti-Chronicon, called The Black Book of Paisley.
The old abbey still remains, converted into a dwelling-house, belonging to the earl of Dundonald.
Renfrew is a pretty town, on the banks of Clyde, capital of the shire, which was heretofore
the patrimony of the Stuart family, and gave the title of baron to the king's eldest son, which
is still assumed by the prince of Wales.

The Clyde we left a little on our left-hand at Dunbritton, where it widens into an aestuary
or frith, being augmented by the influx of the Leven. On this spot stands the castle formerly
called Alcluyd, washed, by these two rivers on all sides, except a narrow isthmus, which at
every spring-tide is overflowed. The whole is a great curiosity, from the quality and form
of the rock, as well as from the nature of its situation -- We now crossed the water of Leven,
which, though nothing near so considerable as the Clyde, is much more transparent, pastoral,
and delightful. This charming stream is the outlet of Lough-Lomond, and through a tract of
four miles pursues its winding course, murmuring over a bed of pebbles, till it joins the Frith
at Dunbritton. I have seen the Lago di Garda, Albano, De Vico, Bolsena, and Geneva, and, upon
my honour, I prefer Lough-Lomond to them all, a preference which is certainly owing to the
verdant islands that seem to float upon its surface, affording the most inchanting objects
of repose to the excursive view. Nor are the banks destitute of beauties, which even partake
of the sublime. On this side they display a sweet variety of woodland, cornfield, and pasture,
with several agreeable villas emerging as it were out of the lake, till, at some distance,
the prospect terminates in huge mountains covered with heath, which being in the bloom, affords
a very rich covering of purple. Every thing here is romantic beyond imagination. This country
is justly stiled the Arcadia of Scotland; and I don't doubt but it may vie with Arcadia in
every thing but climate. -- I am sure it excels it in verdure, wood, and water. -- What say
you to a natural bason of pure water, near thirty miles long, and in some places seven miles
broad, and in many above a hundred fathom deep, having four and twenty habitable islands, some
of them stocked with deer, and all of them covered with wood; containing immense quantities
of delicious fish, salmon, pike, trout, perch, flounders, eels, and powans, the last a delicate
kind of fresh-water herring peculiar to this lake; and finally communicating with the sea,
by sending off the Leven, through which all those species (except the powan) make their exit
and entrance occasionally?

Inclosed I send you the copy of a little ode to this river, by Dr Smollett, who was born on
the banks of it, within two miles of the place where I am now writing. -- It is at least picturesque
and accurately descriptive, if it has no other merit. -- There is an idea of truth in an agreeable
landscape taken from nature, which pleases me more than the gayest fiction which the most luxuriant
fancy can display.

I have other remarks to make; but as my paper is full, I must reserve them till the next occasion.
I shall only observe at present, that I am determined to penetrate at least forty miles into
the Highlands, which now appear like a vast fantastic vision in the clouds, inviting the approach
of

Yours always, MATT. BRAMBLE CAMERON, Aug. 28.

ODE TO LEVEN-WATER

On Leven's banks, while free to rove, And tune the rural pipe to love; I envied not the happiest
swain That ever trod th' Arcadian plain.

Pure stream! in whose transparent wave My youthful limbs I wont to lave; No torrents stain
thy limpid source; No rocks impede thy dimpling course, That sweetly warbles o'er its bed,
With white, round, polish'd pebbles spread; While, lightly pois'd, the scaly brood In myriads
cleave thy crystal flood; The springing trout in speckled pride; The salmon, monarch of the
tide; The ruthless pike, intent on war; The silver eel, and motled par.*

Devolving from thy parent lake, A charming maze thy waters make, By bow'rs of birch, and groves
of pine, And hedges flow'r'd with eglantine.

Still on thy banks so gayly green, May num'rous herds and flocks be seen, And lasses chanting
o'er the pail, And shepherds piping in the dale, And ancient faith that knows no guile, And
industry imbrown'd with toil, And hearts resolv'd, and hands prepar'd, The blessings they enjoy
to guard.

* The par is a small fish, not unlike the smelt, which it rivals in delicacy and flavour.

To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

If I was disposed to be critical, I should say this house of Cameron is too near the lake,
which approaches, on one side, to within six or seven yards of the window. It might have been
placed in a higher site, which would have afforded a more extensive prospect and a drier atmosphere;
but this imperfection is not chargeable on the present proprietor, who purchased it ready built,
rather than be at the trouble of repairing his own family-house of Bonhill, which stands two
miles from hence on the Leven, so surrounded with plantation, that it used to be known by the
name of the Mavis (or thrush) Nest. Above that house is a romantic glen or clift of a mountain,
covered with hanging woods having at bottom a stream of fine water that forms a number of cascades
in its descent to join the Leven; so that the scene is quite enchanting. A captain of a man
of war, who had made the circuit of the globe with Mr Anson, being conducted to this glen,
exclaimed, 'Juan Fernandez, by God!'

Indeed, this country would be a perfect paradise, if it was not, like Wales, cursed with a
weeping climate, owing to the same cause in both, the neighbourhood of high mountains, and
a westerly situation, exposed to the vapours of the Atlantic ocean. This air, however, notwithstanding
its humidity, is so healthy, that the natives are scarce ever visited by any other disease
than the smallpox, and certain cutaneous evils, which are the effects of dirty living, the
great and general reproach of the commonalty of this kingdom. Here are a great many living
monuments of longaevity; and among the rest a person, whom I treat with singular respect, as
a venerable druid, who has lived near ninety years, without pain or sickness, among oaks of
his own planting. -- He was once proprietor of these lands; but being of a projecting spirit,
some of his schemes miscarried, and he was obliged to part with his possession, which hath
shifted hands two or three times since that period; but every succeeding proprietor hath done
every thing in his power, to make his old age easy and comfortable. He has a sufficiency to
procure the necessaries of life; and he and his old woman reside in a small convenient farm-house,
having a little garden which he cultivates with his own hands. This ancient couple live in
great health, peace, and harmony, and, knowing no wants, enjoy the perfection of content. Mr
Smollet calls him the admiral, because he insists upon steering his pleasure-boat upon the
lake; and he spends most of his time in ranging through the woods, which he declares he enjoys
as much as if they were still his own property -- I asked him the other day, if he was never
sick, and he answered, Yes; he had a slight fever the year before the union. If he was not
deaf, I should take much pleasure in his conversation; for he is very intelligent, and his
memory is surprisingly retentive -- These are the happy effects of temperance, exercise, and
good nature -- Notwithstanding all his innocence, however, he was the cause of great perturbation
to my man Clinker, whose natural superstition has been much injured, by the histories of witches,
fairies, ghosts, and goblins, which he has heard in this country -- On the evening after our
arrival, Humphry strolled into the wood, in the course of his meditation, and all at once the
admiral stood before him, under the shadow of a spreading oak. Though the fellow is far from
being timorous in cases that are not supposed preternatural, he could not stand the sight of
this apparition, but ran into the kitchen, with his hair standing on end, staring wildly, and
deprived of utterance. Mrs Jenkins, seeing him in this condition, screamed aloud, 'Lord have
mercy upon us, he has seen something!' Mrs Tabitha was alarmed, and the whole house in confusion.
When he was recruited with a dram, I desired him to explain the meaning of all this agitation;
and, with some reluctance, he owned he had seen a spirit, in the shape of an old man with a
white beard, a black cap, and a plaid night-gown. He was undeceived by the admiral in person,
who, coming in at this juncture, appeared to be a creature of real flesh and blood.

Do you know how we fare in this Scottish paradise? We make free with our landlord's mutton,
which is excellent, his poultry-yard, his garden, his dairy, and his cellar, which are all
well stored. We have delicious salmon, pike, trout, perch, par, &c. at the door, for the taking.
The Frith of Clyde, on the other side of the hill, supplies us with mullet, red and grey, cod,
mackarel, whiting, and a variety of sea-fish, including the finest fresh herrings I ever tasted.
We have sweet, juicy beef, and tolerable veal, with delicate bread from the little town of
Dunbritton; and plenty of partridge, growse, heath cock, and other game in presents.

We have been visited by all the gentlemen in the neighbourhood, and they have entertained us
at their houses, not barely with hospitality, but with such marks of cordial affection, as
one would wish to find among near relations, after an absence of many years.

I told you, in my last, I had projected an excursion to the Highlands, which project I have
now happily executed, under the auspices of Sir George Colquhoun, a colonel in the Dutch service,
who offered himself as our conductor on this occasion. Leaving our women at Cameron, to the
care and inspection of Lady H-- C--, we set out on horseback for Inverary, the county town
of Argyle, and dined on the road with the Laird of Macfarlane, the greatest genealogist I ever
knew in any country, and perfectly acquainted with all the antiquities of Scotland.

The Duke of Argyle has an old castle in Inverary, where he resides when he is in Scotland;
and hard by is the shell of a noble Gothic palace, built by the last duke, which, when finished,
will be a great ornament to this part of the Highlands. As for Inverary, it is a place of very
little importance.

This country is amazingly wild, especially towards the mountains, which are heaped upon the
backs of one another, making a most stupendous appearance of savage nature, with hardly any
signs of cultivation, or even of population. All is sublimity, silence, and solitude. The people
live together in glens or bottoms, where they are sheltered from the cold and storms of winter:
but there is a margin of plain ground spread along the sea side, which is well inhabited and
improved by the arts of husbandry; and this I take to be one of the most agreeable tracts of
the whole island; the sea not only keeps it warm, and supplies it with fish, but affords one
of the most ravishing prospects in the whole world; I mean the appearance of the Hebrides,
or Western Islands to the number of three hundred, scattered as far as the eye can reach, in
the most agreeable confusion. As the soil and climate of the Highlands are but ill adapted
to the cultivation of corn, the people apply themselves chiefly to the breeding and feeding
of black cattle, which turn to good account. Those animals run wild all the winter, without
any shelter or subsistence, but what they can find among the heath. When the snow lies so deep
and hard, that they cannot penetrate to the roots of the grass, they make a diurnal progress,
guided by a sure instinct, to the seaside at low water, where they feed on the alga marina,
and other plants that grow upon the beach.

Perhaps this branch of husbandry, which required very little attendance and labour, is one
of the principal causes of that idleness and want of industry, which distinguishes these mountaineers
in their own country. When they come forth into the world, they become as diligent and alert
as any people upon earth. They are undoubtedly a very distinct species from their fellow subjects
of the Lowlands, against whom they indulge an ancient spirit of animosity; and this difference
is very discernible even among persons of family and education. The Lowlanders are generally
cool and circumspect, the Highlanders fiery and ferocious:' but this violence of their passions
serves only to inflame the zeal of their devotion to strangers, which is truly enthusiastic.

We proceeded about twenty miles beyond Inverary, to the house of a gentleman, a friend of our
conductor, where we stayed a few days, and were feasted in such a manner, that I began to dread
the consequence to my constitution.

Notwithstanding the solitude that prevails among these mountains, there is no want of people
in the Highlands. I am credibly informed that the duke of Argyle can assemble five thousand
men in arms, of his own clan and surname, which is Campbell; and there is besides a tribe of
the same appellation, whose chief' is the Earl of Breadalbine. The Macdonalds are as numerous,
and remarkably warlike: the Camerons, M'Leods, Frasers, Grants, M'Kenzies, M'Kays, M'Phersons,
M'Intoshes, are powerful clans; so that if all the Highlanders, including the inhabitants of
the Isles, were united, they could bring into the field an army of forty thousand fighting
men, capable of undertaking the most dangerous enterprize. We have lived to see four thousand
of them, without discipline, throw the whole kingdom of Great Britain into confusion. They
attacked and defeated two armies of regular troops accustomed to service. They penetrated into
the centre of England; and afterwards marched back with deliberation, in the face of two other
armies, through an enemy's country, where every precaution was taken to cut off their retreat.
I know not any other people in Europe, who, without the use or knowledge of arms, will attack
regular forces sword in hand, if their chief will head them in battle. When disciplined, they
cannot fail of being excellent soldiers. They do not walk like the generality of mankind, but
trot and bounce like deer, as if they moved upon springs. They greatly excel the Lowlanders
in all the exercises that require agility; they are incredibly abstemious, and patient of hunger
and fatigue, -- so steeled against the weather, that in travelling, even when the ground is
covered with snow, they never look for a house, or any other shelter but their plaid, in which
they wrap themselves up, and go to sleep under the cope of heaven. Such people, in quality
of soldiers, must be invincible, when the business is to perform quick marches in a difficult
country, to strike sudden strokes, beat up the enemy's quarters, harrass their cavalry, and
perform expeditions without the formality of magazines, baggage, forage, and artillery. The
chieftainship of the Highlanders is a very dangerous influence operating at the extremity of
the island, where the eyes and hands of government cannot be supposed to see [and] act with
precision and vigour. In order to break the force of clanship, administration has always practised
the political maxim, Divide et impera. Every peculiarity of policy, custom, and even temperament,
is affectedly traced to this origin, as if the feudal constitution had not been common to almost
all the natives of Europe. The connection between the clans and their chiefs is, without all
doubt, patriarchal. It is founded on hereditary regard and affection, cherished through a long
succession of ages. The clan consider the chief as their father, they bear his name, they believe
themselves descended from his family, and they obey him as their lord, with all the ardour
of filial love and veneration; while he, on his part, exerts a paternal authority, commanding,
chastising, rewarding, protecting, and maintaining them as his own children. If the legislature
would entirely destroy this connection, it must compel the Highlanders to change their habitation
and their names. Even this experiment has been formerly tried without success -- In the reign
of James VI a battle was fought within a few short miles of this place, between two clans,
the M'Gregors and the Colquhouns, in which the latter were defeated: the Laird of M'Gregor
made such a barbarous use of his victory, that he was forfeited and outlawed by act of parliament:
his lands were given to the family of Montrose, and his clan were obliged to change their name.
They obeyed so far, as to call themselves severally Campbell, Graham, or Drummond, the surnames
of the families of Argyle, Montrose, and Perth, that they might enjoy the protection of those
houses; but they still added M'Gregor to their new appellation; and as their chief was deprived
of his estate, they robbed and plundered for his subsistence. -- Mr Cameron of Lochiel, the
chief of that clan, whose father was attainted for having been concerned in the last rebellion,
returning from France in obedience to a proclamation and act of parliament, passed at the beginning
of the late war, payed a visit to his own country, and hired a farm in the neighbourhood of
his father's house, which had been burnt to the ground. The clan, though ruined and scattered,
no sooner heard of his arrival than they flocked to him from all quarters, to welcome his return,
and in a few days stocked his farm with seven hundred black cattle, which they had saved in
the general wreck of their affairs: but their beloved chief, who was a promising youth, did
not live to enjoy the fruits of their fidelity and attachment.

The most effectual method I know to weaken, and at length destroy this influence, is to employ
the commonalty in such a manner as to give them a taste of property and independence. In vain
the government grants them advantageous leases on the forfeited estates, if they have no property
to prosecute the means of improvement -- The sea is an inexhaustible fund of riches; but the
fishery cannot be carried on without vessels, casks, salt, lines, nets, and other tackle. I
conversed with a sensible man of this country, who, from a real spirit of patriotism had set
up a fishery on the coast, and a manufacture of coarse linen, for the employment of the poor
Highlanders. Cod is here in such plenty, that he told me he had seen several hundred taken
on one line, at one hawl -- It must be observed, however, that the line was of immense length,
and had two thousand hooks, baited with muscles; but the fish was so superior to the cod caught
on the banks of Newfoundland, that his correspondent at Lisbon sold them immediately at his
own price, although Lent was just over when they arrived, and the people might be supposed
quite cloyed with this kind of diet -- His linen manufacture was likewise in a prosperous way,
when the late war intervening, all his best hands were pressed into the service.

It cannot be expected, that the gentlemen of this country should execute commercial schemes
to render their vassals independent; nor, indeed, are such schemes suited to their way of life
and inclination; but a company of merchants might, with proper management, turn to good account
a fishery established in this part of Scotland -- Our people have a strange itch to colonize
America, when the uncultivated parts of our own island might be settled to greater advantage.

After having rambled through the mountains and glens of Argyle, we visited the adjacent islands
of Ila, Jura, Mull, and Icomkill. In the first, we saw the remains of a castle, built in a
lake, where Macdonald, lord or king of the isles, formerly resided. Jura is famous for having
given birth to one Mackcrain, who lived one hundred and eighty years in one house, and died
in the reign of Charles the Second. Mull affords several bays, where there is safe anchorage:
in one of which, the Florida, a ship of the Spanish armada, was blown up by one of Mr Smollett's
ancestors -- About forty years ago, John duke of Argyle is said to have consulted the Spanish
registers, by which it appeared, that this ship had the military chest on board -- He employed
experienced divers to examine the wreck; and they found the hull of the vessel still entire,
but so covered with sand, that they could not make their way between decks; however, they picked
up several pieces of plate, that were scattered about in the bay, and a couple of fine brass
cannon.

Icolmkill, or Iona, is a small island which St Columba chose for his habitation -- It was respected
for its sanctity, and college or seminary of ecclesiastics -- Part of its church is still standing,
with the tombs of several Scottish, Irish, and Danish sovereigns, who were here interred --
These islanders are very bold and dexterous watermen, consequently the better adapted to the
fishery: in their manners they are less savage and impetuous than their countrymen on the continent;
and they speak the Erse or Gaelick in its greatest purity.

Having sent round our horses by land, we embarked in the distinct of Cowal, for Greenock, which
is a neat little town, on the other side of the Frith, with a curious harbour formed by three
stone jetties, carried out a good way into the sea -- Newport-Glasgow is such another place,
about two miles higher up. Both have a face of business and plenty, and are supported entirely
by the shipping of Glasgow, of which I counted sixty large vessels in these harbours -- Taking
boat again at Newport, we were in less than an hour landed on the other side, within two short
miles of our head-quarters, where we found our women in good health and spirits. They had been
two days before joined by Mr. Smollett and his lady, to whom we have such obligations as I
cannot mention, even to you, without blushing.

To-morrow we shall bid adieu to the Scotch Arcadia, and begin our progress to the southward,
taking our way by Lanerk and Nithsdale, to the west borders of England. I have received so
much advantage and satisfaction from this tour, that if my health suffers no revolution in
the winter, I believe I shall be tempted to undertake another expedition to the Northern extremity
of Caithness, unencumbered by those impediments which now clog the heels of,

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE CAMERON, Sept. 6.

To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAREST LETTY,

Never did poor prisoner long for deliverance, more than I have longed for an opportunity to
disburthen my cares into your friendly bosom; and the occasion which now presents itself, is
little less than miraculous -- Honest Saunders Macawly, the travelling Scotchman, who goes
every year to Wales, is now at Glasgow, buying goods, and coming to pay his respects to our
family, has undertaken to deliver this letter into your own hand -- We have been six weeks
in Scotland, and seen the principal towns of the kingdom, where we have been treated with great
civility -- The people are very courteous; and the country being exceedingly romantic, suits
my turn and inclinations -- I contracted some friendships at Edinburgh, which is a large and
lofty city, full of gay company; and, in particular, commenced an intimate correspondence with
one miss R--t--n, an amiable young lady of my own age, whose charms seemed to soften, and even
to subdue the stubborn heart of my brother Jery; but he no sooner left the place than he relapsed
into his former insensibility -- I feel, however, that this indifference is not the family
constitution -- I never admitted but one idea of love, and that has taken such root in my heart,
as to be equally proof against all the pulls of discretion, and the frosts of neglect.

Dear Letty! I had an alarming adventure at the hunters ball in Edinburgh -- While I sat discoursing
with a friend in a corner, all at once the very image of Wilson stood before me, dressed exactly
as he was in the character of Aimwell! It was one Mr Gordon, whom I had not seen before --
Shocked at the sudden apparition, I fainted away, and threw the whole assembly in confusion
-- However, the cause of my disorder remained a secret to every body but my brother, who was
likewise struck with the resemblance, and scolded after we came home -- I am very sensible
of Jery's affection, and know he spoke as well with a view to my own interest and happiness,
as in regard to the honour of the family; but I cannot bear to have my wounds probed severely
-- I was not so much affected by the censure he passed upon my own indiscretion, as with the
reflection he made on the conduct of Wilson. He observed, that if he was really the gentleman
he pretended to be, and harboured nothing but honourable designs, he would have vindicated
his pretensions in the face of day -- This remark made a deep impression upon my mind -- I
endeavoured to conceal my thoughts; and this endeavour had a bad effect upon my health and
spirits; so it was thought necessary that I should go to the Highlands, and drink the goat-milk-whey.

We went accordingly to Lough Lomond, one of the most enchanting spots in the whole world; and
what with this remedy, which I had every morning fresh from the mountains, and the pure air,
and chearful company, I have recovered my flesh and appetite; though there is something still
at bottom, which it is not in the power of air, exercise, company, or medicine to remove --
These incidents would not touch me so nearly, if I had a sensible confidant to sympathize with
my affliction, and comfort me with wholesome advice -- I have nothing of this kind, except
Win Jenkins, who is really a good body in the main, but very ill qualified for such an office
-- The poor creature is weak in her nerves, as well as in her understanding; otherwise I might
have known the true name and character of that unfortunate youth -- But why do I call him unfortunate?
perhaps the epithet is more applicable to me for having listened to the false professions of
-- But, hold! I have as yet no right, and sure I have no inclination to believe any thing to
the prejudice of his honour -- In that reflection I shall still exert my patience. As for Mrs
Jenkins, she herself is really an object of compassion -- Between vanity, methodism, and love,
her head is almost turned. I should have more regard for her, however, if she had been more
constant in the object of her affection; but, truly, she aimed at conquest, and flirted at
the same time with my uncle's footman, Humphrey Clinker, who is really a deserving young man,
and one Dutton, my brother's valet de chambre, a debauched fellow; who, leaving Win in the
lurch, ran away with another man's bride at Berwick.

My dear Willis, I am truly ashamed of my own sex -- We complain of advantages which the men
take of our youth, inexperience, insensibility, and all that; but I have seen enough to believe,
that our sex in general make it their business to ensnare the other; and for this purpose,
employ arts which are by no means to be justified -- In point of constancy, they certainly
have nothing to reproach the male part of the creation -- My poor aunt, without any regard
to her years and imperfections, has gone to market with her charms in every place where she
thought she had the least chance to dispose of her person, which, however, hangs still heavy
on her hands -- I am afraid she has used even religion as a decoy, though it has not answered
her expectation -- She has been praying, preaching, and catechising among the methodists, with
whom this country abounds; and pretends to have such manifestations and revelations, as even
Clinker himself can hardly believe, though the poor fellow is half crazy with enthusiasm. As
for Jenkins, she affects to take all her mistress's reveries for gospel. She has also her heart-heavings
and motions of the spirit; and God forgive me if I think uncharitably, but all this seems to
me to be downright hypocrisy and deceit -- Perhaps, indeed, the poor girl imposes on herself
-- She is generally in a flutter, and is much subject to vapours -- Since we came to Scotland,
she has seen apparitions, and pretends to prophesy -- If I could put faith in all these supernatural
visitations, I should think myself abandoned of grace; for I have neither seen, heard, nor
felt anything of this nature, although I endeavour to discharge the duties of religion with
all the sincerity, zeal, and devotion, that is in the power of,

Dear Letty, your ever affectionate, LYDIA MELFORD GLASGOW, Sept. 7.

We are so far on our return to Brambleton-hall; and I would fain hope we shall take Gloucester
in our way, in which case I shall have the inexpressible pleasure of embracing my dear Willis
-- Pray remember me to my worthy governess.

To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MARY,

Sunders Macully, the Scotchman, who pushes directly for Vails, has promised to give it you
into your own hand, and therefore I would not miss the opportunity to let you know as I am
still in the land of the living: and yet I have been on the brink of the other world since
I sent you my last letter. -- We went by sea to another kingdom called Fife, and coming back,
had like to have gone to pot in a storm. -- What between the frite and sickness, I thought
I should have brought my heart up; even Mr Clinker was not his own man for eight and forty
hours after we got ashore. It was well for some folks that we scaped drownding; for mistress
was very frexious, and seemed but indifferently prepared for a change; but, thank God, she
was soon put in a better frame by the private exaltations of the reverend Mr Macrocodile. --
We afterwards churned to Starling and Grascow, which are a kiple of handsome towns; and then
we went to a gentleman's house at Loff-Loming, which is a wonderful sea of fresh water, with
a power of hylands in the midst on't. -- They say as how it has n'er a bottom, and was made
by a musician and, truly, I believe it; for it is not in the coarse of nature. -- It has got
waves without wind, fish without fins, and a floating hyland; and one of them is a crutch-yard,
where the dead are buried; and always before the person dies, a bell rings of itself to give
warning.

O Mary! this is the land of congyration -- The bell knolled when we were there -- I saw lights,
and heard lamentations. -- The gentleman, our landlord, has got another house, which he was
fain to quit, on account of a mischievous ghost, that would not suffer people to lie in their
beds. The fairies dwell in a hole of Kairmann, a mounting hard by; and they steal away the
good women that are in the straw, if so be as how there a'n't a horshoe nailed to the door:
and I was shewn an ould vitch, called Elspath Ringavey, with a red petticoat, bleared eyes,
and a mould of grey bristles on her sin. -- That she mought do me no harm, I crossed her hand
with a taster, and bid her tell my fortune; and she told me such things descriving Mr Clinker
to a hair -- but it shall ne'er be said, that I minchioned a word of the matter. -- As I was
troubled with fits, she advised me to bathe in the loff, which was holy water; and so I went
in the morning to a private place along with the house-maid, and we bathed in our birth-day
soot, after the fashion of the country; and behold whilst we dabbled in the loff, sir George
Coon started up with a gun; but we clapt our hands to our faces, and passed by him to the place
where we had left our smocks -- A civil gentleman would have turned his head another way. --
My comfit is, he new not which was which; and, as the saying is, all cats in the dark are grey
-- Whilst we stayed at Loff-Loming, he and our two squires went three or four days churning
among the wild men of the mountings; a parcel of selvidges that lie in caves among the rocks,
devour young children, speak Velch, but the vords are different. Our ladies would not part
with Mr Clinker, because he is so stout and so pyehouse, that he fears neither man nor devils,
if so be as they don't take him by surprise. -- Indeed, he was once so flurried by an operition,
that he had like to have sounded. -- He made believe as if it had been the ould edmiral; but
the old edmiral could not have made his air to stand on end,, and his teeth to shatter; but
he said so in prudence, that the ladies mought not be afear'd. Miss Liddy has been puny, and
like to go into a decline -- I doubt her pore art is too tinder -- but the got's-fey has set
her on her legs again. -- You nows got's-fey is mother's milk to a Velch woman. As for mistress,
blessed be God, she ails nothing. -- Her stomick is good, and she improves in grease and godliness;
but, for all that, she may have infections like other people, and I believe, she wouldn't be
sorry to be called your ladyship, whenever sir George thinks proper to ax the question -- But,
for my part, whatever I may see or hear, not a praticle shall ever pass the lips of,

Dear Molly, Your loving friend, WIN. JENKINS GRASCO, Sept. 7.

Remember me, as usual, to Sall. -- We are now coming home, though not the nearest road. --
I do suppose, I shall find the kitten a fine boar at my return.

To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. at Oxon.

DEAR KNIGHT,

Once more I tread upon English ground, which I like not the worse for the six weeks' ramble
I have made among the woods and mountains of Caledonia; no offence to the land of cakes, where
bannocks grow upon straw. I never saw my uncle in such health and spirits as he now enjoys.
Liddy is perfectly recovered; and Mrs Tabitha has no reason to complain. Nevertheless, I believe,
she was, till yesterday, inclined to give the whole Scotch nation to the devil, as a pack of
insensible brutes, upon whom her accomplishments had been displayed in vain. -- At every place
where we halted, did she mount the stage, and flourished her rusty arms, without being able
to make one conquest. One of her last essays was against the heart of Sir George Colquhoun,
with whom she fought all the weapons more than twice over. -- She was grave and gay by turns
-- she moralized and methodized -- she laughed, and romped, and danced, and sung, and sighed,
and ogled, and lisped, and fluttered, and flattered -- but all was preaching to the desart.
The baronet, being a well-bred man, carried his civilities as far as she could in conscience
expect, and, if evil tongues are to be believed, some degrees farther; but he was too much
a veteran in gallantry, as well as in war, to fall into any ambuscade that she could lay for
his affection -- While we were absent in the Highlands, she practised also upon the laird of
Ladrishmore, and even gave him the rendezvous in the wood of Drumscailloch; but the laird had
such a reverend care of his own reputation, that he came attended with the parson of the parish,
and nothing passed but spiritual communication. After all these miscarriages, our aunt suddenly
recollected lieutenant Lismahago, whom, ever since our first arrival at Edinburgh, she seemed
to have utterly forgot; but now she expressed her hopes of seeing him at Dumfries, according
to his promise.

We set out from Glasgow by the way of Lanerk, the county-town of Clydesdale, in the neighbourhood
of which, the whole river Clyde, rushing down a steep rock, forms a very noble and stupendous
cascade. Next day we were obliged to halt in a small borough, until the carriage, which had
received some damage, should be repaired; and here we met with an incident which warmly interested
the benevolent spirit of Mr Bramble -- As we stood at the window of an inn that fronted the
public prison, a person arrived on horseback, genteelly, tho' plainly, dressed in a blue frock,
with his own hair cut short, and a gold-laced hat upon his head. -- Alighting, and giving his
horse to the landlord, he advanced to an old man who was at work in paving the street, and
accosted him in these words: 'This is hard work for such an old man as you.' -- So saying,
he took the instrument out of his hand, and began to thump the pavement. -- After a few strokes,
'Have you never a son (said he) to ease you of this labour?' 'Yes, an please Your honour (replied
the senior), I have three hopeful lads, but, at present, they are out of the way.' 'Honour
not me (cried the stranger); but more becomes me to honour your grey hairs. Where are those
sons you talk of?' The ancient paviour said, his eldest son was a captain in the East Indies;
and the youngest had lately inlisted as a soldier, in hopes of prospering like his brother.
The gentleman desiring to know what was become of the second, he wiped his eyes, and owned,
he had taken upon him his old father's debts, for which he was now in the prison hard by.

The traveller made three quick steps towards the jail, then turning short, 'Tell me (said he),
has that unnatural captain sent you nothing to relieve your distress?' 'Call him not unnatural
(replied the other); God's blessing be upon him! he sent me a great deal of money; but I made
a bad use of it; I lost it by being security for a gentleman that was my landlord, and was
stript of all I had in the world besides.' At that instant a young man, thrusting out his head
and neck between two iron bars in the prison-window, exclaimed, 'Father! father! if my brother
William is in life, that's he!' 'I am! -- I am! -- (cried the stranger, clasping the old man
in his arms, and shedding a flood of tears) -- I am your son Willy, sure enough!' Before the
father, who was quite confounded, could make any return to this tenderness, a decent old woman
bolting out from the door of a poor habitation, cried, 'Where is my bairn? where is my dear
Willy?' -- The captain no sooner beheld her, than he quitted his father, and ran into her embrace.

I can assure you, my uncle, who saw and heard every thing that passed, was as much moved as
any one of the parties concerned in this pathetic recognition -- He sobbed, and wept, and clapped
his hands, and hollowed, and finally ran down into the street. By this time, the captain had
retired with his parents, and all the inhabitants of the place were assembled at the door.
-- Mr Bramble, nevertheless, pressed thro' the crowd, and entering the house, 'Captain (said
he), I beg the favour of your acquaintance. I would have travelled a hundred miles to see this
affecting scene; and I shall think myself happy if you and your parents will dine with me at
the public house.' The captain thanked him for his kind invitation, which, he said, he would
accept with pleasure; but in the mean time, he could not think of eating or drinking, while
his poor brother was in trouble. He forthwith deposited a sum equal to the debt in the hands
of the magistrate, who ventured to set his brother at liberty without farther process; and
then the whole family repaired to the inn with my uncle, attended by the crowd, the individuals
of which shook their townsman by the hand, while he returned their caresses without the least
sign of pride or affectation.

This honest favourite of fortune, whose name was Brown, told my uncle, that he had been bred
a weaver, and, about eighteen years ago, had, from a spirit of idleness and dissipation, enlisted
as a soldier in the service of the East-India company; that, in the course of duty, he had
the good fortune to attract the notice and approbation of Lord Clive, who preferred him from
one step to another, till he attained the rank of captain and pay-master to the regiment, in
which capacities he had honestly amassed above twelve thousand pounds, and, at the peace, resigned
his commission. -- He had sent several remittances to his father, who received the first only,
consisting of one hundred pounds; the second had fallen into the hands of a bankrupt; and the
third had been consigned to a gentleman of Scotland, who died before it arrived; so that it
still remained to be accounted for by his executors. He now presented the old man with fifty
pounds for his present occasions, over and above bank notes for one hundred, which he had deposited
for his brother's release. -- He brought along with him a deed ready executed, by which he
settled a perpetuity of four-score pounds upon his parents, to be inherited by their other
two sons after their decease. -- He promised to purchase a commission for his youngest brother;
to take the other as his own partner in a manufacture which he intended to set up, to give
employment and bread to the industrious; and to give five hundred pounds, by way of dower,
to his sister, who had married a farmer in low circumstances. Finally, he gave fifty pounds
to the poor of the town where he was born, and feasted all the inhabitants without exception.

My uncle was so charmed with the character of captain Brown, that he drank his health three
times successively at dinner -- He said, he was proud of his acquaintance; that he was an honour
to his country, and had in some measure redeemed human nature from the reproach of pride, selfishness,
and ingratitude. -- For my part, I was as much pleased with the modesty as with the filial
virtue of this honest soldier, who assumed no merit from his success, and said very little
of his own transactions, though the answers he made to our inquiries were equally sensible
and laconic, Mrs Tabitha behaved very graciously to him until she understood that he was going
to make a tender of his hand to a person of low estate, who had been his sweet-heart while
he worked as a journeyman weaver. -- Our aunt was no sooner made acquainted with this design,
than she starched up her behaviour with a double proportion of reserve; and when the company
broke up, she observed with a toss of her nose, that Brown was a civil fellow enough, considering
the lowness of his original; but that Fortune, though she had mended his circumstances, was
incapable to raise his ideas, which were still humble and plebeian.

On the day that succeeded this adventure, we went some miles out of our road to see Drumlanrig,
a seat belonging to the duke of Queensberry, which appears like a magnificent palace erected
by magic, in the midst of a wilderness. -- It is indeed a princely mansion, with suitable parks
and plantations, rendered still more striking by the nakedness of the surrounding country,
which is one of the wildest tracts in all Scotland. -- This wildness, however, is different
from that of the Highlands; for here the mountains, instead of heath, are covered with a fine
green swarth, affording pasture to innumerable flocks of sheep. But the fleeces of this country,
called Nithsdale, are not comparable to the wool of Galloway, which is said to equal that of
Salisbury plain. Having passed the night at the castle of Drumlanrig, by invitation from the
duke himself, who is one of the best men that ever breathed, we prosecuted our journey to Dumfries,
a very elegant trading town near the borders of England, where we found plenty of good provision
and excellent wine, at very reasonable prices, and the accommodation as good in all respects
as in any part of South-Britain. If I was confined to Scotland for life, I would chuse Dumfries
as the place of my residence. Here we made enquiries about captain Lismahago, of whom hearing
no tidings, we proceeded by the Solway Frith, to Carlisle. You must know, that the Solway sands,
upon which travellers pass at low water, are exceedingly dangerous, because, as the tide makes,
they become quick in different places, and the flood rushes in so impetuously, that the passengers
are often overtaken by the sea and perish.

In crossing these treacherous Syrtes with a guide, we perceived a drowned horse, which Humphry
Clinker, after due inspection, declared to be the very identical beast which Mr Lismahago rode
when he parted with us at Feltonbridge in Northumberland. This information, which seemed to
intimate that our friend the lieutenant had shared the fate of his horse, affected us all,
and above all our aunt Tabitha, who shed salt tears, and obliged Clinker to pull a few hairs
out of the dead horse's tail, to be worn in a ring as a remembrance of his master: but her
grief and ours was not of long duration; for one of the first persons we saw in Carlisle, was
the lieutenant in propria persona, bargaining with a horse-dealer for another steed, in the
yard of the inn where we alighted. -- Mrs Bramble was the first that perceived him, and screamed
as if she had seen a ghost; and, truly, at a proper time and place, he might very well have
passed for an inhabitant of another world; for he was more meagre and grim than before. --
We received him the more cordially for having supposed he had been drowned; and he was not
deficient in expressions of satisfaction at this meeting. He told us, he had enquired for us
at Dumfries, and been informed by a travelling merchant from Glasgow, that we had resolved
to return by the way of Coldstream. He said, that in passing the sands without a guide, his
horse had knocked up, and he himself must have perished, if he had not been providentially
relieved by a return post-chaise. -- He moreover gave us to understand, that his scheme of
settling in his own country having miscarried, he was so far on his way to London, with a view
to embark for North-America, where he intended to pass the rest of his days among his old friends
the Miamis, and amuse himself in finishing the education of the son he had by his beloved Squinkinacoosta.

This project was by no means agreeable to our good aunt, who expatiated upon the fatigues and
dangers that would attend such a long voyage by sea, and afterwards such a tedious journey
by land -- She enlarged particularly on the risque he would run, with respect to the concerns
of his precious soul, among savages who had not yet received the glad tidings of salvation;
and she hinted that his abandoning Great-Britain might, perhaps, prove fatal to the inclinations
of some deserving person, whom he was qualified to make happy for life. My uncle, who is really
a Don Quixote in generosity, understanding that Lismahago's real reason for leaving Scotland
was the impossibility of subsisting in it with any decency upon the wretched provision of a
subaltern's half-pay, began to be warmly interested on the side of compassion. -- He thought
it very hard, that a gentleman who had served his country with honour, should be driven by
necessity to spend his old age, among the refuse of mankind, in such a remote part of the world.
-- He discoursed with me upon the subject; observing, that he would willingly offer the lieutenant
an asylum at Brambleton-hall, if he did not foresee that his singularities and humour of contradiction
would render him an intolerable housemate, though his conversation at some times might be both
instructive and entertaining: but, as there seemed to be something particular in his attention
to Mrs Tabitha, he and I agreed in opinion, that this intercourse should be encouraged and
improved, if possible, into a matrimonial union; in which case there would be a comfortable
provision for both; and they might be settled in a house of their own, so that Mr Bramble should
have no more of their company than he desired.

In pursuance of this design, Lismahago has been invited to pass the winter at Brambleton-hall,
as it will be time enough to execute his American project in the spring. -- He has taken time
to consider of this proposal; mean while, he will keep us company as far as we travel in the
road to Bristol, where he has hopes of getting a passage for America. I make no doubt but that
he will postpone his voyage, and prosecute his addresses to a happy consummation; and sure,
if it produces any fruit, it must be of a very peculiar flavour. As the weather continues favourable,
I believe, we shall take the Peak of Derbyshire and Buxton Wells in our way. -- At any rate,
from the first place where we make any stay, you shall hear again from

Yours always, J. MELFORD CARLISLE, Sep. 12.

To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

The peasantry of Scotland are certainly on a poor footing all over the kingdom; and yet they
look better, and are better cloathed than those of the same rank in Burgundy, and many other
places of France and Italy; nay, I will venture to say they are better fed, notwithstanding
the boasted wine of these foreign countries. The country people of North-Britain live chiefly
on oat-meal, and milk, cheese, butter, and some garden-stuff, with now and then a pickled-herring,
by way of delicacy; but flesh-meat they seldom or never taste; nor any kind of strong liquor,
except two-penny, at times of uncommon festivity -- Their breakfast is a kind of hasty pudding,
of oat-meal or pease-meal, eaten with milk. They have commonly pottage for dinner, composed
of cale or cole, leeks, barley or big, and butter; and this is reinforced with bread and cheese,
made of skimmed-milk -- At night they sup on sowens or flummery of oat-meal -- In a scarcity
of oats, they use the meal of barley and pease, which is both nourishing and palatable. Some
of them have potatoes; and you find parsnips in every peasant's garden -- They are cloathed
with a coarse kind of russet of their own making, which is both decent and warm -- They dwell
in poor huts, built of loose stones and turf, without any mortar, having a fireplace or hearth
in the middle, generally made of an old mill-stone, and a hole at top to let out the smoke.

These people, however, are content, and wonderfully sagacious -- All of them read the Bible,
and are even qualified to dispute upon the articles of their faith; which in those parts I
have seen, is entirely Presbyterian. I am told, that the inhabitants of Aberdeenshire are still
more acute. I once knew a Scotch gentleman at London, who had declared war against this part
of his countrymen; and swore that the impudence and knavery of the Scots, in that quarter,
had brought a reproach upon the whole nation.

The river Clyde, above Glasgow, is quite pastoral; and the banks of it are every where adorned
with fine villas. From the sea to its source, we may reckon the seats of many families of the
first rank, such as the duke of Argyle at Roseneath, the earl of Bute in the isle of that name,
the earl of Glencairn at Finlayston, lord Blantyre at Areskine, the dutchess of Douglas at
Bothwell, duke Hamilton at Hamilton, the duke of Douglas at Douglas, and the earl of Hyndford
at Carmichael. Hamilton is a noble palace, magnificently furnished; and hard by is the village
of that name, one of the neatest little towns I have seen in any country. The old castle of
Douglas being burned to the ground by accident, the late duke resolved, as head of the first
family of Scotland, to have the largest house in the kingdom, and ordered a plan for this purpose;
but there was only one wing of it finished when he died. It is to be hoped that his nephew,
who is now in possession of his great fortune, will complete the design of his predecessor
-- Clydesdale is in general populous and rich, containing a great number of gentlemen, who
are independent in their fortune; but it produces more cattle than corn -- This is also the
case with Tweedale, through part of which we passed, and Nithsdale, which is generally rough,
wild, and mountainous -- These hills are covered with sheep; and this is the small delicious
mutton, so much preferable to that of the London-market. As their feeding costs so little,
the sheep are not killed till five years old, when their flesh, juices, and flavour are in
perfection; but their fleeces are much damaged by the tar, with which they are smeared to preserve
them from the rot in winter, during which they run wild night and day, and thousands are lost
under huge wreaths of snow -- 'Tis pity the farmers cannot contrive some means to shelter this
useful animal from the inclemencies of a rigorous climate, especially from the perpetual rains,
which are more prejudicial than the greatest extremity of cold weather.

On the little river Nid, is situated the castle of Drumlanrig, one of the noblest seats in
Great-Britain, belonging to the duke of Queensberry; one of those few noblemen whose goodness
of heart does honour to human-nature -- I shall not pretend to enter into a description of
this palace, which is really an instance of the sublime in magnificence, as well as in situation,
and puts one in mind of the beautiful city of Palmyra, rising like a vision in the midst of
the wilderness. His grace keeps open house, and lives with great splendour -- He did us the
honour to receive us with great courtesy, and detain'd us all night, together with above twenty
other guests, with all their servants and horses to a very considerable number -- The dutchess
was equally gracious, and took our ladies under her immediate protection. The longer I live,
I see more reason to believe that prejudices of education are never wholly eradicated, even
when they are discovered to be erroneous and absurd. Such habits of thinking as interest the
grand passions, cleave to the human heart in such a manner, that though an effort of reason
may force them from their hold for a moment, this violence no sooner ceases, than they resume
their grasp with an increased elasticity and adhesion.

I am led into this reflection, by what passed at the duke's table after supper. The conversation
turned upon the vulgar notions of spirits and omens, that prevail among the commonalty of North-Britain,
and all the company agreed, that nothing could be more ridiculous. One gentleman, however,
told a remarkable story of himself, by way of speculation 'Being on a party of hunting in the
North (said he), I resolved to visit an old friend, whom I had not seen for twenty years --
So long he had been retired and sequestered from all his acquaintance, and lived in a moping
melancholy way, much afflicted with lowness of spirits, occasioned by the death of his wife,
whom he had loved with uncommon affection. As he resided in a remote part of the country, and
we were five gentlemen with as many servants, we carried some provision with us from the next
market town, lest we should find him unprepared for our reception. The roads being bad, we
did not arrive at the house till two o'clock in the afternoon; and were agreeably surprised
to find a very good dinner ready in the kitchen, and the cloth laid with six covers. My friend
himself appeared in his best apparel at the gate, and received us with open arms, telling me
he had been expecting us these two hours. Astonished at this declaration, I asked who had given
him intelligence of our coming? and he smiled without making any other reply. However, presuming
upon our former intimacy, I afterwards insisted upon knowing; and he told me, very gravely,
he had seen me in a vision of the second sight -- Nay, he called in the evidence of his steward,
who solemnly declared, that his master had the day before apprised him of my coming, with four
other strangers, and ordered him to provide accordingly; in consequence of which intimation,
he had prepared the dinner which we were now eating; and laid the covers according to the number
foretold.' The incident we all owned to be remarkable, and I endeavoured to account for it
by natural means. I observed, that as the gentleman was of a visionary turn, the casual idea,
or remembrance of his old friend, might suggest those circumstances, which accident had for
once realized; but that in all probability he had seen many visions of the same kind, which
were never verified. None of the company directly dissented from my opinion; but from the objections
that were hinted, I could plainly perceive that the majority were persuaded there was something
more extraordinary in the case.

Another gentleman of the company, addressing himself to me, 'Without all doubt (said he), a
diseased imagination is very apt to produce visions; but we must find some other method to
account for something of this kind, that happened within these eight days in my neighbourhood
-- A gentleman of a good family, who cannot be deemed a visionary in any sense of the word,
was near his own gate, in the twilight, visited by his grandfather, who has been dead these
fifteen years -- The spectre was mounted seemingly on the very horse he used to ride, with
an angry and terrible countenance, and said something, which his grandson, in the confusion
of fear, could not understand. But this was not all -- He lifted up a huge horse whip, and
applied it with great violence to his back and shoulders, on which I saw the impression with
my own eyes. The apparition was afterwards seen by the sexton of the parish, hovering about
the tomb where his body lies interred; as the man declared to several persons in the village,
before he knew what had happened to the gentleman -- Nay, he actually came to me as a justice
of the peace, in order to make oath of these particulars, which, however, I declined administering.
As for the grandson of the defunct, he is a sober, sensible, worldly minded fellow, too intent
upon schemes of interest to give in to reveries. He would have willingly concealed the affair;
but he bawled out in the first transport of his fear, and, running into the house, exposed
his back and his sconce to the whole family; so that there was no denying it in the sequel.
It is now the common discourse of the country, that this appearance and behaviour of the old
man's spirit, portends some great calamity to the family, and the good-woman has actually taken
to her bed in this apprehension.'

Though I did not pretend to explain this mystery, I said, I did not at all doubt, but it would
one day appear to be a deception; and, in all probability, a scheme executed by some enemy
of the person who had sustained the assault; but still the gentleman insisted upon the clearness
of the evidence, and the concurrence of testimony, by which two creditable witnesses, without
any communication one with another, affirmed the appearance of the same man, with whose person
they were both well acquainted -- From Drumlanrig we pursued the course of the Nid to Dumfries,
which stands seven miles above the place where the river falls into the sea; and is, after
Glasgow, the handsomest town I have seen in Scotland. The inhabitants, indeed, seem to have
proposed that city as their model; not only in beautifying their town and regulating its police,
but, also in prosecuting their schemes of commerce and manufacture, by which they are grown
rich and opulent.

We re-entered England, by the way of Carlisle, where we accidentally met with our friend Lismahago,
whom we had in vain inquired after at Dumfries and other places -- It would seem that the captain,
like the prophets of old, is but little honoured in his own country, which he has now renounced
for ever -- He gave me the following particulars of his visit to his native soil -- In his
way to the place of his nativity, he learned that his nephew had married the daughter of a
burgeois, who directed a weaving manufacture, and had gone into partnership with his father-in-law:
chagrined with this information, he had arrived at the gate in the twilight, where he heard
the sound of treddles in the great hall, which had exasperated him to such a degree, that he
had like to have lost his senses: while he was thus transported with indignation, his nephew
chanced to come forth, when, being no longer master of his passion, he cried, 'Degenerate rascal!
you have made my father's house a den of thieves;' and at the same time chastised him with
his horse-whip; then, riding round the adjoining village, he had visited the burying-ground
of his ancestors by moon-light; and, having paid his respects to their manes, travelled all
night to another part of the country -- Finding the head of the family in such a disgraceful
situation, all his own friends dead or removed from the places of their former residence, and
the expence of living increased to double of what it had been, when he first left his native
country, he had bid it an eternal adieu, and was determined to seek for repose among the forests
of America.

I was no longer at a loss to account for the apparition, which had been described at Drumlanrig;
and when I repeated the story to the lieutenant, he was much pleased to think his resentment
had been so much more effectual than he intended; and he owned, he might at such an hour, and
in such an equipage, very well pass for the ghost of his father, whom he was said greatly to
resemble -- Between friends, I fancy Lismahago will find a retreat without going so far as
the wigwams of the Miamis. My sister Tabby is making continual advances to him, in the way
of affection; and, if I may trust to appearances, the captain is disposed to take opportunity
by the forelock. For my part, I intend to encourage this correspondence, and shall be glad
to see them united -- In that case, we shall find a way to settle them comfortably in our own
neighbourhood. I, and my servants, will get rid of a very troublesome and tyrannic gouvernante;
and I shall have the benefit of Lismahago's conversation, without being obliged to take more
of his company than I desire; for though an olla is a high-flavoured dish, I could not bear
to dine upon it every day of my life.

I am much pleased with Manchester, which is one of the most agreeable and flourishing towns
in Great-Britain; and I perceive that this is the place which hath animated the spirit, and
suggested the chief manufactures of Glasgow. We propose to visit Chatsworth, the Peak, and
Buxton, from which last place we shall proceed directly homewards, though by easy journies.
If the season has been as favourable in Wales as in the North, your harvest is happily finished;
and we have nothing left to think of but our October, of which let Barns be properly reminded.
You will find me much better in flesh than I was at our parting; and this short separation
has given a new edge to those sentiments of friendship with which I always have been, and ever
shall be,

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE MANCHESTER, Sept. 15.

To Mrs GWILLIM, house-keeper at Brambleton-hall.

MRS GWYLLIM,

It has pleased Providence to bring us safe back to England, and partake us in many pearls by
land and water, in particular the Devil's Harse a pike, and Hoyden's Hole, which hath got no
bottom; and, as we are drawing huomwards, it may be proper to uprise you, that Brambleton-hall
may be in condition to receive us, after this long gurney to the islands of Scotland. By the
first of next month you may begin to make constant fires in my brother's chamber and mine;
and burn a fagget every day in the yellow damask room: have the tester and curtains dusted,
and the featherbed and matrosses well haired, because, perhaps, with the blissing of haven,
they may be yoosed on some occasion. Let the ould hogsheads be well skewred and seasoned for
bear, as Mat is resolved to have his seller choak fool.

If the house was mine, I would turn over a new leaf -- I don't see why the sarvants of Wales
shouldn't drink fair water, and eat hot cakes and barley cale, as they do in Scotland, without
troubling the botcher above once a quarter -- I hope you keep accunt of Roger's purseeding
in reverence to the buttermilk. I expect my dew when I come huom, without baiting an ass, I'll
assure you. -- As you must have layed a great many more eggs than would be eaten, I do suppose
there is a power of turks, chickings, and guzzling about the house; and a brave kergo of cheese
ready for market; and that the owl has been sent to Crickhowel, saving what the maids spun
in the family.

Pray let the whole house and furniture have a thorough cleaning from top to bottom, for the
honour of Wales; and let Roger search into, and make a general clearance of the slit holes,
which the maids have in secret; for I know they are much given to sloth and uncleanness. I
hope you have worked a reformation among them, as I exhorted you in my last, and set their
hearts upon better things than they can find in junkitting and caterwauling with the fellows
of the country.

As for Win Jenkins, she has undergone a perfect metamurphysis, and is become a new creeter
from the ammunition of Humphry Clinker, our new footman, a pious young man, who has laboured
exceedingly, that she may bring forth fruits of repentance. I make no doubt but he will take
the same pains with that pert hussey Mary Jones, and all of you; and that he may have power
given to penetrate and instill his goodness, even into your most inward parts, is the fervent
prayer of

Your friend in the spirit, TAB. BRAMBLE Septr. 18.

To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS,

Lismahago is more paradoxical than ever. -- The late gulp he had of his native air, seems to
have blown fresh spirit into all his polemical faculties. I congratulated him the other day
on the present flourishing state of his country, observing that the Scots were now in a fair
way to wipe off the national reproach of poverty, and expressing my satisfaction at the happy
effects of the union, so conspicuous in the improvement of their agriculture, commerce, manufactures,
and manners -- The lieutenant, screwing up his features into a look of dissent and disgust,
commented on my remarks to this effect -- 'Those who reproach a nation for its poverty, when
it is not owing to the profligacy or vice of the people, deserve no answer. The Lacedaemonians
were poorer than the Scots, when they took the lead among all the free states of Greece, and
were esteemed above them all for their valour and their virtue. The most respectable heroes
of ancient Rome, such as Fabricius, Cincinnatus, and Regulus, were poorer than the poorest
freeholder in Scotland; and there are at this day individuals in North-Britain, one of whom
can produce more gold and silver than the whole republic of Rome could raise at those times
when her public virtue shone with unrivalled lustre; and poverty was so far from being a reproach,
that it added fresh laurels to her fame, because it indicated a noble contempt of wealth, which
was proof against all the arts of corruption -- If poverty be a subject for reproach, it follows
that wealth is the object of esteem and veneration -- In that case, there are Jews and others
in Amsterdam and London, enriched by usury, peculation, and different species of fraud and
extortion, who are more estimable than the most virtuous and illustrious members of the community.
An absurdity which no man in his senses will offer to maintain. -- Riches are certainly no
proof of merit: nay they are often (if not most commonly) acquired by persons of sordid minds
and mean talents: nor do they give any intrinsic worth to the possessor; but, on the contrary,
tend to pervert his understanding, and render his morals more depraved. But, granting that
poverty were really matter of reproach, it cannot be justly imputed to Scotland. No country
is poor that can supply its inhabitants with the necessaries of life, and even afford articles
for exportation. Scotland is rich in natural advantages: it produces every species of provision
in abundance, vast herds of cattle and flocks of sheep, with a great number of horses; prodigious
quantities of wool and flax, with plenty of copse wood, and in some parts large forests of
timber. The earth is still more rich below than above the surface. It yields inexhaustible
stores of coal, free-stone, marble, lead, iron, copper, and silver, with some gold. The sea
abounds with excellent fish, and salt to cure them for exportation; and there are creeks and
harbours round the whole kingdom, for the convenience and security of navigation. The face
of the country displays a surprising number of cities, towns, villas, and villages, swarming
with people; and there seems to be no want of art, industry, government, and police: such a
kingdom can never be called poor, in any sense of the word, though there may be many others
more powerful and opulent. But the proper use of those advantages, and the present prosperity
of the Scots, you seem to derive from the union of the two kingdoms!'

I said, I supposed he would not deny that the appearance of the country was much mended; that
the people lived better, had more trade, and a greater quantity of money circulating since
the union, than before. 'I may safely admit these premises (answered the lieutenant), without
subscribing to your inference. The difference you mention, I should take to be the natural
progress of improvement -- Since that period, other nations, such as the Swedes, the Danes,
and in particular the French, have greatly increased in commerce, without any such cause assigned.
Before the union, there was a remarkable spirit of trade among the Scots, as appeared in the
case of their Darien company, in which they had embarked no less than four hundred thousand
pounds sterling; and in the flourishing state of the maritime towns in Fife, and on the eastern
coast, enriched by their trade with France, which failed in consequence of the union. The only
solid commercial advantage reaped from that measure, was the privilege of trading to the English
plantations; yet, excepting Glasgow and Dumfries, I don't know any other Scotch towns concerned
in that traffick. In other respects, I conceive the Scots were losers by the union. -- They
lost the independency of their state, the greatest prop of national spirit; they lost their
parliament, and their courts of justice were subjected to the revision and supremacy of an
English tribunal.'

'Softly, captain (cried I), you cannot be said to have lost your own parliament, while you
are represented in that of Great-Britain.' 'True (said he, with a sarcastic grin), in debates
of national competition, the sixteen peers and forty-five commoners of Scotland, must make
a formidable figure in the scale, against the whole English legislature.' 'Be that as it may
(I observed) while I had the honour to sit in the lower house, the Scotch members had always
the majority on their side.' 'I understand you, Sir (said he), they generally side with the
majority; so much the worse for their constituents. But even this evil is not the worst they
have sustained by the union. Their trade has been saddled with grievous impositions, and every
article of living severely taxed, to pay the interest of enormous debts, contracted by the
English, in support of measures and connections in which the Scots had no interest nor concern.'
I begged he would at least allow, that by the union the Scots were admitted to all the privileges
and immunities of English subjects; by which means multitudes of them were provided for in
the army and navy, and got fortunes in different parts of England, and its dominions. 'All
these (said he) become English subjects to all intents and purposes, and are in a great measure
lost to their mother-country. The spirit of rambling and adventure has been always peculiar
to the natives of Scotland. If they had not met with encouragement in England, they would have
served and settled, as formerly, in other countries, such as Muscovy, Sweden, Denmark, Poland,
Germany, France, Piedmont, and Italy, in all which nations their descendants continue to flourish
even at this day.'

By this time my patience began to fail and I exclaimed, 'For God's sake, what has England got
by this union which, you say, has been so productive of misfortune to the Scots.' ' Great and
manifold are the advantages which England derives from the union (said Lismahago, in a solemn
tone). First and foremost, the settlement of the protestant succession, a point which the English
ministry drove with such eagerness, that no stone was left unturned, to cajole and bribe a
few leading men, to cram the union down the throats of the Scottish nation, who were surprisingly
averse to the expedient. They gained by it a considerable addition of territory, extending
their dominion to the sea on all sides of the island, thereby shutting up all back-doors against
the enterprizes of their enemies. They got an accession of above a million of useful subjects,
constituting a never-failing nursery of seamen, soldiers, labourers, and mechanics; a most
valuable acquisition to a trading country, exposed to foreign wars, and obliged to maintain
a number of settlements in all the four quarters of the globe. In the course of seven years,
during the last war, Scotland furnished the English army and navy with seventy thousand men,
over and above those who migrated to their colonies, or mingled with them at home in the civil
departments of life. This was a very considerable and seasonable supply to a nation, whose
people had been for many years decreasing in number, and whose lands and manufactures were
actually suffering for want of hands. I need not remind you of the hackneyed maxim, that, to
a nation in such circumstances, a supply of industrious people is a supply of wealth; nor repeat
an observation, which is now received as an eternal truth, even among the English themselves,
that the Scots who settle in South-Britain are remarkably sober, orderly, and industrious.'

I allowed the truth of this remark, adding, that by their industry, oeconomy, and circumspection,
many of them in England, as well as in her colonies, amassed large fortunes, with which they
returned to their own country, and this was so much lost to South-Britain. -- 'Give me leave,
sir (said he), to assure you, that in your fact you are mistaken, and in your deduction erroneous.
Not one in two hundred that leave Scotland ever returns to settle in his own country; and the
few that do return, carry thither nothing that can possibly diminish the stock of South-Britain;
for none of their treasure stagnates in Scotland -- There is a continual circulation, like
that of the blood in the human body, and England is the heart, to which all the streams which
it distributes are refunded and returned: nay, in consequence of that luxury which our connexion
with England hath greatly encouraged, if not introduced, all the produce of our lands, and
all the profits of our trade, are engrossed by the natives of South-Britain; for you will find
that the exchange between the two kingdoms is always against Scotland; and that she retains
neither gold nor silver sufficient for her own circulation. -- The Scots, not content with
their own manufactures and produce, which would very well answer all necessary occasions, seem
to vie with each other in purchasing superfluities from England; such as broad-cloth, velvets,
stuffs, silks, lace, furs, jewels, furniture of all sorts, sugar, rum, tea, chocolate and coffee;
in a word, not only every mode of the most extravagant luxury, but even many articles of convenience,
which they might find as good, and much cheaper in their own country. For all these particulars,
I conceive, England may touch about one million sterling a-year. -- I don't pretend to make
an exact calculation; perhaps, it may be something less, and perhaps, a great deal more. The
annual revenue arising from all the private estates of Scotland cannot fall short of a million
sterling; and, I should imagine, their trade will amount to as much more. -- I know the linen
manufacture alone returns near half a million, exclusive of the home-consumption of that article.
-- If, therefore, North-Britain pays a ballance of a million annually to England, I insist
upon it, that country is more valuable to her in the way of commerce, than any colony in her
possession, over and above the other advantages which I have specified: therefore, they are
no friends, either to England or to truth, who affect to depreciate the northern part of the
united kingdom.'

I must own, I was at first a little nettled to find myself schooled in so many particulars.
-- Though I did not receive all his assertions as gospel, I was not prepared to refute them;
and I cannot help now acquiescing in his remarks so far as to think, that the contempt for
Scotland, which prevails too much on this side the Tweed, is founded on prejudice and error.
-- After some recollection, 'Well, captain (said I), you have argued stoutly for the importance
of your own country: for my part, I have such a regard for our fellow-subjects of North-Britain,
that I shall be glad to see the day, when your peasants can afford to give all their oats to
their cattle, hogs, and poultry, and indulge themselves with good wheaten loaves, instead of
such poor, unpalatable, and inflammatory diet.' Here again I brought my self into a premunire
with the disputative Caledonian. He said he hoped he should never see the common people lifted
out of that sphere for which they were intended by nature and the course of things; that they
might have some reason to complain of their bread, if it were mixed, like that of Norway, with
saw dust and fish-bones; but that oatmeal was, he apprehended, as nourishing and salutary as
wheat-flour, and the Scots in general thought it at least as savoury. -- He affirmed, that
a mouse, which, in the article of self-preservation, might be supposed to act from infallible
instinct, would always prefer oats to wheat, as appeared from experience; for, in a place where
there was a parcel of each, that animal has never begun to feed upon the latter till all the
oats were consumed: for their nutritive quality, he appealed to the hale, robust constitutions
of the people who lived chiefly upon oatmeal; and, instead of being inflammatory, he asserted,
that it was a cooling sub-acid, balsamic and mucilaginous; insomuch, that in all inflammatory
distempers, recourse was had to water-gruel, and flummery made of oatmeal.

'At least (said I), give me leave to wish them such a degree of commerce as may enable them
to follow their own inclinations.' -- 'Heaven forbid! (cried this philosopher). Woe be to that
nation, where the multitude is at liberty to follow their own inclinations! Commerce is undoubtedly
a blessing, while restrained within its proper channels; but a glut of wealth brings along
with it a glut of evils: it brings false taste, false appetite, false wants, profusion, venality,
contempt of order, engendering a spirit of licentiousness, insolence, and faction, that keeps
the community in continual ferment, and in time destroys all the distinctions of civil society;
so that universal anarchy and uproar must ensue. Will any sensible man affirm, that the national
advantages of opulence are to be sought on these terms?' 'No, sure; but I am one of those who
think, that, by proper regulations, commerce may produce every national benefit, without the
allay of such concomitant evils.'

So much for the dogmata of my friend Lismahago, whom I describe the more circumstantially,
as I firmly believe he will set up his rest in Monmouthshire. Yesterday, while I was alone
with him he asked, in some confusion, if I should have any objection to the success of a gentleman
and a soldier, provided he should be so fortunate as to engage my sister's affection. I answered
without hesitation, that my sister was old enough to judge for herself; and that I should be
very far from disapproving any resolution she might take in his favour. -- His eyes sparkled
at this declaration. He declared, he should think himself the happiest man on earth to be connected
with my family; and that he should never be weary of giving me proofs of his gratitude and
attachment. I suppose Tabby and he are already agreed; in which case, we shall have a wedding
at Brambleton-hall, and you shall give away the bride. -- It is the least thing you can do,
by way of atonement for your former cruelty to that poor love-sick maiden, who has been so
long a thorn in the side of

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE Sept. 20.

We have been at Buxton; but, as I did not much relish either the company or the accommodations,
and had no occasion for the water, we stayed but two nights in the place. Lismahago has now
professed himself the admirer of our aunt, and carries on his addresses under the sanction
of her brother's approbation; so that we shall certainly have a wedding by Christmas. I should
be glad you was present at the nuptials, to help me throw the stocking, and perform other ceremonies
peculiar to that occasion. -- I am sure it will be productive of some diversion; and, truly,
it would be worth your while to come across the country on purpose to see two such original
figures in bed together, with their laced night caps; he, the emblem of good cheer, and she,
the picture of good nature. All this agreeable prospect was clouded, and had well nigh vanished
entirely, in consequence of a late misunderstanding between the future brothers-in-law, which,
however, is now happily removed.

A few days ago, my uncle and I, going to visit a relation, met with lord Oxmington at his house,
who asked us to dine with him, next day, and we accepted the invitation. -- Accordingly, leaving
our women under the care of captain Lismahago, at the inn where we had lodged the preceding
night, in a little town, about a mile from his lordship's dwelling, we went at the hour appointed,
and had a fashionable meal served up with much ostentation to a company of about a dozen persons,
none of whom he had ever seen before. -- His lordship is much more remarkable for his pride
and caprice, than for his hospitality and understanding; and, indeed, it appeared, that he
considered his guests merely as objects to shine upon, so as to reflect the lustre of his own
magnificence -- There was much state, but no courtesy; and a great deal of compliment without
any conversation. -- Before the desert was removed, our noble entertainer proposed three general
toasts; then calling for a glass of wine, and bowing all round, wished us a good afternoon.
This was the signal for the company to break up, and they obeyed it immediately, all except
our 'squire who was greatly shocked at the manner of this dismission -- He changed countenance,
bit his lip in silence, but still kept his seat, so that his lordship found himself obliged
to give us another hint, by saying, he should be glad to see us another time. 'There is no
time like the present (cried Mr Bramble); your lordship has not yet drank a bumper to the best
in Christendom.' 'I'll drink no more bumpers to-day (answered our landlord); and I am sorry
to see you have drank too many. -- Order the gentleman's carriage to the gate.' -- So saying,
he rose and retired abruptly; our 'squire starting up at the same time, laying his hand upon
his sword, and eyeing him with a most ferocious aspect. The master having vanished in this
manner, our uncle bad one of the servants to see what was to pay; and the fellow answering,
'This is no inn,' 'I cry you mercy (cried the other), I perceive it is not; if it were, the
landlord would be more civil. There's a guinea, however; take it, and tell your lord, that
I shall riot leave the country till I have had the opportunity to thank him in person for his
politeness and hospitality.'

We then walked down stairs through a double range of lacqueys, and getting into the chaise,
proceeded homewards. Perceiving the 'squire much ruffled, I ventured to disapprove of his resentment,
observing, that as lord Oxmington was well known to have his brain very ill timbered, a sensible
man should rather laugh, than be angry at his ridiculous want of breeding. -- Mr Bramble took
umbrage at my presuming to be wiser than he upon this occasion; and told me, that as he had
always thought for himself in every occurrence in life, he would still use the same privilege,
with my good leave.

When we returned to our inn, he closeted Lismahago; and having explained his grievance, desired
that gentleman to go and demand satisfaction of lord Oxmington in his name. -- The lieutenant
charged himself with this commission, and immediately set out a horseback for his lordship's
house, attended, at his own request, by my man Archy Macalpine, who had been used to military
service; and truly, if Macalpine had been mounted upon an ass, this couple might have passed
for the knight of La Mancha and his 'squire Panza. It was not till after some demur that Lismahago
obtained a private audience, at which he formally defied his lordship to single combat, in
the name of Mr Bramble, and desired him to appoint the time and place. Lord Oxmington was so
confounded at this unexpected message, that he could not, for some time, make any articulate
reply; but stood staring at the lieutenant with manifest marks of perturbation. At length,
ringing a bell with great vehemence, he exclaimed, 'What! a commoner send a challenge to a
peer of the realm! -- Privilege! privilege! -- Here's a person brings me a challenge from the
Welshman that dined at my table -- An impudent fellow. -- My wine is not yet out of his head.'

The whole house was immediately in commotion. -- Macalpine made a soldierly retreat with two
horses; but the captain was suddenly surrounded and disarmed by the footmen, whom a French
valet de chambre headed in this exploit; his sword was passed through a close-stool, and his
person through the horse-pond. In this plight he returned to the inn, half mad with his disgrace.
So violent was the rage of his indignation, that he mistook its object. -- He wanted to quarrel
with Mr Bramble; he said, he had been dishonoured on his account, and he looked for reparation
at his hands. -- My uncle's back was up in a moment; and he desired him to explain his pretensions.
-- 'Either compel lord Oxmington to give me satisfaction (cried he), or give it me in your
own person.' 'The latter part of the alternative is the most easy and expeditious (replied
the 'squire, starting up): if you are disposed for a walk, I'll attend you this moment.'

Here they were interrupted by Mrs Tabby, who had overheard all that passed. -- She now burst
into the room, and running betwixt them, in great agitation, 'Is this your regard for me (said
she to the lieutenant), to seek the life of my brother?' Lismahago, who seemed to grow cool
as my uncle grew hot, assured her he had a very great respect for Mr Bramble, but he had still
more for his own honour, which had suffered pollution; but if that could be once purified,
he should have no further cause of dissatisfaction. The 'squire said, he should have thought
it incumbent upon him to vindicate the lieutenant's honour; but, as he had now carved for himself,
he might swallow and digest it as well as he could -- In a word, what betwixt the mediation
of Mrs Tabitha, the recollection of the captain, who perceived he had gone too far, and the
remonstrances of your humble servant, who joined them at this juncture, those two originals
were perfectly reconciled; and then we proceeded to deliberate upon the means of taking vengeance
for the insults they had received from the petulant peer; for, until that aim should be accomplished,
Mr Bramble swore, with great emphasis, that he would not leave the inn where we now lodged,
even if he should pass his Christmas on the spot.

In consequence of our deliberations, we next day, in the forenoon, proceeded in a body to his
lordship's house, all of us, with our servants, including the coachman, mounted a-horseback,
with our pistols loaded and ready primed. -- Thus prepared for action, we paraded solemnly
and slowly before his lordship's gate, which we passed three times in such a manner, that he
could not but see us, and suspect the cause of our appearance. -- After dinner we returned,
and performed the same cavalcade, which was again repeated the morning following; but we had
no occasion to persist in these manoeuvres. About noon, we were visited by the gentleman, at
whose house we had first seen lord Oxmington. -- He now came to make apologies in the name
of his lordship, who declared he had no intention to give offence to my uncle, in practising
what had been always the custom of his house; and that as for the indignities which had been
put upon the officer, they were offered without his Lordship's knowledge, at the instigation
of his valet de chambre. -- 'If that be the case (said my uncle, in a peremptory tone), I shall
be contented with lord Oxmington's personal excuses; and I hope my friend will be satisfied
with his lordship's turning that insolent rascal out of his service.' -- 'Sir (cried Lismahago),
I must insist upon taking personal vengeance for the personal injuries I have sustained.'

After some debate, the affair was adjusted in this manner. -- His lordship, meeting us at our
friend's house, declared he was sorry for what had happened; and that he had no intention to
give umbrage. -- The valet de chambre asked pardon of the lieutenant upon his knees, when Lismahago,
to the astonishment of all present, gave him a violent kick on the face, which laid him on
his back, exclaiming in a furious tone, 'Oui je te pardonne, gens foutre.'

Such was the fortunate issue of this perilous adventure, which threatened abundance of vexation
to our family; for the 'squire is one of those who will sacrifice both life and fortune, rather
than leave what they conceive to be the least speck or blemish upon their honour and reputation.
His lordship had no sooner pronounced his apology, with a very bad grace, than he went away
in some disorder, and, I dare say, he will never invite another Welchman to his table.

We forthwith quitted the field of this atchievement, in order to prosecute our journey; but
we follow no determinate course. We make small deviations, to see the remarkable towns, villas,
and curiosities on each side of our route; so that we advance by slow steps towards the borders
of Monmouthshire: but in the midst of these irregular motions, there is no abberration nor
eccentricity in that affection with which I am, dear Wat,

Yours always, J. MELFORD Sept. 28.

To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

At what time of life may a man think himself exempted from the necessity of sacrificing his
repose to the punctilios of a contemptible world? I have been engaged in a ridiculous adventure,
which I shall recount at meeting; and this, I hope, will not be much longer delayed, as we
have now performed almost all our visits, and seen every thing that I think has any right to
retard us in our journey homewards -- A few days ago, understanding by accident, that my old
friend Baynard was in the country, I would not pass so near his habitation without paying him
a visit, though our correspondence had been interrupted for a long course of years.

I felt my self very sensibly affected by the idea of our past intimacy, as we approached the
place where we had spent so many happy days together; but when we arrived at the house, I could
not recognize any one of those objects, which had been so deeply impressed upon my remembrance
-- The tall oaks that shaded the avenue, had been cut down, and the iron gates at the end of
it removed, together with the high wall that surrounded the court yard. The house itself, which
was formerly a convent of Cistercian monks, had a venerable appearance: and along the front
that looked into the garden, was a stone gallery, which afforded me many an agreeable walk,
when I was disposed to be contemplative. Now the old front is covered with a screen of modern
architecture; so that all without is Grecian, and all within Gothic. As for the garden, which
was well stocked with the best fruit which England could produce, there is not now the least
vestage remaining of trees, walls, or hedges -- Nothing appears but a naked circus of loose
sand, with a dry bason and a leaden triton in the middle.

You must know, that Baynard, at his father's death, had a clear estate of fifteen hundred pounds
a-year, and was in other respects extremely well qualified to make a respectable figure in
the commonwealth; but, what with some excesses of youth, and the expence of a contested election,
he in a few years found himself encumbered with a debt of ten thousand pounds, which he resolved
to discharge by means of a prudent marriage. He accordingly married a miss Thomson, whose fortune
amounted to double the sum that he owed -- She was the daughter of a citizen, who had failed
in trade; but her fortune came by an uncle, who died in the East-Indies -- Her own parents
being dead, she lived with a maiden aunt, who had superintended her education; and, in all
appearance, was well enough qualified for the usual purposes of the married state -- Her virtues,
however, stood rather upon a negative, than a positive foundation -- She was neither proud,
insolent, nor capricious, nor given to scandal, nor addicted to gaming, nor inclined to gallantry.
She could read, and write, and dance, and sing, and play upon the harpsichord, and smatter
French, and take a hand at whist and ombre; but even these accomplishments she possessed by
halves -- She excelled in nothing. Her conversation was flat, her stile mean, and her expression
embarrassed -- In a word, her character was totally insipid. Her person was not disagreeable;
but there was nothing graceful in her address, nor engaging in her manners; and she was so
ill qualified to do the honours of the house, that when she sat at the head of the table, one
was always looking for the mistress of the family in some other place.

Baynard had flattered himself, that it would be no difficult matter to mould such a subject
after his own fashion, and that she would chearfully enter into his views, which were wholly
turned to domestic happiness. He proposed to reside always in the country, of which he was
fond to a degree of enthusiasm; to cultivate his estate, which was very improvable; to enjoy
the exercise of rural diversions; to maintain an intimacy of correspondence with some friends
that were settled in his neighbourhood; to keep a comfortable house, without suffering his
expence to exceed the limits of his income; and to find pleasure and employ merit for his wife
in the management and avocations of her own family -- This, however, was a visionary scheme,
which he never was able to realize. His wife was as ignorant as a new-born babe of everything
that related to the conduct of a family; and she had no idea of a country-life. Her understanding
did not reach so far as to comprehend the first principles of discretion; and, indeed, if her
capacity had been better than it was, her natural indolence would not have permitted her to
abandon a certain routine, to which she had been habituated. She had not taste enough to relish
any rational enjoyment; but her ruling passion was vanity, not that species which arises from
self-conceit of superior accomplishments, but that which is of a bastard and idiot nature,
excited by shew and ostentation, which implies not even the least consciousness of any personal
merit.

The nuptial peal of noise and nonsense being rung out in all the usual changes, Mr Baynard
thought it high time to make her acquainted with the particulars of the plan which he had projected
-- He told her that his fortune, though sufficient to afford all the comforts of life, was
not ample enough to command all the superfluities of pomp and pageantry, which, indeed, were
equally absurd and intolerable -- He therefore hoped she would have no objection to their leaving
London in the spring, when he would take the opportunity to dismiss some unnecessary domestics,
whom he had hired for the occasion of their marriage -- She heard him in silence, and after
some pause, 'So (said she) I am to be buried in the country!' He was so confounded at this
reply, that he could not speak for some minutes: at length he told her, he was much mortified
to find he had proposed anything that was disagreeable to her ideas -- 'I am sure (added he)
I meant nothing more than to lay down a comfortable plan of living within the bounds of our
fortune, which is but moderate.' 'Sir (said she), you are the best judge of your own affairs
-- My fortune, I know, does not exceed twenty thousand pounds -- Yet, even with that pittance,
I might have had a husband who would not have begrudged me a house in London' -- 'Good God!
my dear (cried poor Baynard, in the utmost agitation), you don't think me so sordid -- I only
hinted what I thought -- But, I don't pretend to impose --' 'Yes, sir (resumed the lady), it
is your prerogative to command, and my duty to obey'  So saying, she burst into tears and retired
to her chamber, where she was joined by her aunt -- He endeavoured to recollect himself, and
act with vigour of mind on this occasion; but was betrayed by the tenderness of his nature,
which was the greatest defect of his constitution. He found the aunt in tears, and the niece
in a fit, which held her the best part of eight hours, at the expiration of which, she began
to talk incoherently about death and her dear husband, who had sat by her all this time, and
now pressed her hand to his lips, in a transport of grief and penitence for the offence he
had given -- From thence forward, he carefully avoided mentioning the country; and they continued
to be sucked deeper and deeper into the vortex of extravagance and dissipation, leading what
is called a fashionable life in town -- About the latter end of July, however, Mrs Baynard,
in order to exhibit a proof of conjugal obedience, desired of her own accord, that they might
pay a visit to his country house, as there was no company left in London. He would have excused
himself from this excursion which was no part of the oeconomical plan he had proposed; but
she insisted upon making this sacrifice to his taste and prejudices, and away they went with
such an equipage as astonished the whole country. All that remained of the season was engrossed
by receiving and returning visits in the neighbourhood; and, in this intercourse it was discovered
that sir John Chickwell had a house-steward and one footman in livery more than the complement
of Mr Baynard's household. This remark was made by the aunt at table, and assented to by the
husband, who observed that sir John Chickwell might very well afford to keep more servants
than were found in the family of a man who had not half his fortune. Mrs Baynard ate no supper
that evening; but was seized with a violent fit, which completed her triumph over the spirit
of her consort. The two supernumerary servants were added -- The family plate was sold for
old silver, and a new service procured; fashionable furniture was provided, and the whole house
turned topsy turvy.

At their return to London in the beginning of winter, he, with a heavy heart, communicated
these particulars to me in confidence. Before his marriage, he had introduced me to the lady
as his particular friend; and I now offered in that character, to lay before her the necessity
of reforming her oeconomy, if she had any regard to the interest of her own family, or complaisance
for the inclinations of her husband -- But Baynard declined my offer, on the supposition that
his wife's nerves were too delicate to bear expostulation; and that it would only serve to
overwhelm her with such distress as would make himself miserable.

Baynard is a man of spirit, and had she proved a termagant, he would have known how to deal
with her; but, either by accident or instinct, she fastened upon the weak side of his soul,
and held it so fast, that he has been in subjection ever since -- I afterwards advised him
to carry her abroad to France or Italy, where he might gratify her vanity for half the expence
it cost him in England: and this advice he followed accordingly. She was agreeably flattered
with the idea of seeing and knowing foreign parts, and foreign fashions; of being presented
to sovereigns, and living familiarly with princes. She forthwith seized the hint which I had
thrown out on purpose, and even pressed Mr Baynard to hasten his departure; so that in a few
weeks they crossed the sea to France, with a moderate train, still including the aunt; who
was her bosom counsellor, and abetted her in all her oppositions to her husband's will-- Since
that period, I have had little or no opportunity to renew our former correspondence -- All
that I knew of his transactions, amounted to no more than that after an absence of two years,
they returned so little improved in oeconomy, that they launched out into new oceans of extravagance,
which at length obliged him to mortgage his estate -- By this time she had bore him three children,
of which the last only survives, a puny boy of twelve or thirteen, who will be ruined in his
education by the indulgence of his mother.

As for Baynard, neither his own good sense, nor the dread of indigence, nor the consideration
of his children, has been of force sufficient to stimulate him into the resolution of breaking
at once the shameful spell by which he seems enchanted -- With a taste capable of the most
refined enjoyment, a heart glowing with all the warmth of friendship and humanity, and a disposition
strongly turned to the more rational pleasures of a retired and country life, he is hurried
about in a perpetual tumult, amidst a mob of beings pleased with rattles, baubles, and gewgaws,
so void of sense and distinction, that even the most acute philosopher would find it a very
hard task to discover for what wise purpose of providence they were created -- Friendship is
not to be found; nor can the amusements for which he sighs be enjoyed within the rotation of
absurdity, to which he is doomed for life. He has long resigned all views of improving his
fortune by management and attention to the exercise of husbandry, in which he delighted; and
as to domestic happiness, not the least glimpse of hope remains to amuse his imagination. Thus
blasted in all his prospects, he could not fail to be overwhelmed with melancholy and chagrin,
which have preyed upon his health and spirits in such a manner, that he is now threatened with
a consumption.

I have given you a sketch of the man, whom the other day I went to visit -- At the gate we
found a great number of powdered lacquies, but no civility -- After we had sat a considerable
time in the coach, we were told, that Mr Baynard had rode out, and that his lady was dressing;
but we were introduced to a parlour, so very fine and delicate, that in all appearance it was
designed to be seen only, not inhabited. The chairs and couches were carved, gilt, and covered
with rich damask, so smooth and slick, that they looked as if they had never been sat upon.
There was no carpet upon the floor, but the boards were rubbed and waxed in such a manner,
that we could not walk, but were obliged to slide along them; and as for the stove, it was
too bright and polished to be polluted with sea-coal, or stained by the smoke of any gross
material fire -- When we had remained above half an hour sacrificing to the inhospitable powers
in the temple of cold reception, my friend Baynard arrived, and understanding we were in the
house, made his appearance, so meagre, yellow, and dejected, that I really should not have
known him, had I met with him in any other place. Running up to me, with great eagerness, he
strained me in his embrace, and his heart was so full, that for some minutes he could not speak.
Having saluted us all round, he perceived our uncomfortable situation, and conducting us into
another apartment, which had fire in the chimney, called for chocolate -- Then, withdrawing,
he returned with a compliment from his wife, and, in the mean time, presented his son Harry,
a shambling, blear-eyed boy, in the habit of a hussar; very rude, forward, and impertinent.
His father would have sent him to a boarding-school, but his mamma and aunt would not hear
of his lying out of the house; so that there was a clergyman engaged as his tutor in the family.

As it was but just turned of twelve, and the whole house was in commotion to prepare a formal
entertainment, I foresaw it would be late before we dined, and proposed a walk to Mr Baynard,
that we might converse together freely. In the course of this perambulation, when I expressed
some surprize that he had returned so soon from Italy, he gave me to understand, that his going
abroad had not at all answered the purpose, for which he left England; that although the expence
of living was not so great in Italy as at home, respect being had to the same rank of life
in both countries, it had been found necessary for him to lift himself above his usual stile,
that he might be on some footing with the counts, marquises, and cavaliers, with whom he kept
company -- He was obliged to hire a great number of servants, to take off a great variety of
rich cloaths, and to keep a sumptuous table for the fashionable scorocconi of the country;
who, without a consideration of this kind, would not have payed any attention to an untitled
foreigner, let his family or fortune be ever so respectable -- Besides, Mrs Baynard was continually
surrounded by a train of expensive loungers, under the denominations of language-masters, musicians,
painters, and ciceroni; and had actually fallen into the disease of buying pictures and antiques
upon her own judgment, which was far from being infallible -- At length she met with an affront,
which gave her disgust to Italy, and drove her back to England with some precipitation. By
means of frequenting the dutchess of B[edford]'s conversazione, while her grace was at Rome,
Mrs Baynard became acquainted with all the fashionable people of that city, and was admitted
to their assemblies without scruple -- Thus favoured, she conceived too great an idea of her
own importance, and when the dutchess left Rome, resolved to have a conversazione that should
leave the Romans no room to regret her grace's departure. She provided hands for a musical
entertainment, and sent biglietti of invitation to every person of distinction; but not one
Roman of the female sex appeared at her assembly -- She was that night seized with a violent
fit, and kept her bed three days, at the expiration of which she declared that the air of Italy
would be the ruin of her constitution. In order to prevent this catastrophe, she was speedily
removed to Geneva, from whence they returned to England by the way of Lyons and Paris. By the
time they arrived at Calais, she had purchased such a quantity of silks, stuffs, and laces,
that it was necessary to hire a vessel to smuggle them over, and this vessel was taken by a
custom-house cutter; so that they lost the whole cargo, which had cost them above eight hundred
pounds.

