 We [9] we decided to climb to Montanvers
morning, requesting the "Sea-of-ice", and visit in the afternoon, on foot, the waterfalls of
the Pilgrims and the Dard and refrigerators "Bossons."

[9] When I speak in plural I refer to my wife and me.

There is an old story which in respect of a modern application may bear re-telling. Once upon
a time in a lonely 'coombe-bottom' of the Downs, where there was neither church, chapel, nor
public building of any kind, there lived a cottage-girl who had never seen anything of civilisation.
A friend, however, having gone out to service in a market-town some few miles distant, she
one day walked in to see her, and was shown the wonders of the place, the railway, the post-office,
the hotels, and so forth. In the evening the friend accompanied her a short way on the return
journey, and as they went out of the town, they passed the church. Looking suddenly up at the
tower, the visitor exclaimed, 'Lard-a-mussy! you've got another moon here. Yourn have got figures
all round un!' In her excitement, and prepared to see marvels, she had mistaken the large dial
of the church clock for a moon of a different kind to the one which shone upon her native home.
This old tale, familiar to country folk as an illustration of simplicity, has to-day a wider
meaning. Until recent years the population dwelling in villages and hamlets, and even in little
rural towns, saw indeed the sun by day and the moon by night, and learned the traditions and
customs of their forefathers, such as had been handed down for generations. But now a new illumination
has fallen upon these far-away places. The cottager is no longer ignorant, and his child is
well grounded in rudimentary education, reads and writes with facility, and is not without
knowledge of the higher sort. Thus there is now another moon with the figures of education
all round it. In this book some notes have been made of the former state of things before it
passes away entirely. But I would not have it therefore thought that I wish it to continue
or return. My sympathies and hopes are with the light of the future, only I should like it
to come from nature. The clock should be read by the sunshine, not the sun timed by the clock.
The latter is indeed impossible, for though all the clocks in the world should declare the
hour of dawn to be midnight, the sun will presently rise just the same.

RICHARD JEFFERIES.

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER                                                PAGE

   I. OKEBOURNE CHACE.  FELLING TREES.                    1

  II. CICELY.  THE BROOK.                                20

 III. A PACK OF STOATS.  BIRDS.                          42

  IV. HAMLET FOLK.                                       61

   V. WIND-ANEMONES.  THE FISHPOND.                      82

  VI. A FARMER OF THE OLDEN TIMES.                      103

 VII. THE CUCKOO-FIELDS.                                125

VIII. CICELY'S DAIRY.  HILARY'S TALK.                   144

  IX. THE WATER-MILL.  FIELD NAMES.                     163

   X. THE COOMBE-BOTTOM.  CONCLUSION.                   183

ROUND ABOUT A GREAT ESTATE.

CHAPTER I.

OKEBOURNE CHACE.    FELLING TREES.

The great house at Okebourne Chace stands in the midst of the park, and from the southern windows
no dwellings are visible. Near at hand the trees appear isolated, but further away insensibly
gather together, and above them rises the distant Down crowned with four tumuli. Among several
private paths which traverse the park there is one that, passing through a belt of ash wood,
enters the meadows. Sometimes following the hedges and sometimes crossing the angles, this
path finally ends, after about a mile, in the garden surrounding a large thatched farmhouse.
In the maps of the parish it has probably another name, but from being so long inhabited by
the Lucketts it is always spoken of as Lucketts' Place.

The house itself and ninety acres of grass land have been their freehold for many generations;
in fact, although there is no actual deed of entail, the property is as strictly preserved
in the family and descends from heir to heir as regularly as the great estate and mansion adjacent.
Old Hilary Luckett--though familiarly called 'old,' he is physically in the prime of life--is
probably about the most independent man in the county. Yet he is on terms of more than goodwill
with the great house, and rents one of the largest farms on the estate, somewhere between six
and seven hundred acres. He has the right of shooting, and in the course of years privilege
after privilege has been granted, till Hilary is now as free of the warren as the owner of
the charter himself. If you should be visiting Okebourne Chace, and any question should arise
whether of horses, dog, or gun, you are sure to be referred to Hilary. Hilary knows all about
it: he is the authority thereabout on all matters concerning game. Is it proposed to plant
fresh covers? Hilary's opinion is asked. Is it proposed to thin out some of the older trees;
what does Hilary say?

It is a fact that people really believe no part of a partridge is ever taken away after being
set before him. Neither bones nor sinews remain: so fond is he of the brown bird. Having eaten
the breast, and the juicy leg and the delicate wing, he next proceeds to suck the bones; for
game to be thoroughly enjoyed should be eaten like a mince-pie, in the fingers. There is always
one bone with a sweeter flavour than the rest, just at the joint or fracture: it varies in
every bird according to the chance of the cooking, but, having discovered it, put it aside
for further and more strict attention. Presently he begins to grind up the bones in his strong
teeth, commencing with the smallest. His teeth are not now so powerful as when in younger days
he used to lift a sack of wheat with them, or the full milking-bucket up to the level of the
copper in the dairy. Still they gradually reduce the slender skeleton. The feat is not so difficult
if the bird has been well hung.

He has the right to shoot, and need take no precautions. But, in fact, a farmer, whether he
has liberty or not, can usually amuse himself occasionally in that way. If his labourer sees
him quietly slipping up beside the hedge with his double-barrel towards the copse in the corner
where a pheasant has been heard several times lately, the labourer watches him with delight,
and says nothing. Should anyone in authority ask where that gun went off, the labourer 'thenks
it wur th' birdkippur up in th' Dree Vurlong, you.' Presently the pheasant hangs in the farmer's
cellar, his long tail sweeping the top of the XXX cask; and the 'servant-wench,' who is in
and out all day, also says nothing. Nor can anything exceed the care with which she disposes
of the feathers when she picks the bird. There is a thorough sympathy between master and man
so far. Hilary himself, with all that great estate to sport over, cannot at times refrain from
stepping across the boundary. His landlord once, it is whispered, was out with Hilary shooting,
and they became so absent-minded while discussing some interesting subject as to wander several
fields beyond the property before they discovered their mistake.

At Lucketts' Place the favourite partridge always comes up for supper: a pleasant meal that
nowadays can rarely be had out of a farmhouse. Then the bright light from the burning log outshines
the lamp, and glances rosy on the silver tankard standing under a glass shade on a bracket
against the wall. Hilary's father won it near half a century since in some heats that were
run on the Downs on the old racecourse, before it was ploughed up. For the wicked turnip is
responsible for the destruction of old England; far more so than the steam-engine.

Waste lands all glorious with golden blossoming furze, with purple foxglove, or curious orchis
hiding in stray corners; wild moor-like lands, beautiful with heaths and honey-bottle; grand
stretches of sloping downs where the hares hid in the grass, and where all the horses in the
kingdom might gallop at their will; these have been overthrown with the plough because of the
turnip. As the root crops came in, the rage began for thinning the hedges and grubbing the
double mounds and killing the young timber, besides putting in the drains and driving away
the wild-ducks. The wicked turnip put diamonds on the fingers of the farmer's wife, and presently
raised his rent. But now some of the land is getting 'turnip-sick,' the roots come stringy
and small and useless, so that many let it 'vall down.'

After the last crop it is left alone, the couch grows, the docks spread out from the hedges,
every species of weed starts up, till by-and-by the ploughed land becomes green and is called
pasture. This is a process going on at the present moment, and to which owners of land should
see without delay. Hilary has been looked on somewhat coldly by other tenants for openly calling
the lord of the manor's attention to it. He sturdily maintains that arable land if laid down
for pasture should be laid down properly--a thing that requires labour and expenditure just
the same as other farming operations. So the silver tankard, won when 'cups' were not so common
as now, is a memorial of the old times before the plough turned up the sweet turf of the racecourse.

Hilary does not bet beyond the modest 'fiver' which a man would be thought unsociable if he
did not risk on the horse that carries the country's colours. But he is very 'thick' with the
racing-people on the Downs, and supplies the stable with oats, which is, I believe, not an
unprofitable commission. The historical anecdote of the Roman emperor who fed his horse on
gilded oats reads a little strange when we first come across it in youth. But many a race-horse
owner has found reason since to doubt if it be so wonderful, as his own stud--to judge by the
cost--must live on golden fodder. Now, before I found this out about the stable, it happened
one spring day that I met Hilary in the fields, and listened to a long tirade which he delivered
against 'wuts.'

The wheat was then showing a beautiful flag, the despised oats were coming out in jag, and
the black knots on the delicate barley straw were beginning to be topped with the hail. The
flag is the long narrow green leaf of the wheat; in jag means the spray-like drooping awn of
the oat; and the hail is the beard of the barley, which when it is white and brittle in harvest-time
gets down the back of the neck, irritating the skin of those who work among it. According to
Hilary, oats do not flourish on rich land; and when he was young (and everything was then done
right) a farmer who grew oats was looked upon with contempt, as they were thought only fit
for the poorest soil, and a crop that therefore denoted poverty. But nowadays, thundered Hilary
in scorn, all farmers grow oats, and, indeed, anything in preference to wheat.

Afterwards, at the Derby that year, methought I saw Hilary as I passed the sign of the 'Carrion
Crow:' the dead bird dangles from the top of a tall pole stuck in the sward beside a booth.
I lost him in the crowd then. But later on in autumn, while rambling round the Chace, there
came on a 'skit' of rain, and I made for one of his barns for shelter. There was Hilary in
the barn with his men, as busy as they could well be, winnowing oats. It seemed to me that
especial care was being taken, and on asking questions, to which the men silently replied with
a grin, Hilary presently blurted out that the dust had to be carefully removed, because the
grain was for the racing-stable. The dainty creatures up there must have food free from dust,
which makes them too thirsty. The hay supplied, for the same reason, had to be shaken before
being used. No oats would do under 40 lb. the bushel, and the heavier the better.

Luckett was a man whom every one knew to be 'square;' but, if the talk of the country-side
is to be believed, the farmers who have much to do with the stables do not always come off
successful. They sometimes become too sharp, and fancy themselves cleverer than a class of
men who, if their stature be not great, are probably the keenest of wit. The farmer who obliges
them is invariably repaid with lucrative 'tips;' but if he betrays those 'tips' may possibly
find his information in turn untrustworthy, and have to sell by auction, and depart to Texas.
Luckett avoids such pitfalls by the simple policy of 'squareness,' which is, perhaps, the wisest
of all. When the 'skit' blew past he took his gun from the corner and stepped over the hatch,
and came down the path with me, grumbling that all the grain, even where the crop looked well,
had threshed out so light.

Farming had gone utterly to the dogs of late seasons; he thought he should give up the land
he rented, and live on the ninety acres freehold. In short, to hear him talk, you would think
that he was conferring a very great favour upon his landlord in consenting to hold that six
or seven hundred acres at a rent which has not been altered these fifty years at least. But
the owner was a very good fellow, and as Hilary said, 'There it is, you see.' My private opinion
is that, despite the late bad seasons, Hilary has long been doing remarkably well; and as for
his landlord, that he would stand by him shoulder to shoulder if defence were needed.

Much as I admired the timber about the Chace, I could not help sometimes wishing to have a
chop at it. The pleasure of felling trees is never lost. In youth, in manhood--so long as the
arm can wield the axe--the enjoyment is equally keen. As the heavy tool passes over the shoulder
the impetus of the swinging motion lightens the weight, and something like a thrill passes
through the sinews. Why is it so pleasant to strike? What secret instinct is it that makes
the delivery of a blow with axe or hammer so exhilarating? The wilder frenzy of the sword--the
fury of striking with the keen blade, which overtakes men even now when they come hand to hand,
and which was once the life of battle--seems to arise from the same feeling. Then, as the sharp
edge of the axe cuts deep through the bark into the wood, there is a second moment of gratification.
The next blow sends a chip spinning aside; and by-the-bye never stand at the side of a woodman,
for a chip may score your cheek like a slash with a knife. But the shortness of man's days
will not allow him to cut down many trees. In imagination I sometimes seem to hear the sounds
of the axes that have been ringing in the forests of America for a hundred years, and envy
the joy of the lumbermen as the tall pines toppled to the fall. Of our English trees there
is none so pleasant to chop as the lime; the steel enters into it so easily.

In the enclosed portion of the park at Okebourne the boughs of the trees descended and swept
the sward. Nothing but sheep being permitted to graze there, the trees grew in their natural
form, the lower limbs drooping downwards to the ground. Hedgerow timber is usually 'stripped'
up at intervals, and the bushes, too, interfere with the expansion of the branches; while the
boughs of trees standing in the open fields are nibbled off by cattle. But in that part of
the park no cattle had fed in the memory of man; so that the lower limbs, drooping by their
own weight, came arching to the turf. Each tree thus made a perfect bower.

The old woodmen who worked in the Chace told me it used to be said that elm ought only to be
thrown on two days of the year--i.e. the 31st of December and the 1st of January. The meaning
was that it should be cut in the very 'dead of the year,' when the sap had retired, so that
the timber might last longer. The old folk took the greatest trouble to get their timber well
seasoned, which is the reason why the woodwork in old houses has endured so well. Passing under
some elms one June evening, I heard a humming overhead, and found it was caused by a number
of bees and humble-bees busy in the upper branches at a great height from the ground. They
were probably after the honey-dew. Buttercups do not flourish under trees; in early summer,
where elms or oaks stand in the mowing-grass, there is often a circle around almost bare of
them and merely green, while the rest of the meadow glistens with the burnished gold of that
beautiful flower.

The oak is properly regarded as a slow-growing tree, but under certain circumstances a sapling
will shoot up quickly to a wonderful height. When the woodmen cut down a fir plantation in
the Chace there was a young oak among it that overtopped the firs, and yet its diameter was
so small that it looked no larger than a pole; and the supporting boughs of the firs being
now removed it could not uphold itself, but bent so much from the perpendicular as to appear
incapable of withstanding a gale. The bark of the oak, when stripped and stacked, requires
fine weather to dry it, much the same as hay, so that a wet season like 1879 is very unfavourable.

In the open glades of the Chace there were noble clumps of beeches, and if you walked quietly
under them in the still October days you might hear a slight but clear and distinct sound above
you. This was caused by the teeth of a squirrel nibbling the beech-nuts, and every now and
then down came pieces of husk rustling through the coloured leaves. Sometimes a nut would fall
which he had dropped; and yet, with the nibbling sound to guide the eye, it was not always
easy to distinguish the little creature. But his tail presently betrayed him among the foliage,
far out on a bough where the nuts grew. The husks, if undisturbed, remain on all the winter
and till the tree is in full green leaf again; the young nuts are formed about midsummer.

The black poplars are so much like the aspen as to be easily mistaken, especially as their
leaves rustle in the same way. But the true aspen has a smooth bark, while that of the black
poplar is scored or rough. Woodmen always call the aspen the 'asp,' dropping the termination.
In the spring the young foliage of the black poplar has a yellow tint. When they cut down the
alder poles by the water and peeled them, the sap under the bark as it dried turned as red
as if stained. The paths in spring were strewn with the sheaths of the young leaves and buds
pushing forth; showers of such brown sheaths came off the hawthorn with every breeze. These,
with the catkins, form the first fall from tree and bush. The second is the flower, as the
May, and the horse-chestnut bloom, whose petals cover the ground. The third fall is that of
the leaf, and the fourth the fruit.

On the Scotch fir the young green cones are formed about the beginning of June, and then the
catkin adjacent to the cone is completely covered with quantities of pale yellow farina. If
handled, it covers the fingers as though they had been dipped in sulphur-flour; shake the branch
and it flies off, a little cloud of powdery particles. The scaly bark takes a ruddy tinge,
when the sunshine falls upon it, and would then, I think, be worthy the attention of an artist
as much as the birch bark, whose peculiar mingling of silvery white, orange, and brown, painters
so often endeavour to represent on canvas. There is something in the Scotch fir, crowned at
the top like a palm with its dark foliage, which, in a way I cannot express or indeed analyse,
suggests to my mind the far-away old world of the geologists.

In the boughs of the birch a mass of twigs sometimes grows so close and entangled together
as to appear like a large nest from a distance when the leaves are off. Even as early as December
the tomtits attack the buds, then in their sheaths, of the birch, clinging to the very extremities
of the slender boughs. I once found a young birch growing on the ledge of a brick bridge, outside
the parapet, and some forty or fifty feet from the ground. It was about four feet high, quite
a sapling, and apparently flourishing, though where the roots could find soil it was difficult
to discover.

The ash tree is slowly disappearing from many places, and owners of hedgerow and copse would
do well to plant ash, which affords a most useful wood. Ash poles are plentiful, but ash timber
gets scarcer year by year; for as the present trees are felled there are no young ones rising
up to take their place. Consequently ash is becoming dearer, as the fishermen find; for many
of the pleasure yachts which they let out in summer are planked with ash, which answers well
for boats which are often high and dry on the beach, though it would not do if always in the
water. These beach-boats have an oak frame, oak stem and stern-post, beech keel, and are planked
with ash. When they require repairing, the owners find ash planking scarce and dear.

Trees may be said to change their garments thrice in the season. In the spring the woods at
Okebourne were of the tenderest green, which, as the summer drew on, lost its delicacy of hue.
Then came the second or 'midsummer shoot,' brightening them with fresh leaves and fresh green.
The second shoot of the oak is reddish: there was one oak in the Chace which after midsummer
thus became ruddy from the highest to the lowest branch; others did not show the change nearly
so much. Lastly came the brown and yellow autumn tints.

CHAPTER II.

CICELY.    THE BROOK.

In the kitchen at Lucketts' Place there was a stool made by sawing off about six inches of
the butt of a small ash tree. The bark remained on, and it was not smoothed or trimmed in any
way. This mere log was Cicely Luckett's favourite seat as a girl; she was Hilary's only daughter.
The kitchen had perhaps originally been the house, the rest having been added to it in the
course of years as the mode of life changed and increasing civilisation demanded more convenience
and comfort. The walls were quite four feet thick, and the one small lattice-window in its
deep recess scarcely let in sufficient light, even on a summer's day, to dispel the gloom,
except at one particular time.

The little panes, yellow and green, were but just above the ground, looking out upon the road
into the rickyard, so that the birds which came searching along among the grasses and pieces
of wood thrown carelessly aside against the wall could see into the room. Robins, of course,
came every morning, perching on the sill and peering in with the head held on one side. Blackbird
and thrush came, but always passed the window itself quickly, though they stayed without fear
within a few inches of it on either hand.

There was an old oak table in the centre of the room--a table so solid that young Aaron, the
strong labourer, could only move it with difficulty. There was no ceiling properly speaking,
the boards of the floor above and a thick beam which upheld it being only whitewashed; and
much of that had scaled off. An oaken door led down a few steps into the cellar, and over both
cellar and kitchen there sloped a long roof, thatched, whose eaves were but just above the ground.

Now, when there was no one in the kitchen, as in the afternoon, when even the indoor servants
had gone out to help in the hayfield, little Cicely used to come in here and sit dreaming on
the ash log by the hearth. The rude stool was always placed inside the fireplace, which was
very broad for burning wood, faggots and split pieces of timber. Bending over the grey ashes,
she could see right up the great broad tunnel of the chimney to the blue sky above, which seemed
the more deeply azure, as it does from the bottom of a well. In the evenings when she looked
up she sometimes saw a star shining above. In the early mornings of the spring, as she came
rushing down to breakfast, the tiny yellow panes of the window which faced the east were all
lit up and rosy with the rays of the rising sun.

The beautiful light came through the elms of the rickyard, away from the ridge of the distant
Down, and then for the first hour of the day the room was aglow. For quite two hundred years
every visible sunrise had shone in at that window more or less, as the season changed and the
sun rose to the north of east. Perhaps it was that sense of ancient homeliness that caused
Cicely, without knowing why, to steal in there alone to dream, for nowhere else indoors could
she have been so far away from the world of to-day.

Left much to herself, she roamed along the hedgerow as now and then a mild day came, soon after
the birds had paired, and saw the arrow-shaped, pointed leaves with black spots rising and
unrolling at the sides of the ditches. Many of these seemed to die away presently without producing
anything, but from some there pushed up a sharply conical sheath, from which emerged the spadix
of the arum with its frill. Thrusting a stick into the loose earth of the bank, she found the
root, covered with a thick wrinkled skin which peeled easily and left a white substance like
a small potato. Some of the old women who came into the kitchen used to talk about 'yarbs,'
and she was told that this was poisonous and ought not to be touched--the very reason why she
slipped into the dry ditch and dug it up. But she started with a sense of guilt as she heard
the slow rustle of a snake gliding along the mound over the dead, dry leaves of last year.

In August, when the reapers began to call and ask for work, she found the arum stalks, left
alone without leaves, surrounded with berries, some green, some ripening red. As the berries
ripen, the stalk grows weak and frequently falls prone of its own weight among the grasses.
This noisome fruit of clustering berries, like an ear of maize stained red, they told her was
'snake's victuals,' and to be avoided; for, bright as was its colour, it was only fit for a
reptile's food.

She knew, too, where to find the first 'crazy Betties,' whose large yellow flowers do not wait
for the sun, but shine when the March wind scatters king's ransoms over the fields. These are
the marsh marigolds: there were two places where she gathered them, one beside the streamlet
flowing through the 'Mash,' a meadow which was almost a water-meadow; and the other inside
a withy-bed. She pulled the 'cat's-tails,' as she learned to call the horse-tails, to see the
stem part at the joints; and when the mowing-grass began to grow long, picked the cuckoo-flowers
and nibbled the stalk and leaflets to essay the cress-like taste. In the garden, which was
full of old-fashioned shrubs and herbs, she watched the bees busy at the sweet-scented 'honey-plant,'
and sometimes peered under the sage-bush to look at the 'effets' that hid there.

By the footpath through the meadows there were now small places where the mowers had tried
their new scythes as they came home, a little warm with ale perhaps, from the market town.
They cut a yard or two of grass as they went through the fields, just to get the swing of the
scythe and as a hint to the farmer that it was time to begin. With the first June rose in the
hedge the haymaking commenced--the two usually coincide--and then Cicely fluctuated between
the haymakers and the mowers, now watching one and now the other. One of the haymaking girls
was very proud because she had not lost a single wooden tooth out of her rake, for it is easy
to break or pull them out. In the next field the mowers, one behind the other in echelon, left
each his swathe as he went. The tall bennets with their purplish anthers, the sorrel, and the
great white 'moon-daisies' fell before them. Cicely would watch till perhaps the sharp scythe
cut a frog, and the poor creature squealed with the pain.

Then away along the hedge to the pond in the corner, all green with 'creed,' or duckweed, when
one of the boys about the place would come timidly up to offer a nest of eggs just taken, and
if she would speak to him would tell her about his exploits 'a-nisting,' about the bombarrel
tit--a corruption apparently of nonpareil--and how he had put the yellow juice of the celandine
on his 'wurrut' to cure it. Then they pulled the plantain leaves, those that grew by the path,
to see which could draw out the longest 'cat-gut;' the sinews, as it were, of the plant stretching
out like the strings of a fiddle.

In the next meadow the cows had just been turned into fresh grass, and were lazily rioting
in it. They fed in the sunshine with the golden buttercups up above their knees, literally
wading in gold, their horns as they held their heads low just visible among the flowers. Some
that were standing in the furrows were hidden up to their middles by the buttercups. Their
sleek roan and white hides contrasted with the green grass and the sheen of the flowers: one
stood still, chewing the cud, her square face expressive of intense content, her beautiful
eye--there is no animal with a more beautiful eye than the cow--following Cicely's motions.
At this time of the year, as they grazed far from the pens, the herd were milked in the corner
of the field, instead of driving them to the yard.

One afternoon Cicely came quietly through a gap in the hedge by this particular corner, thinking
to laugh at Aaron's voice, for he milked there and sang to the cows, when she saw him sitting
on the three-legged milking-stool, stooping in the attitude of milking, with the bucket between
his knees, but firm asleep, and quite alone in his glory. He had had too much ale, and dropped
asleep while milking the last cow, and the herd had left him and marched away in stately single
file down to the pond, as they always drink after the milking. Cicely stole away and said nothing;
but presently Aaron was missed and a search made, and he was discovered by the other men still
sleeping. Poor 'young Aaron' got into nearly as much disgrace through the brown jug as a poaching
uncle of his through his ferrets and wires.

When the moon rose full and lit up the Overboro'-road as bright as day, and the children came
out from the cottages to their play, Cicely, though she did not join, used to watch their romping
dances and picked up the old rhymes they chanted. When the full moon shone in at her bedroom
window, Cicely was very careful to turn away or cover her face; for she had heard one of the
mowers declare that after sleeping on the hay in the moonlight one night he woke up in the
morning almost blind. Besides the meadows around Lucketts' Place, she sometimes wandered further
to the edge of Hilary's great open arable fields, where the green corn, before it came out
in ear, seemed to flutter, flutter like innumerable tiny flags, as the wind rushed over it.

She learned to rub the ripe ears in her hands to work the grain out of the husk, and then to
winnow away the chaff by letting the corn slowly drop in a stream from one palm to the other,
blowing gently with her mouth the while. The grain remained on account of its weight, the chaff
floating away, and the wheat, still soft though fully formed, could thus be pleasantly tasted.
The plaintive notes of the yellowhammer fell from the scanty trees of the wheat-field hedge,
and the ploughboy who was put there to frighten away the rooks told her the bird said, repeating
the song over and over again, 'A little bit of bread and no cheese.' And indeed these syllables,
with a lengthening emphasis on the 'no,' come ludicrously near to represent the notes. The
ploughboy understood them very well, for to have only a hunch of bread and little or no cheese
was often his own case.

Two meadows distant from the lower woods of the Chace there is what seems from afar a remarkably
wide hedge irregularly bordered with furze. But on entering a gateway in it you find a bridge
over a brook, which for some distance flows with a hedge on either side. The low parapet of
the bridge affords a seat--one of Cicely's favourite haunts--whence in spring it is pleasant
to look up the brook; for the banks sloping down from the bushes to the water are yellow with
primroses, and hung over with willow boughs. As the brook is straight, the eye can see under
these a long way up; and presently a kingfisher, bright with azure and ruddy hues, comes down
the brook, flying but just above the surface on which his reflection travels too. He perches
for a moment on a branch close to the bridge, but the next sees that he is not alone, and instantly
retreats with a shrill cry.

A moorhen ventures forth from under the arches, her favourite hiding-place, and feeds among
the weeds by the shore, but at the least movement rushes back to shelter. A wood-pigeon comes
over, flying slowly; he was going to alight on the ash tree yonder, but suddenly espying some
one under the cover of the boughs increases his pace and rises higher. Two bright bold bullfinches
pass; they have a nest somewhere in the thick hawthorn. A jay, crossing from the fir plantations,
stays awhile in the hedge, and utters his loud harsh scream like the tearing of linen. For
a few hours the winds are still and the sunshine broods warm over the mead. It is a delicious
snatch of spring.

Every now and then a rabbit emerges from the burrows which are scattered thickly along the
banks, and, passing among the primroses, goes through the hedge into the border of furze, and
thence into the meadow-grass. Some way down the brook they are so numerous as to have destroyed
the vegetation on the banks, excepting a few ferns, by their constant movements and scratching
of the sand; so that there is a small warren on either side of the water. It is said that they
occasionally swim across the broad brook, which is much too wide to jump; but I have never
seen such a thing but once. Read civil law, read a Commercial Code which was a treaty Appendix bookkeeping; Cernuda
consulted with the young, eloquent advocate y. .. nothing more. The Uncle certainly prepared.
Expected a rush. Oh! He knew that Nepo would Bonis armed to defend himself! So he took flight
was so long the subject ... therefore, worth truth, his legs trembled each time he said: "Today
the same name other than his uncle and I say ...».

But if he knew what he had to say even! One afternoon the postman arrived with two letters internal
mail. An era of Serafina, who had seemed at home Emma was three or four days this time wrote
Bonis, forgetting the treaty, which was not to write him, and said he felt bad and nasty trouble
because of a letter of Mochi, had not arrived. Asked consolation, a visit and ... developed some
hard. Sorry infinite, but the innkeeper of the Olive had wounded pride, had offended, and I wanted
to pay to have the right to leave the inn, and tell the rude not know dealing with a woman,
alone, without a man to defend her.

Given this letter, the first stirrings of Bonis were worthy of a Bayardo and a Croesus in one
piece. For a moment he forgot his priesthood and was on the ground through the guest of Oliver
in a lunge, and throwing to the base, a mesh pocket, as Mochi those used in the operas ....
But the lyrics counterfeit of another letter he called attention: tore the envelope and read
at once, and what a blow!, the content of anonymity because was. He did not say more than this:
"Thief! Sacrilegious! Where are the seven thousand reais returned in the confessional by a repentant
sinner? ".

Bonis, who was in her bedroom, sitting slumped on the quilt of blue
flowers humble bed.

He felt a cold sweat, his throat tight.

"I'm getting bad!" He said.

But suddenly forgot their evil, anonymous, all because Eufemia came screaming, running, ran into
Bonis knees, and exclaimed:

- "Miss, miss ... The girl is in pain.

Bonis jumped like a tiger, ran through the rooms and corridors, with a boot and shoe, as letters
had been caught ill-fated, and came to the office of his wife in a few bounds.

Horrified, looking doomed to hell, Emma grabbed twisted iron nail
shoulders and neck Minghetti, who had not had time to rise from the
bench the piano.

He was singing and accompanying himself, as usual, when his disciple threw a scream of horror,
shocked and horrified by the first labor pain next. Was caught the teacher and friend, not only
with the instinct of every woman in trances such, but as determined not to die alone, if that
was dying, determined not to let the prey this time and take them to another world to him
to take first hand.

At present Bonis, there was a movement in the three appeared to obey the impulse of a same mandate
of consciousness, Emma released her neck and shoulder, Gaetano, this gave a jump separating
from Emma, ​​and Reyes walked resolved pretended to claim, to occupy
the site of Minghetti.

Emma grabbed more anxious, more confident sturdy neck and chest her husband, she felt the contact of
the nails and very strong shaking, nervous, a strange new delight, indirectly revealed the
presence of being that looked so desire. That was it, yes, he, the son who was there, which was
announced by the pain of mother, with that sad and solemn mystery, grave, sublime in its uncertainty,
all the great natural moments of life.

In Emma's desperate push to each new pain, Bonis felt, besides the natural effects the weakness
of women in such trouble, besides mere physiological phenomenon, the character the wife saw the selfishness,
tyranny, cruelty ever. A percentage of that Emma damage done by relying on him, and as trying
to convey by the contact part pain, for distribution, Bonis attributed it to the desire to annoy,
to make him suffer for nothing.

- Let me die, Bonis, I'm dying! - She shouted, perched on her husband.

The weight seemed to him sweet and loving voice.

He searched the faces of Emma, ​​who had supported on his chest, and found an expression like
on the covers Melpomene Gallery dramatic. Frightened eyes, with some loss, of the mother, did
not express any tenderness gender of fixed her son did not think he thought of nothing but suffering,
and that could die, and that it was an atrocity die and others to stay here. He suffered and was
furious; took the set, in the supreme hour, like a condemned man, innocent, but resigned and attached
to life. There was a time when Bonis thought he felt the sharp teeth of his wife in the flesh
of the neck.

Minghetti cabinet had disappeared under the pretext of going to tell more lords.

Indeed, shortly after his cousin Sebastian appeared, pale, and five
minutes Marta very upset, because that could delay a few days the
next link, and perhaps Christening overshadow the wedding.

One would think, by the way they look at the scene, which had been given assurances that Emma
did not give birth until after she married. Nepomuceno was finally presented, together old doctor,
the distinguished obstetrician, because, with apologies to D. Basilio, Emma was saved that
felony, until the day of trance, Aguado, but at the critical moment, if things do not came very
crooked, the other. I wanted to give birth to the miraculous popular midwife, who never he
died any customer. Ladies and women of the village had more faith in the man in San Ramon. Those
who died, died forever in the hands of the obstetricians without supernatural prestige. The
midwife could call time distinguished colleagues. A lack of science, he was conscious, and
on the way helped the legend that made him infallible.

Bonis, who had always defended the obstetricians in the city and harshly
attacked fame miracle of the great midwife, seeing that he was entering
contaminated general faith.

That science and forgive Mr. Aguado ... but he also felt full of confidence presence of that
ignorant as practical, far more than a day had convicted him falsely
to the sterility of his wife.

This was the false prophet who had started the hope of being a parent, to reach the dignity that
seemed higher. Outside and wants, Don Venancio came, as usual, shouting,
scolding, saying she did not respond to anything because it was called
later.

No one greeted, separated Kings pushed the side of your wife made this lie on the bed and
under the very noses of the astonished Bonis asked such kind of utensils that to him, the future
father, he figured what the illustrious midwife were material required
to produce a string with which the child drown.

Sebastian skeptical especially since he had left the romance and fattened, he smiled, quietly
ensuring that the thing was not for so soon.

D. Venancio hurry, taking steps with the gestures of a firefighter in a fire. Always did the
same. Sebastian had seen him many times, they were not to report it.

Martin believed that the role of an innocent child who had played
in this comedy, there this quotation: Vase.

And he retired to the dining room where he found Minghetti, which
dipped biscuits in Malaga.

I was not happy as usual.

From there you could hear, from time to time, the screams of Emma as if they gave muted.

Marta looked at the Italian with malicious curiosity. "Things in the world!" Thought the German
that in the end for their pure wilderness, was more skeptical than Sebastian. "This here as
if nothing mattered, and the other unhappy !...». Minghetti was dunking biscuits and drinking
Malaga.

Finally look at the persistent and expressive eyes Marta.

Took the wrong end leaves, and approaching the German rosy, when she thought he was going
to reveal a secret, to do some inner confidence ... grabbed her waist and her mouth sealed
with a loud kiss.

Marta's scream mingled with the distant other throwing the mother.

-XVI-

"I was going to be a father!" To this idea in his brain burst the
booms phrases as of gunpowder in fireworks.

Reyes noticed with great regret that your heart took at least part of the solemn event that the
head ... and rhetoric. That new dignity, the first, in fact, his life, was called, why let him,
basically, somewhat cold?

Above all, why not love even the son of her womb, as son, not As a concept? ... '"Son or daughter?
Mystery - Bonis thought that at that moment doubted the reality penalty paid to the gut -. Maybe
daughter, though, God forbid! Mystery. "

And up the fold of the bed and slid under the bedclothes.

That bed, even were a few hours, it seemed something like an abdication. "It was the role of husband,
where trance delivery, too passive, rebuffed."

Bonis was itching to do something, to intervene directly and effectively in that business, was
for him of such grave importance.

More was, but the reason I said that in such cases the husbands of the world all had very little
to do, and that everything was now a thing of the mother and the doctor, he felt like he was there
being even more useless than other parents in similar situations, that is cornered too much,
too much of it is dispensed.

However, what he had said D. Venancio was no turning back.

- You, my friend Bonifacio, to bed, to bed a few hours, because this may be long and we will need
all forces, and if not you rest now, you can not serve as fresh troops when needed.

"Well, this was rational."

So he slept, because he always yielded to reason and evidence and give further thought, if
you could, now that would be a father and had to give example. But he had no reason for being
was the indifference of everyone else, including Emma, and the strange
looks and gestures that took their displays of paternal and marital
everyone who walked around his wife.

Doña Celestina, registered midwife, who had come on the advice of D. Venancio, the husband
of the midwife, D. Alberto, who also walked there, Nepomuceno, Marta,
Sebastian and even the folksy Minghetti, although this was looking
at him at times with eyes that seemed to reveal some respect and some
awe.

Looking back and tying ropes, Bonis Serafina came to remember that it had wanted to give to
understand, some time ago already, that the birth of his son, de Bonis, was anything but should
be taken with heat in July Mochi himself, in a letter written months earlier from Corunna, spoke
of the case and paternal enthusiasm with a singular indifference, words behind which it seemed
to him to see the smiles of sympathy and even mocking.

But, finally, what of Serafina and Mochi could be jealousy and fear of losing their friendship
and protection. Serafina seen in fixed, in what was to come a rival,
that would eventually steal the whole heart of his former lover, his
good friend ... "Poor Serafina!".

No, there was that fear. He had a heart for everyone.

Charity, Fraternity, was compatible with the moral more stringent. Not to mention that ...
frankly, that parental love was not something so intense, as strong as he had believed to see
him from afar. Ca! It was not like large passions or a hundred leagues. Where was that selfish
personal satisfaction that comes the pleasures of love and vanity
flattered?

Where that smile of life, which was as the box which contained the joy in the sublime moments
of passion?

This was something else, a feeling austere, something cold, poetic, yes, the mystery with him, but
had nothing of solemnity.

It was something like an endowment, as made bishop in short, was no joy or passion.

Bonis and spun on his bed, impatiently, like a pony, holding back only because meet the rational
precept D. Venancio.

"Sure, there to rest, can give birth tonight or not give birth until tomorrow ... or even past.
All these cries may be false alarm. Good is she! If it were not for Don Venancio has touched
the creature .... I still flaky self. But, of all kinds, Emma is able to complain of pain one
month earlier than necessary. Yes, we sleep.

Can this be for long and having to watch a lot .... If I leave these intruders. What is strange
is that Emma, ​​who always I have had to nurse, and almost almost bedside, I now call him.
Women's extraordinary! And now that I would help with such gusto. "

The warmth of the sheets, that dream began to draw him out, bowing to the views vague, to the
contemplation of images and memories soporific flattering, made her think, sigh

- If it was my wife Serafina, and this son of hers, and I a little younger!

As if the thought and wish this had been a knife, back in his mind, he knew where, Bonis felt
a spiritual pain, as a protest, and ears have fancied burbujillas felt like a distant noise, into the
room from his wife, a thing as the first cry of a little creature.

-
My God, if you will !...-- Without wishing to confess, he felt remorse
for what he had thinking, and superstition made him believe that his
son was born in the same instant the somewhat father disowned him
and his mother.

- Soul of my soul - Bonis shouted, throwing a jump
to the ground -, would that be like being born orphan Father!

My son! Emma, ​​Emma, ​​wife of mine!

He opened the bedroom door, and above all, Bonifacio heard different, of course, the whining providing
optimum of a newborn.

"His own flesh to be born again crying!".

- A child, you have a child, sir! - Cried Euphemia, who came like
a whirlwind and reached to touch the stunned Bonis, not realizing
that was the gentleman in his shirt in the middle of the bedroom.

Neither she nor he saw it, the maid was excited, moved; Bonis thanked
him in the soul, as she put pants on backwards and had to undo the
mistake, trembling, panting, wondering if once again break with convention
and take running in their underwear around the house later.

But no half-dressed, and facing walls, doors and furniture, and people arrived at the foot of
the bed of his wife.

In the lap of Mrs. Celestina was a mass movement that made purple frog, something like troglodyte
animal, which looked surprised in his den and brought to power light
and dangers of life; Bonis, in a split second, he remembered reading
Some poor little creatures of the sea, fleeing more powerful enemies,
were resigned to live in hiding under the sand, denying life-saving
light: eternal prison for fear of the world.

His son seemed well. He had taken so long!

Fancied that he was born to force, violence was to be opening the
doors of life ....

- Coronado, Bonis, crowned! - Said a weak voice
and mimosa, excited, from the bed.

Bonis, without understanding, approached and gave Emma a hug, crying.

Emma wept, nervous, weak, emaciated, turned into an old lady suddenly. She pressed her husband's
neck with the force with which she clung to life, and as complaining, but without the sour
voice of other times, he went

- Coronado, Bonis, crowned, you know, was crowned!

- Yeah, like head was born! - Shouted D. Venancio, who was on the other side of the bed with the
arms rolled up, with some spots of blood on his shirt and frock coat, sweating, much like an
official slaughterhouse.

- But he was crowned a long time ... Bonis!

- Yes, centuries - the doctor said.

- To you I told you, did you go, but there was a danger, eh, D. Venancio?

-
But, my dear, if you just go to bed ....

- Yes, but long ago that
things were coming ... was crowned ... and not telling you not to
scare you ... There was danger! ...

And Emma cried, yet with a grudge
against the danger past, but more tenderly by the pleasure of living,
have been saved, with a heart full of a feeling that it should be
gratitude to God and it was not because she did not think God thought
itself.

- Well, well, less talk - shouted D. Venancio, and hid her
veil Emma's shoulders.

- And now, watch sleep!

- No, my child, sleep,
no, that really would be dangerous - Bonis said with a shudder. The
idea of ​​the death of his wife entered his imagination as a ghost.
She die! Kedar he no mother! And he turned to his son, who wept like
a prophet.

O wonder! At that instant he saw the infant's face, wrinkled,
graceless, unfortunate the spitting image of his face, as he had seen
a mirror sometimes at night when she cried alone humiliation, misfortune.
He remembered the night he died his mother, he, at bedtime, desolate,
had been in the shaving mirror, distracted, habit, to see if I had
dark circles and coated tongue, and noticed that expression tragicomic,
that monkey face choking, it was so different from what he believed
to to feel so so so pure and poetic. Although he was right faction,
crying is became very ugly, very ridiculous, with a gesture similar
to giving his side the most sentimental music, performed in the flute
Valcárcel. Her son, her poor son was crying like this: ugly, laughable
and sad too. But ... Was his portrait! Yes, it was with that expression
of suffocation. Then, to calm down a bit, thanks to a shot of sugar
water, which must have seemed flood pleasant, grimaced with mouth
and nose, which led to the memory Bonis grandfather. "Oh, like my
father! Like me in the shade! ".

And at the same time it felt like
a spiritual rest, and proud animal, male, remorse stung him with having
fathered the first pains of parenthood, which are formed by agglomerates
of surprises, strange penalties, which hurt as their own, the holy
charity of love for children.
The rook displayed great power of wing, twisting and turning, now descending or turning on
one side to glide more rapidly, and uttering short 'caws' of eagerness or anger; but, just
eluding the heavy rush of its pursuer, the swift doubled and darted away before it, as if tempting
the enemy to charge, and then enjoying his disappointment. Several other swifts wheeled above
at a distance, apparently watching. These evolutions lasted some minutes, rook and swift rising
higher and higher into the air until, tired of being chased, the swift went straight away at
full speed, easily outstripping the rook, which soon desisted from the attempt to follow.

When birds are thus combating, the chief aim of each is to get above the other, as any elevation
gives an advantage. This may be continually noticed in spring, when fighting is always going
on, and is as characteristic of the small birds as the larger. At first I thought it was a
crow after the swift, but came to the conclusion that it must be a rook because the battle
began over the rookery and afterwards the aggressor sailed away to where some rooks were feeding.
Nor would a crow have exhibited such agility of wing. Swallows often buffet a crow; but this
was a clear case of a rook attacking.

In the country rooks never perch on houses, and but seldom on sheds, unless fresh thatched,
when they come to examine the straw, as also on the ricks. But in Brighton, which is a treeless
locality, a rook may sometimes be seen on a chimney-pot in the midst of the town, and the pinnacles
of the Pavilion are a favourite resort; a whole flock of rooks and jackdaws often wheel about
the domes of that building. At the Chace a rook occasionally mounted on a molehill recently
thrown up and scattered the earth right and left with his bill--striking now to one side and
now to the other. Hilary admitted that rooks destroyed vast quantities of grubs and creeping
things, but was equally positive that they feasted on grain; and indeed it could not be denied
that a crop of wheat almost ripe is a very favourite resort of a flock. He had seen rooks carry
away ears of wheat detached from the stalk to an open spot for better convenience. They would
follow the dibbling machine, taking each grain of seed-wheat in succession, guided to the exact
spot by the slight depression made by the dibble.

Every evening all the rooks of the neighbourhood gathered into vast flocks and returned to
roost in the woods of the Chace. But one winter afternoon there came on the most dense fog
that had been known for a length of time, and a flock of rooks on their way as usual to the
Chace stopped all night in a clump of trees on the farm a mile from the roosting-place. This
the oldest labourer had never known them do before. In the winter just past (1879-80) there
were several very thick fogs during sharp frost. One afternoon I noticed a small flock of starlings
which seemed unable to find their way home to the copse where I knew vast numbers of them roosted.
This flock as it grew dusk settled in an elm by the roadside, then removed to another, shaking
down the rime from the branches, and a third time wheeled round and perched in an oak. At that
hour on ordinary days the starlings would all have been flying fast in a straight line for
the copse, but these were evidently in doubt and did not know which direction to take.

Hilary disliked to see the wood-pigeons in his wheat-fields: the wood-pigeon beats the grains
out of a wheat-ear with the bill, striking it while on the ground. The sparrows, again, clear
the standing wheat-ears, which at a little distance look thin and disarranged, and when handled
are empty.

There were many missel-thrushes about the Chace; they are fond of a wooded district. They pack
together in summer and part in winter--just opposite in that respect to so many other birds,
which separate in warm weather and congregate as it grows cold, so that the lower the temperature
the larger the flock. In winter and spring the missel-thrushes fly alone or not more than two
together. After their young have left the nest they go in small packs. I saw ten or twelve
rise from an arable field on the 18th of June last year; there do not often seem to be more
than a dozen together. I have counted ten in a pack on the 16th of September, and seven together
as late as the 2nd of October. Soon after that they appear to separate and act on their individual
wishes. Starlings in like manner pack after their young can fly, but then they do not separate
in autumn.

It may be remarked that by autumn the young missel-thrushes would not only fly well, but would
have been educated by the old birds, and would have come to maturity. Their natural independence
might then come into play. But these are effects rather than causes, besides which I think
birds and animals often act from custom rather than for advantage. Among men customs survive
for centuries after the original meaning has been lost. I had always been told by country people
that the missel-thrush was a solitary bird, and when I first observed a pack and mentioned
it some incredulity was expressed. Very naturally in summer people do not see much but hay
and wheat. It was noticed on the farms about the Chace in the springs of 1878 and 1879 that
the corncrakes, which had formerly been so numerous and proclaimed their presence so loudly,
were scarcely heard at all.

It is a little outside my subject, since it did not occur in the Chace, but the other day a
friend was telling me how he had been hunted by bucks while riding a bicycle. He was passing
through a forest in the summer, when he suddenly became aware of six or seven bucks coming
down a glade after him. The track being rough he could not ride at full speed--probably they
would have outstripped him even if he had been able to do so--and they were overtaking him
rapidly. As they came up he saw that they meant mischief, and fearing a bad fall he alighted
by a tree, behind which he thought to dodge them. But no sooner did he touch the ground than
the bucks so furiously rushing after him stopped dead in their career; he stepped towards them,
and directly they saw him walking they retreated hastily to a distance.

The first berries to go as the autumn approaches are those of the mountain-ash. Both blackbirds
and thrushes began to devour the pale-red bunches hanging on the mountain-ashes as early as
the 4th of September last year. Starlings are fond of elder-berries: a flock alighting on a
bush black with ripe berries will clear the bunches in a very short time. Haws, or peggles,
which often quite cover the hawthorn bushes, are not so general a food as the fruit of the
briar. Hips are preferred; at least, the fruit of the briar is the first of the two to disappear.
The hip is pecked open (by thrushes, redwings, and blackbirds) at the tip, the seeds extracted,
and the part where it is attached to the stalk left, just as if the contents had been sucked
out. Greenfinches, too, will eat hips.

Haws are often left even after severe frosts; sometimes they seem to shrivel or blacken, and
may not perhaps be palatable then. Missel-thrushes and wood-pigeons eat them. Last winter in
the stress of the sharp and continued frosts the greenfinches were driven in December to swallow
the shrivelled blackberries still on the brambles. The fruity part of the berries was of course
gone, and nothing remained but the seeds or pips, dry and hard as wood; they were reduced to
feeding on this wretched food. Perhaps the last of the seeds available are those of the docks.

This is well known to bird-fowlers, and on a dry day in January they take two large bunches
of docks--'red docks' they call them--tied round the centre like faggots and well smeared at
the top with birdlime. These are placed on the ground, by a hedge, and near them a decoy goldfinch
in a cage. Goldfinches eat dock-seed, and if any approach the decoy-bird calls. The wild bird
descends from the hedge to feed on the dock-seed and is caught. Goldfinches go in pairs all
the winter and work along the hedges together. In spring the young green buds upon the hawthorn
are called 'cuckoo's bread and cheese' by the ploughboys.

CHAPTER IV.

HAMLET FOLK.

It happened one Sunday morning in June that a swarm of bees issued from a hive in a cottage
garden near Okebourne church. The queen at first took up her position in an elm tree just outside
the churchyard, where a large cluster of bees quickly depended from a bough. Being at a great
height the cottager could not take them, and, anxious not to lose the swarm, he resorted to
the ancient expedient of rattling fire-tongs and shovel together in order to attract them by
the clatter. Bonis had concern
that the children rather than parents, grandparents are like. The word metempsychosis blew up
in the ears, inside. The estimated long, time ago, the exotic, and now it flattered its meaning
is not precisely metempsychosis .-- ...-- thought -; but there may be something that ... otherwise.
Who knows if the immortality of the soul is a thing is explained by this kind of rebirth?
Yes, my heart says, and I Intuition says, my son will be something for my father. And now
the Kings are born rich, become the ancient splendor ...».

In thinking this, a cold sweat ran up the spine .... He recalled, in synthesis of two or three
sentences, the dialogue was surprised that night: the Nepomuceno with Marta. Oh! Would but the Kings?
Was born one more ... y. .. born in ruin! They were ruined, or were to become pregnant very soon
that the uncle had said, he knew what to expect!

Bonis had to sit in a chair in the bed because his wife did not dare to do so.

- God in the world there is no happiness possible! Tonight, I thought it would be gay pictures
of that interior .... all of it What gives me horrible torment! Ruined my son! And ruined my fault!
Yes, yes, I started the work .... And besides, my ineptitude, my
ignorance of the most important things in life ... the numbers ...
money ... accounts ... Prose, I said!

The art, the passion! That was poetry ... And now the son is born
ruined me!

Emma moved a little and sighed, as grumbling.

Bonis was a time determined to wake her. That was in a hurry. I wanted to reveal the terrible secret
as soon as possible, the same night. There had to waste a day from the morning were the two
to change his life, had to put props to the house, and this did not allow waiting ....

"In the future, less brooding and more action. This is my son. I'll be your master, will be the
administrator of our assets. And the factory, that factory that do not even know what they are
doing fixed point? There'll see. Oh, Don Juan, my dear Nepomuceno, scene there, I know, but I'm
solved! Come the scene. But all this morning.

Now, the immediate, the act manly, dignified a father who belonged to that night, was ... Emma
awaken, aware of everything. "

But Emma woke up without anyone entreating him, and Bonis had no time
to dare to address the question of the secret revealed: his wife insulted
him, as in classical times of servitude, because I was there papando
flies.

He threw the bedroom screaming, calling him Eufemia and gave him
by the hand of the maiden, with the door in his face.

"We also had to conclude that, but ... after delivery.

Had to avoid abortion, nothing upset her .... In giving birth ... and raising ... if you raised it,
as he wished, be talking about everything would be if a Reyes could and should be a slave to a
Valcárcel.

"However, I must re-enter with the best ways to announce the danger ...».

He lifted the latch of the door that just closed it ... but again let fall.

He felt very weak. There was no dinner. I saw red sparks in the air.

Had to take some food and leave everything for tomorrow. It was just like that, too late. The trouble
was that I had no appetite, that he lost appetite hard.

Made two
boiled eggs, and finally bedtime. Take long to fall asleep, and dreamed,
crying, Serafina, who had died and called from within the earth, with
a bottle between arms. The bottle contained a human fetus in spirits.

-XV-

Emma
defended his hope that the doctor was wrong, as long as he could,
and with many resources of ingenuity. In the matter of the evidence
which was removed she had intimacies to confess, intimacies which
generally were full proof, claimed as an exception its strange nature,
an enemy of all rhythm in the most common physiological phenomena.
But his major argument was presented in a profile:

- Do you see?
Nothing. And the corset tightened more and more each day without fear,
ignoring advice of prudence and hygiene. There was a regular feud for many years between the Okebourne
men and the Clipstone 'chaps;' and never did the stalwart labourers of those two villages meet
without falling to fisticuffs with right goodwill. Nor did they like each other at all the
worse, and after the battle drank deeply from the same quart cups. Had these encounters found
an historian to put them upon record, they would have read something like the wars (without
the bloodshed) between the little Greek cities, whose population scarcely exceeded that of
a village, and between which and our old villages there exists a certain similarity. A simplicity
of sentiment, an unconsciousness as it were of themselves, strong local attachments and hatreds,
these they had in common, and the Okebourne and Clipstone men thwacked and banged each other's
broad chests in true antique style.

Hilary said that when he was a boy almost all the cottages in the place had a man or woman
living in them who had attained to extreme old age. He reckoned up cottage after cottage to
me in which he had known old folk up to and over eighty years of age. Of late the old people
seemed to have somehow died out: there were not nearly so many now.

Okebourne Wick, a little hamlet of fifteen or twenty scattered houses, was not more than half
a mile from Lucketts' Place; on the Overboro' road, which passed it, was a pleasant roadside
inn, where, under the sign of The Sun, very good ale was sold. Most of the farmers dropped
in there now and then, not so much for a glass as a gossip, and no one from the neighbouring
villages or from Overboro' town ever drove past without stopping. In the 'tap' of an evening
you might see the labourers playing at 'chuck-board,' which consists in casting a small square
piece of lead on to certain marked divisions of a shallow tray-like box placed on the trestle-table.
The lead, being heavy, would stay where it fell; the rules I do not know, but the scene reminded
me of the tric-trac contests depicted by the old Dutch painters.

Young Aaron was very clever at it. He pottered round the inn of an evening and Saturday afternoons,
doing odd jobs in the cellar with the barrels; for your true toping spirit loves to knock the
hoops and to work about the cask, and carry the jugs in answer to the cry for some more 'tangle-legs'--for
thus they called the strong beer. Sometimes a labourer would toast his cheese on a fork in
the flame of the candle. In the old days, before folk got so choice of food and delicate of
palate, there really seemed no limit to the strange things they ate. Before the railways were
made, herds of cattle had of course to travel the roads, and often came great distances. The
drovers were at the same time the hardiest and the roughest of men in that rough and hardy
time. As night came on, after seeing their herd safe in a field, they naturally ate their supper
at the adjacent inn. Then sometimes, as a dainty treat with which to finish his meal, a drover
would call for a biscuit, large and hard, as broad as his hand, and, taking the tallow candle,
proceed to drip the grease on it till it was well larded and soaked with the melted fat.

At that date, before the Government stamp had been removed from newspapers, the roadside inn
was the centre and focus of all intelligence. When the first railway was constructed up in
the North the Okebourne folk, like the rest of the world, were with good reason extremely curious
about this wonderful invention, and questioned every passer-by eagerly for information. But
no one could describe it, till at last a man, born in the village, but who had been away for
some years soldiering, returned to his native place. He had been serving in Canada and came
through Liverpool, and thus saw the marvel of the age. At the Sun the folk in the evening crowded
round him, and insisted upon knowing what a steam-engine was like. He did his best to describe
it, but in vain; they wanted a familiar illustration, and could not be satisfied till the soldier,
by a happy inspiration, said the only thing to which he could compare a locomotive was a great
cannon on a timber-carriage. To us who are so accustomed to railways it seems a singular idea;
but, upon reflection, it was not so inapt, considering that the audience had seen or heard
something of cannons, and were well acquainted with timber-carriages. The soldier wished to
convey the notion of a barrel or boiler mounted on wheels.

They kept up the institution of the parish constable, as separate and distinct from the policeman,
till very recently at Okebourne, though it seems to have lapsed long since in many country
places. One year Hilary, with much shrugging of shoulders, was forced into the office; and
during his term there was a terrible set-to between two tribes of gipsies in the Overboro'
road. They fought like tigers, making the lovely summer day hideous with their cries and shrieks--the
women, the fiercer by far, tearing each other's hair. One fiendish creature drew her scissors,
and, using them like a stiletto, drove the sharp point into a sister 'gip's' head.

'Where's the constable?' was the cry. Messengers rushed to Lucketts' Place; the barn, the sheds,
the hayfield, all were searched in vain--Hilary had quite disappeared. At the very first sound
he had slipped away to look at some cattle in Chequer's Piece, the very last and outlying field
of the farms, full a mile away, and when the messengers got to Chequer's Piece of course he
was up on the Down. So much for the parish constable's office--an office the farmers shirked
whenever they could, and would not put in force when compelled to accept it.

How could a resident willingly go into a neighbour's cottage and arrest him without malice
and scandal being engendered? If he did his duty he was abused; if he did not do it, it was
hinted that he favoured the offender. As for the 'gip' who was stabbed, nothing more was heard
of it; she 'traipsed' off with the rest.

Sometimes when the 'tangle-legs' got up into their heads the labourers felt an inclination
to resume the ancient practices of their fore-fathers. Then you might see a couple facing each
other in the doorway, each with his mug in one hand, and the other clenched, flourishing their
knuckles. 'Thee hit I.' 'Thee come out in th' road and I'll let thee knaw.' The one knew very
well that the other dared not strike him in the house, and the other felt certain that, however
entreated, nothing would induce his opponent to accept the invitation and 'come out into th' road.'

The shadows of the elm have so far to fall that they become enlarged and lose the edge upon
reaching the ground. I noticed this one moonlight night in early June while sitting on a stile
where the footpath opened on the Overboro' road. Presently I heard voices, and immediately
afterwards a group came round the curve of the highway. There were three cottage women, each
with a basket and several packages; having doubtless been into Overboro' town shopping, for
it was Saturday. They walked together in a row; and in front of them, about five yards ahead,
came a burly labourer of the same party, carrying in his arms a large clock.

He had taken too much ale, and staggered as he walked, two steps aside to one forward, and
indeed could hardly keep upright. His efforts to save himself and the clock from destruction
led to some singular flexures of the body, and his feet traced a maze as he advanced, hugging
the clock to his chest. The task was too much for his over-taxed patience: just opposite the
stile he stood still, held his load high over his head, and shouting, 'Dang th' clock!' hurled
it with all his force thirty feet against the mound, at the same time dropping a-sprawl. The
women, without the least excitement or surprise, quietly endeavoured to assist him up; and,
as he resisted, one of them remarked in the driest matter-of-fact tone, 'Ourn be just like
un--as contrary as the wind.' She alluded to her own husband.

When I mentioned this incident afterwards to Mrs. Luckett, she said the troubles the cottage
women underwent on account of the 'beer' were past belief. One woman who did some work at the
farmhouse kept her cottage entirely by her own exertions; her husband doing nothing but drink.
He took her money from her by force, nor could she hide it anywhere but what he would hunt
it out. At last in despair she dropped the silver in the jug on the wash-hand basin, and had
the satisfaction of seeing him turn everything topsy-turvy in a vain attempt to find it. As
he never washed, it never occurred to him to look in the water-jug.

The cottage women when they went into Overboro' shopping, she said, were the despair of the
drapers. A woman, with two or three more to chorus her sentiments, would go into a shop and
examine half-a-dozen dress fabrics, rubbing each between her work-hardened fingers and thumb
till the shopkeeper winced, expecting to see it torn. After trying several and getting the
counter covered she would push them aside, contemptuously remarking, 'I don't like this yer
shallygallee (flimsy) stuff. Haven't'ee got any gingham tackle?' Whereat the poor draper would
cast down a fresh roll of stoutest material with the reply: 'Here, ma'am. Here's something
that will wear like pin-wire.' This did better, but was declared to be 'gallus dear.'

Even within recent years, now and then a servant-girl upon entering service at the farmhouse
would refuse to touch butcher's meat. She had never tasted anything but bacon at home, and
could only be persuaded to eat fresh meat with difficulty, being afraid she should not like
it. One girl who came from a lonely cottage in a distant 'coombe-bottom' of the Downs was observed
never to write home or attempt to communicate with her parents. She said it was of no use;
no postman came near, and the letters they wrote or the letters written to them never reached
their destination. 'Coombe-bottom' is a curious duplication--either word being used to indicate
a narrow valley or hollow. An unfortunate child who lived there had never been so well since
the stone roller went over his head. She had a lover, but he was 'a gurt hummocksing noon-naw,'
so she was not sorry to leave him. The phrase might be translated, 'great loose-jointed idiot.'

They sometimes had lettuce-pudding for dinner, and thought nothing of eating raw bacon. In
the snow the men wound hay-bands round their legs to serve as gaiters, and found it answered
admirably. One poor girl had been subject to fits ever since a stupid fellow, during the haymaking,
jokingly picked up a snake and threw it round her neck. Yet even in that far-away coombe-bottom
they knew enough to put an oyster-shell in the kettle to prevent incrustation.

The rules of pronunciation understood about Okebourne seemed to consist in lengthening the
syllables that are usually spoken quick, and shortening those that are usually long. Hilary
said that years ago it really appeared as if there was something deficient in the organs of
the throat among the labourers, for there were words they positively could not pronounce. The
word 'reservoir,' for instance, was always 'tezzievoy;' they could not speak the word correctly.
He could not explain to me a very common expression among the men when they wished to describe
anything unusual or strange for which they had no exact equivalent. It was always 'a sort of
a meejick.' By degrees, however, we traced it back to 'menagerie.' The travelling shows of
wild beasts at first so much astonished the villagers that everything odd and curious became
a menagerie, afterwards corrupted to 'meejick.'

'Caddle no man's cattle' was a favourite proverb with a population who were never in a hurry.
'Like shot out of a show'l,' to express extreme nimbleness, was another. A comfortless, bare
apartment was 'gabern;' anything stirred with a pointed instrument was 'ucked'--whether a cow
'ucked' the fogger with her horn or the stable was cleaned out with the fork. The verb 'to
uck' was capable indeed of infinite conjugation, and young Aaron, breaking off a bennet, once
asked me to kindly 'uck' a grain of hay-dust out of his eye with it. When a heron rose out
of the brook 'a moll ern flod away.'

With all their apparent simplicity some of the cottage folk were quite up to the value of appearances.
Old Aaron had a little shop; he and his wife sold small packets of tea, tobacco, whipcord,
and so forth. Sometimes while his wife was weighing out the sugar, old Aaron--wretched old
deceiver--would come in rustling a crumpled piece of paper as if it were a banknote, and handing
it to her with much impressiveness of manner whisper loudly, 'Now you take un and put un away;
and mind you don't mix um. You put he along with the fives and not with the tens.'

Hilary once showed me the heel of a boot which had just been mended by the hedge carpenter
and cobbler who worked for him; and offered to bet that not all the scientific people in Europe,
with microscope, spectrum analysis, all their appliances, could tell what leather the new heel-piece
was made of. Unable to guess, I gave it up; it was of bacon. A pig that was never a 'good doer'
was found in a ditch dead. There is always a competition among the labourers for a dead pig
or sheep; it was the cobbler's turn, and he had it, cut it up, and salted it down. But when
in course of time he came to partake of his side of bacon, behold it was so tough and dried
up that even he could not gnaw it. The side hung in the cottage for months, for he did not
like to throw it away, and could not think what to do with it, for the dogs could not eat it.
At last the old fellow hit upon the notion of using it as leather to mend shoes; so half his
customers walked about the world on bacon heels.

So far as I could discover, the cottage folk did not now use many herbs. They made tea sometimes
of the tormentil, whose little yellow flowers appear along the furrows. The leaves of the square-stemmed
figwort, which they called 'cresset' or 'cressil,' were occasionally placed on a sore; and
the yarrow--locally 'yarra'--was yet held in estimation as a salve or ointment.

It would be possible for any one to dwell a long time in the midst of a village, and yet never
hear anything of this kind and obtain no idea whatever of the curious mixture of the grotesque,
the ignorance and yet cleverness, which go to make up hamlet life. But so many labourers and
labouring women were continually in and out of the kitchen at Lucketts' Place that I had an
opportunity of gathering these items from Mrs. Luckett and Cicely. Years since they had employed
even more labour, before machinery came into use so much: then as many as twenty-four women
might have been counted in one hayfield, all in regular rank like soldiers, turning the hay
'wallows' with their rakes. 'There's one thing now you have forgotten,' said Cicely. 'They
pick the canker-roses off the briars and carry them in the pocket as a certain preventive of
rheumatism.'

CHAPTER V.

WIND-ANEMONES.    THE FISHPOND.

The only spot about the Chace where the wind-anemones grew was in a small detached copse of
ash-poles nearly a mile from the great woods. Between the stoles, which were rather far apart,
the ground was quite covered in spring with dark-green vegetation, so that it was impossible
to walk there without treading down the leaves of bluebells, anemones, and similar woodland
plants. But if you wished to see the anemones in their full beauty it was necessary to visit
the copse frequently; for if you forgot it, or delayed a fortnight, very likely upon returning
you would find that their fleeting loveliness was over. Their slender red stems rise but a
few inches, and are surrounded with three leaves; the six white petals of the cup-shaped flower
droop a little and have a golden centre. Under the petal is a tinge of purple, which is sometimes
faintly visible through it. The leaves are not only three in number, but are each cut deeply
thrice; they are hardy, but the flower extremely delicate.

On the banks dividing the copse from the meadows around it the blue dog-violets, which have
no perfume, often opened so large and wide as to resemble pansies. They do not appear like
this till just as their flowering time is almost over. The meadows by the copse were small,
not more than two or three acres each. One which was marshy was white for weeks together with
the lady's-smock or cuckoo-flower. The petals of these flowers are silvery white in some places,
in others tinted with lilac. The hues of wild flowers vary with their situation: in shady woodlands
the toadflax or butter-and-eggs is often pale--a sulphur colour; upon the Downs it is a deep
and beautiful yellow. In a ditch, of this marshy meadow was a great bunch of woodruff, above
whose green whorls the white flowers were lifted. Over them the brambles arched, their leaves
growing in fives, and each leaf prickly. The bramble-shoots, as they touch the ground, take
root and rise again, and thus would soon cross a field were they not cut down.

Pheasants were fond of visiting this copse, following the hedgerows to it from the Chace, and
they always had one or more nests in it. A green woodpecker took it in his route, though he
did not stay long, there not being many trees. These birds seem to have their regular rounds;
there are some copses where they are scarcely ever heard. They prefer old trees; where there
is much large and decaying timber, there the woodpeckers come. Such little meadows as these
about the copse are the favourite resort of birds and the very home of flowers--more so than
extensive woods like the Chace, or the open pastures and arable fields. Thick hedgerows attract
birds, and behind such cover their motions may be watched. There is, too, more variety of bush
and tree.

In one such hedgerow leading from the copse the maple-bushes in spring were hung with the green
flowers which, though they depend in their season from so many trees, as the oak, are perhaps
rarely observed. The elder-bushes in full white bloom scented the air for yards around both
by night and day; the white bloom shows on the darkest evening. Besides several crab-stoles--the
buds of the crab might be mistaken for thorns growing pointed at the extreme end of the twigs--there
was a large crab tree, which bore a plentiful crop. The lads sharpen their knives by drawing
the blade slowly to and fro through a crab-apple; the acid of the fruit eats the steel like
aquafortis. They hide stores of these crabs in holes in the hayricks, supposing them to improve
by keeping. There, too, they conceal quantities of the apples from the old orchards, for the
fruit in them is often almost as hard and not much superior in flavour to the crab. These apples
certainly become more mellow after several months in the warm hay.

A wild 'plum,' or bullace, grew in one place; the plum about twice the size of a sloe, with
a bloom upon the skin like the cultivated fruit, but lacking its sweetness. Yet there was a
distinct difference of taste: the 'plum' had not got the extreme harshness of the sloe. A quantity
of dogwood occupied a corner; in summer it bore a pleasing flower; in the autumn, after the
black berries appeared upon it, the leaves became a rich bronze colour, and some when the first
frosts touched them curled up at the edge and turned crimson. There were two or three guelder-rose
bushes--the wild shrub--which were covered in June with white bloom; not in snowy balls like
the garden variety, but flat and circular, the florets at the edge of the circle often whitest,
and those in the centre greenish. In autumn the slender boughs were weighed down with heavy
bunches of large purplish berries, so full of red juice as to appear on the point of bursting.
As these soon disappeared they were doubtless eaten by birds.

Besides the hawthorn and briar there were several species of willow--the snake-skin willow,
so called because it sheds its bark; the 'snap-willow,' which is so brittle that every gale
breaks off its feeble twigs, and pollards. One of these, hollow and old, had upon its top a
crowd of parasites. A bramble had taken root there, and hung over the side; a small currant-bush
grew freely--both, no doubt, unwittingly planted by birds--and finally the bines of the noxious
bitter-sweet or nightshade, starting from the decayed wood, supported themselves among the
willow-branches, and in autumn were bright with red berries. Ash-stoles, the buds on whose
boughs in spring are hidden under black sheaths; nut-tree stoles, with ever-welcome nuts--always
stolen here, but on the Downs, where they are plentiful, staying till they fall; young oak
growing up from the butt of a felled tree. On these oak-twigs sometimes, besides the ordinary
round galls, there may be found another gall, larger, and formed, as it were, of green scales
one above the other.

Where shall we find in the artificial and, to my thinking, tasteless pleasure-grounds of modern
houses so beautiful a shrubbery as this old hedgerow? Nor were evergreens wanting, for the
ivy grew thickly, and there was one holly-bush--not more, for the soil was not affected by
holly. The tall cow-parsnip or 'gicks' rose up through the bushes; the great hollow stem of
the angelica grew at the edge of the field, on the verge of the grass, but still sheltered
by the brambles. Some reeds early in spring thrust up their slender green tubes, tipped with
two spear-like leaves. The reed varies in height according to the position in which it grows.
If the hedge has been cut it does not reach higher than four or five feet; when it springs
from a deep, hollow corner, or with bushes to draw it up, you can hardly touch its tip with
your walking-stick. The leaders of the black bryony, lifting themselves above the bushes, and
having just there nothing to cling to, twist around each other, and two bines thus find mutual
support where one alone would fall of its own weight.

In the watery places the sedges send up their dark flowers, dusted with light yellow pollen,
rising above the triangular stem with its narrow, ribbed leaf. The reed-sparrow or bunting
sits upon the spray over the ditch with its carex grass and rushes; he is a graceful bird,
with a crown of glossy black. Hops climb the ash and hang their clusters, which impart an aromatic
scent to the hand that plucks them; broad burdock leaves, which the mouchers put on the top
of their baskets to shield their freshly gathered watercresses from the sunshine; creeping
avens, with buttercup-like flowers and long stems that straggle across the ditch, and in autumn
are tipped with a small ball of soft spines; mints, strong-scented and unmistakable; yarrow,
white and sometimes a little lilac, whose flower is perhaps almost the last that the bee visits.
In the middle of October I have seen a wild bee on a last stray yarrow.

On the higher and drier bank some few slender square stems of betony, with leaves in pairs
like wings, stand up tall and stiff as the summer advances. The labiate purplish flowers are
all at the top; each flower is set in the cup by a curve at the lesser end, like a crook; the
leaves and stalk are slightly rough, and have an aromatic bitter perfume when crushed. On the
flower of a great thistle a moth has alighted, and hidden under its broad wing is a humble-bee,
the two happy together and neither interfering with the other. Sometimes a bee will visit the
white rose on the briar.

Near the gateway, on the edge of the trodden ground, grows a tall, stout, bushy plant, like
a shrub, with pale greyish-green leaves, much lobed and divided: the top of each branch in
August is thick with small whitish-green flowers tipped with brown. These, if rubbed in the
hand, emit a strong and peculiar scent, with a faint flavour of lavender, and yet quite different.
This is the mugwort. Still later on, under the shade of the trees on the mound, there appear
bunches of a pale herb, with greenish labiate flowers, and a scent like hops: it is the woodsage,
and if tasted the leaf will be found extremely bitter.

In the mornings of autumn the webs of the spiders hang along the hedge bowed a little with
dew, like hammocks of gossamer slung from thorn to thorn. Then the hedge-sparrows, perching
on the topmost boughs of the hawthorn, cry 'peep-peep' mournfully; the heavy dew on the grass
beneath arranges itself in two rows of drops along the edges of the blades. From the day when
the first leaf appears upon the hardy woodbine, in the early year, to the time when the partridge
finds the eggs in the ant-hill, and on again till the last harebell dies, there is always something
beautiful or interesting in these great hedgerows. Indeed, it is impossible to exhaust them.
I have omitted the wild geranium with its tiny red petals scarce seen in the mass of green,
the mosses, the ferns, and have scarcely said a word about the living creatures that haunt
it. But then one might begin to write a book about a hedgerow when a boy and find it incomplete
in old age.

A much-neglected path led from the park through some fir plantations down to the fishpond.
After the first turn of the narrow track the close foliage of the firs, through which nothing
could be seen, shut out the world with green walls. The strip of blue sky visible above was
wider than the path, because the trees sloped away somewhat, their branches shortening towards
the top; still it was so contracted that a passing woodpigeon was seen but for a second as
he went over. Every step carried me into deeper silence--the sudden call of a jay was startling
in its harsh contrast. Presently the path widened where the thickly planted firs were succeeded
by sycamores, horse-chestnuts, alders, and aspen--trees which stand farther apart, and beneath
which some underwood grew. Here there were thickets of hawthorn and bramble and elder bushes
which can find no place among firs.

The ground now sloped rapidly down into a hollow, and upon this descent numbers of skeleton
leaves were scattered. There was no other spot all over the Chace where they could be seen
like this; you might walk for hours and not find one, yet here there were hundreds. Sometimes
they covered the ground in layers, several leaves one on the other. In spring violets pushed
up through them and blue-bells--sweet hope rising over grey decay.

Lower down a large pond almost filled the hollow. It was surrounded on three sides by trees
and thickets; on the fourth an irregular margin of marshy grass extended. Floating leaves of
weeds covered the surface of the water; these weeds had not been disturbed for years, and there
was no check to their growth except their own profusion, for they choked each other. The pond
had long ceased to supply fish for the table. Before railways brought the sea so near, such
ponds were very useful. At that time almost everything consumed came from the estate itself:
the bread, the beef, the mutton, the venison, game, fish, all was supplied by the adjacent
woods, the fields, or the water. The lord in old days hunted the deer on his own domain, brought
down game with a crossbow or captured it with nets, and fished or netted his own streams and
ponds. These great parks and chaces enclosed everything, so that it was within easy reach of
his own door. Sometimes the lord and his visitors strolled out to see the fishponds netted.

This pond had originally been one of a series, but the others had been drained and added to
the meadows. It was said to be staked at the bottom to prevent illicit netting; but if so,
the stakes by this time were probably rotten or buried in mud formed from the decaying weeds,
the fallen leaves, and branches which were gradually closing it up. A few yards from the edge
there was a mass of ivy through which a little brown thatch could be distinguished, and on
approaching nearer this low roof was found to cover the entrance to a cave. It was an ice-house
excavated in the sloping ground or bank, in which, 'when George the Third was King,' the ice
of the ponds had been preserved to cool the owner's wine in summer. Ice was then a luxury for
the rich only; but when so large a supply arrived from America, a supply increased by freezing
machines, the ice-house lost its importance. The door, once so jealously closed, was gone,
and the dead leaves of last year had gathered in corners where the winds had whirled them.

The heat of a warm June day seemed still more powerful in this hollow. The sedges, into which
two or three moorhens had retired at my approach, were still, and the leaves on the boughs
overhanging the water were motionless. Where there was a space free from weeds--a deeper hole
near the bank--a jack basked at the surface in the sunshine. High above on the hill stood a
tall dead fir, from whose trunk the bark was falling; it had but one branch, which stood out
bare and stark across the sky. There came a sound like distant thunder, but there were no clouds
overhead, and it was not possible to see far round. Pushing gently through the hawthorn bushes
and ash-stoles at the farther end of the pond, I found a pleasant little stream rushing swiftly
over a clear chalky bottom, hastening away down to the larger brook.

Beyond it rose a mound and hedgerow, up to which came the meadows, where, from the noise, the
cattle seemed racing to and fro, teased by insects. Tiny black flies alighting on my hands
and face, irritated the skin; the haymakers call them 'thunder-flies;' but the murmur of the
running water was so delicious that I sat down on a bulging tree-root, almost over the stream,
and listened to the thrushes singing. Had it been merely warm they would have been silent.
They do not sing in dry sunshine, but they knew what was coming; so that there is no note so
hated by the haymaker as that of the thrush. The birds were not in the firs, but in the ash-trees
along the course of the rill.

The voice of the thrush is the most 'cultivated,' so to speak, of all our birds: the trills,
the runs, the variations, are so numerous and contrasted. Not even the nightingale can equal
it: the nightingale has not nearly such command: the thrush seems to know no limit. I own I
love the blackbird best, but in excellence of varied music the thrush surpasses all. Few birds,
except those that are formed for swimming, come to a still pond. They like a clear running
stream; they visit the sweet running water for drinking and bathing. Dreaming away the time,
listening to the rush of the water bubbling about the stones, I did not notice that the sky
had become overcast, till suddenly a clap of thunder near at hand awakened me. Some heavy drops
of rain fell; I looked up and saw the dead branch of the fir on the hill stretched out like
a withered arm across a black cloud.

Hastening back to the ice-house, I had barely entered the doorway when the lightning, visible
at noonday, flashed red and threatening, the thunder crackled and snapped overhead, and the
rain fell in a white sheet of water. There were but two of these overpowering discharges with
their peculiar crack and snap; the electricity passed on quickly, and the next clap roared
over the woods. But the rain was heavier than before, the fall increased after every flash,
however distant, and the surface of the pond was threshed by the drops which bore down with
them many leaves weakened by blight.

Doubtless the mowers in the meadows had hidden the blades of their scythes under the swathe,
and the haymakers had placed their prongs in the ditches: nothing is so likely to attract a
shock of lightning as a prong carried on the shoulder with the bright steel points upwards.
In the farmhouses the old folk would cover up the looking-glasses lest the quicksilver should
draw the electric fluid. The haymakers will tell you that sometimes when they have been standing
under a hedge out of a storm a flash of lightning has gone by with a distinct sound like 'swish,'
and immediately afterwards the wet ground has sent forth a vapour, or, as they say, smoked.

Woodpigeons and many other birds seem to come home to woods and copses before and during a
storm. The woodpigeon is one of the freest of birds to all appearance: he passes over the highest
trees and goes straight away for miles. Yet, though it is usual to speak of wild birds and
of their freedom, the more you watch their ways the more you feel that the wildest have their
routes and customs: that they do not act entirely from the impulse of the moment, but have
their unwritten laws. How do the gnats there playing under the horse-chestnut boughs escape
being struck down by the heavy raindrops, each one of which looks as if it would drown so small
a creature? The numbers of insects far exceed all that words can express: consider the clouds
of midges that often dance over a stream. One day, chancing to glance at a steeple, I saw what
looked like thin smoke issuing from the top of it. Now it shot out in a straight line from
the gilded beak of the weathercock, now veered about, or declined from the vane. It was an
innumerable swarm of insects, whose numbers made them visible at that height.

Some insects are much more powerful than would be supposed. A garden was enclosed with fresh
palings formed of split oak so well seasoned (split oak is the hardest of wood) that it was
difficult to train any creepers against them, for a nail could not be driven in without the
help of a bradawl. Passing along the path one afternoon I heard a peculiar rasping sound like
a very small saw at work, and found it proceeded from four wasps biting the oak for the materials
of their nest. The noise they made was audible four or five yards away, and upon looking closer
I found the palings all scored and marked in short shallow grooves. The scores and marks extended
along that part of the palings where the sunshine usually fell; there were none on the shady
side, the wasps preferring to work in the sunlight.

Soon the clouds began to break, and then the sun shone on innumerable rain-drops. I at once
started forth, knowing that such a storm is often followed by several lesser showers with brief
intervals between. The deserted ice-house was rarely visited--only, perhaps, when some borage
was wanted to put in summer drinks. For a thick growth of borage had sprung up by it, where
perhaps a small garden patch had once been cultivated, for there was a pear-tree near. The
plant, with its scent of cucumber, grew very strong; the blue flowers when fallen, if they
had not been observed when growing, might be supposed to have been inserted exactly upside
down to their real manner of attachment. In autumn the leaves of the pear-tree reddened, and
afterwards the ivy over the entrance to the ice-house flowered; then in the cold months of
early spring the birds came for the ivy-berries.

CHAPTER VI.

A FARMER OF THE OLDEN TIMES.

The winding paths traced by a hare in spring as he roams over an arable field show that he
must cover a mile within a furlong. From a gateway one morning I watched a hare busy in this
way, restlessly passing to and fro over the 'lands.' Every motion was visible, because, although
the green wheat was rising in an adjacent field, no crop had yet appeared here. Now the hare
came direct towards me, running down a furrow; then he turned short and followed a course like
the letter V; next he crossed the angle of the field and came back along the shore of the ditch,
under the hedge. Then away to the centre of the field, where he stayed some time exploring
up one furrow and down another, his ears and the hump of his back only seen above the clods.

But suddenly he caught a scent of something that alarmed him, and away he went full speed:
when on the open ground the peculiar way in which the hind limbs are thrown forward right under
the body, thus giving an immense 'stride,' was clearly displayed. I had been so interested
in the hare that I had not observed Hilary coming along on the other side of the low fence,
looking at his wheat. The hare, busy as he was and seeming to see nothing, had crossed his
'wind.' Hilary came to me, and we walked together along the waggon-track, repassing the wheat.
He was full about it: he was always grieving over the decadence of the wheat crop.

There was nothing, he went on, so pleasant to watch as it came up, nothing that required so
much care and skill, nothing so thoroughly associated with the traditions of English farming
as wheat, and yet nothing so disappointing. Foreign importations had destroyed this the very
mainstay. Now, that crop which he had just left had 'tillered out' well; but what profit should
he get from the many stalks that had tillered or sprung from each single grain, thus promising
a fiftyfold return? It had been well got in, and, as the old saw had it, 'Well sown, half grown;'
it had been in the ground the proper time ('Long in the bed, big in the head'); but likely
enough the price next autumn would not much more than pay the expenses of preparation.

The thunderstorm before Christmas was not perhaps a favourable omen, since

    Winter's thunder and summer's flood
    Bode old England no good.

Last year showed that 'summer's flood' was as destructive as in the olden time. But then there
would have been a rise of prices, according to the saying,--

    When the vale shall feed the hill,
    Every man shall eat his fill.
    But when the hill shall feed the vale,
    The penny loaf shall be but small.

Now, last season, so far as our home harvests were concerned, the 'hill' did feed the 'vale,'
but the penny loaves were as large and as plentiful as usual, owing to foreign grain. In those
old days, seventy or eighty years since, the whole population of the kingdom watched the weather
with anxiety; and it was then that the signs and tokens of birds and plants and the set of
the wind at particular times were regarded as veritable oracles to be inquired into not without
fear and trembling.

Hilary heard all about it when he was a lad from old Jonathan, who had a corn-farm up on the
hills, and where he used to go to plough. Hilary never stated the exact degree, but there was
some relationship between them--two branches, I fancy, of the same family. He seemed to have
a very bitter memory of the old man (now dead), who had been a hard master to him in his youth;
besides which, some family jar had arisen over money matters; still, he was fond of quoting
Jonathan in reference to wheat and the heyday of corn-farming. Jonathan remembered when a load
of wheat fetched 55l.--a load being five quarters or ten sacks--or 11l. a quarter. The present
average of wheat was about 2l. 6s. per quarter. At the same time bread was at 3s. a gallon;
it is now about 1s. 6d. The wages of an agricultural labourer were 6s. a week. It was gambling,
positive gambling, in the staff of life.

No farmer was held in any esteem if he did not keep his wheat ricks till harvest came again
before threshing them out: men grew rich suddenly and knew not what to do with their money.
Farmers who had been brought up 'hard,' living like labourers, working like labourers, and
with little more amusement than labourers, all at once found their pockets full of coin. 

"Indeed, at twelve he was Serafina's house, everything was a lie, or treble had bought some
boots like these, nothing of this. This was a miserable speculation of Fuejo the shoemaker to lure his
wife, but how Fuejo being his friend, de Bonis, and excellent person, had allowed this slander?
Did he not know that was rumored Fuejo in the village if he, Reyes, had or had nothing to do
with the soprano? ... And knowing this, to be know, "he would tell his wife, to that of Bonifacio,
who? ... Impossible. " "No, the lie was not a shoemaker, was Emma, ​​but then the gravity of
the case back to be as much as it had announced the sweats! Emma preparing some great vengeance,
and in the meantime fun with him like a cat with a mouse. Maybe he despised so much, I thought
the unhappy did not even want to grant the honor to be jealous, but though he was not jealous, what
would not take revenge. "

Despite these considerations, the perplexity of the unfaithful husband would not go away, clinging
like to hope that the idea had been Fuejo the liar. As we take the coffee, he thought, I'm going
to the shoe store to see what has been.

But Bonis and Emma proposed disposal.

As they took coffee, Emma, ​​who was very good humor, got up and
said solemnly comic:

- Now wait you sitting here, he prepared a great
surprise.

What time is it?

- The eight - said the uncle, who, despite his little jokes, which
horrified Bonifacio, not had them all along.

- Eight?

Magnificent. Wait a quarter of an hour.

Emma disappeared, and uncle and nephew, by marriage, silent as silent. Between uncle and he
had for Bonis an abyss ... better, a sea of ​​silver and gold, it would rise a. ... God knows
how many thousands of reais. Had reached such a terror of Kings on what he owed the Valcárcel, who
never took the trouble of adding the amounts had not returned to the box, counting the seven
thousand actual cure of the mountain, it seemed what a fortune. So much that, sometimes, reading
the newspapers lament about State debt is a bit disturbed remembering yours. Experienced similar
feeling when I heard about or read something of large embezzlement,
treasurers fleeing with a box and stuff on.

Emma returned to the quarter hour, in fact, and told guests at a time:

- What is it! And they both stood up, stunned, because the case no wonder. Emma came dressed in
a magnificent dress, that none of them knew him brought face full rice powder, the hairdresser
hairstyle hand, something completely new in it, because never consented
to receive the wrong hands touched her head and wore a diamond bracelet
and necklace and earrings of the same trace, all very expensive and
all new to the husband and the administrator.

- This is ... this
- she said.

And stood before the eyes of her husband a yellow slip, saying .-- Main Theatre main stage,
no. 7. This is going to the theater, stage Military Governor, as he has no family, hardly ever
deals. So, hala, uncle, to get dressed up, and you, Bonis, come here, I saw in a jiffy.

Emma did not leave time to their subordinates to keep marveling at this unprecedented resolution.
She had so many quirks lifelong fan never been shown to theater, and less to the music, from
miscarriage to date, and it had rained later, there was no been in the arena four times: the current
Company had not even seen, and they were ending the third payment ... and suddenly wham, without
telling anyone, he took a box, and Opera around the world. So Bonis thought, mistakenly in
some detail, as will be seen, and something like the guy thought. But this, as usual, soon became
what he called to himself "composition of place" that is, the leading plan to remove all those
new strange the best possible for their interests, and without saying Oxte or moxte, smiling,
left the room and returned a little black dress coat, with an overcoat that suited her pearls.

-
It was also the uncle presentable Butler - Emma thought - but this does not mean that the pay
all together, like everyone else.

Bonis headdress was more complicated work, and directed, in effect, his wife, he did shave in
that Jesus, with no contingencies that three minor injuries, which she covered her Rubber paper.
He did release a dark suit, trendy, English cloth, for course. A Reyes at times he imagined
that he was being dressed for the stick, and he seemed hopa, gender, English, elegant suit
that he was pulling out of the box sent by the artist from Madrid.

Eufemia, who apparently also had orders not to wonder at nothing, gave birth to portal, where
there was no bluff, and saw them leave the house, Emma's arm Bonis, D. Juan behind as if every
night the same thing happened.

The maid, indeed, had his reasons for not wonder as much as others, first because the lady was
crazy for her day our daily bread, and some crazy things of a kind intimate, secret, others did
not know, and also was amazed least because know some background. Boards had been to the theater
nights ago, to the pan, dressed the two craft.

This was what I knew Bonis; this, and what he had seen, heard and felt that his wife night
of the escape, and had then imagined, and desired, and projected.

They arrived at the theater, and the entry of Emma in her box was much more effect than it
could have figured. Moreover, she had not thought of that. I was not going there to show off,
but then I tasted honey, and added a corruption than to its spirit, the pleasure of waking envy, by their
clothing, ladies less pestles.

For an aberration, best, entertainment, did not notice before arriving that it was entering a
different main stage, that of brigadier dressed in such luxury, she never went to the theater,
and enter paradise, in disguise, hiding the public that their presence did not dream, or she
knew that night.

She was ready to enjoy much, but age was not precisely from whom he expected these strong emotions,
to be prepared, its purpose was to give the stage, and was complicated with domestic affairs,
but these complex and bizarre attractions are added to Suddenly an acute pleasure that Emma
did not, and revealed a new world of delights intense that no thought had occurred to him,
but saw very clear, strongly felt, from time to penetrate her in her box, and leave the shelter
to man, and walk around before sitting round, felt secure in his person the looks, and in the
stands near heard the murmur of comment, and in the air, can be said, took the overall effect
of presence. After sitting, and when she was taking charge of what was in front, admiration persisted,
in vain the singers, who were alone on stage, as the Galician the story, badly chaired by a partiquino,
distinguished only by a mock boot More suede and tune it all together, screaming like madmen
in vain, the public distinguished chairs and boxes civil attending the show offered Emma;
subscribers of his pockets, did not see the room without putting the body out of the sill, peered groups
to see the Kings, and the pocket of the party greeted Helmets at Bonis and his wife, the brigadier
general commander of the province was among them, and bowed his head. Emma left her alone
as a voluntary closure; emotions the walks and processions were not
like that, it tasted glory, what would be fun, count on it!

Because with the glories would not be the memories. His plan was their plan, and everything
would run.

While understanding the daughter of attorney Valcárcel her beauty was not what both called attention,
it was mainly his dressing, and her dress a lot too, and a little
novelty of seeing in the theater.

- Come on, this is released to
the world again - she thought it must have been thinking about a lot
of those ladies, who were eating the eyes from seats and boxes.

-
Yes, I throw, indeed!, Head - she said to herself, very pleased, thrilled
having discovered that wellspring of pleasures that they would oppose
both plans uncle consisting, apparently, to go stealing all that she
and only she had.

For many of the ladies and ladies present, who either were not or
were very young country, the appearance of Emma in the world, whether
it was the world, offering a completely new, because could not remember,
as a few others, who years ago this woman, both dressed in luxury
faction withered, a nervous tension and vinegar in the act, had been
the talk population by their whims and follies of young spoiled and
rich and extravagant as her own.

Emma understood all this, and had no illusions about the motives of much curiosity, and almost,
almost stunned, but the result was that it looked and looked, and commented its presence well,
nobody can remember the scene to see her, and this gave him, was
so it was, one of the most intense and profound feelings that could
experience a woman of her ilk.

Above all, what she most relished, and which was safer, was envy. The envy, not just poor, they could
not afford the expense meant those diamonds and that dress, but also two or three rich men present,
who have could, without making a nonsense, presented that evening with something so good and
yet better. Despite this, the jealous too, because this class of people is a lot like animals,
live only in the sense this, and the fact was that there, in the theater, at the time, the most
richly dressed and jeweled was she, Emma, ​​and the public there was no reason to stick to and figure
out who could and who does not look the same. In addition, that "actions speak louder." Perhaps the
most envied of Valcárcel was the wife of American Sariegos, the richest of the province, which
would stun the world all the enfolding Valcárcel in the Funds and shares of the Bank and a
thousand other great things, but not allowed Sariegos such waste, that it would not, and his
wife had to be content with a very luxurious medium. So she was raging. As Sariegos, who was
present, behind his wife, also suddenly began to hate Emma, ​​because she was to blame for what
at the moment his wife would be cursed and detested him greedy, and also, oddly enough, also watched
with envy the abogaducha dressing. But then it became more than feelings so humiliating for him, and, rising,
by financial considerations or plutonic philosophy, more high level, though, and ended by saying,
half aloud, from the height of his sincere contempt:

- That girl is going to run out of shirts in a few years.

Knew, because it also seemed that Emma was no longer a girl, but no matter; and thought he better
mean contempt: that girl ... the abogaducha.

But these comments and outbursts, and the like, did not hear Emma,
​​she saw the envy, not heard, saw his eyes shining, her sad smile,
his sincere and ecstasy melancholy in the face of the unwary, who
could not even hide, and stayed as Santa Teresa rapt in meditation
and love despite the good of others.

Some girls, they really, who minutes earlier flirted happy, very satisfied with the four above
them cheat, now languishing, forgotten their worshipers the seats, and as it was much more
serious, with the face of it had disappeared all grace, all poetry, all idealism, were devoted
to the cult of luxury envious of others, with great reverence for
the jewels and silk, with great bitterness concealed the priestess,
I had the privilege to hold over your body with the rays of the god
worshiped.

The sound of starched skirts that came on the scene drew the attention of Emma, ​​removing it from
that rapture of self satisfied.

For the rear door came a very elegant lady brisk, sweeping the boards
with a long tail and emitting sparks of his body, dressed in brocade
comedy and covered with fake jewels, tiara included.

- Who is that?
- Asked the wife of Reyes.

Bonifacio, seeing that Nepomuceno did not give questioned, he said, not without saliva before
swallowing:

- It's the Queen, who is desalinated know that the Prince ....

-
No, if you do not ask why - interrupted his wife, turning to look
at Bonis, who was behind her in the shadows -.

I say if that's treble.

- I think ... yes. Yeah, right, the star ....

- The boots. Do bring on?

Bonis stopped.

- Say, man, do you believe will bring them on?

-
It would be ... an anachronism.

- Hush, hush, now ascended the throne
... Let's see ...?

No, you have seen the feet.

Perhaps when you get off ....

Emma struck the twins to the underside
of the treble, and as this did not quite rise to its throne, raised
his eyes to the face of Serafina.

- Boy, is beautiful - he said -.

I've seen that face. What do you call that?, Is the many? ...

- Serafina Gorgheggi, I think ....

- Think! ... But do not you know for sure?

- You might mistake them for the contralto.

- Can.

- But ... no,
yes, is the soprano; fair, Gorgheggi.

- Now you're safe, huh?

-
Yes, sure.

Bonis admired himself. This was grown to danger!

There were the powders Rice .... Now I understand everything, his
wife was teasing him.

Knew of his love, and that unexpected trip to the theater was a confrontation
... yes, a confrontation of criminals.

Because he was a criminal, of course. No matter, come what had to be defended as scalded cat.
He had to sit behind his wife, because his legs were shaking, as usual in such cases (if he had
ever been seen in similar case), but was willing to conceal, to lie as a hero, if need be,
as the Lord deign to grant that gift of pretense, that could not have believed him not. What
can the instinct conservation, I thought.

- Ah! - Shouted, drowning out the cry before leaving his lips, Emma, ​​who had just seen a foot of the
Gorgheggi, descending the majestic treble its painted wooden throne bunting. Was an anachronism or
not, the SA boots were identical to those that had purchased it in
the afternoon.

Fuejo had not lied.

- The same as mine. Fuejo That is to say real person. You see, Bonifacio? The other couple brings
the lady, what I said the cobbler.

Why do you bear false witness? Why has denied that he saw the foot to the lady this morning?
What's so special? Do you think I'm going to celarme, unfaithful husband?

Bonis stopped.

As much value he had, and I was sure I had it, it could not last. Where are you going to stop
his wife?

- Do you know if you wanted that Dona Serafina? If so, that would have paid the boots.

This freedom of speech was not surprised to Nepomuceno, who, as he watched his niece some meat
and regular color, and she expected any of this madness or fact.

As the husband, not seen on such a nerve more than the wife's terrible sarcasm outraged. It
seemed only natural that the deceived spouse will entertain those prodrome of irony before taking
terrible revenge. This was so in the tragedies, and even operas.

Absorbed in his terror, turned his face toward the back of the box, could not tell by Bonis Emma
does not insist on their jokes, if those questions were apparently tricky. If he had been before
on, then very pale, to take to the tables Serafina Emma was now taking the color of a cherry,
and fixed her twins in a character that had just come from land of the Moors, who won as himself,
and that was that Queen had married the bride with a king of France to avoid rival in sight.
The winner of the infidels was the baritone Minghetti, who wore two spurs and two suns, and
had a huge booming voice, not bad ring and full of energy.

In vain the queen asked forgiveness colgándosele neck, after the
clearing of the hall, choir cover all these vile courtiers.

The baritone is not compromised, fled from the arms of the Queen and called shouted another.

-
It is very handsome and - thought Emma - but I liked the suit as a barber.

When the leader could not cry no more, or burst, the soprano began to complain of their fate and
paint their passion with a lot of gurgling, which came with the flute, hunchback. As often do in such
cases Spurned lover, instead of hearing the lamentations and complaints Queen's, baritone took the
rest to cough and spit discreetly, and then review was made very blatantly boxes, where ladies wore
their most haughty beauty. Once Upon A look at Emma's box, he felt the blue eyes and sweetest of
splinter Minghetti through the tubes of the twins and smiling at her as if he had known her
whole life and had something between them. Emma, ​​without thinking, smiled, and the baritone,
who had eagle eye, noticed the smile and smiled back, not with the eyes but with his whole
face. The thrill of the Valcárcel was more intense than that experienced just before noticing
the admiration his produced luxurious presence in the competition. He said to himself: This
is most serious, deep pleasure more satisfying cravings, which has more substance ... and
has more than do with my plans. Plans were in a fierce mock her uncle and her husband, play
with them like a cat with a mouse, find ways to cheat and lose, that for it were very funny.
Against the guy already knew long ago what weapons to use; take the boat out, spend a lot on
the gift of his own little person. As to Bonis ... and in fact wanted him as badly as the other,
nor was specifically designed to then in a great punishment for him, only he had thought of
having you always in a pony treat him as a slave who threatened a torment that he had just
met, but the look and smile like lightning Minghetti clarified awareness of Emma, ​​which suddenly
saw what the punishment might be to her unfaithful husband. Because, in effect, was long supposed
cheating, not to mention that Emma, ​​in the meditations of their loneliness alcove, with hysterical
Sybil, had come to conceive of man, all men, as selfish animal instincts and cruel and abusive
par excellence, the husband did not believe in strictly faithful to his wife the most was, that
entity seemed ridiculous reason, and confessed she, in the case of any married man would not
be content with his wife. As women, not affording them the right to adultery in normal circumstances
because seemed ugly and because the woman is something else, but in case of marital infidelity
discovered and was different: there was also a right of reprisal, and the same could be said by
analogy when the husband was so gross that the wife was trying to rope ... "If I pegase Bonis
as I hit it, hit it. " This was evident. "And if he hits me ... if insurance hit me ...». Here
Emma hesitated and looked to the third case of female infidelity excusable. "If pegase me, I would
cheat too ... someone inspire me a great passion. " Although Emma's moral wanderings had nothing
to do with the literary romanticism, decadent, of his time and people, because it was original
by temperament and not just read verses and novels, some phrases and concerns of his neighbors
he had been infected, and this perfidious vague idea of ​​the passion he sanctifies everything,
was one of those pests. As Moreover, she alone is enough to make a clean sweep of a hundred
decalogues and without, according to whim, rules of conduct contrary. But if the region of
pure ideas, Bonis and would have thought this was common, the inner sense told him that the
said Emma the fact is a long way, she would not miss its Bonis, as it is not rush much, unless
it was in a moment of madness, raised by a Russian prince or another character of exceptional
merit, and that even so, did she have to become another, violent lot. The truth was that his
flesh was quiet, which tastes the sensual wanderings carried nothing erotic, and finally, after
all, Bonis, which is like a good boy was handsome, and was satisfied with their physical ....
But the look and the smile of a baritone, were already quite another matter. For now, Emma forgot
all to think about the pleasure of stumbling into of twins with those eyes and that mouth smiling
under his mustache brown. Minghetti Whenever he returned to the scene, the Kings rehearsed
repetition of the set that had known him well, and more often with success, for, outside chance,
or the singer had the habit of looking far to the boxes and look at who admired him, and Flirting
all kinds of roles and circumstances scenic, it was requested that pleasure Twins Emma and
renewed in several of the most serious perils and worries of the opera and that that would
not stop nagging baritone with the Queen, always desperate to escape to France on the other.

Bonis not get over his amazement to notice, much to his delight, that Emma could not speak because
of the treble or boots, a true anachronism, as he put it very well,
or anything that remotely could refer to what he called "the powder
of rice."

After the opera, they returned home the Valcárcel, or if you like
the Kings, but more typical is the Valcárcel for the little master
of his house that was Bonifacio, bye marriage Nepomuceno, who lay
maturing his plans for the future that, or he saw wrong, or had inklings
of a change had not without dangers.



Resting on the rail under the hawthorn for a minute or two in early spring, when it was too
chilly to stay long, I watched a flock of rooks and jackdaws soaring in the sky. Round and
round and ever upwards they circled, the jackdaws of course betraying their presence by their
call; up towards the blue, as if in the joy of their hearts, they held a festival, happy in
the genial weather and the approach of the nesting-time. This soaring and wheeling is evidently
done for recreation, like a dance. Presently the flock seems to tumble and fall, and there
comes the rushing sound of the air swiftly parted by their out-spread wings as they dive a
hundred feet in a second. The noise is audible a quarter of a mile off. This, too, is play;
for, catching themselves and regaining their balance just above the elms, they resume their
steady flight onwards to distant feeding-grounds. Later in the season, sitting there in the
warm evenings, I could hear the pheasants utter their peculiar roost-cry, and the noise of
their wings as they flew up in the wood: the vibration is so loud that it might almost be described
as thumping.

By-and-by the cuckoo began to lose his voice; he gurgled and gasped, and cried 'cuck--kuk--kwai--kash,'
and could not utter the soft, melodious 'oo.' The latest date on which I ever heard the cuckoo
here, to be certain, was the day before St. Swithin, July 14, 1879. The nightingales, too,
lose their sweet notes, but not their voices; they remain in the hedges long after their song
has ceased. Passing by the hawthorn bushes up to the end of July, you may hear a bird within
that seems to threaten you with a loud 'sweet-kurr,' and, looking in, you will find it to be
a nightingale. The spelling exactly represents the sound, 'r' being twirled. 'Sweet-kurr-kurr'
comes from the interior of the bushes with an angry emphasis.

Along the lower part of these meadows there was a brook, and the brook-sparrows were chattering
ceaselessly as I walked among the willow-stoles by it one morning towards the end of June.
On the left hand the deep stream flowed silently round its gentle curves, and on the other
through the willows and alders the grassy slope of the Cuckoo-fields was visible. Broad leaves
of the marsh marigold, the flower long since gone, covered the ground; light-green horsetails
were dotted thickly about; and tall grasses flourished, rising to the knee. Dark shallow pools
were so hidden under these grasses and plants that the presence of the black and yet clear
water could not be perceived until the foot sank into it.

The sedge-birds kept just in front of me, now busy on a willow-stole, and concealed in the
grasses and moss which grew out of the decaying wood; now among the sedges covering the mudbanks
where the brook had silted up; now in the hedge which divided the willows from the meadow.
Still the peculiar sparrow-like note, the ringing chirp, came continually from their throats;
the warm sultry day delighted them. One clung to the side of a slender flag, which scarcely
seemed strong enough to support it, yet did not even bend under its weight; then on again as
I came nearer--but only two or three yards--to recommence singing immediately.

Pushing through the brushwood and past the reddish willow-poles, I entered a very thicket of
flags, rising to the shoulder. These were not ribbed or bayonet-shaped, but flat, like a long
sword. Three or four sprang from a single root, broad and tall, and beside them a stalk, and
on it the yellow iris in fall flower. The marsh seemed lit up with these bright lamps of colour
under the shadowy willows and the dark alders. There were a dozen at least within a few yards
close around, and others dimly visible through the branches--three large yellow petals drooping,
and on the curve of each brownish mottled markings or lines delicately stippled, beside them
a rolled spike-like bloom not yet unfolded: a flower of the waters, crowned with gold, above
the green dwellers by the shore.

Here the sedge-birds left me, doubling back to their favourite willow-stoles and sedges. Further
on, the ground rose, and on the drier bank the 'gicks' grew shoulder high, towering over the
brambles. It was difficult to move through the tangled underwood, so I went out into the Cuckoo-fields.
Hilary had drained away much of the water that used to form a far larger marsh about here,
and calculated his levellings in a most ingenious manner with a hollow 'gicks.' He took a wooden
bowl, and filled it to the brim with water. Then cutting a dry 'gicks' so that it should be
open at either end, like a tube, he floated it--the stalk is very light--on the bowl. Looking
through this tube he could get his level almost as accurately as with an engineer's instrument,
though of course it was more cumbrous to use.

There was a corner here that had not been mown for a long time, and in the autumn the wild
carrots took possession of it, almost to the exclusion of grass and other plants. The flower
of the wild carrot gathers together as the seeds mature, and forms a framework cup at the top
of the stalk, like a bird's-nest. These 'bird's-nests,' brown and weather-beaten, endured far
into the winter. The brook-sparrows still sang as I passed by again in the evening; they seem
the most unwearied of birds, for you may hear them all day, all the evening, and at one o'clock
next morning; indeed, at intervals, all night. By night the note is, or appears to be, less
sparrow-like, or perhaps the silence of night improves it to the ear. I stayed that evening
in a corner of a wheatfield not yet yellow, and watched the shadows of the trees grow longer
and broader as the sun declined.

As the breeze rushed over the corn there was a play of various shades of green, the stalks
as they bent this and that way taking different hues. But under the hedge it was still; the
wind could not come through, though it moved the boughs above. A mass of cloud like flocks
of wool, mottled and with small spaces of blue between, drifted slowly eastwards, and its last
edge formed an arch over the western horizon, under which the sun shone. The yellow vetchling
had climbed up from the ditch and opened its flower, and there were young nuts on the hazel
bough. Far away in a copse a wood-pigeon called; nearer the blackbirds were whistling; a willow
wren uttered his note high in the elm, and a distant yellowhammer sang to the sinking sun.

The brook had once been much wider, and in flood times rendered the Overboro' road almost impassable;
for before a bridge was built it spread widely and crossed the highway--a rushing, though shallow,
torrent fifty yards broad. The stumps of the willows that had grown by it could still be found
in places, and now and then an ancient 'bullpoll' was washed up. This grass is so tough that
the tufts or cushions it forms will last in water for fifty years, even when rooted up--decayed
of course and black, but still distinguishable. In those times just previous to the construction
of railways, when the lord of the manor came down after Parliament rose, there used to be a
competition to get hold of his coachman. So few agricultural people travelled, and news came
so slowly and in such distorted fashion, that the coachman became a great authority. Such a
brook as this was then often a serious obstacle.

There was still an old punt, seldom used, to be found in a rickyard of Hilary's, close by which
was an extensive pond. The punt was thatched over with flags from the stream. The moorhens
were fond of this pond because it was surrounded with a great quantity of rushes; they were
numerous all up the brook. These birds, being tame and common, are not much regarded either
for sport or the table, yet a moorhen shot at the right time of the year--not till the frosts
have begun--is delicious eating. If the bird were rare it would be thought to rival the woodcock;
as it is, probably few people ever taste it. The path to Lucketts' Place from this rickyard
passed a stone-quarry, where the excavated stone was built up in square heaps. In these heaps,
in which there were many interstices and hollows, rabbits often sat out; and by stopping the
entrance and carefully removing the stones they might occasionally be taken by hand. Next by
the barn where in spring the sparrows made a continuous noise, chirping and quarrelling as
they carried on their nesting operations: they sometimes flew up with long green bennets and
grass fibres as well as with dry straws.

Then across the road, where the flint-heaps always put me in mind of young Aaron; for he once
gravely assured me that they were the very best places in the world on which to rest or sleep.
The flints were dry, and preserved the slumbering wayfarer from damp. He had no doubt proved
this when the ale was too strong. At the house, as I passed through the courtyard, I found
him just on the point of starting for Overboro' with a wallet, to bring back some goods from
the shops. The wallet is almost unknown even in farmsteads now: it is a kind of long bag closed
at each end, but with a slit in the centre for the insertion of the things to be conveyed.
When filled it is slung over the shoulder, one end in front and the other behind, so as to
balance. Without knowing the shape of a wallet the story of Jack the Giant-Killer stowing away
such enormous quantities of pudding is scarcely to be understood: children nowadays never see
such a thing. Many nursery tales contain allusions of this kind, the meaning of which must
be obscure to the rising generation.

Within doors I found a great discussion going forward between Hilary and a farmer who had called,
as to the exact relationship of a man who had just quitted his tenancy and another who died
nearly forty years before. They could not agree either as to the kinship or the date; though
the visitor was the more certain because he so well remembered that there was an extraordinary
cut of 'turvin' that year. The 'turvin' is the hay made on the leaze, not the meadows, out
of the rough grass and bennets left by the cows. To listen to the zest with which they entered
into the minutest details of the family affairs of so long ago, concerning people with whom
neither had any connection--how they recollected the smallest particulars--was astonishing.
This marvellous capacity for gossip seemed like a revelation of a totally different state of
society. The memory of country people for such details is beyond belief.

When the visitor left with his wife we walked to the gate and saw them down the road; and it
was curious to note that they did not walk side by side. If you meet a farmer of the old style
and his wife walking together, never do you see them arm-in-arm. The husband walks a yard or
two in front, or else on the other side of the road; and this even when they are going to church.

CHAPTER VIII.

CICELY'S DAIRY.    HILARY'S TALK.

Just outside the palings of the courtyard at Lucketts' Place, in front of the dairy, was a
line of damson and plum trees standing in a narrow patch bordered by a miniature box-hedge.
The thrushes were always searching about in this box, which was hardly high enough to hide
them, for the snails which they found there. They broke the shells on the stone flags of the
garden path adjacent, and were often so intently occupied in the box as to seem to fly up from
under the very feet of any one who passed.

Under the damson tree the first white snowdrops came, and the crocuses, whose yellow petals
often appeared over the snow, and presently the daffodils and the beautiful narcissus. There
were cowslips and primroses, too, which the boys last year had planted upside down that they
might come variegated. The earliest violet was gathered there, for the corner was enclosed
on three sides, and somehow the sunshine fell more genially in that untrimmed spot than in
formal gardens where it is courted. Against the house a pear was trained, and opened its white
bloom the first of all: in its shelter the birds built their nests. The chaffinches called
cheerfully on the plum-trees and sang in the early morning. When the apples bloomed, the goldfinches
visited the same trees at least once a day.

A damask rose opened its single petals, the sweetest-scented of all the roses; there were a
few strawberries under the wall of the house; by-and-by the pears above enlarged, and the damsons
were coated with the bloom. On the tall plum-trees hung the large purplish-red plums: upon
shaking the tree, one or two came down with a thud. The branches of the damsons depended so
low, looking, as it were, right into the court and pressing the fruit against your very face
as you entered, that you could not choose but take some when it was ripe. A blue-painted barrel-churn
stood by the door; young Aaron turned it in the morning, while the finches called in the plum-trees,
but now and then not all the strength of his sturdy shoulders nor patient hours of turning
could 'fetch' the butter, for a witch had been busy.

Sometimes on entering the dairy in the familiar country way, you might find Cicely, now almost
come to womanhood, at the cheese-tub. As she bent over it her rounded arms, bare nearly to
the shoulder, were laved in the white milk. It must have been from the dairy that Poppæa learned
to bathe in milk, for Cicely's arms shone white and smooth, with the gleam of a perfect skin.
But Mrs. Luckett would never let her touch the salt, which will ruin the hands. Cicely, however,
who would do something, turned the cheeses in the cheese-room alone. Taking one corner of the
clean cloth in her teeth, in a second, by some dexterous sleight-of-hand, the heavy cheese
was over, though ponderous enough to puzzle many a man, especially as it had to come over gently
that the shape might not be injured.

She did it without the least perceptible exertion. At the moment of the turn, when the weight
must have been felt, there was no knot of muscle visible on her arm. That is the difference; for

    When Ajax strives some rock's vast weight to throw

the muscles of the man's limb knot themselves and stand out in bold relief. The smooth contour
of Cicely's arm never varied. Mrs. Luckett, talking about cheese as we watched Cicely one morning,
said people's taste have much altered; for she understood they were now fond of a foreign sort
that was full of holes. The old saying was that bread should be full of holes, cheese should
have none. Just then Hilary entered and completed the triad by adding that ale should make
you see double.

So he called for the brown jug, and he and I had a glass. On my side of the jug stood a sportsman
in breeches and gaiters, his gun presented, and ever in the act to fire: his dog pointed, and
the birds were flying towards Hilary. Though rude in design the scene was true to nature and
the times: from the buttons on the coat to the long barrel of the gun, the details were accurate
and nothing improved to suit the artist's fancy. To me these old jugs and mugs and bowls have
a deep and human interest, for you can seem to see and know the men who drank from them in
the olden days.

Now a tall Worcester vase, with all its elegance and gilding, though it may be valued at 5,000l.,
lacks that sympathy, and may please the eye but does not touch the heart. For it has never
shared in the jovial feast nor comforted the weary; the soul of man has never communicated
to it some of its own subtle essence. But this hollow bowl whispers back the genial songs that
were shouted over it a hundred years ago. On the ancient Grecian pottery, too, the hunter with
his spear chases the boar or urges his hounds after the flying deer; the women are dancing,
and you can almost hear the notes of the flute. These things were part of their daily life;
these are no imaginary pictures of imaginary and impossible scenes: they are simply scenes
in which every one then took part. So I think that the old English jugs and mugs and bowls
are true art, with something of the antique classical spirit in them, for truly you can read
the hearts of the folk for whom they were made. They have rendered the interpretation easy
by writing their minds upon them: the motto, 'Prosperity to the Flock,' for instance, is a
good one still; and 'Drink fair; don't swear,' is yet a very pleasant and suitable admonition.

As I looked at the jug, the cat coughed under the table. 'Ah,' said Mrs. Luckett, 'when the
cat coughs, the cold goes through the house.' Hilary, returning to the subject of the cheese,
said that the best was made when the herd grazed on old pastures: there was a pasture field
of his which it was believed had been grazed for fully two hundred years. When he was a boy,
the cheese folk made to keep at home for eating often became so hard that, unable to cut it,
they were obliged to use a saw. Still longer ago, they used to despatch a special cheese to
London in the road-waggon; it was made in thin vats (pronounced in the dairy 'vates'), was
soft, and eaten with radishes. Another hard kind was oval-shaped, or like a pear; it was hung
up in nets to mature, and traded to the West Indies.

He looked to see when the moon changed in 'Moore's Almanac,' which was kept for ready reference
on the mantelpiece. Next to Bible and Prayer-book comes old Moore's rubric in the farmhouse--that
rubric which declares the 'vox stellarum.' There are old folk who still regret the amendments
in the modern issue, and would have back again the table which laid down when the influence
of the constellations was concentrated in each particular limb and portion of the body. In
his oaken cabinet Hilary had 'Moore' from the beginning of the century, or farther back, for
his fathers had saved them before him. On the narrow margins during his own time he had jotted
down notes of remarkable weather and the events of the farm, and could tell you the very day
cow 'Beauty' calved twenty years ago.

I thought the ale good, but Hilary was certain it was not equal to what he used to brew himself
before he had so large an acreage to look after, and indeed before the old style of farm-life
went out of fashion. Then he used to sit up all night watching--for brewing is a critical operation--and
looking out of doors now and then to pass the long hours saw the changes of the sky, the constellations
rising in succession one after the other, and felt the slight variations of the wind and of
moisture or dryness in the air which predict the sunshine or the shower of the coming day.
He seemed to have thought a good deal in those lonely watches; but he passed it off by referring
to the malting. Barn barley was best for malting--i.e. that which had been stored in a barn
and therefore kept perfectly dry, for ricks sometimes get wet before they can be thatched.
But barn barley was not often come by nowadays, as one by one the old barns disappeared: burned
perhaps, and not rebuilt. He had ceased to brew for some time; Cicely could, however, remember
sipping the sweet wort, which is almost too sweet for the palate after childhood.

They still baked a batch of bread occasionally, but not all that was required. Cicely superintended
the baking, passing the barm through a sieve with a wisp of clean hay in it. The hay takes
off any sourness, and ensures it being perfectly sweet. She knew when the oven was hot enough
by the gauge-brick: this particular brick as the heat increased became spotted with white,
and when it had turned quite white the oven was ready. The wood embers were raked out with
the scraper, and the malkin, being wetted, cleaned out the ashes. 'Thee looks like a gurt malkin'
is a common term of reproach among the poor folk--meaning a bunch of rags on the end of a stick.
We went out to look at the oven; and then Mrs. Luckett made me taste her black-currant gin,
which was very good. Presently we went into the orchard to look at the first apple-tree out
in bloom. While there a magpie flew across the meadow, and as I watched it Mrs. Luckett advised
me to turn my back and not to look too long in that direction. 'For,' said she, 'one magpie
is good luck, but two mean sorrow; and if you should see three--goodness!--something awful
might happen.'[1]

      [1] See Notes.

One lovely June afternoon as Hilary and I strolled about the fields, we passed some lambs at
play. 'Lamb is never good eating without sunshine,' said Hilary. Not only wheat and plants
generally but animals also are affected by the absence of sun, so that the epicure should hope
as devoutly as the farmer that the dull and overcast season of 1879 will not be repeated. Hilary's
remark was founded upon the experience of long years--such experience as is only to be found
in farmhouses where kindred succeed each other, and hand down practical observations from father
to son.

The thistles were showing rather strongly in the barley--the result of last year's rain and
the consequent impossibility of proper clearing. These thistles he thought came from portions
of the root and not from seed. Last year all the farmers had been Latter Lammas men. The 1st
of August is Lammas Day; and in the old time if a farmer had neglected his work and his haymaking
was still unfinished on August 13 (i.e. old style), he was called in reproach a Latter Lammas
man. But last year (1879) they were all alike, and the hay was about till September; yet Hilary
could recollect it being all done by St. Swithin's, July 15.

Sometimes, however, the skilled and careful agriculturist did not succeed so well as the lazy
one. Once in seven years there came a sloven's year, according to the old folk, when the sloven
had a splendid crop of wheat and hardly knew where to put it. Such a harvest was as if a man
had gone round his farm with the sun in one hand and the watering-pot in the other! Last year
there had been nearly as much mathern (wild camomile) and willow-wind (convolvulus and buckwheat)
as crop, and he did not want to see the colt's tail in the sky so often again. The colt's tail
is a cloud with a bushy appearance like a ragged fringe, and portends rain.

I remarked that it was curious how thunderstorms sometimes returned on the same day of the
week and at the same hour for a month running. Hilary said they had been known to return every
day at the same hour. The most regular operation on a farm is the milking: one summer his fogger
declared it came on to thunder day after day in the afternoon just as he took his yoke off
his shoulders. Such heavy and continuous downpour not only laid the crops, but might spoil
them altogether; for laid barley had been known to sprout there and then, and was of course
totally spoiled. It was a mistake to associate thunder solely with hot weather; the old folk
used to say that it was never too cold to thunder and never too warm to snow.

A sweet yet faintly pungent odour came on the light breeze over the next field--a scent like
clover, but with a slight reminiscence of the bean-flower. It arose from the yellow flower
of the hop-trefoil: honey sometimes has a flavour which resembles it. The hop-trefoil is a
favourite crop for sheep, but Hilary said it was too soft for horses. The poppies were not
yet out in the wheat. When in full bloom some of the cottagers gather the scarlet flowers in
great quantities and from them make poppy wine. This liquor has a fine colour and is very heady,
and those who make it seem to think much of it. Upon the hills where furze grows plentifully
the flowers are also collected, and a dye extracted from them. Ribbons can thus be dyed a bright
yellow, but it requires a large quantity of the flowers.

A little farther a sheep-dog looked at us from a gateway; and on coming nearer we found the
shepherd busily engaged cutting the feet of his sheep one by one with a keen knife. They had
got the foot-rot down in a meadow--they do not suffer from it on the arable uplands where folded--and
the shepherd was now applying a caustic solution. Every shepherd has his own peculiar specific,
which he believes to be the only certain remedy.

Tar is used in the sheepfold, just as it used to be when sweet Dowsabell went forth to gather
honeysuckle and lady's-smock nearly three centuries since. For the shepherd with whom she fell
in love carried

    His tar-boxe on his broad belt hong.

So, too,

    He leared his sheepe as he him list
    When he would whistle in his fist;

and the shepherd still guides and encourages his sheep by whistling.

Hilary said that years ago the dogs kept at farmhouses in that district did not seem of such
good breeds, nor were there so many varieties as at present. They were mostly sheep-dogs, or
mongrels of the sheep-dog cast; for little attention was paid to breed. Dogs of this kind,
with shaggy black coats and stump tails, could be found at most farms, and were often of a
savage disposition; so much so that it was occasionally necessary to break their teeth that
they might not injure the sheep. From his description the dogs at the present day must be far
superior; indeed, there seems to have been no variety of dog and no purity of breed at that
time (in that neighbourhood); meaning, of course, outside the gamekeeper's kennels, or the
hounds used for hunting. Shepherds like to keep their flock in hurdles, folded as much as possible,
that they may not rub their wool off and so get a ragged appearance. Once now and then in wet
weather the ground becomes so soft that a flock will not move, their narrow feet sinking so
deeply in the mud. It is then necessary to 'dog them out'--to set the dog at them--and the
excitement, fright, and exertion have been known to kill one or more of the flock.

Passing on to the lower grounds, we entered the meadows, where the men were at haycart. The
cart-horses wore glittering brazen ornaments, crescent-shaped, in front of the neck, and one
upon the forehead. Have these ornaments a history?[2] The carters and ploughmen have an old-world
vocabulary of their own, saying 'toward' for anything near or leaning towards you, and 'vrammards'
for the reverse. 'Heeld' or 'yeeld,' again, is ploughman's language; when the newly sown corn
does not 'heeld' or 'yeeld' it requires the harrow. In the next field, which the mowers had
but just cut, the men were 'tedding'--i.e. spreading the swathe with their prongs. Hilary said
that hay was a safe speculation if a man could afford to wait; for every few years it was sure
to be extremely dear, so that the old people said, 'Old hay, old gold.'

      [2] See Notes.

As we returned towards Lucketts' Place, he pointed out to me a distant house upon which he
said slates had been first used in that neighbourhood. Fifty or sixty years since no slates
were to be seen there, and when they began to be introduced the old folk manifested great opposition.
They said slate would never last--the moss would eat through it, and so cause holes; and, in
fact, some of the slate that was brought up did decay and become useless. But that was, of
course, an inferior kind, quite different to what is now employed. In so comparatively short
a period has everything--even the mode of roofing--changed that the introduction of slates
is still in many places within the memory of man. Hilary had still a lingering preference for
thatch; and though he could not deny the utility of slate, his inclination was obviously in
favour of straw. He assured me that good straw from a good harvest (for there was much difference
in it), well laid on by a good thatcher, had been known to keep out the weather for forty-five
years.

We looked into the garden at the Place, where Hilary particularly called my attention to the
kidney-beans; for, said he, if the kidney-beans run up the sticks well, with a strong vine,
then it would be a capital hop-year. On the contrary, if they were weak and poor, the hops
would prove a failure. Thus the one plant was an index to the other, though they might be growing
a hundred miles apart, both being particularly sensitive to the same atmospheric influences.

In a distant tree beyond the rickyard there was something hanging in the branches that I could
not quite make out: it was a limb of a dead horse. A cart-horse belonging to a neighbouring
farmer had met with an accident and had to be killed, when, according to old custom, portions
were sent round to each adjacent farmstead for the dogs, which then had a feast. Thus, said
Hilary, according to the old saw, the death of a horse is the life of a dog.

CHAPTER IX.

THE WATER-MILL.    FIELD NAMES.

'Our time be a-most gone by,' said the miller looking up from his work and laying aside the
millpeck for a moment as he rubbed his eyes with his white and greasy sleeve. From a window
of the old mill by Okebourne I was gazing over the plain green with rising wheat, where the
titlarks were singing joyously in the sunshine. A millstone had been 'thrown off' on some full
sacks--like cushions--and Tibbald, the miller, was dexterously pecking the grooves afresh.

The millpeck is a little tool like a double adze, or perhaps rather like two chisels set in
the head of a mallet. Though age was stealing upon him, Tibbald's eye and hand were still true,
and his rude sculpture was executed with curious precision. The grooves, which are the teeth
of the millstone, radiate from the centre, but do not proceed direct to the edge: they slant
slightly.

'There bean't many as can do this job,' he said, 'I can put in sixteen or twenty to the inch.
These old French burrs be the best stone; they be hard, but they be mild and takes the peck
well.' Ponderous as the millstones appear, they are capable of being set so that their surfaces
shall grind with extreme accuracy. The nether, called the 'bed stone,' is stationary; the upper
millstone, or 'runner,' revolves, and the grain crushed between the two works out along the
furrows to the edge.

Now and then the miller feels the grain as it emerges with his pudgy thumb and finger, and
knows by touch how the stones are grinding. It is perceptibly warm at the moment it issues
forth, from the friction: yet the stones must not grind too close, or they 'kill' the wheat,
which should be only just cracked, so as to skin well. To attain this end, first, the surfaces
of the stones must be level, and the grooves must be exactly right; and, secondly, the upper
stone must be hung at the exact distance above the other to the smallest fraction of an inch.
The upper millstone is now sometimes balanced with lead, which Tibbald said was not the case
of old.

'We used to have a good trade at this mill,' he continued, as he resumed his pecking; 'but
our time be a-most gone by. We be too fur away up in these here Downs. There! Listen to he!'
A faint hollow whistle came up over the plain, and I saw a long white cloud of steam miles
away, swiftly gliding above the trees beneath which in the cutting the train was running.

'That be th' express. It be that there steam as have done for us. Everything got to go according
to that there whistle: they sets the church clock by he. The big London mills as be driven
by steam does the most of the work; and this here foreign wheat, as comes over in the steamers,
puts the market down, so as we yent got a chance to buy up a lot and keep it till the price
gets better. I seed in the paper as the rate is gone down a penny: the steamers be going to
ship the American wheat a penny a bushel cheaper. So it bean't much good for Hilary to talk
about his wheat. I thenks that'll about do.'

He laid down the millpeck, and took his millstaff to prove the work he had done. This was made
of well-seasoned oak, two pieces put together so that they should not warp. He rubbed the edge
with ruddle, and, placing the millstaff on the stone, turned it about on its shorter axis:
where the ruddle left its red mark more pecking would be required. There was but one small
spot, and this he quickly put right. Even the seasoned oak, however, is not always true, and
to be certain on the point Tibbald had a millstaff prover. This is of rigid steel, and the
staff is put on it; if any daylight is visible between the two the staff is not accurate--so
delicately must these great stones be adjusted for successful grinding.

The largest of them are four feet two inches diameter; and dangerous things they are to move,
for if the men do not all heave or 'give' at the same moment the stone may slip, and the edge
will take off a row of fingers as clean as the guillotine. Tibbald, of course, had his joke
about that part of the machinery which is called the 'damsel.' He was a righteous man enough
as millers go, but your miller was always a bit of a knave; nor could he forbear from boasting
to me how he had been half an hour too soon for Hilary last Overboro' market.

He said the vast water-wheel was of elm, but it would not last so long up so near the springs.
Upon a river or brook the wheel might endure for thirty years, and grind corn for a generation.
His millpond was close to the spring-head, and the spring-water ate into the wood and caused
it to decay much quicker. The spokes used to be mortised in, now they used flanges, ironwork
having almost destroyed the business of the ancient millwright. Of all manual workers, probably
the old style of millwright employed the greatest variety of tools, and was the cleverest in
handling them. There seemed no end to the number of his chisels and augers; some of the augers
of immense size. In winter time the millwright made the millstones, for the best stones are
not in one piece but composed of forty or fifty. The French burrs which Tibbald preferred come
over in fragments, and these are carefully fitted together and stuck with plaster of Paris.
Such work required great nicety: the old millwright was, in fact, a kind of artist in his handicraft.

I could not help regretting, as Tibbald dilated on these things, that the village millwright
no longer existed; the care, the skill, the forethought, the sense of just proportion he exhibited
quite took him out of the ranks of the mere workman. He was a master of his craft, and the
mind he put into it made him an artist. Tibbald went on that he did not care for the Derby
or Welsh millstones. These were in one piece, but they were too hard for the delicate grinding
necessary to make the fine flour needed for good bread. They answered best for barley meal.
Now, the French burr was not only hard but mild, and seemed to feel the corn as it crushed
it. A sack of wheat lost 4 lb. in grinding. I asked about the toll: he showed me the old measure,
reckoned at the tenth of a sack; it was a square box. When the lord's tenants in the olden
times were forced to have their corn ground at the lord's mill, the toll was liable to be abused
in a cruel manner; hence the universal opinion that a miller must be a knave. Even in much
more recent times, when the labourers took part of their wages in flour, there is said to have
been a great deal of sleight-of-hand in using the toll-box, and the miller's thumb grew fat
by continually dipping into other folk's sacks.

But Tibbald had an argument even here, for he said that men nowadays never grew so strong as
they used to do when they brought their own wheat to be ground at the mill, and when they made
their bread and baked it at home. His own father once carried the fattest man in the parish
on his back half a mile; I forget how much he weighed exactly, but it was something enormous,
and the fat man, moreover, held a 56 lb. weight in each hand. He himself remembered when Hilary
used to be the strongest man in the place; when the young men met together they contended who
should lift the heaviest weight, and he had seen Hilary raise 5 cwt., fair lifting, with the
hands only, and without any mechanical appliance. Hilary, too, used to write his name with
a carpenter's flat cedar pencil on the whitewashed ceiling of the brewhouse, holding the while
a 1/2 cwt. of iron hung on his little finger. The difficulty was to get the weight up, lifting
it fairly from the ground; you could lift it very well half-way, but it was just when the arm
was bent that the tug came to get it past the hip, after which it would go up comparatively easily.

Now this great strength was not the result of long and special training, or, indeed, of any
training at all; it came naturally from outdoor life, outdoor work, plain living (chiefly bacon),
and good bread baked at home. At the present time men ate the finest and whitest of bread,
but there was no good in it. Folk grew tall and big--taller than they used to be, he thought--and
they could run quick, and so forth; but there was no stamina, no power of endurance, of withstanding
exposure like there was formerly. The mere measure of a man, he was certain, had nothing to
do with his strength; and he could never understand how it was that the army folk would have
men precisely so high and so many inches round. Just then he was called away to a carter who
had brought up his team and waggon at the door, and as he was gone some time I went up under
the roof, whence there was a beautiful view down over the plain.

The swifts, which had but just arrived, were rushing through the sky in their headlong way;
they would build presently in the roof. So said the soprano, taking by
the wrists to her lover, drawing him to her breast and kissing her with an enthusiasm of gratitude,
Reyes estimated that it was worth.

"Yes, she was happy, I thought, it was better that way." Emma also had a very happy and treated
him it better than before, and sometimes he implied that he also appreciated the initiation
that new life ... art, as they called the trots home where they had gone. Everyone was happy,
but him ... at times. I was not satisfied with others or himself, or anyone. Should be itself good,
and no one was. In the world and people were not completely honest, and it was a shame. There
was nobody to treat or himself. He fled, he amazed; repugnant to him conscientious of those
soliloquies that once was proud and that he was pleased to the point of falling asleep like
to make an examination of conscience. Now he saw clearly that, in short, he was a bad person.
But what does it value that it was tough on himself when awake, with bile the throat, if after
getting up, and washed, and missed a lot of water on the neck, revived it with the vigor of
life, with the strength of its autumn virile, healthy and strong, concupiscence invincible,
the desire to enjoy the laziness of sin become habit? That was wrong, very wrong, his home, his wife,
before it was boring, unbearable, a dungeon, a tyranny, but it was worse than that, was a
... brothel, yes, brothel, and told themselves same: "Here they all come to have fun and ruin,
all seem funny and adventurous heretics and crowded. " This meant something terrible piled in
soliloquies Bonis. Was crowded ... a mixture of incompatible love of complacency scandalous
of abominable confusion. Sometimes he imagined that this over-familiarity of German comedians,
and his wife, was somewhat similar to the round bed of misery could not be there any crime
against honesty ... but the danger existed and appearances condemned all. Marta, who was to
marry the guy Nepomuceno, admitted surreptitious courtship Sebastian's cousin, a fifty-green and well
maintained, which had become romantic a cynical, believing that this was progress. Sebastian, once
so idealistic and poetic now I could not see a cook without giving a pinch, and this is attributed
to that we were in positive a century. He, Bonifacio, had to consent to enter his beloved home
his wife, and were friends and eat together .... Emma, ​​though undoubtedly honest, let Minghetti
to get too close and talk quietly. He does not trust ... but why? Perhaps because of guilty conscience
he closed his eyes, because they dared to accuse anyone ... for he had lost the spiritual touch,
because I did not know, among so much falseness, dullness and disorder, which was good and
bad, decency, honor, delicacy ... and in another time when he exhaust the finances of the Valcárcel,
in competition with D. Nepo, when he spots the honor of his home with a male adultery, but
adultery, in the midst of was remorseful for his conduct apologize for: love and art, passion sincere,
explained everything. But now! A long season had been unfaithful to his passion, delivered
night after night to an absurd love lost, all lightness, love crazy sense, it was more disgusting
to have the wedding and theater itálamo quirky adventures, and it opened his eyes and made
him understand the spiritual misery carried within itself, and that his passion was not as
great as previously thought, and therefore was not legitimate. Plus ... and oh pain!, the art itself had
its pluses and minuses, and there Art was all that glittered. No, no, no longer had to fool
himself, what was a brothel, and he lost one of many. There was nothing good but that tenderness peaceful,
gentle, serious, silent, to be awakened from time to time, which made him hateful everything
around him and led him to crave, do not die because the death had very afraid for the pain
and uncertainty of the grave, but transformed, regenerated. I was thinking something like a
new man graft in the trunk and dragged spent the world so long ago. She was not old, and he thought
he had lived for centuries, from memories of childhood, which related to years of dream that he
had left limbo of the unconscious life, as of the date, how far! Had much sense! What lap had
the same ideas!

And poor Bonis rubbed his forehead and the whole head in his hands, feeling sorry for him brain
that seethed, creaking, asking rest, peace ... and the help of new forces.

One day he found a book Bonis word avatar and its explanation, and said: - One thing so I would
come to me perfectly! Another soul into my body, a new life without
commitments of the former.

Do not expect miracles.

He did not like at all. The miracle was absurd, something against the cold right, and he wanted
to method, order, a law at all, constant law, without exception. The miracle was romantic,
revolutionary, violent, and he was no longer the romantic, or violence, and for the extraordinary, not
by passion. Yes, there was love that was worth more than passionate. More was, there was no
love sublime sensual love, by this convoluted and Platonic would be considered .... Love the
woman ... was always love the woman. No, something else .... Male-male love, from father to
son. A child, a son of my soul! That's the avatar I need. A being who is myself, but starting
over, outside of me, with blood my blood!

And Bonis, weeping at the thought, it was said, snuggling his head
against a wall:

- Yes, yes, as always, the desire of my life since
I could have it, son!

For his spirit passed like the flattery of a hand of light that healed, only with your contact
the wounds of the heart. He felt a thrill of legitimate self-satisfied with the consciousness
clearly, obviously, that in the background of all his mistakes, and overcame them almost always had
latent, but real, vigorous, that longing for the child, that love without any mixture of lust.
In his most serious, deep, rather than the love of art, rather than
the desire for passion by passion, had always been the fatherly love
... frustrated.

And I had always wanted the same, his desire was the plastic form, steady, fixed, an intense
memory. He was always the son and one man alone, his only son.

A woman ... could not continue with him, he was not conceived to be female to inherit the blood, his
spirit. It had to be man. And one only, for the love he had to devote the child had to be absolute,
unchallenged. Amar several children seemed to Bonis infidelity on the first. Without knowing
what he did was comparing a lot of affection for offspring with polytheism.

Many children were as many gods. No one ..., one, one that spoke to him the entrails, one that
very nearly had him in the eyes, in the air, the hallucination of
his nights sleep.

And where had to leave his only son? ... No doubt, the law was the law, order the order, no
sophistry of sin fit, had to leave the womb of Emma.

But alas, he did not deserve the child! No, not coming.

After that night of dancing, social origin of this heap they lived comedy, Germans and people from
your home, Emma's uncle, himself, after that night he if not admitted enemy of direct intervention
in their affairs, the supernatural, would seen the hand of Providence, the revelation of fate,
had he been at the right height of the great things he had dreamed? No, no way. He had returned
to falter, he had been carried away with everyone else's life easy, lazy, vice, and had come with
delight to see his mistress in the house, the table of his wife,
and had come to imagine legitimate such abominations with that philosophy
semiborrachos desktop, which at one time seemed poetic inspiration,
moral art, exceptional, privileged.

And he was the one who had sense, hearing Serafina sing a song to the Virgin, embodied in her womb
a divine love! He, with a bizarre mysticism, false, had comparative crazy but honestly, with
the Virgin Mother!

And many times, then saw things differently, and had come to believe: "All is a matter of geography!
If I were Turkish, this would be legitimate, then let us imagine that are elsewhere ... and lengths.
" More was, at that moment was so sad reflections, were you sorry? No. He was sure, because he
said the awareness that few hours later, when the body was filled with fantasy and excitement for
wine and coffee, and perhaps by the music of Minghetti and Emma again him that Bonifacio would
be corrupted complacent, well found with the kind of free love had got home. Would Serafina,
and while Emma Minghetti and continued their endless lessons, two
of them, Serafina and he, in the arbor of the garden, oh misery!,
oh shame shame!, would, as always, lovers, lovers of habit, without
apology, albeit a little strength, apology at the end of the blindness
of passion, love by habit, by the facility, for the sin itself ....

No,
would not the child!

Miserable! It deserved it! Gave up the venture.

But if happiness could be true repentance.

Why not aspire to moral perfection and come in this way where they could?

Among all the great things that had happened to be in this world, great writer, great captain
(this rarely, only child), great musician, great artist above all,
his dreams never had taken the side of holiness.

If at one time had said, and I can not invent great passions, dramas
and novels, we do all this, the hero is myself, why should he not
now aspire to heroism of the opposite sex?

Could not be holy?

For artist, to writer, he lacked talent, skill. To be holy is not
needed this.

And poor Bonis, which at times was crazy at home, the streets and solitary walks, he sought
Golden Legend in the library of his father, and saw that indeed, there had been many saints
short ranges, and no less visited by grace.

Yes, that was, you could be a simple saint, a saint to simple ....

Leave everything as it had no son, and on ... Will I continue to whom? If he did not have enough
faith far from it! If you hesitated, doubted, and with a mess of ideas that made it impossible
clarify their doubts and believe again macha-hammer! Those tomes, who had read eagerness to
be wise everything possible to prepare the child's education, had produced, in short, an intellectual
indigestion denials. He was not religious ... or left to be. There were things in the Bible that
they could not swallow. One day he heard that the six days of Genesis were not days, but times,
even in pure orthodoxy, felt a great relief, as if you take a load off, as if it was he who had
invented what the world made in six days. But was it the Ark with all species of animals was
Tower of Babel, was the sin, which passed from father to son, and was stopping Joshua the sun
..., instead of stopping the earth. No, could not: he could not take his cross, because was
a simple as those of the Middle Ages, but a simple illustrated, a simple coffee, a simple Modern
... Ah, but what he lacked was the sincere desire to sacrifice, sacrifice and charity! ...
Making nonsense for the greater glory ... of what had up there, it seemed only reasonable, something
like an inner music. One night in bed read a book spoke of a mystical half-crazy, Italian, Middle
Ages, who was called the jester God seemed to be the clown of the glory-filled with the love
of Jesus, laughed and gave the Church for granted that he would be
condemned, but taking into hell divine passion that no one could tear,
and such Jacopone of Todi, so he called the crowd, who laughed at
him and admired, was ridiculous atrocities that his penance was not
exalted, but object mocking, and walk out with your hands, head down
and feet in the air, and oil was smeared whole body, naked, and she
started to roll over a lot of feathers, which stuck to him body, and
this facade left on the streets for boys he ran ....

Bonis tenderness
cried reading these feats of clowning mystic, author of Lauds, then
immortalized.

He Bonis, was no poet, but with the flute he thought he could say a lot things, and to convert
unbelievers .... But the touch was in the boot. Going around the world, to run, leave everything,
and it did not have a child, being a holy people, a holy fool, was only reasonable, but alas,
the conscience told him that no one would ever, no and to leave everything, even shoes, and take
up his cross, not even to leave his wife .... even his mistress.

-XIV-

Major events Reyes came to get these intermittent whims mystical that he, in his hours of sensuality
and moderate rationalist, described as unhealthy. The unhappy Bonis could not help but recall
a well-known passage from La Sonnambula, that of:

     
     ah, the non sei tutto ancor cancellata dal mio cuore,

(As he sang),
when it came time to say goodbye Gorgheggi Serafina, which, broken
again the company was contracted to the theater with Mochi Coruna.

That separation had been a continuing threat, the bitter drop of happiness in the days and months
of blind passion; then a necessary pain, and even deserved and healthy, he thought the lover, full
of remorse and moral plans. But when it came, it was felt Bonis a lady of operation performed
in the flesh. Quite frankly, and explaining everything satisfactorily by an intricate web of
sophistry, Reyes acknowledged that natural affections, merely human, were the strongest, true,
and that he was a mystic stick, and a romantic and passionate about truth. Ah, separated from
Serafina, despite of that warmth with which his spirit was some time that part was a pain
True, those that horrified him, which gave the laziness of suffering. It was so annoying to
have the courage under stress, need to take heart of grace to endure pains, real! And there was
no choice. Think about having more time opera company, was absurd. And all invented to keep records
in the village and his disciple Mochi were exhausted, they could not give anymore. He had
never seen, nor in time of Tiplona, while this was a singer, that parts of a company to remain
one year in a row and something else in the city, working out or on strike. What you saw was exactly
showgirl he stayed there, married to one of the people, or exercising a trade, a conductor neighbor
had been leading a local band ... but sopranos and tenors, had never stopped many months: wheat
ended, he flew. The phenomenon that offered Serafina, Julio and Gaetano, was so admirable
as the swallows have left to spend a winter from snow. Only the swallows had not become gossip to
say that fed sparrows, for example. And the comic long stay, hired a few seasons, others do not,
they said horrors. Not to silence the gossip, of which no one remembered, unless Bonis, but because
there was no decent way, not even half decent, to continue covering appearances, nor resources
to continue maintaining the great expense caused those remnants of the company dissolved, they
understood the need to end that state of affairs, as he called Reyes. The company had lost a lot, and
the company, ie on the flow mermadísimo Valcárcel attorney, continued loading, more or less directly,
the main parts, namely: Mochi, Serafina and Minghetti. Was presented chance to earn a living from
work and had to take it, it hurts more about and other farewell. Emma who was not compromised.


'Mary,' said he, calling the servant, as if he did not hear her, 'Some ale, and the ginger
wine, and the grey-beard--mebbe you'd like a drop a' shart'--to me; but I declined. She repeated
her question, but Uncle Bennet was looking towards me.

'The wuts be very forrard,' said he, 'I got some a-most ready to cut.'

'Do you hear?' cried Cicely, angrily.

'Niece,' replied the farmer, turning to her, 'there's them summer apples as you used to like,
there be some ready; will 'ee have one?'

'I don't want your apples; why didn't you come down?'

'Aw; that's what you be a-talking about.'

'Yes, that's it.'

'The turmots wants some rain terrable bad' (to me)--'you med see the fly a-hopping about 'em.'

'I hope they will spoil your turnips,' said Cicely; 'you are a very rude man not to answer
a lady when she speaks to you.'

'You be a-coming on nicely, Cissy,' said he. 'Have 'ee got are a gage-ring yet?'

'How dare you!' (blushing). 'Tell me instantly why have you not been to see us? You know how
angry it makes me.'

'Well, I was a-coming,' deliberately.

'When were you coming?'

'Well, I got to see a man down your way, Cissy; a' owes me for a load a' straw.'

'Then why don't you come down and get the money?'

'I telled 'ee I was a-coming. He wants some of our sheep to feed off a meadow; s'pose I must
see about it'--with a sigh, as if the idea of a decision was insupportable.

'Why didn't you come before?'

'Aw, I don't seem to have no time'--farmers having more time than anybody else.

'You could have come in June.'

'Bless 'ee, your feyther's got the hay about; a' don't want no strangers bothering.'

'As if you were a stranger! Well, why didn't you come in May?'

'Lor bless 'ee, my dear.'

'In April?'

'Us was main busy a-hoeing.'

'In March?'

'I had the rheumatism bad in March.'

'Well, then,' concluded Cicely, 'now just change your coat and come to-day. Jump up in the
pony-trap--we will make room.'

'To-day!' in hopeless bewilderment, his breath quite taken away at the idea of such sudden
action. 'Couldn't do't--couldn't do't. Got to go down to Thirty Acre Corner: got to get out
the reaping machine--a' wants oiling, a' reckon; got some new hurdles coming; 'spects a chap
to call about them lambs;' a farmer can always find a score of reasons for doing nothing.

'All rubbish!' cried Cicely, smiling.

'Nieces be main peart now-a-days,' said he, shutting one eye and keeping it closed, as much
as to say--I won't be driven. Then to me, 'There won't be many at market to-day.'

'I am hungry,' said Cicely softly; 'I should like some bread and honey.'

'Aw; should 'ee?' in gentler tones; 'I'll get 'ee some: will'ee have it in th' comb? I got
a bit left.'

She knew his pride in his bees and his honey; hill farmers still keep large stocks. He brought
her a slice of home-baked bread and a piece of comb. She took the comb in her white fingers,
and pressed the liquid gold from the cells; the luscious sweetness gathered from a thousand
flowers making her lips still sweeter. Uncle Bennet offered me a jar full to the brim: 'Dip
your vinger in,' said he.

'Why is the honey of the hills so much nicer?' asked Cicely, well knowing, but drawing him on.

'It be th' clover and th' thyme, and summat in the air. There bean't no hedges for um to fly
up against, and so um carries home a bigger load.'

'How many hives have you?' I inquired.

'Let's see'--he counted them up, touching a finger for each twenty--'There be three score and
sixteen; I have a' had six score years ago, but folk don't care for honey now sugar be so cheap.'

'Let us go and see them,' said Cicely. We went out and looked at the hives; they were all in
a row, each protected by large 'pan-sherds' from heavy rain, and placed along beneath the wall
of the garden, which sheltered them on one side. Uncle Bennet chatted pleasantly about his
bees for an hour, and would, I believe, have gossiped all day, notwithstanding that he had
so little time for anything. Nothing more was said about the delayed visit, but just as we
were on the point of departure, and Cicely had already taken the reins, he said to her, as
if it were an afterthought, 'Tell your mother, I s'pose I must look down that way next week.'

We passed swiftly through the little hamlet; the children had gathered by a gateway to watch
us. Though so far from the world, they were not altogether without a spice of the impudence
of the city arab. A tall and portly gentleman from town once chanced to visit this 'coombe-bottom'
on business, and strolled down the 'street' in all the glory of shining boots, large gold watch-chain,
black coat and high hat, all the pomp of Regent-street; doubtless imagining that his grandeur
astonished the rustics. A brown young rascal, however, looking him up--he was a tall man--with
an air of intelligent criticism, audibly remarked, 'Hum! He be very well up to his ankles--and
then a' falls off!'

That evening was one of the most beautiful I remember. We all sat in the garden at Lucketts'
Place till ten o'clock; it was still light and it seemed impossible to go indoors. There was
a seat under a sycamore tree with honeysuckle climbing over the bars of the back; the spot
was near the orchard, but on slightly higher ground. From our feet the meadow sloped down to
the distant brook, the murmur of whose stream as it fell over a bay could be just heard. Northwards
the stars were pale, the sun seems so little below the horizon there that the glow of the sunset
and the glow of the dawn nearly meet. Changed
doctor and could change if it were a favorite Christina of Sweden or Catalina Russia, moving and always
had a ministry of doctors. Aguado was the most time in power, as a specialist in diseases of
the womb, and hysterical flatus and apprehensions, total flatus.

Bonis admired in general science, despite the instinctive revulsion that inspired the exact and
physical, which speak only to the subject, believe in medicine, not for nothing but because
of health troubles, unless it involved doctors, who are going to use? You had to have faith in something,
his weak spirit will not consent to any trouble staying without hope, without a table to hold.
 The mill was the property of two or three
of the village folk, a small band of adventurers now grown old, who every autumn went round
from farm to farm grinding the produce of the various orchards. They sometimes poured a quantity
of the acid juice into the mill to sharpen it, as cutting a lemon will sharpen a knife. The
great press, with its unwieldy screw and levers, squeezed the liquor from the cut-up apples
in the horse-hair bags: a cumbersome apparatus, but not without interest; for surely so rude
an engine must date back far in the past. The old fellows who brought it and put it up with
slow deliberative motions were far, far past the joy with which all the children about the
farm hailed its arrival. With grave faces and indifferent manner they ground the apples, and
departed as slowly and deliberately as they came; verily men of the autumn, harbingers of the
fall of the year.

As I dreamed with the honeysuckle over my shoulder, and Antares southwards, Hilary talked at
intervals about his wheat as usual and the weather, but I only caught fragments of it. The
less tiring are the Bois and Bossons refrigerators, which are made by car or foot soldiers as
simple walks. The high hills called the Garden, and Buet Brevent not be tolerated but for those
who like strong emotions and know how to march on foot with energy. How all things had changed
since the Queen ascended the throne! Not long since Hilary was talking with a labourer, an
elderly man, who went to the feast in Overboro' town on the day of the coronation. The feast
was held in the market-place, and the puddings, said the old fellow regretfully, were so big
they were brought in on hand-barrows.

It was difficult since he himself remembered even to learn the state of the markets. So few
newspapers came into country places that before service on Sundays the farmers gathered round
anybody in the churchyard who was known to take in a paper, to get particulars from this fortunate
individual. From its top corners saw the immense abyss at the bottom of plunges
the river, angry, wild, waking to the sound of a thousand waterfalls echoes the mountains. The
road tour, then at the height of Servoz, through labyrinths of rocks smashed and secular and thick
forests of pines and firs, where these rocks lie scattered erratic that have been one of the
mysteries of geology - revelations of awesome power of refrigerators traveling on the slopes
of the hills. In the depths of the forest roars the Arve, raging torrent there, and wherever
queen's majesty of wild nature. After all, the forest ends, the field is leveled, the Arve
has a less stormy course, mountains open a little, and the Chamonix valley, carpeted with flowers,
ferns and Gramal, and town with crops and livestock, seductive develops, dominated on one side
and another great granite cliffs or hills, forests of firs and pines high, and sea ice have the
sad solemnity of desolation.

The Chamonix valley, situated about 1,000 meters elevation above sea level, measured a length
of 20 to 25 kilometers N.-E. the S.-O., and a width of 1.500 to 2.000 meters. Súrcalo in all
its extension the Arve River, which, being born in the icy heights Balme neck, is increasing
sharply with the waters of the valley show the immediate refrigerators that dominate.
 She rose at this, doubtless pouting, but it was too dusky
to see, and went indoors, and presently from the open window came the notes of her piano. As
she played I dreamed again, till presently Mrs. Luckett began to argue with Hilary that the
shrubs about the garden ought to be cut and trimmed. Hilary said he liked to see the shrubs
and the trees growing freely; he objected to cut and trim them. 'For,' said he, 'God made nothing
tidy.' Just then Cicely called us to supper.

NOTES.

The following interesting correspondence has been received.

MAGPIE OMENS. Page 153.--In reference to the superstition that one magpie is good luck, but
two sorrow, 'R. F.' writes from Wiesbaden:--'In the north of England the contrary belief holds
good, witness the following saw which I heard many years ago in the county of Durham:--

    "One for sorrow, two for mirth;
    Three a marriage, four a birth;
    Five for heaven, six for hell,
    Seven--the devil's own sel!"

As to seventeen, which number I once saw together, Mrs. Luckett's exclamation "Goodness! something
awful might happen" might have been appropriate; only nothing dreadful did occur.'

CART-HORSE ORNAMENTS. Page 159.--As to the history of the crescent-shaped ornaments on carthorses,
'J. D.' writes from Dover: 'Anyone who has lived in Spanish countries must be struck on going
to East Kent by the gay trappings of the farmers' horses on gala days, in which the national
colours of Spain, scarlet and orange yellow, and the "glittering brazen" ornament of the crescent
and the cross, so generally prevail. Their history must date from the introduction of the Flemish
breed of horses to this country, showing that as the Moors carried the crescent to Spain, so
the Spaniards took it to Flanders, and the Flemings here, whence it has been adopted pretty
generally by the farmers of England.'

NAMES OF FIELDS. Page 176.--'The Conigers is evidently the same as Coningar, a word sometimes
occurring in Scottish local nomenclature, and which meant a rabbit-warren--Coniger, Coney-garth.
I know two Coningars in Aberdeenshire, but the meaning of the word is as much forgotten there
also.--H. W. L.'

MEDICINAL USE OF SNAILS. Page 189.--In Dorset, writes 'S. C. S. S.,' an extract of snails for
external use is still sometimes prepared, and, mixed with rum, is rubbed into weak backs, or
legs, especially of children.

LONDON: PRINTED BY SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW STREET SQUARE AND PARLIAMENT STREET

