THE REV. H. F. CARY

PURGATORY

Part 5

Cantos 26 - 33

CANTO XXVI

While singly thus along the rim we walk'd, Oft the good master warn'd me: "Look thou well.
Avail it that I caution thee."  The sun Now all the western clime irradiate chang'd From azure
tinct to white; and, as I pass'd, My passing shadow made the umber'd flame Burn ruddier.  At
so strange a sight I mark'd That many a spirit marvel'd on his way.

This bred occasion first to speak of me, "He seems," said they, "no insubstantial frame:" Then
to obtain what certainty they might, Stretch'd towards me, careful not to overpass The burning
pale.  "O thou, who followest The others, haply not more slow than they, But mov'd by rev'rence,
answer me, who burn In thirst and fire: nor I alone, but these All for thine answer do more
thirst, than doth Indian or Aethiop for the cooling stream. Tell us, how is it that thou mak'st
thyself A wall against the sun, as thou not yet Into th' inextricable toils of death Hadst
enter'd?"  Thus spake one, and I had straight Declar'd me, if attention had not turn'd To new
appearance.  Meeting these, there came, Midway the burning path, a crowd, on whom Earnestly
gazing, from each part I view The shadows all press forward, sev'rally Each snatch a hasty
kiss, and then away. E'en so the emmets, 'mid their dusky troops, Peer closely one at other,
to spy out Their mutual road perchance, and how they thrive.

That friendly greeting parted, ere dispatch Of the first onward step, from either tribe Loud
clamour rises: those, who newly come, Shout "Sodom and Gomorrah!" these, "The cow Pasiphae
enter'd, that the beast she woo'd Might rush unto her luxury."  Then as cranes, That part towards
the Riphaean mountains fly, Part towards the Lybic sands, these to avoid The ice, and those
the sun; so hasteth off One crowd, advances th' other; and resume Their first song weeping,
and their several shout.

Again drew near my side the very same, Who had erewhile besought me, and their looks Mark'd
eagerness to listen.  I, who twice Their will had noted, spake: "O spirits secure, Whene'er
the time may be, of peaceful end! My limbs, nor crude, nor in mature old age, Have I left yonder:
here they bear me, fed With blood, and sinew-strung.  That I no more May live in blindness,
hence I tend aloft. There is a dame on high, who wind for us This grace, by which my mortal
through your realm I bear.  But may your utmost wish soon meet Such full fruition, that the
orb of heaven, Fullest of love, and of most ample space, Receive you, as ye tell (upon my page
Henceforth to stand recorded) who ye are, And what this multitude, that at your backs Have
past behind us."  As one, mountain-bred, Rugged and clownish, if some city's walls He chance
to enter, round him stares agape, Confounded and struck dumb; e'en such appear'd Each spirit.
But when rid of that amaze, (Not long the inmate of a noble heart) He, who before had question'd,
thus resum'd: "O blessed, who, for death preparing, tak'st Experience of our limits, in thy
bark! Their crime, who not with us proceed, was that, For which, as he did triumph, Caesar
heard The snout of 'queen,' to taunt him.  Hence their cry Of 'Sodom,' as they parted, to rebuke
Themselves, and aid the burning by their shame. Our sinning was Hermaphrodite: but we, Because
the law of human kind we broke, Following like beasts our vile concupiscence, Hence parting
from them, to our own disgrace Record the name of her, by whom the beast In bestial tire was
acted.  Now our deeds Thou know'st, and how we sinn'd.  If thou by name Wouldst haply know
us, time permits not now To tell so much, nor can I.  Of myself Learn what thou wishest.  Guinicelli
I, Who having truly sorrow'd ere my last, Already cleanse me."  With such pious joy, As the
two sons upon their mother gaz'd From sad Lycurgus rescu'd, such my joy (Save that I more represt
it) when I heard From his own lips the name of him pronounc'd, Who was a father to me, and
to those My betters, who have ever us'd the sweet And pleasant rhymes of love.  So nought I
heard Nor spake, but long time thoughtfully I went, Gazing on him; and, only for the fire,
Approach'd not nearer.  When my eyes were fed By looking on him, with such solemn pledge, As
forces credence, I devoted me Unto his service wholly.  In reply He thus bespake me: "What
from thee I hear Is grav'd so deeply on my mind, the waves Of Lethe shall not wash it off,
nor make A whit less lively.  But as now thy oath Has seal'd the truth, declare what cause
impels That love, which both thy looks and speech bewray."

"Those dulcet lays," I answer'd, "which, as long As of our tongue the beauty does not fade,
Shall make us love the very ink that trac'd them."

"Brother!"  he cried, and pointed at a shade Before him, "there is one, whose mother speech
Doth owe to him a fairer ornament. He in love ditties and the tales of prose Without a rival
stands, and lets the fools Talk on, who think the songster of Limoges O'ertops him.  Rumour
and the popular voice They look to more than truth, and so confirm Opinion, ere by art or reason
taught. Thus many of the elder time cried up Guittone, giving him the prize, till truth By
strength of numbers vanquish'd.  If thou own So ample privilege, as to have gain'd Free entrance
to the cloister, whereof Christ Is Abbot of the college, say to him One paternoster for me,
far as needs For dwellers in this world, where power to sin No longer tempts us."  Haply to
make way For one, that follow'd next, when that was said, He vanish'd through the fire, as
through the wave A fish, that glances diving to the deep.

I, to the spirit he had shown me, drew A little onward, and besought his name, For which my
heart, I said, kept gracious room. He frankly thus began: "Thy courtesy So wins on me, I have
nor power nor will To hide me.  I am Arnault; and with songs, Sorely lamenting for my folly
past, Thorough this ford of fire I wade, and see The day, I hope for, smiling in my view. I
pray ye by the worth that guides ye up Unto the summit of the scale, in time Remember ye my
suff'rings."  With such words He disappear'd in the refining flame.  Such the sounds, That
hail'd us from within a light, which shone So radiant, I could not endure the view. "The sun,"
it added, "hastes: and evening comes. Delay not: ere the western sky is hung With blackness,
strive ye for the pass."  Our way Upright within the rock arose, and fac'd Such part of heav'n,
that from before my steps The beams were shrouded of the sinking sun.

Nor many stairs were overpass, when now By fading of the shadow we perceiv'd The sun behind
us couch'd: and ere one face Of darkness o'er its measureless expanse Involv'd th' horizon,
and the night her lot Held individual, each of us had made A stair his pallet: not that will,
but power, Had fail'd us, by the nature of that mount Forbidden further travel.  As the goats,
That late have skipp'd and wanton'd rapidly Upon the craggy cliffs, ere they had ta'en Their
supper on the herb, now silent lie And ruminate beneath the umbrage brown, While noonday rages;
and the goatherd leans Upon his staff, and leaning watches them: And as the swain, that lodges
out all night In quiet by his flock, lest beast of prey Disperse them; even so all three abode,
I as a goat and as the shepherds they, Close pent on either side by shelving rock.

A little glimpse of sky was seen above; Yet by that little I beheld the stars In magnitude
and rustle shining forth With more than wonted glory.  As I lay, Gazing on them, and in that
fit of musing, Sleep overcame me, sleep, that bringeth oft Tidings of future hap.  About the
hour, As I believe, when Venus from the east First lighten'd on the mountain, she whose orb
Seems always glowing with the fire of love, A lady young and beautiful, I dream'd, Was passing
o'er a lea; and, as she came, Methought I saw her ever and anon Bending to cull the flowers;
and thus she sang: "Know ye, whoever of my name would ask, That I am Leah: for my brow to weave
A garland, these fair hands unwearied ply. To please me at the crystal mirror, here I deck
me.  But my sister Rachel, she Before her glass abides the livelong day, Her radiant eyes beholding,
charm'd no less, Than I with this delightful task.  Her joy In contemplation, as in labour mine."

And now as glimm'ring dawn appear'd, that breaks More welcome to the pilgrim still, as he Sojourns
less distant on his homeward way, Darkness from all sides fled, and with it fled My slumber;
whence I rose and saw my guide Already risen.  "That delicious fruit, Which through so many
a branch the zealous care Of mortals roams in quest of, shall this day Appease thy hunger."
Such the words I heard From Virgil's lip; and never greeting heard So pleasant as the sounds.
Within me straight Desire so grew upon desire to mount, Thenceforward at each step I felt the
wings Increasing for my flight.  When we had run O'er all the ladder to its topmost round,
As there we stood, on me the Mantuan fix'd His eyes, and thus he spake: "Both fires, my son,
The temporal and eternal, thou hast seen, And art arriv'd, where of itself my ken No further
reaches.  I with skill and art Thus far have drawn thee.  Now thy pleasure take For guide.
Thou hast o'ercome the steeper way, O'ercome the straighter.  Lo! the sun, that darts His beam
upon thy forehead! lo! the herb, The arboreta and flowers, which of itself This land pours
forth profuse!

My feet advanc'd not; but my wond'ring eyes Pass'd onward, o'er the streamlet, to survey The
tender May-bloom, flush'd through many a hue, In prodigal variety: and there, As object, rising
suddenly to view, That from our bosom every thought beside With the rare marvel chases, I beheld
A lady all alone, who, singing, went, And culling flower from flower, wherewith her way Was
all o'er painted.  "Lady beautiful! Thou, who (if looks, that use to speak the heart, Are worthy
of our trust), with love's own beam Dost warm thee," thus to her my speech I fram'd: "Ah! please
thee hither towards the streamlet bend Thy steps so near, that I may list thy song. Beholding
thee and this fair place, methinks, I call to mind where wander'd and how look'd Proserpine,
in that season, when her child The mother lost, and she the bloomy spring."

As when a lady, turning in the dance, Doth foot it featly, and advances scarce One step before
the other to the ground; Over the yellow and vermilion flowers Thus turn'd she at my suit,
most maiden-like, Valing her sober eyes, and came so near, That I distinctly caught the dulcet
sound. Arriving where the limped waters now Lav'd the green sward, her eyes she deign'd to
raise, That shot such splendour on me, as I ween Ne'er glanced from Cytherea's, when her son
Had sped his keenest weapon to her heart. Upon the opposite bank she stood and smil'd through
her graceful fingers shifted still The intermingling dyes, which without seed That lofty land
unbosoms.  By the stream Three paces only were we sunder'd: yet The Hellespont, where Xerxes
pass'd it o'er, (A curb for ever to the pride of man) Was by Leander not more hateful held
For floating, with inhospitable wave 'Twixt Sestus and Abydos, than by me That flood, because
it gave no passage thence.

"Strangers ye come, and haply in this place, That cradled human nature in its birth, Wond'ring,
ye not without suspicion view My smiles: but that sweet strain of psalmody, 'Thou, Lord! hast
made me glad,' will give ye light, Which may uncloud your minds.  And thou, who stand'st The
foremost, and didst make thy suit to me, Say if aught else thou wish to hear: for I Came prompt
to answer every doubt of thine."

She spake; and I replied: "I know not how To reconcile this wave and rustling sound Of forest
leaves, with what I late have heard Of opposite report."  She answering thus: "I will unfold
the cause, whence that proceeds, Which makes thee wonder; and so purge the cloud That hath
enwraps thee.  The First Good, whose joy Is only in himself, created man For happiness, and
gave this goodly place, His pledge and earnest of eternal peace. Favour'd thus highly, through
his own defect He fell, and here made short sojourn; he fell, And, for the bitterness of sorrow,
chang'd Laughter unblam'd and ever-new delight. That vapours none, exhal'd from earth beneath,
Or from the waters (which, wherever heat Attracts them, follow), might ascend thus far To vex
man's peaceful state, this mountain rose So high toward the heav'n, nor fears the rage Of elements
contending, from that part Exempted, where the gate his limit bars. Because the circumambient
air throughout With its first impulse circles still, unless Aught interpose to cheek or thwart
its course; Upon the summit, which on every side To visitation of th' impassive air Is open,
doth that motion strike, and makes Beneath its sway th' umbrageous wood resound: And in the
shaken plant such power resides, That it impregnates with its efficacy The voyaging breeze,
upon whose subtle plume That wafted flies abroad; and th' other land Receiving (as 't is worthy
in itself, Or in the clime, that warms it), doth conceive, And from its womb produces many
a tree Of various virtue.  This when thou hast heard, The marvel ceases, if in yonder earth
Some plant without apparent seed be found To fix its fibrous stem.  And further learn, That
with prolific foison of all seeds, This holy plain is fill'd, and in itself Bears fruit that
ne'er was pluck'd on other soil.  Albeit thy thirst may now Be well contented, if I here break
off, No more revealing: yet a corollary I freely give beside: nor deem my words Less grateful
to thee, if they somewhat pass The stretch of promise.  They, whose verse of yore The golden
age recorded and its bliss, On the Parnassian mountain, of this place Perhaps had dream'd.
Here was man guiltless, here Perpetual spring and every fruit, and this The far-fam'd nectar."
Turning to the bards, When she had ceas'd, I noted in their looks A smile at her conclusion;
then my face Again directed to the lovely dame.

CANTO XXIX

Singing, as if enamour'd, she resum'd And clos'd the song, with "Blessed they whose sins Are
cover'd."  Like the wood-nymphs then, that tripp'd Singly across the sylvan shadows, one Eager
to view and one to 'scape the sun, So mov'd she on, against the current, up The verdant rivage.
I, her mincing step Observing, with as tardy step pursued.

Between us not an hundred paces trod, The bank, on each side bending equally, Gave me to face
the orient.  Nor our way Far onward brought us, when to me at once She turn'd, and cried: "My
brother! look and hearken." And lo! a sudden lustre ran across Through the great forest on
all parts, so bright I doubted whether lightning were abroad; But that expiring ever in the
spleen, That doth unfold it, and this during still And waxing still in splendor, made me question
What it might be: and a sweet melody Ran through the luminous air.  Then did I chide With warrantable
zeal the hardihood Of our first parent, for that there were earth Stood in obedience to the
heav'ns, she only, Woman, the creature of an hour, endur'd not Restraint of any veil: which
had she borne Devoutly, joys, ineffable as these, Had from the first, and long time since,
been mine.

While through that wilderness of primy sweets That never fade, suspense I walk'd, and yet Expectant
of beatitude more high, Before us, like a blazing fire, the air Under the green boughs glow'd;
and, for a song, Distinct the sound of melody was heard.

O ye thrice holy virgins! for your sakes If e'er I suffer'd hunger, cold and watching, Occasion
calls on me to crave your bounty. Now through my breast let Helicon his stream Pour copious;
and Urania with her choir Arise to aid me: while the verse unfolds Things that do almost mock
the grasp of thought.

Onward a space, what seem'd seven trees of gold, The intervening distance to mine eye Falsely
presented; but when I was come So near them, that no lineament was lost Of those, with which
a doubtful object, seen Remotely, plays on the misdeeming sense, Then did the faculty, that
ministers Discourse to reason, these for tapers of gold Distinguish, and it th' singing trace
the sound "Hosanna."  Above, their beauteous garniture Flam'd with more ample lustre, than
the moon Through cloudless sky at midnight in her full.

I turn'd me full of wonder to my guide; And he did answer with a countenance Charg'd with no
less amazement: whence my view Reverted to those lofty things, which came So slowly moving
towards us, that the bride Would have outstript them on her bridal day.

The lady called aloud: "Why thus yet burns Affection in thee for these living, lights, And
dost not look on that which follows them?"

I straightway mark'd a tribe behind them walk, As if attendant on their leaders, cloth'd With
raiment of such whiteness, as on earth Was never.  On my left, the wat'ry gleam Borrow'd, and
gave me back, when there I look'd. As in a mirror, my left side portray'd.

When I had chosen on the river's edge Such station, that the distance of the stream Alone did
separate me; there I stay'd My steps for clearer prospect, and beheld The flames go onward,
leaving, as they went, The air behind them painted as with trail Of liveliest pencils! so distinct
were mark'd All those sev'n listed colours, whence the sun Maketh his bow, and Cynthia her
zone. These streaming gonfalons did flow beyond My vision; and ten paces, as I guess, Parted
the outermost.  Beneath a sky So beautiful, came foul and-twenty elders, By two and two, with
flower-de-luces crown'd.

All sang one song: "Blessed be thou among The daughters of Adam! and thy loveliness Blessed
for ever!"  After that the flowers, And the fresh herblets, on the opposite brink, Were free
from that elected race; as light In heav'n doth second light, came after them Four animals,
each crown'd with verdurous leaf. With six wings each was plum'd, the plumage full Of eyes,
and th' eyes of Argus would be such, Were they endued with life.  Reader, more rhymes Will
not waste in shadowing forth their form: For other need no straitens, that in this I may not
give my bounty room.  But read Ezekiel; for he paints them, from the north How he beheld them
come by Chebar's flood, In whirlwind, cloud and fire; and even such As thou shalt find them
character'd by him, Here were they; save as to the pennons; there, From him departing, John
accords with me.

The space, surrounded by the four, enclos'd A car triumphal: on two wheels it came Drawn at
a Gryphon's neck; and he above Stretch'd either wing uplifted, 'tween the midst And the three
listed hues, on each side three; So that the wings did cleave or injure none; And out of sight
they rose.  The members, far As he was bird, were golden; white the rest With vermeil intervein'd.
So beautiful A car in Rome ne'er grac'd Augustus pomp, Or Africanus': e'en the sun's itself
Were poor to this, that chariot of the sun Erroneous, which in blazing ruin fell At Tellus'
pray'r devout, by the just doom Mysterious of all-seeing Jove.  Three nymphs at the right wheel,
came circling in smooth dance; The one so ruddy, that her form had scarce Been known within
a furnace of clear flame: The next did look, as if the flesh and bones Were emerald: snow new-fallen
seem'd the third.

Now seem'd the white to lead, the ruddy now; And from her song who led, the others took Their
treasure, swift or slow.  At th' other wheel, A band quaternion, each in purple clad, Advanc'd
with festal step, as of them one The rest conducted, one, upon whose front Three eyes were
seen. His fellow mark'd an opposite intent, Bearing a sword, whose glitterance and keen edge,
E'en as I view'd it with the flood between, Appall'd me.  Next four others I beheld, Of humble
seeming: and, behind them all, One single old man, sleeping, as he came, With a shrewd visage.
And these seven, each Like the first troop were habited, but wore No braid of lilies on their
temples wreath'd. Rather with roses and each vermeil flower, A sight, but little distant, might
have sworn, That they were all on fire above their brow.

Whenas the car was o'er against me, straight. Was heard a thund'ring, at whose voice it seem'd
The chosen multitude were stay'd; for there, With the first ensigns, made they solemn halt.

CANTO XXX

Soon as the polar light, which never knows Setting nor rising, nor the shadowy veil Of other
cloud than sin, fair ornament Of the first heav'n, to duty each one there Safely convoying,
as that lower doth The steersman to his port, stood firmly fix'd; Forthwith the saintly tribe,
who in the van Between the Gryphon and its radiance came, Did turn them to the car, as to their
rest: And one, as if commission'd from above, In holy chant thrice shorted forth aloud: "Come,
spouse, from Libanus!" and all the rest Took up the song--At the last audit so The blest shall
rise, from forth his cavern each Uplifting lightly his new-vested flesh, As, on the sacred
litter, at the voice Authoritative of that elder, sprang A hundred ministers and messengers
Of life eternal.  "Blessed thou! who com'st!" And, "O," they cried, "from full hands scatter
ye Unwith'ring lilies;" and, so saying, cast Flowers over head and round them on all sides.

I have beheld, ere now, at break of day, The eastern clime all roseate, and the sky Oppos'd,
one deep and beautiful serene, And the sun's face so shaded, and with mists Attemper'd at lids
rising, that the eye Long while endur'd the sight: thus in a cloud Of flowers, that from those
hands angelic rose, And down, within and outside of the car, Fell showering, in white veil
with olive wreath'd, A virgin in my view appear'd, beneath Green mantle, rob'd in hue of living
flame:

And o'er my Spirit, that in former days Within her presence had abode so long, No shudd'ring
terror crept.  Mine eyes no more Had knowledge of her; yet there mov'd from her A hidden virtue,
at whose touch awak'd, The power of ancient love was strong within me.

No sooner on my vision streaming, smote The heav'nly influence, which years past, and e'en
In childhood, thrill'd me, than towards Virgil I Turn'd me to leftward, panting, like a babe,
That flees for refuge to his mother's breast, If aught have terrified or work'd him woe: And
would have cried: "There is no dram of blood, That doth not quiver in me.  The old flame Throws
out clear tokens of reviving fire:" But Virgil had bereav'd us of himself, Virgil, my best-lov'd
father; Virgil, he To whom I gave me up for safety: nor, All, our prime mother lost, avail'd
to save My undew'd cheeks from blur of soiling tears.

"Dante, weep not, that Virgil leaves thee: nay, Weep thou not yet: behooves thee feel the edge
Of other sword, and thou shalt weep for that."

As to the prow or stern, some admiral Paces the deck, inspiriting his crew, When 'mid the sail-yards
all hands ply aloof; Thus on the left side of the car I saw, (Turning me at the sound of mine
own name, Which here I am compell'd to register) The virgin station'd, who before appeared
Veil'd in that festive shower angelical.

Towards me, across the stream, she bent her eyes; Though from her brow the veil descending,
bound With foliage of Minerva, suffer'd not That I beheld her clearly; then with act Full royal,
still insulting o'er her thrall, Added, as one, who speaking keepeth back The bitterest saying,
to conclude the speech: "Observe me well.  I am, in sooth, I am Beatrice.  What! and hast thou
deign'd at last Approach the mountainnewest not, O man! Thy happiness is whole?"  Down fell
mine eyes On the clear fount, but there, myself espying, Recoil'd, and sought the greensward:
such a weight Of shame was on my forehead.  With a mien Of that stern majesty, which doth surround
mother's presence to her awe-struck child, She look'd; a flavour of such bitterness Was mingled
in her pity.  There her words Brake off, and suddenly the angels sang: "In thee, O gracious
Lord, my hope hath been:" But went no farther than, "Thou Lord, hast set My feet in ample room."
As snow, that lies Amidst the living rafters on the back Of Italy congeal'd when drifted high
And closely pil'd by rough Sclavonian blasts, Breathe but the land whereon no shadow falls,
And straightway melting it distils away, Like a fire-wasted taper: thus was I, Without a sigh
or tear, or ever these Did sing, that with the chiming of heav'n's sphere, Still in their warbling
chime: but when the strain Of dulcet symphony, express'd for me Their soft compassion, more
than could the words "Virgin, why so consum'st him?"  then the ice, Congeal'd about my bosom,
turn'd itself To spirit and water, and with anguish forth Gush'd through the lips and eyelids
from the heart.

Upon the chariot's right edge still she stood, Immovable, and thus address'd her words To those
bright semblances with pity touch'd: "Ye in th' eternal day your vigils keep, So that nor night
nor slumber, with close stealth, Conveys from you a single step in all The goings on of life:
thence with more heed I shape mine answer, for his ear intended, Who there stands weeping,
that the sorrow now May equal the transgression.  Not alone Through operation of the mighty
orbs, That mark each seed to some predestin'd aim, As with aspect or fortunate or ill The constellations
meet, but through benign Largess of heav'nly graces, which rain down From such a height, as
mocks our vision, this man Was in the freshness of his being, such, So gifted virtually, that
in him All better habits wond'rously had thriv'd. The more of kindly strength is in the soil,
So much doth evil seed and lack of culture Mar it the more, and make it run to wildness. These
looks sometime upheld him; for I show'd My youthful eyes, and led him by their light In upright
walking.  Soon as I had reach'd The threshold of my second age, and chang'd My mortal for immortal,
then he left me, And gave himself to others.  When from flesh To spirit I had risen, and increase
Of beauty and of virtue circled me, I was less dear to him, and valued less. His steps were
turn'd into deceitful ways, Following false images of good, that make No promise perfect. 
Nor avail'd me aught To sue for inspirations, with the which, I, both in dreams of night, and
otherwise, Did call him back; of them so little reck'd him, Such depth he fell, that all device
was short Of his preserving, save that he should view The children of perdition.  To this end
I visited the purlieus of the dead: And one, who hath conducted him thus high, Receiv'd my
supplications urg'd with weeping. It were a breaking of God's high decree, If Lethe should
be past, and such food tasted Without the cost of some repentant tear."

CANTO XXXI

"O Thou!"  her words she thus without delay Resuming, turn'd their point on me, to whom They
but with lateral edge seem'd harsh before, "Say thou, who stand'st beyond the holy stream,
If this be true.  A charge so grievous needs Thine own avowal."  On my faculty Such strange
amazement hung, the voice expir'd Imperfect, ere its organs gave it birth.

A little space refraining, then she spake: "What dost thou muse on?  Answer me.  The wave On
thy remembrances of evil yet Hath done no injury."  A mingled sense Of fear and of confusion,
from my lips Did such a "Yea" produce, as needed help Of vision to interpret.  As when breaks
In act to be discharg'd, a cross-bow bent Beyond its pitch, both nerve and bow o'erstretch'd,
The flagging weapon feebly hits the mark; Thus, tears and sighs forth gushing, did I burst
Beneath the heavy load, and thus my voice Was slacken'd on its way.  She straight began: "When
my desire invited thee to love The good, which sets a bound to our aspirings, What bar of thwarting
foss or linked chain Did meet thee, that thou so should'st quit the hope Of further progress,
or what bait of ease Or promise of allurement led thee on Elsewhere, that thou elsewhere should'st
rather wait?"

A bitter sigh I drew, then scarce found voice To answer, hardly to these sounds my lips Gave
utterance, wailing: "Thy fair looks withdrawn, Things present, with deceitful pleasures, turn'd
My steps aside."  She answering spake: "Hadst thou Been silent, or denied what thou avow'st,
Thou hadst not hid thy sin the more: such eye Observes it.  But whene'er the sinner's cheek
Breaks forth into the precious-streaming tears Of self-accusing, in our court the wheel Of
justice doth run counter to the edge. Howe'er that thou may'st profit by thy shame For errors
past, and that henceforth more strength May arm thee, when thou hear'st the Siren-voice, Lay
thou aside the motive to this grief, And lend attentive ear, while I unfold How opposite a
way my buried flesh Should have impell'd thee.  Never didst thou spy In art or nature aught
so passing sweet, As were the limbs, that in their beauteous frame Enclos'd me, and are scatter'd
now in dust. If sweetest thing thus fail'd thee with my death, What, afterward, of mortal should
thy wish Have tempted?  When thou first hadst felt the dart Of perishable things, in my departing
For better realms, thy wing thou should'st have prun'd To follow me, and never stoop'd again
To 'bide a second blow for a slight girl, Or other gaud as transient and as vain. The new and
inexperienc'd bird awaits, Twice it may be, or thrice, the fowler's aim; But in the sight of
one, whose plumes are full, In vain the net is spread, the arrow wing'd."

I stood, as children silent and asham'd Stand, list'ning, with their eyes upon the earth, Acknowledging
their fault and self-condemn'd. And she resum'd: "If, but to hear thus pains thee, Raise thou
thy beard, and lo! what sight shall do!"

With less reluctance yields a sturdy holm, Rent from its fibers by a blast, that blows From
off the pole, or from Iarbas' land, Than I at her behest my visage rais'd: And thus the face
denoting by the beard, I mark'd the secret sting her words convey'd.

No sooner lifted I mine aspect up, Than downward sunk that vision I beheld Of goodly creatures
vanish; and mine eyes Yet unassur'd and wavering, bent their light On Beatrice.  Towards the
animal, Who joins two natures in one form, she turn'd, And, even under shadow of her veil,
And parted by the verdant rill, that flow'd Between, in loveliness appear'd as much Her former
self surpassing, as on earth All others she surpass'd.  Remorseful goads Shot sudden through
me.  Each thing else, the more Its love had late beguil'd me, now the more I Was loathsome.
On my heart so keenly smote The bitter consciousness, that on the ground O'erpower'd I fell:
and what my state was then, She knows who was the cause.  When now my strength Flow'd back,
returning outward from the heart, The lady, whom alone I first had seen, I found above me.
"Loose me not," she cried: "Loose not thy hold;" and lo! had dragg'd me high As to my neck
into the stream, while she, Still as she drew me after, swept along, Swift as a shuttle, bounding
o'er the wave.

The blessed shore approaching then was heard So sweetly, "Tu asperges me," that I May not remember,
much less tell the sound. The beauteous dame, her arms expanding, clasp'd My temples, and immerg'd
me, where 't was fit The wave should drench me: and thence raising up, Within the fourfold
dance of lovely nymphs Presented me so lav'd, and with their arm They each did cover me.  "Here
are we nymphs, And in the heav'n are stars.  Or ever earth Was visited of Beatrice, we Appointed
for her handmaids, tended on her. We to her eyes will lead thee; but the light Of gladness
that is in them, well to scan, Those yonder three, of deeper ken than ours, Thy sight shall
quicken."  Thus began their song; And then they led me to the Gryphon's breast, While, turn'd
toward us, Beatrice stood. "Spare not thy vision.  We have stationed thee Before the emeralds,
whence love erewhile Hath drawn his weapons on thee."  As they spake, A thousand fervent wishes
riveted Mine eyes upon her beaming eyes, that stood Still fix'd toward the Gryphon motionless.
As the sun strikes a mirror, even thus Within those orbs the twofold being, shone, For ever
varying, in one figure now Reflected, now in other.  Reader! muse How wond'rous in my sight
it seem'd to mark A thing, albeit steadfast in itself, Yet in its imag'd semblance mutable.

Full of amaze, and joyous, while my soul Fed on the viand, whereof still desire Grows with
satiety, the other three With gesture, that declar'd a loftier line, Advanc'd: to their own
carol on they came Dancing in festive ring angelical.

"Turn, Beatrice!" was their song: "O turn Thy saintly sight on this thy faithful one, Who to
behold thee many a wearisome pace Hath measur'd.  Gracious at our pray'r vouchsafe Unveil to
him thy cheeks: that he may mark Thy second beauty, now conceal'd."  O splendour!

Awhile my vision labor'd; as when late Upon the' o'erstrained eyes the sun hath smote: But
soon to lesser object, as the view Was now recover'd (lesser in respect To that excess of sensible,
whence late I had perforce been sunder'd) on their right I mark'd that glorious army wheel,
and turn, Against the sun and sev'nfold lights, their front. As when, their bucklers for protection
rais'd, A well-rang'd troop, with portly banners curl'd, Wheel circling, ere the whole can
change their ground: E'en thus the goodly regiment of heav'n Proceeding, all did pass us, ere
the car Had slop'd his beam.  Attendant at the wheels The damsels turn'd; and on the Gryphon
mov'd The sacred burden, with a pace so smooth, No feather on him trembled.  The fair dame
Who through the wave had drawn me, companied By Statius and myself, pursued the wheel, Whose
orbit, rolling, mark'd a lesser arch.

Through the high wood, now void (the more her blame, Who by the serpent was beguil'd) I past
With step in cadence to the harmony Angelic.  Onward had we mov'd, as far Perchance as arrow
at three several flights Full wing'd had sped, when from her station down Descended Beatrice.
With one voice All murmur'd  "Adam," circling next a plant Despoil'd of flowers and leaf on
every bough. Its tresses, spreading more as more they rose, Were such, as 'midst their forest
wilds for height The Indians might have gaz'd at.  "Blessed thou! Gryphon, whose beak hath
never pluck'd that tree Pleasant to taste: for hence the appetite Was warp'd to evil."  Round
the stately trunk Thus shouted forth the rest, to whom return'd The animal twice-gender'd:
"Yea: for so The generation of the just are sav'd." And turning to the chariot-pole, to foot
He drew it of the widow'd branch, and bound There left unto the stock whereon it grew.

As when large floods of radiance from above Stream, with that radiance mingled, which ascends
Next after setting of the scaly sign, Our plants then burgeon, and each wears anew His wonted
colours, ere the sun have yok'd Beneath another star his flamy steeds; Thus putting forth a
hue, more faint than rose, And deeper than the violet, was renew'd The plant, erewhile in all
its branches bare.

Unearthly was the hymn, which then arose. I understood it not, nor to the end Endur'd the harmony.
Had I the skill To pencil forth, how clos'd th' unpitying eyes Slumb'ring, when Syrinx warbled,
(eyes that paid So dearly for their watching,) then like painter, That with a model paints,
I might design The manner of my falling into sleep. But feign who will the slumber cunningly;
I pass it by to when I wak'd, and tell How suddenly a flash of splendour rent The curtain of
my sleep, and one cries out: "Arise, what dost thou?"  As the chosen three, On Tabor's mount,
admitted to behold The blossoming of that fair tree, whose fruit Is coveted of angels, and
doth make Perpetual feast in heaven, to themselves Returning at the word, whence deeper sleeps
Were broken, that they their tribe diminish'd saw, Both Moses and Elias gone, and chang'd The
stole their master wore: thus to myself Returning, over me beheld I stand The piteous one,
who cross the stream had brought My steps.  "And where," all doubting, I exclaim'd, "Is Beatrice?"--"See
her," she replied, "Beneath the fresh leaf seated on its root. Behold th' associate choir that
circles her. The others, with a melody more sweet And more profound, journeying to higher realms,
Upon the Gryphon tend."  If there her words Were clos'd, I know not; but mine eyes had now
Ta'en view of her, by whom all other thoughts Were barr'd admittance.  On the very ground Alone
she sat, as she had there been left A guard upon the wain, which I beheld Bound to the twyform
beast.  The seven nymphs Did make themselves a cloister round about her, And in their hands
upheld those lights secure From blast septentrion and the gusty south.

"A little while thou shalt be forester here: And citizen shalt be forever with me, Of that
true Rome, wherein Christ dwells a Roman To profit the misguided world, keep now Thine eyes
upon the car; and what thou seest, Take heed thou write, returning to that place."

Thus Beatrice: at whose feet inclin'd Devout, at her behest, my thought and eyes, I, as she
bade, directed.  Never fire, With so swift motion, forth a stormy cloud Leap'd downward from
the welkin's farthest bound, As I beheld the bird of Jove descending Pounce on the tree, and,
as he rush'd, the rind, Disparting crush beneath him, buds much more And leaflets.  On the
car with all his might He struck, whence, staggering like a ship, it reel'd, At random driv'n,
to starboard now, o'ercome, And now to larboard, by the vaulting waves.

Next springing up into the chariot's womb A fox I saw, with hunger seeming pin'd Of all good
food.  But, for his ugly sins The saintly maid rebuking him, away Scamp'ring he turn'd, fast
as his hide-bound corpse Would bear him.  Next, from whence before he came, I saw the eagle
dart into the hull O' th' car, and leave it with his feathers lin'd; And then a voice, like
that which issues forth From heart with sorrow riv'd, did issue forth From heav'n, and, "O
poor bark of mine!" it cried, "How badly art thou freighted!"  Then, it seem'd, That the earth
open'd between either wheel, And I beheld a dragon issue thence, That through the chariot fix'd
his forked train; And like a wasp that draggeth back the sting, So drawing forth his baleful
train, he dragg'd Part of the bottom forth, and went his way Exulting.  What remain'd, as lively
turf With green herb, so did clothe itself with plumes, Which haply had with purpose chaste
and kind Been offer'd; and therewith were cloth'd the wheels, Both one and other, and the beam,
so quickly A sigh were not breath'd sooner.  Thus transform'd, The holy structure, through
its several parts, Did put forth heads, three on the beam, and one On every side; the first
like oxen horn'd, But with a single horn upon their front The four.  Like monster sight hath
never seen. O'er it methought there sat, secure as rock On mountain's lofty top, a shameless
whore, Whose ken rov'd loosely round her.  At her side, As 't were that none might bear her
off, I saw A giant stand; and ever, and anon They mingled kisses.  But, her lustful eyes Chancing
on me to wander, that fell minion Scourg'd her from head to foot all o'er; then full Of jealousy,
and fierce with rage, unloos'd The monster, and dragg'd on, so far across The forest, that
from me its shades alone Shielded the harlot and the new-form'd brute.

CANTO XXXIII

"The heathen, Lord! are come!" responsive thus, The trinal now, and now the virgin band Quaternion,
their sweet psalmody began, Weeping; and Beatrice listen'd, sad And sighing, to the song',
in such a mood, That Mary, as she stood beside the cross, Was scarce more chang'd.  But when
they gave her place To speak, then, risen upright on her feet, She, with a colour glowing bright
as fire, Did answer: "Yet a little while, and ye Shall see me not; and, my beloved sisters,
Again a little while, and ye shall see me."

Before her then she marshall'd all the seven, And, beck'ning only motion'd me, the dame, And
that remaining sage, to follow her.

So on she pass'd; and had not set, I ween, Her tenth step to the ground, when with mine eyes
Her eyes encounter'd; and, with visage mild, "So mend thy pace," she cried, "that if my words
Address thee, thou mayst still be aptly plac'd To hear them."  Soon as duly to her side I now
had hasten'd: "Brother!" she began, "Why mak'st thou no attempt at questioning, As thus we
walk together?"  Like to those Who, speaking with too reverent an awe Before their betters,
draw not forth the voice Alive unto their lips, befell me shell That I in sounds imperfect
thus began: "Lady! what I have need of, that thou know'st, And what will suit my need."  She
answering thus: "Of fearfulness and shame, I will, that thou Henceforth do rid thee: that thou
speak no more, As one who dreams.  Thus far be taught of me: The vessel, which thou saw'st
the serpent break, Was and is not: let him, who hath the blame, Hope not to scare God's vengeance
with a sop. Without an heir for ever shall not be That eagle, he, who left the chariot plum'd,
Which monster made it first and next a prey. Plainly I view, and therefore speak, the stars
E'en now approaching, whose conjunction, free From all impediment and bar, brings on A season,
in the which, one sent from God, (Five hundred, five, and ten, do mark him out) That foul one,
and th' accomplice of her guilt, The giant, both shall slay.  And if perchance My saying, dark
as Themis or as Sphinx, Fail to persuade thee, (since like them it foils The intellect with
blindness) yet ere long Events shall be the Naiads, that will solve This knotty riddle, and
no damage light On flock or field.  Take heed; and as these words By me are utter'd, teach
them even so To those who live that life, which is a race To death: and when thou writ'st them,
keep in mind Not to conceal how thou hast seen the plant, That twice hath now been spoil'd.
This whoso robs, This whoso plucks, with blasphemy of deed Sins against God, who for his use
alone Creating hallow'd it.  For taste of this, In pain and in desire, five thousand years
And upward, the first soul did yearn for him, Who punish'd in himself the fatal gust.

"Thy reason slumbers, if it deem this height And summit thus inverted of the plant, Without
due cause: and were not vainer thoughts, As Elsa's numbing waters, to thy soul, And their fond
pleasures had not dyed it dark As Pyramus the mulberry, thou hadst seen, In such momentous
circumstance alone, God's equal justice morally implied In the forbidden tree.  But since I
mark thee In understanding harden'd into stone, And, to that hardness, spotted too and stain'd,
So that thine eye is dazzled at my word, I will, that, if not written, yet at least Painted
thou take it in thee, for the cause, That one brings home his staff inwreath'd with palm."

I thus: "As wax by seal, that changeth not Its impress, now is stamp'd my brain by thee. But
wherefore soars thy wish'd-for speech so high Beyond my sight, that loses it the more, The
more it strains to reach it?"--"To the end That thou mayst know," she answer'd straight, "the
school, That thou hast follow'd; and how far behind, When following my discourse, its learning
halts: And mayst behold your art, from the divine As distant, as the disagreement is 'Twixt
earth and heaven's most high and rapturous orb."

"I not remember," I replied, "that e'er I was estrang'd from thee, nor for such fault Doth
conscience chide me."  Smiling she return'd: "If thou canst, not remember, call to mind How
lately thou hast drunk of Lethe's wave; And, sure as smoke doth indicate a flame, In that forgetfulness
itself conclude Blame from thy alienated will incurr'd. From henceforth verily my words shall
be As naked as will suit them to appear In thy unpractis'd view."  More sparkling now, And
with retarded course the sun possess'd The circle of mid-day, that varies still As th' aspect
varies of each several clime, When, as one, sent in vaward of a troop For escort, pauses, if
perchance he spy Vestige of somewhat strange and rare: so paus'd The sev'nfold band, arriving
at the verge Of a dun umbrage hoar, such as is seen, Beneath green leaves and gloomy branches,
oft To overbrow a bleak and alpine cliff. And, where they stood, before them, as it seem'd,
Tigris and Euphrates both beheld, Forth from one fountain issue; and, like friends, Linger
at parting. "O enlight'ning beam! O glory of our kind! beseech thee say What water this, which
from one source deriv'd Itself removes to distance from itself?"

To such entreaty answer thus was made: "Entreat Matilda, that she teach thee this."

And here, as one, who clears himself of blame Imputed, the fair dame return'd: "Of me He this
and more hath learnt; and I am safe That Lethe's water hath not hid it from him."

And Beatrice: "Some more pressing care That oft the memory 'reeves, perchance hath made His
mind's eye dark.  But lo! where Eunoe cows! Lead thither; and, as thou art wont, revive His
fainting virtue."  As a courteous spirit, That proffers no excuses, but as soon As he hath
token of another's will, Makes it his own; when she had ta'en me, thus The lovely maiden mov'd
her on, and call'd To Statius with an air most lady-like: "Come thou with him."  Were further
space allow'd, Then, Reader, might I sing, though but in part, That beverage, with whose sweetness
I had ne'er Been sated.  But, since all the leaves are full, Appointed for this second strain,
mine art With warning bridle checks me.  I return'd From the most holy wave, regenerate, If
'en as new plants renew'd with foliage new, Pure and made apt for mounting to the stars.

