A man who was shaking with mingled rage and fear hastily strode across the broad portico, as
Berthe Louison glided away from the curtained window and confidently resumed her own chosen
chair. Her bosom was heaving, her eye was fixed and stern, and she steadily awaited her foe,
for one last warning whisper had reached her hidden servitor.

When Marie Victor threw open the double doors of the reception room, on its threshold stood
the towering form of the man whom Alixe Delavigne had known in other years as Hugh Fraser,
the man whose pallid face told her that he knew at last that he was under the sword of Damocles!
Clad in white linen, his sun helmet in his hand, steadying himself with a jeweled bamboo crutch-handled
stick, the old Anglo-Indian waited until Berthe Louison's voice rang out, as clear as a silver
bell: "Marie! I am not to be interrupted." she calmly said. "You may wait beyond, in the ante-room!"

The woman who had emerged from the dark penumbra of a dead Past, to torture the embryo Baronet,
gazed silently at the stern old man glowering there.

Striding up to her, the insolent habit of years was, strong upon him, as he hoarsely said:
"What juggling fiend of hell brings you here?"

Without a tremor in her voice, the lady of Jitomir replied:

"I came here to undo the work of years! To teach an orphaned girl to know that a love which
hallows and which blesses, can reach her from the grave in which your cold brutality buried
the only being I ever loved! She shall know her mother, from my lips, and not wither in the
gray hell of your egoism. I have searched the world over, and found you, at last, together!"

"By God! You shall never even see her face, you she-devil!" cried the infuriated old man, nearing
the defiant woman. "You were the go-between for your worthless sister and that Russian cur,
Troubetskoi!"

"You lie! Hugh Fraser, you lie!" cried Berthe, in a ringing voice. "You crushed the flower
that Fate had drifted within your reach! You turned her into the streets of London to starve!
You robbed her of her child, all this to feed your own flinty-hearted tyrant vanity! She was
divorced from you by a Royal Russian Decree, before she married the man whose heart broke when
she was laid in the tomb. She rests with the princes of his line, and her tomb bears the name
of wife!"

The old nabob crept nearer, growling:

"You shall never see the child's face!"

Then, Alixe Delavigne sprang up and faced him: "There she is! on my heart! Just what her mother
was, before you sent her to an early grave. Valerie died hungering for one sight of that child's
face!" Throwing the picture of Nadine Johnstone on the table, the lady of Jitomir said: "Pierre
Troubetskoi left to me the wealth which makes me your equal. I fear you not! I shall see Nadine
to-morrow!"

"Never!" roared Hugh Johnstone, now beyond all control. "I defy you! Beware how you approach
my threshold!" His eyes were murderous in their steely blue gleam, and, yet, he met a glance
as steady as his own.

"Listen," said Berthe Louison, sinking back into her chair, "I will tell you a little story." His
brother, who is tall, calls him of medium height, five feet four inches (about five feet nine,
English measure), slender, well-made and of good carriage: his eyes were blue and full of
fire; his nose was aquiline, like the portraits of Vandyke; his profile was slightly equine
in type: the chief beauty of his face was his forehead, round which clustered the many-shaded
masses of his fair hair, which never turned gray: the countenance was mobile, animated and
sensitive; the predominating expression was pride. Paul relates without reserve how one married
woman encouraged his brother and trifled with him, using his devotion to screen a real intrigue
which she was carrying on, and that another, who was lying in wait
for him, undertook his consolation.
It rests for me to give the Viceroy the receipt for your private deposit. The private bank
vault in Calcutta has hidden your shame for twenty years. You know the condition of your settlement
with the Government. Now, shall I see my sister's child? I hold your very existence here--in
the hollow of my hand!" The dauntless woman drew forth a yellowed envelope from her breast.
There was a smothered shriek, a crash and a groan, as Jules Victor, springing from his concealment,
hurled the infuriated man to the floor!

With a knee on the panting nabob's breast, he hissed:

"Move, and you are a dead man!"

"Take the paper, Madame," calmly said the victorious Jules. Then Alixe Delavigne laughed scornfully.

"Let the fool arise. The contents are only blank paper. The document is where I can find it
for use. Remain here, Jules," concluded the triumphant woman, as she replaced the photograph
in her bosom. "Take the envelope--you know it, Hugh Fraser. I stole it the night you drove
the sister I loved from our miserly lodgings in London." The furious onslaught had failed,
and the old nabob was only a cowering, cringing prisoner at will. He dared not even cry out.

Hugh Johnstone groaned as his eyes turned from the woman, now laughing him to scorn, to the
stern-faced Frenchman, who was covering the baffled assailant with the grim Lefacheux revolver.

"Send this man away. Let us talk, Alixe," muttered the astounded Johnstone. Then a mocking
laugh rang out in the room.

"I am in no hurry now. I can wait. I like Delhi, and I shall find my way to Nadine's side,
and she shall know the story of a mother's love. One signal from me, by telegraph, and the
document goes to the Viceroy. So, I fear you not, my would-be strangler! It is for me to make
conditions! Listen! I will send my carriage and my man to your house to-morrow morning at ten.
You will have made up your mind then. I have friends all around me, here, at Allahabad, and
in Calcutta. If you practice any treachery on me you die the death of a dog, even here, in
your robber nest!"

"I will come! I will come!" faltered Johnstone.

"Ah!" smiled the lady. "Jules, show Sir Hugh Johnstone to his carriage." And then turning her
back in disdain, she vanished without a word.

CHAPTER VII. THE PRICE OF SAFETY.

When nabob Hugh Johnstone's carriage dashed swiftly down the crowded Chandnee Chouk, on its
return to the marble house, the driver and footman, as well as the slim syce runners, were
alarmed at the old man's appearance when he was half led, half carried out of his luxurious
vehicle. The staggering sufferer reached his rooms and was surrounded by a bevy of frightened
menials, while the equippage dashed away in search of old Doctor McMorris, the surgeon par
excellence of Delhi. A second butler had hastily darted away to the Delhi Club with an imperative
summons for Major Alan Hawke, who had, unfortunately, left for the day.

With a shudder of affright Mademoiselle Justine Delande had slipped into a booth on the great
thoroughfare, only to feel safe when she glided into Ram Lal Singh's jewel shop, to be swiftly
hurried into the rear reception room by the argus-eyed merchant, who had noted the swiftly
passing carriage. Her womanly conscience was as tender as her heart.

"Lock the door, Ram Lal!" cried Alan Hawke, "We will be in the pagoda in the garden. Let no
one pass this door, on your life!" When they were alone, Major Alan Hawke led the trembling
woman away to to the hidden bower, where Ram Lal had hospitably spread a feast of India's choicest
cakes and dainties.

Only there, in that haven of safety, dared the excited Justine to falter. "If you knew what
I have suffered! He drove almost over me as I crossed the Chandnee Chouk, and I had a struggle
to leave Nadine. There is the curse of an old family sorrow there. The father and daughter
are arrayed against each other."

"Forget it all, my dear Justine," murmured Alan Hawke. "Here you are hidden now and perfectly
safe with me. Never mind those people now. Let us only think of each other. You were simply
matchless in your behavior at the house."

"Oh, I fear him so! I fear that hard old man!" whispered the timid woman, as she dropped her
eyes before Alan Hawke's ardent glances. He had noted the growing touch of coquetry in her
dress; he measured the tell-tale quiver of her voice, and he smiled tenderly when she shyly
showed him the diamond bracelet, securely hidden upon her left arm.

"I put this on to show you that I do trust you," she murmured. "And I wear it every night.
It seems to give me courage." The happy Major pressed her hand warmly.

"Let it be a secret sign between us, an omen of brighter days for all of us. Stand by me and
I will stand by you to the last. We will all meet happily yet by the beautiful shores of Lake
Leman!"

In half an hour, Justine Delande was completely at her ease, for well the artful renegade knew
how to circle around the dangerous subject nearest his heart--the secret history of Nadine
Johnstone's mother. He had dropped easily into the wooing and confidential intimacy which lulled
Justine Delande into a fool's paradise of happy content.

She was sinking away and now losing her will and identity in his own, without one warning qualm
of conscience. For Alan Hawke's dearly bought knowledge of womankind now stood him in great stead.

"One single familiarity, one questionable liberty, and this cold-pulsed Heloise would fly forever.
She must be left to her day dreams and to the work of a sweet self-deception," he artfully
mused. They were interrupted but a moment, when Ram Lal Singh glided to the door of the pagoda.

"I must now go to the bungalow to see Madame Louison and have her approve her horses and carriage.
She has sent word that she will drive this afternoon. And," he whispered breathlessly, "Old
Johnstone is very sick. He has sent all over the city to find you, and now his own private
man bids me go there at once. He must have me, if he can't find you."

Major Hawke mused a moment. "Give me the keys! Put your best man on guard to watch for any
intruders! Go first to the Mem-Sahib! Keep your mouth shut! Remember about me and--" He pointed
to the governess, now timidly cowering in a shadowy corner. "Let the old devil wait till you
are done with her! Pump the old wretch! Find out what he wants! Say that I went off for a day's
jaunt!" Alan Hawke smiled grimly as he seated himself tenderly at Justine Delande's side. "Old
Hugh did not last long! They must have had their first skirmish. If he is a coward at heart,
she will rule him with a rod of iron. What is her hold over him? I warrant that the jade will
never tell me. She will fight him to the death in silence, and try to hoodwink me. We will
see, my lady! We will see!"

"Now, Justine," softly said the renegade, "tell me all of the story of this strange father
and daughter! Ram Lal has reconnoitered! We are safe! Both Hugh and his daughter are at home!"

