The Japanese horse objects to a tight girth, objects to being overloaded, and to various other
indignities that his relations of other countries meekly endure. To suit his fastidious requirements
he is allowed to meander carelessly along at the end of a twenty-foot string, and he is decorated
all over with gay and fanciful trappings. A very peculiar trait of his character is that of
showing fight at anything he doesn't like the looks of, instead of scaring at it after the
orthodox method of horse-flesh in other countries. This peculiarity sometimes makes it extremely
interesting for myself. Their usual manner of taking exception to me and the bicycle is to
rear up on the hind feet and squeal and paw the air, at the same time evincing a disposition
to come on and chew me up. This necessitates continual wariness on my part when passing a company
of peasants, for the men never seem to think it worth while to restrain their horses until
the actions of the latter render it absolutely necessary.

Jinrikishas now become quite frequent, pulled by sturdy-limbed men, who, naked almost as the
day they were born, trot along between the shafts of their two-wheeled vehicles at the rate
of six miles an hour. Men also are met pulling heavy hand-carts, loaded with tiles, from country
factories to the city. Most of the heaviest labor seems to be performed by human beings, though
not to the same extent as in China.

In every town and village one is struck with the various imitations of European goods. Ludicrous
mistakes are everywhere met with, where this serio-comical people have attempted to imitate
name, trade-mark, and everything complete. In one portion of the eating-house where lunch is
obtained to-day are a number of umbrella-makers manufacturing gingham umbrellas; on every umbrella
is stamped the firm-name "John Douglas, Manchester." Cigarettes, nicely made and equal in every
respect to those of other countries, are boldly labelled "cigars:" thus do these curious imitators
make mistakes. Had Shakespeare seen the Japs one could better understand his "All the world's
a stage, and all the men and women merely players;" for most other nations life is a serious
enough problem, the Japs alone seem to be merely "playing at making a livelihood." They always
impress me as happy-go-lucky harlequins, to whom this whole business of coming into the world
and getting a living for a few years is nothing more nor less than a huge joke.

The happiest state of affairs seems to exist among all classes and conditions of people in
Japan. One passes school-houses and sees the classes out on the well-kept grounds, going through
various exercises, such as one would never expect to see in the East. To-day I pause a while
before the public-school in Nakabairu, watching the interesting exercises going on. Under the
supervision of teachers in black frock-coats and Derby hats, a class of girls are ranged in
two rows, throwing and catching pillows, altogether back and forth at the word of command.
Classes of boys are manipulating wooden dumb-bells and exercising their muscles by various
systematic exercises. The youngsters are enjoying it hugely, and the whole affair looks so
thoroughly suggestive of the best elements of Occidental school-life that it is difficult to
believe the evidence of one's own eyes. I suspect the Japanese children are about the only
children in the wide, wide world who really enjoy studying their lessons and going to school.
One of the teachers comes to the gate and greets me with a polite bow. I address him in English,
but he doesn't know a word.

The wooden houses of Japan seem frail and temporary, but they look new and bright mostly in
the country. The government buildings, police-offices, post-offices, schools, etc., all look
new and bright and artistic, as though but lately finished. The roads, too, are sometimes laid
out straight and trim, suggestive of an attempt to imitate the roads of France; then, again,
one traverses for miles the counterpart of the green lanes of Merrie England--narrow, winding,
and romantic. The Japanese roads are mainly about ten or twelve feet wide, giving ample room
for two jinrikishas to pass, these being the only wheeled vehicles on the roads. Rustic bridges
frequently span lovely little babbling brooks, and waterfalls abound this afternoon as I approach,
at early eve, Futshishi. Rain necessitates a lay-over of a day at Futshishi, but there is nothing
unendurable about it; the proprietor of the house is a blind man, who plays the samosan, and
makes the girls sing and dance the geisha for my edification. Beef and chicken are both forthcoming
at Futshishi, and the fish, as in almost all Japanese towns, are very excellent.

The weather opens clear and frosty after the rain, and the road to Fukuoko is most excellent
wheeling; the country continues charming, and every day the people seem to get more and more
polite and agreeable. A novel sight of the morning's ride is a big gang of convicts working
the roads. They are fastened together with light chains, wear neat brown uniforms, and seem
to regard the unconvicted world of humans outside their own company with an expression of apology.
To look in their serio-comic faces it is difficult to imagine them capable of doing anything
wrong, except in fun: they look, in fact, as if their being chained together and closely attended
by guards was of itself anything but a serious affair.

Cavalry officers, small, smart-looking, and soldierly, in yellow-braided uniforms, are seen
in Fukuoko, looking as un-Asiatic in make-up as the schools, policemen, and telegraph-operators.
A collision with a jinrikisha that treats me to a header, and another with a diminutive Jap,
that bowls him over like a ninepin, and a third with a bobtailed cat, that damages nothing
but pussy's dignity, enter into my reminiscences of Fukuoko. The numbers of jinrikishas, and
the peculiar habits of the people, necessitate lynx-eyed vigilance to prevent collisions every
hour of the day. The average Jap leaves the door of a house backward, and bows and scrapes
his way clear out into the middle of the street, in bidding adieu to the friends he has been
calling upon, or even the shopkeeper he has been patronizing. Scarcely a village is passed
through but some person waltzes backward out of a door and right in front of the bicycle.

A curious sight one frequently sees along the road is an acre or two of ground covered with
paper parasols, set out in the sun to dry after being pasted, glued, and painted ready for
market. Umbrellas and paper lanterns are as much a part of the Japanese traveller's outfit
as his clothes. These latter, nowadays, are sometimes a very grotesque mixture of native and
European costume. The craze for foreign innovations pervades all ranks of society, and every
village dandy aspires to some article of European clothing. The result is that one frequently
encounters men on the road wearing a Derby hat, a red blanket, tight-fitting white drawers,
and straw sandals. The villager who sports a European hat or coat comes around to my yadoya,
wearing an amusing expression of self-satisfaction, as though filled with an inward consciousness
of inv approval of the same. Whereas, every European traveller deprecates the change from their
native costume to our own.

Following for some distance along the bank of a large canal I reach the village of Hakama for
the night. The yadoya here is simply spotless from top to bottom; however the Japanese hotel-keeper
manages to transact business and preserve such immaculate apartments is more of a puzzle every
day. The regulation custom at a yadoya is for the newly arrived guest to take a scalding hot
bath, and then squat beside a little brazier of coals, and smoke and chat till supper-time.
The Japanese are more addicted to hot-water bathing than the people of any other country. They
souse themselves in water that has been heated to 140 deg. Fahr., a temperature that is quite
unbearable to the "Ingurisu-zin" or "Amerika-zin" until he becomes gradually hardened and accustomed
to it. Both men and women bathe regularly in hot water every evening. The Japs have not yet
imbibed any great quantity of mauvaise honte from their association with Europeans, so the
sexes frequent the bath-tub indiscriminately, taking no more notice of one another than if
they were all little children. "Venus disporting in the waves"--of a bath-tub--is a regular
feature of life at a Japanese inn. Nor can they quite understand why the European tourist should
object to the proprietor, his wife and children, chambermaids, tea-girls, guests and visitors
crowding around to see him undress and waltz into the tub. Bless their innocent Japanese souls!
why should he object. They are only attracted out of curiosity to see the whiteness of his
skin, to note his peculiar manner of undressing, and to satisfy a general inquisitiveness concerning
his corporeal possibilities. They have no squeamishness whatever about his watching their own
natatorial duties; why, then, should he shrink within himself and wave them off?

The regular hotel meals consist of rice, fish in various forms, little slices of crisp, raw
turnip, pickles, and a catsup-like sauce. Meat is rarely forthcoming, unless specially ordered,
when, of course, extra charges are made; sake also has to be purchased separately. After supper
one is supplied with a teapot of tea and a brazier of coals.

Passing the following night at Hakama, I pull out next morning for Shimonoseki. Traversing
for some miles a hilly country, covered with pine-forest, my road brings me into Ashiyah, situated
on a small estuary. Here, at Ashiyah, I indulge in nay first simon-pure Japanese shave, patronizing
the village barber while dodging a passing shower. The Japanese tonsorial artist shaves without
the aid of soap, merely wetting the face by dipping his fingers in a bowl of warm water. During
the operation of shaving he hones the razor frequently on an oil-stone. He shaves the entire
face and neck, not omitting even the lobes of the ear, the forehead, and nose. If the European
traveller didn't keep his senses about him, while in the barber-chair of a Japanese village,
he would find himself with every particle of fuzz scraped off his face and neck, save, of course,
his regular whiskers or mustache, and with eye-brows considerably curtailed.

From Ashiyah my road follows up alongside a small tidal canal to Hakamatsu, traversing a lowland
country, devoted entirely to the cultivation of rice. Scores of coal-barges are floating along
the canal, propelled solely by the flowing of the tide. I can imagine them floating along until
the tide changes, then tying up and waiting patiently until it ebbs and flows again; from long
experience they, no doubt, have come to calculate upon one, two, or three tides, as the case
may be, floating their barges up to certain landings or villages.

The streets of Hakamatsu present a lively and picturesque scene, swarming with country people
in the gayest of costumes; the stalls are fairly groaning beneath big piles of tempting eatables,
toys, clothing, lanterns, tissue-paper flowers, and every imaginable Japanese thing. Street-men
are attracting small crowds about them by displaying curiosities. One old fellow I pause awhile
to look at is selling tiny rolls of colored paper which, when cast into a bowl of water, unfold
into flowers, boats, houses, birds, or animals. In explanation of the holiday-making, a young
man in a custom-house uniform, who knows a few words of English, explains "Japan God "-it is
some religious festival these smiling, chatting, bowing, and comical-looking crowds are keeping
with such evident relish.

Prom Hakamatsu to Kokura the country is hilly and broken; from Kokura one can look across the
narrow strait and see Shimonoseki, on the mainland of Japan. Thus far we have been traversing
the island of Kiu-shiu, separated from the main island by a strait but a few hundred yards
wide at Shimonoseki. From Kokura the jinrikisha road leads a couple of ri farther to Dairi;
thence footpaths traverse hills and wax-tree groves for another two miles (a ri is something
over two English miles) to the village of Moji. Here I obtain passage on a little ferry-boat
across to Shimonoseki, arriving there about two o'clock in the afternoon.

A twenty-four hours' halt is made at Shimonoseki in deference to rainy weather. The landlady
of the yadoya understands enough about European cookery to prepare me a very decent beefsteak
and a pot of coffee. Shimonoseki is full of European goods, and clever imitations of the same;
a stroll of an hour through the streets reveals the extent of the Japs' appreciation of foreign
things. Every other shop, almost, seems devoted to the goods that come from other countries,
or their counterfeits. Not content with merely copying an imported article, the Japanese artisan
generally endeavors to make some improvement on the original. For instance, after making an
exact imitation of a petroleum-lamp, the Jap workman constructs a neat little lacquer cabinet
to set it in when not in use. The coffee-pot in which the coffee served at my yadoya is prepared
is an ingenious contrivance with three chambers, evidently a reproduction of Yankee ingenuity.

A big Shinto temple occupies the crest of a little hill near by, and flights of stone steps
lead up to the entrance. At the foot of the steps, and repeated at several stages up the slope,
are the peculiar torii, or "bird-perches," that form the distinctive mark of a Shinto temple.
Numerous shrines occupy the court-yard of the temple; the shrines are built of wood mostly,
and contain representations of the various gods to whose particular worship they are dedicated.
Before each shrine is a barred receptacle for coins. The Japanese devotee poses for a minute
before the shrine, bowing his head and smiting together the palms of his hands; he then tosses
a diminutive coin or two into the barred treasury, and passes on round to the next shrine he
wishes to pay his respects to. In the main building are numerous pictures, bows, arrows, swords,
and various articles, evidently votive offerings. The shrine of the deity that presides over
the destiny of fishermen is distinguished by a huge silver-paper fish and numerous three-pronged
fish-spears. Among other queer objects whose meaning defies the penetration of the traveller
unversed in Japanese mythology is a monstrous human face, with a nose at least three feet long,
and altogether out of proportion.

Strolling about to while away a rainy forenoon I pass big school-houses full of children reciting
aloud. Their wooden clogs and paper umbrellas are stowed away in racks, provided for the purpose,
at the door. The cheerfulness with which they shout out their exercises proves plainly enough
that they are only keeping "make-believe" school. Female vegetable and fruit venders, neat
and comely as Normandy dairy-maids, are walking about chatting and smiling and bowing, "playing
at selling vegetables." While I pause a moment to inspect the stock of a curio-dealer, the
proprietor, seated over a brazier of coals, smoking, bows politely and points, with a chuckle
of amusement, at the fierce-looking effigy of a daimio in armor. There is not the slightest
hint of a mercenary thought about his actions; plainly enough, he hasn't the remotest wish
to sell me anything--he merely wants to call my attention to the grotesqueness of this particular
figure. He is only playing curio-dealer; he doesn't try to sell anything, but would do so out
of the abundance of his good-nature if requested to, no doubt. A pair of little old-fashioned
fire-engines repose carelessly against the side of a municipal building. They have grown tired
of playing at extinguishing fires and have thrown aside their toys. I wander to the water-front
and try to locate my hotel from that point of observation. Watermen are lounging about in wistaria
waterproof coats. They want me to ride to my destination in one of their boats, very evidently,
from their manner, only for the fun of the thing. Everybody is smiling and urbane, nobody looks
serious; no careworn faces are seen, no pinched poverty. Wonderful people! they come nearer
solving the problem of living happily than any other nation. Even the professional mendicants
seem to be amused at their own poverty, as if life to them was a mere humorous experiment,
scarcely deserving of a serious thought.

The weather clears up at noon, and in the face of a strong northern breeze I bid farewell to
Shimonoseki.

The road follows for some miles along the shore, a smooth, level road that winds about the
bases of the hills that here slope down to toy and dally with the restless surf of the famous
Inland Sea. Following the shore in a general sense, the road now and then leads inland for
a mile or two, for the purpose of linking together the numerous towns and villages that dot
the little alluvial valleys between the hills. Passing through one large village, my attention
is attracted by the sign "English Books," over a book-shop. Desirous of purchasing some kind
of a guide for the road to Kobe, I enter the establishment, expecting at least to find some
one capable of understanding English. The young man in charge knows never a word of English,
and his stock of "English books" consists of primers, spelling-books, etc., for the use of
school-children.

The architecture of the villages above Shimonoseki is strikingly artistic. The quaint gabled
houses are painted a snowy white, and are roofed with brown glazed tiles of curious pattern,
also rimmed with white. About the houses are hedges grotesquely clipped and trained in imitation
of storks, animals, or fishes, miniature orange and persimmon trees, pretty flower-gardens
and little landscape vanities peculiar to the Japanese. Circling around through little valleys,
over small promontories and along smooth, gravelly stretches of sea-shore road, for thirty
miles, brings me to anchor for the night in a good-sized village.

Among my visitors for the evening is a young gentleman arrayed in shiny top-boots, tight-fitting
corduroy trousers, and jockey cap. In his general make-up he is the "horsiest" individual I
have seen for many a day. One could readily imagine him to be a professional jockey. The probability
is, however, that he has never mounted a horse in his life. In all likelihood he has become
infatuated with this style of Western clothes from studying a copy of the London Graphic, has
gone to great trouble and expense to procure the garments from Yokohama, and now blossoms forth
upon the dazed provincials of his native town in a make-up that stamps him as the swellest
of the swell He affects great interest in the bicycle--much more so than the average Jap--from
which I infer that he has actually imbibed certain notions of Western sport, and is desirous
of posing before his uninitiated and, consequently, unappreciative, countrymen, as an exponent
of athletics. Altogether the horsey young gentleman is the most startling representative of
"New Japan" I have yet encountered.

A cold drizzle ushers in the commencement of my next day's journey. One is loath to exchange
the neat yadoya, with everything within so spotless and so pleasant, the tiny garden, not over
ten yards square, but containing a miniature lake, grottos, quaint stone lanterns, bronze storks,
flowers, and stunted trees, for the road. Disagreeable weather has followed me, however, from
Nagasaki like an avenging Fate, bent on preventing the consummation of my tour from being too
agreeable. Even with rain and mud and consequent delays my first few days in Japan have seemed
a very paradise after my Chinese experiences; what, then, would have been my impressions of
country and people amid sunshine and favorable conditions of weather and road, when the novelty
of it all first burst upon my Chinese-disgusted senses?

The country round about is mountainous, snow lying upon the summits of a few of the higher
peaks. The road, though hilly at times, manages to twist and wind its way along from one little
valley to another without any very long hills. Peasants from the mountains are met with, leading
ponies loaded with firewood and rice. Their old Japanese aboriginal costumes of wistaria raincoats,
broad bamboo-hats, and rude straw-sandals make a conspicuous contrast to their countrymen of
"New Japan," in Derby hats or jockey suits. Notwithstanding the rapid Europeanizing of the
city-bred Japs, the government's progressive policy, the blue-coated gendarmerie, and the general
revolutionizing of the country at large, many a day will come and go ere these mountaineers
forsake the ways and methods and grotesque costumes of their ancestors. For decades Japan will
present an interesting study of mountaineer conservatism and ultra-liberal city life. One party
will be wearing foreign clothes, aping foreign manners, adopting foreign ways of doing everything;
the other will be clinging tenaciously to the wistaria garments, bamboo sieve-hats, straw-sandals,
and the traditions of "Old Japan."

Most farm-houses are now thatched with straw; one need hardly add that they are prettily and
neatly thatched, and that they are embellished by various unique contrivances. Some of them,
I notice, are surrounded by a broad, thick hedge of dark-green shrubbery. The hedge is trimmed
so that the upper edge appears to be a continuation of the brown thatch, which merely changes
its color and slopes at the same steep gradient to the ground. This device produces a very
charming effect, particularly when a few neatly trimmed young pines soar above the hedge like
green sentinels about the dwelling. One inimitable piece of "botanical architecture" observed
to-day is a thick shrub trimmed into an imitation of a mountain, with trees growing on the
slopes, and a temple standing in a grove. Before many of the houses one sees curious tree-roots
or rocks, that have been brought many a mile down from the mountains, and preserved on account
of some fanciful resemblance to bird, reptile, or animal. Artificial lakes, islands, waterfalls,
bridges, temples, and groves abound; and at occasional intervals a large figure of the Buddha
squats serenely on a pedestal, smiling in happy contemplation of the peace, happiness, prosperity,
and beauty of everything and everybody around. Happy people! happy country. Are the Japs acting
wisely or are they acting foolishly in permitting European notions of life to creep in and
revolutionize it all. Who can tell. Time alone will prove. They will get richer, more powerful,
and more enterprising, because of the necessity of waking themselves up to keep abreast of
the times; but wealth and power, and the buzz and rattle of machinery and commerce do not always
mean happiness.

CHAPTER XX.

THE HOME STRETCH.

During the afternoon the narrow kuruma road merges into a broad, newly made macadam, as fine
a piece of road as I have seen the whole world round. Wonderful work has been done in grading
it from the low-lying rice-fields, up, up, up, by the most gentle and even gradient, to where
it seemingly terminates, far ahead between high rocky cliffs. The picture of charming houses
and beautiful terraced gardens climbing to the very upper stories of the mountains here beggars
description; one no longer marvels at what he has seen in the way of terraced mountains in China.

New sensations of astonishment await me as the upper portion of the smooth boulevard is reached,
and I find myself at the entrance to a tunnel about five hundred yards long and thirty feet
wide. The tunnel is lit up by means of big reflectors in the middle, shining through the gloom
as one enters, like locomotive headlights. It is difficult to imagine the Japs going to all
this trouble and expense for mere jinrikisha and pedestrian travel; yet such is the case, for
no other vehicular traffic exists in the country. It is the only country in which I have found
a tunnel constructed for the ordinary roadway, although there may be similar improvements that
have not happened to come to my notice or ear. One would at least expect to find a toll-keeper
in such a place, especially as a person has to be employed to maintain the lights, but there
is nothing of the kind.

A few miles beyond the tunnel the broad road terminates in a good-sized seaport, whence I encounter
some little difficulty in finding my way along zigzag field-paths to my proper road for the
north. The rain has fallen at intervals throughout the day, but the roads have averaged good.
Fifty miles, or thereabout, must have been reeled off when, at early eventide, I pull up at
a village ya-doya. Before settling myself down, for rest and supper, I take a stroll through
the village in quest of possible interesting things. Not far from the yadoya my attention is
arrested by a prominent sign, in italics, "uropean eating, Kameya hous." Entertaining happy
visions of beefsteak and Bass's ale for supper, I enter the establishment and ask the young
man in charge whether the place is an hotel. He smiles, bows, and intimates his woeful ignorance
of what I am saying.

The following morning is frosty, and low, scudding clouds denote unsettled weather, as I resume
my journey. Much of the time my road practically follows the shore, and sometimes simply follows
the windings and curvatures of the gravelly beach. Most of the low land near the shore appears
to be reclaimed from the sea--low, flat-looking mud-fields, protected from overflow by miles
and miles of stout dikes and rock-ribbed walls. Fishing villages abound along the shore, and
for long distances a recent typhoon has driven the sea inland and washed away the road. Thousands
of men and women are engaged in repairing the damages with the abundance of material ready
to hand on the sloping granite-shale hills around the foot of which the roadway winds.

Fish are cheaper and more plentiful here than anything else, and the old dame at the yadoya
of a fishing village cooks me a big skate for supper, which makes first-rate eating, in spite
of the black, malodorous sauce she uses so liberally in the cooking.

In this room is a wonderful brass-bound cabinet, suggestive of soul-satisfying household idols
and comfortable private worship. During the evening I venture to open and take a peep in this
cabinet to satisfy a pardonable curiosity as to its contents. My trespass reveals a little
wax idol seated amid a wealth of cheap tinsel ornaments, and bits of inscribed paper. Before
him sets an offering of rice, sake, and dried fish in tiny porcelain bowls.

Clear and frosty opens the following morning; the road is good, the country gradually improves,
and by nine o'clock I am engaged in looking at the military exercises of troops quartered in
the populous city of Hiroshima. The exercises are conducted within a large square, enclosed
with a low bank of earth and a ditch. Crowds of curious civilians are watching the efforts
of raw cavalry recruits to ride stout little horses, that buck, kick, bite, and paw the air.
Every time a soldier gets thrown the on-lookers chuckle with delight. Both men and horses are
undersized, but look stocky and serviceable withal. The uniform of the cavalry is blue, with
yellow trimmings. The artillery looks trim and efficient, and the horses, although rather small,
are powerful and wiry, just the horses one would select for the rough work of a campaign.

North of Hiroshima the country assumes a hilly character, the road following up one mountain-stream
and down another. In this mountainous region one meets mail-carriers, the counterpart almost
of the fleet-footed postmen of Bengal. The Japanese postman improves upon nature by the addition
of a waist-cloth and a scant shirt of white and blue cotton check; his letter-pouch is fastened
to a bamboo-staff; as he bounds along with springy stride he warns people to clear the way
by shouting in a musical voice, "Honk, honk." This cry resembles in a very striking degree
the utterances of an old veteran brant, or wild-goose, when speeding northward in the spring
to escape a warm wave from the south.

Among these mountains one is filled with amazement at the tremendous work the industrious Japs
have done to secure a few acres of cultivable land. Dikes have been thrown up to narrow the
channels of the streams, so that the remaining width of the bed may be converted into fields
and gardens. The streams have been literally turned out of their beds for the sake of a few
acres of alluvial soil. Among the mountains, chiefly between the mountains and the shore, are
level areas of a few square miles, supporting a population that seems largely out of proportion
to the size of the land. Many of these sea-shore people however, get their livelihood from
the blue waters of the Inland Sea; fish sharing the honors with rice in being the staple food
of provincial Japan.

The weather changes to quite a disagreeable degree of cold by the time I reach the end of to-day's
ride. This introduces me promptly into the mysteries of how the Japanese manage to keep themselves
warm in their flimsy houses of wooden ribs and semi-transparent paper in cold weather. An opening
in the floor accommodates a brazier of coals; over this stands an open wood-work frame; quilts
covered over the frame retain the heat. The modus operandi of keeping warm is to insert the
body beneath this frame, wrapping the covering about the shoulders, snugly, to prevent the
escape of the warm air within. The advantage of this unique arrangement is that the head can
be kept cool, while, if desirable, the body can be subjected to a regular hot-air bath.

The following day is chilly and raw, with occasional skits of snow. People are humped up and
blue-nosed, and seemingly miserable. Yet, withal, they seem to be only humorously miserable,
and not by any means seriously displeased with the rawness and the snow. Straw wind-breaks
are set up on the windward side of the tea-houses, and there is much stopping among pedestrians
to gather around the tea-house braziers and gossip and smoke.

Everybody in Japan smokes, both men and women. The universal pipe of the country is a small
brass tube about six inches long, with the end turned up and widened to form the bowl. This
bowl holds the merest pinch of tobacco; a couple of whiffs, a smart rap on the edge of the
brazier to knock out the residue, and the pipe is filled again and again, until the smoker
feels satisfied. The girls that wait on one at the yadoyas and tea-houses carry their tobacco
in the capacious sleeve-pockets of their dress, and their pipes sometimes thrust in the sash
or girdle, and sometimes stuck in the back of the hair.

Many of the Buddhas presiding over the cross-roads and village entrances along my route to-day
are provided with calico bibs, the object of which it is impossible for me to determine, owing
to my ignorance of the vernacular. The bibs are, no doubt, significant of some particular season
of religious observance.

The important city of Okoyama provides abundant food for observation--the clean, smooth streets,
the wealth of European goods in the shops, and the swarms of ever-interesting people, as I
wheel leisurely through it on Saturday, December 4th. No human being save Japs has so far crossed
my path since leaving Nagasaki, nor am I expecting to meet anybody here. An agreeable surprise,
however, awaits me, for at the corner of one of the principal business thoroughfares a couple
of American missionaries appear upon the scene. Introducing themselves as Mr. Carey and Mr.
Kowland, they inform me that three families of missionaries reside together here, and extend
a cordial invitation to remain over Sunday. I am very glad indeed to accept their hospitality
for to-morrow, as well as to avail myself of an opportunity to get my proper bearings. Nothing
in the way of a reliable map or itinerary of the road I have been traversing from Shimonoseki
was to be obtained at Nagasaki, and I have travelled with but the vaguest idea of my whereabouts
from day to day. Only from them do I learn that the city we meet in is Okoyama, and that I
am now within a hundred miles of Kobe, north of which place "Murray's Handbook" will prove
of material assistance in guiding me aright.

The little missionary colony is charmingly situated on a pine-clad hill overlooking the city
from the east. Several lady missionaries are visiting from other points, all Americans, making
a pleasant party for one to meet in such an unexpected manner.

On Sunday morning I accompany Mr. Carey to see his native congregation in the nice new church
which he says they have erected from their own means at a cost of two thousand yen. This latter
is a very gratifying statement, not to say surprisingly so, for it savors of something like
sincerity on the part of the converts. In most countries the converts seem to be brought to
a knowledge of their evil ways, and to perceive the beauties of the Christian religion through
the medium of material assistance provided from the mission. Instead of spending money themselves
for the cause they profess to embrace, they expect to receive something from it of a tangible
earthly nature. Here, however, we find the converts themselves building their own meeting-house,
and bidding fair ere long to support the mission without outside aid. This is encouraging from
the stand-point of those who believe in converting "the heathen" from their own religion to
ours, and gratifying to the student of Japanese character.

About five hundred people congregate in the church, seating themselves quietly and orderly
on the mat-covered floor. They embrace all classes, from the samurai lawyer or gentleman to
the humblest citizen, and from gray-haired old men and women to shock-headed youngsters, who
merely come with their mothers. Many of these same mothers have been persuaded by the missionaries
to cease the heathenish practice of blackening their teeth, and so appear at the meeting in
even rows of becoming white ivories like their unmarried sisters. Numbers of curious outsiders
congregate about the open doors and peep in and stand and listen to the sermon of Mr. Carey,
and the singing. The hymns are sung to the same tunes as in America, the words being translated
into Japanese. Everybody seems to enjoy the singing, and they listen intently to the sermon.

After the sermon, several prominent members of the congregation stand up and address their
countrymen and women in convincing words and gestures. Mr. Carey tells me that any ordinary
Jap seems capable of delivering a fluent, off-hand exposition of his views in public without
special effort or embarrassment. Altogether the Japanese Christian congregation, gathered here
in ita own church, sitting on the floor, singing, sermonizing, and looking happy, is a novel
and interesting sight to see. One can imagine missionary life among the genial Japs as being
very pleasant.

Saturday and Sunday pass pleasantly away, and, with happy memories of the little missionary
colony, I wheel away from Oko-yama on Monday morning, passing through a country of rich rice-fields
and numerous villages for some miles. The scene then changes into a beautiful country of small
lakes and pine-covered hills, reminding me very much of portions of the Berkshire Hills, Mass.
The weather is cool and clear, and the road splendid, although in places somewhat hilly.

Fifty-three miles are duly scored when, at three o'clock in the afternoon, I arrive at the
city of Himeji. The yadoya here is a superior sort of a place, and Himeji numbers among its
productions European pan (bread), steak, and bottled beer. The Japs are themselves rapidly
coming to an appreciation of this latter article, and even to manufacture it, a big brewery
being already established somewhere near Tokio. A couple of young dandies of "New Japan" drop
in during the evening, send out for bottles of beer, and seem to take particular delight in
showing off their appreciation of the newly introduced beverage before their countrymen of
the "ancient regime."

Beyond Himeji one leaves behind the mountains, emerging upon a broad, level, rice-producing
plain, which extends eastward to Kobe and the sea-shore. The fine level road traversing the
plain passes through numerous towns and villages, and for the latter half of the distance skirts
the shore. Old dismantled stone forts, tea-houses, eating-stalls, fishermen's huts, house-boats,
and swarms of jinrikishas and pedestrians make their sea-shore road lively and interesting.
The single artery through which the life of all the southern tributary country ebbs and flows
to trade at the busiest treaty port in Japan, this road is constantly swarming with people.
Over the Minato-gawa Kiver by an elevated bridge, and one finds himself in a broad street leading
through Hiogo to Kobe. These two cities are practically joined together, although bearing different
names. Like many of the rivers of Japan, the bed of the Minato-gawa is elevated considerably
above the surrounding plain. Confined between artificial banks to prevent the flooding of the
adjacent fields in spring, the debris brought down from year to year has gradually raised the
bed, and necessitated continued raising also of the levees. These operations have very naturally
ended in raising the whole affair to an elevation that leaves even the bottom of the stream
several feet higher than the fields around.

Kobe is one of the treaty ports of Japan, and nowadays is reputed to do more foreign trade
than any of the others. One can imagine Kobe being a very pleasant and desirable place to live;
the foreign settlement is quite extensive, the surroundings attractive, and the climate mild
and healthful.

Pleasant days are spent at Kobe and Ozaka. Twenty-seven miles of level road from the latter
city, following the course of the Yodo-gawa, a broad shallow stream that flows from Lake Biwa
to the sea, brings me to Kioto. From the eighth century until 1868 Kioto was the capital of
the Japanese empire, and is generally referred to as the old capital of the country. The present
population is about a quarter of a million, about half of what it was supposed to be in the
heyday of its ancient glory as the seat of empire.

