[Some account of what befel Father Vincent de Paul, Religious of La Trappe, with observations
made by him when in America, where he has spent about ten years, with the permission of his
Superior, in obedience to whose orders he writes the following:]

The reverend Father Abbot, of La Trappe, Dom Augustin, (De Lestrange) foreseeing that Bonaparte
would seek to destroy the communities existing in Europe, resolved on sending a party of his
religious to America, in order that they might establish themselves there and preserve their
monastic state.

In 1812, I, in company with two other brothers, was sent by him to the United States, there
to found an establishment of our Order. We left Bordeaux on the 15th June, and on the 6th of
the month of August we arrived at Boston. We had with us one of our Trappistines, whose object
was also to found a community; with this intention she had preceded her companions, but now
found herself alone, as passports were refused to the other sisters. We were welcomed by the
worthy Mr. Matignon, parish priest of the town, who coaxed us to remain in the diocese of Bishop
Cheverus. However as we had received orders to establish ourselves near Baltimore, after a
few days rest I started for that town alone, leaving my brothers and the nun in Boston, intending
to send for them when I should find a suitable site for the two projected establishments. I
paid my respects to His Grace the Archbishop of Baltimore, who received me kindly, but appeared
at a loss where to find a site such as we desired. After many unsuccessful efforts and researches,
he established me temporally on a farm belonging to the Society of Jesus (of which he was a
member) until such time as we could procure the sort of place we wanted; then as I thought
that time might be long in coming, I summoned my brothers to me, and arranged for a suitable
lodging for the nun.

During our stay, a rich man of Baltimore, who was once a Protestant and had been converted,
offered us 2000 acres of land in the mountains of Pensylvania, near a river called the Delaware.
He was even generous enough to offer me the services of his son, who was also a recent convert,
and who came with us to point out the property which, however, I was not able to inspect thoroughly
as I remained there only one day.

I returned soon after with two young men who were inclined to join our Order. They commenced
a somewhat rude novitiate, for we fasted and kept silence on the way, going always on foot
for want of money. After great suffering from fatigue and heat (as it was summer), we arrived
at a little town, distant about sixty miles from Philadelphia, whence we had started on our
tour of inspection. This little town, which was called Milford, was quite near to the land
that was to be ours.

On the way we passed through many Protestant villages whose inhabitants appeared to be anxious
for the light of the true faith, and this budding town of Milford did not look askance at us,
as almost all of its inhabitants came to mass on Sunday. After mass one of the young men aforementioned,
who knew English well, expounded the catechism to them, and they listened with attention. The
Protestant minister came afterwards to preach, but we were told that none of the people went
to hear him which without doubt annoyed him greatly. One of the principal men of the place,
a Protestant, as indeed they were all, begged me to remain with them, saying that they would
subscribe me a pension, and that he would head the list with the sum of fifty dollars. But
we had not come to this country to be missionaries, so we left Milford to go and inspect our land.

Travelling through these immense and trackless forests was very difficult, and we often went
astray. One day when I was alone with a child who served me in the capacity of guide, we were
greatly puzzled. We wished to find a little hut that we had built in the woods in which to
sleep; nightfall was coming on, and there seemed no chance of finding our camp before sundown.
I said to the child: "here is a low, flat rock, on which I will spend the night." He replied
that if I remained there I should be devoured by the bears, of which there were a great number
on these mountains; we had already heard their cries and hideous howlings. At length, thanks
be to God, we found the cabin, which was not a very safe refuge for us, as it was only a little
hut built of young trees. The two novices and I slept there like Indians, either on the bare
ground or on couches formed by heaps of the branches of trees.

Having no provisions with us we were obliged for the first few days to eat what we could find
in the woods, such as certain little blue berries that they call "bluets," and other wild fruits,
which the people of the country despise. On the third or fourth day help came. A Jew and a
Protestant appeared on the scene, bringing us potatoes. This Jew showed a leaning towards our
religion, and the Sunday previous I had said mass in his house. I do not doubt that if we had
remained longer with these people many would have been converted. There was one entire family,
of father, mother and three children, whom I had instructed, and who were to receive baptism
and embrace the Catholic religion. Unfortunately the woman was the victim of evil counsel at
Milford, and was deterred from her good purpose. There were many people in Milford who were
bitter enemies to the truth.

I often said mass in our cabin. One day we made a cross and carried it in procession for nearly
a mile: we sang psalms, and part of the way went barefoot, until we reached the spot where
we planted the cross, which was our consolation and our safeguard, as there were in this desert
a great number of rattlesnakes and other reptiles no less dangerous. When we left our retreat
we would sometimes step upon them and would hear the noise that these serpents make with their
rattles.

At last having walked over a great portion of these two thousand acres of land during the two
weeks that we spent there, we left these solitudes and went down to Philadelphia. [Footnote:
It was not deemed advisable to accept this property, it being almost entirely rock or marsh
land. Besides which it was not suitable for one of our establishments, communication with other
places being too difficult.]

Upon arriving at the town I told the Bishop how well-disposed were the people whom we had seen,
and suggested to him to send some missionaries there, but he told me that he had none to send.
If I had been free I would have returned at once to labor for the conversion of these poor people.

After a year of crosses and difficulties in the way of our discovering a suitable and convenient
place for our establishment, we found ourselves in Maryland, an excellent province, producing
all the necessaries of life in abundance. It is near the sea, and near to the Potoxen, and
not far from the Potomac, two great rivers that add to its commercial advantages and render
it more flourishing. We thought we had at last found the country in which to succeed in establishing
our foundation. I consulted His Grace the Archbishop of Baltimore, and the reverend gentlemen
of the seminary of St. Sulpice, and in accordance with their advice, I decided to go there
and commence the work. Three more brothers sent from France by our Reverend Father Abbot, arrived
at this juncture and joined us. We bought the land and set ourselves to work to cultivate it.
We built a house for ourselves, which consisted of trees placed one upon another--what is called
in this country a loghouse. It was small, being only eighteen feet long, and as many wide.
We shortly commenced another which would serve as a chapel. The negroes of the country--who
are all Catholics--gave us a helping hand in this work On arriving here we found lodgings in
a private house near our clearing, in which we remained until our loghouse was fit to receive us.

Maryland produces an abundance of Indian corn, the cultivation of which is the chief work of
the negroes. We subsisted almost entirely upon this food, with potatoes and occasionally bread;
wheat, however, and buckwheat grow very well. We arrived there at the beginning of the year
1813, and during the winter we were occupied in cutting down trees and preparing the land for
work in the spring, so that when that season arrived we had an acre and a half of land under
cultivation. Part of this we planted with potatoes, another part was a garden where we sowed
different vegetables, and we also laid out an orchard of young fruit trees. So far everything
looked well, but when summer came, and while we were working most zealously we all fell ill
with fever, and many of us were attacked with dysentery. I attribute these maladies to many
causes,--first to the miasma or poisonous vapors exhaled from newly cleared land, then to the
great heat and the bad water that we had to drink, which, though it had been pure enough in
the winter and spring, had become bad by reason of a multitude of little insects that were
perpetually drowning themselves in it. Another reason that contributed to render us ill was
the number of different sorts of flies by which we were devoured day and night. There were
among others two species of flies which in this country they call tics. Some of them are large,
others are small, they fasten themselves to the skin and so penetrate into the flesh that one
can only remove them by pulling them to pieces, even then a part remains and causes an insupportable
itching.

We were dying one after another in this place when our Rev. Father Abbot on his way from Martinique,
with several religious, arrived at New York. He summoned our community to him, as well as that
of the Rev. Father Urbain, which a short time previously had united with ours, so that these
three little communities now formed but one, under our chief Superior, who thus in a moment
effected a foundation such as we had spent years of fruitless effort endeavoring to establish.
Our new monastery was established in the country near New York, and did much good. Thirty-three
poor children (almost all of them orphans) were brought up there, and were given all the necessaries
of life, even to their clothes. Protestants came to see the good work and two ministers were
converted. These gentlemen came sometimes to see us, and assisted at our religious ceremonies.
They liked to converse with our Reverend Father Abbot, who won them by his frank and polite
manner. In addition to the work of this monastery, our Reverend Father Abbot supported and
directed another house of our Order which he had also founded, and which was productive of
much good. This was a community of nuns. There was yet another convent, one belonging to the
Ursulines quite near, that is to say about three or four miles from our monastery, which our
community supplied with a chaplain. I was obliged to go there every Sunday to say mass and
to confess the nuns. When we arrived in their neighborhood they were without a priest; we could
not leave them in such need, so that I, ill though I was, had to say two masses on Sundays,
one in the church of the Ursulines, the other in that of our sisters. However, this was to
me a cause of rejoicing, although I was fatigued after my voyages and overwhelmed by the work
with which I was charged, I was compensated and consoled by the good that I could be the means
of doing. I remember having received the abjuration of Protestantism of three young ladies
who were boarders at the Ursuline Convent, and who had the happiness of becoming Catholics.

Although we were in a Protestant country, our Reverend Father Abbot undertook to have the procession
of the Blessed Sacrament on the festival of Corpus Christi, thinking it might do some good.
He had several repositories built in a field adjoining our house, these he decorated in the
best style possible and managed to have a canopy and boys to swing censors and others to throw
flowers before the Blessed Sacrament. When the time for the procession arrived we saw our Reverend
Father bearing Jesus Christ in his hands and walking under the dais borne by four religious
in dalmatics accompanied by the community and by several strangers singing hymns and canticles.
Numbers of children preceeded the Blessed Sacrament, exercising the solemn functions which
had been allotted to them. This infantine band, clad in white surplices girded with different
colors, resembled angels and presented a spectacle at once beautiful and edifying to the beholder.
The Protestants who were present appeared to be much pleased with the procession.

Our Reverend Father Abbot wished with all his heart to be able to continue the good work thus
commenced, but he was obliged to abandon it for want of pecuniary means, and perhaps also because
of the ill-will of many who offered opposition to his projects; besides which King Louis XVIII
had been restored to the throne of France, and religion was being re-established in that country.
Almost all our brothers were dispersed here and there throughout Europe, and it would be necessary
to reunite them. Persuaded, besides, that he would receive more help in France than in the
United States, and in short, reflecting that there would perhaps be more good to be done yet
in the old world than in the new, (the Revolution having been the cause of such wickedness
and having done so much harm) our Father Abbot decided that he and his community would return
to France. He embarked in the autumn of 1814, and took with him from New York the greater number
of our Brothers and all our Sisters, leaving only six Brothers and myself behind, with orders
that we should join him in France after I had arranged our business matters and recovered my
strength, for I had still within me the germ of that malady of which mention has been made
in speaking of Maryland where I contracted it, as did the others. It left me with a slow fever,
that lasted for a long time.

At this junction two of our Brothers died, a lay Brother and an oblate. This latter had been
almost a millionaire he having acquired a large fortune in the West India Islands; he lost
it, however, in the negro rebellion, and retired to La Trappe, where he died poor enough.

Belonging to the house in which we were living was an orchard which we had made our cemetery,
here we had buried our two brothers; but, as we were going to leave this spot and did not wish
to expose their bodies to be perhaps profaned by heretics who might buy the ground and not
wish to have them there, we determined to exhume them. They had been buried about a fortnight,
and the weather was warm, so we provided ourselves with incense to burn in case there might
be a foul odour. This precaution, however, was not necessary, as there was no smell perceptible,
they were as fresh, so to speak, as if they were still alive. We remarked especially that the
body of Brother Jean Marie, (the lay Brother) was supple. I touched it myself, and saw that
it was really so, for while I held him his legs swayed as would those of a person in life.

Near the town there was a little cemetery well walled in, and intended for the poor. As our
brothers were poor in fact, and by profession, I had them laid there, and in the same spirit
of poverty interred them side by side in the same grave. We accompanied these good brothers
to the tomb, offering our prayers for their repose, and all was finished before daylight.

About the middle of the month of May, 1815, our business being concluded, we left New York,
and fifteen days later arrived at Halifax, without having experienced bad weather. After two
week's delay in searching for another vessel, we at length found one, and by means of the recommendation
of Mr. Burke, then pastor of the town, and since Bishop, we were taken on board with our seven
trunks without being obliged to pay anything for our passage. The ship was a transport called
the "Ceylon," and was delayed by contrary winds. The second day after we embarked the wind
still being from a wrong quarter, I was stupid and imprudent enough to go ashore to see about
some business that was not of grave importance--when lo! the wind veered round suddenly and
became favorable. The ship sailed, but Father, Vincent remained and lost his passage!

I thus found myself alone in a strange country, and without means. I made every effort to discover
some way of overtaking the ship, but in vain. It was impossible to do so, and I felt very sad
at the thought of my brothers being carried so far away from me.

My Superior in France, to whom I made known this event, wrote to me that as God had permitted
it, I could remain until farther orders, and occupy myself with the salvation of the Indians;
for which object I accordingly labored up to the time of my leaving Nova Scotia, that is to
say up to the month of October, 1823. These labors, however, did not prevent my working for
the good of our Order, as we shall see later.

Mr. Bourke having gone to Ireland, we were only two priests for the town of Halifax and its
suburbs, where there were many Catholics, without counting the Mic-macs, who are the Indians
inhabiting Nova Scotia. These Indians were called to the Faith about four centuries ago. French
priests or Jesuits coming at the peril of their lives, brought them the light of the Gospel.
Many of these ministers of our Lord fell victims of their own zeal and charity, being murdered
by this nation, then pagan and barbarous. Since these Indians became acquainted with the true
religion they have never been known to conform to any other, but have preserved their firmness
in the faith up to the present day in spite of the danger of perversion to which they are so
often exposed, more especially since they have lived among the English, and in spite of their
ignorance, for it is difficult to teach them. Their language which they call "Mic-mac," is
a jargon without rule. They have been taught to read in it, but only by means of hieroglyphics.
A figure or a sign which they write themselves on bark or on paper, may sometimes signify only
one word, sometimes again it stands for a whole phrase. Some have thought they detected Arab
words amongst this language, but I think it bears more resemblance to that of children just
learning to speak without being able to understand what they say. For example for the "yes"
they say [long-e] (ay); for "no" they say "mena." The accent of the Mic-mac is soft and slow.
I have remarked that, they do not convey their ideas well in any other language. When one translates
Mic-mac for them into French or English, they often appear dissatisfied, and one can see from
their manner that the true sense is not given. What renders their faith more remarkable and
meritorious is, that they confess through the medium of an interpreter, and they avail themselves
of the first they find, no matter who, provided he knows their language. They are often interpreted
by their relatives, even the oldest by the youngest. Mr. Mayar, a French priest who was formerly
missionary to these parts and who died in Halifax full of merit before God, was deeply regretted
by these Indians. By means of great application, and by the aid of light from heaven, he accomplished
the task of translating into their language a number of the prayers and chants of the church,
so that they now sing the Kyrie, the Gloria in Excelsis, the Credo, &c, even the Te Deum, on
the Roman or Parisian tone, (for this worthy priest came from Paris). They know many hymns
of the Blessed Virgin, which they sing equally well, also the prose Dies Irae. They sing mass
fairly well, especially the tone Royal, and the mass for the dead. Some persons may be surprised
at this, and perhaps harbor a doubt of it, but I can testify as a witness to its truth. More
than a hundred times they have sung it for me. So recently as the month of August, 1823, I
was in a parish called Havre-a-Bouchers, when twenty-six canoes filled with Indians arrived
there; they came to have their children baptised, and for confession, &c. There were eight
singers among them, and during the week that they remained, they sang mass for me each day,
and one might say conducted themselves like canons or like Trappists! They have clear voices.
These poor Indians might shame some of our European Catholics by their zeal and their piety;
they will go fifty or even a hundred leagues to find a priest and to receive the Sacraments,
and as it often happens that they have no provisions when they arrive, they pass two or three
days without eating, occupied only with their souls and forgetful of the wants of the body.

While in Halifax, which is the capital of Nova Scotia, I found myself overladen with work.
The priest who was with me being in very delicate health and often indisposed, most of the
work fell to me. He was at length obliged to go away for change of air and was absent for a
month, during which time it fell to me to baptize, confess, marry, visit the sick in town and
country, and be on my feet day and night, besides saying mass on Sundays and Holy days.

Although I knew very little English, I preached twice in that language in the Catholic church
of the town, where there were about two thousand Catholics, of whom the greater number were Irish.

Soon I felt constrained to go further into the Province of Nova Scotia to minister to the wants
of the poor, neglected inhabitants. The first place to which I went was a parish called Chezzetcook,
composed of French Acadians, who were without a priest. It is seven leagues from the town (Halifax)
and when it possessed a missionary the Indians had been accustomed to go there. They were not
long in learning of my presence, and came from a circuit of fifteen or twenty leagues. I had
a transparancy representing the suffering souls in purgatory, which our Revered Father Abbot
had made. The figures expressing different shades of grief and of the desire as well as the
hope of seeing God, combined with the brilliant and real looking flames, were well calculated
to produce an impression. I showed it to them and explained it by means of one of their interpreters
who knew French. At once penetrated with compassion and charity for the suffering souls in
purgatory they began to weep, and to look up the money they had with them so as to have the
Holy Sacrifice offered on behalf of these suffering souls, and that without my having said
anything to give them the idea. They all wear the cross, some have it hung round their necks,
others fasten it on their breast. It is seldom that an Indian leaves home without his beads;
they generally have them and do not neglect to say them, sometimes repeating the chapelet several
times a day, as well as in the middle of the night, when they rise to pray. They observe all
the fasts of the Church, and the penances imposed on them they generally perform on Fridays.
On that day in a spirit of penitence, and in memory of the passion of Jesus Christ, a man will
hold out to his wife the backs of his hands, which the wife strikes with a rod, giving twenty,
thirty, or fifty blows. She then in turn presents her hands and receives the same chastisement
from her husband. This chastisement is dealt out indiscriminately, children are thus chastized
by their parents, and what is surprising, the little Indians when struck on the hands do not
withdraw them, no matter how much they feel the pain. I have seen them bleeding, yet in spite
of that they were firm and motionless. Their religion is not only exterior, they have it in
their heart as will be seen by the following fact: The feast of St. Anne is a great festival
for the Indians, and I made a point of being at Chezzetcook on that day. Two hundred Indians
assembled, most of them came in a spirit of devotion, but some of them had evil designs, for
they mediated killing their king and all his family. I discovered this plot in time, and learnt
the cause with astonishment. It was that they believed that the chief and all his family would
change their religion, that they had become Protestants, or that they intended so to do. This
is how it came about. Some heretics called Methodists, had done all in their power to attract
the king of the Indians to their sect, going so far as to give him all sorts of provisions,
and other valuables, such as cows, pigs, farming implements, &c. One of these Methodists was
sent among the Indians to learn their language, and so corrupt them more easily. In this way
the report got about that their Chief, Benjamin (which was the name of the king) had joined
the Methodists with all his family. Mr. Mignault, parish priest of Halifax, and myself knew
this to be false, for Benjamin himself, whom we had warned against the dangers that threatened
him, had replied: "The potatoes, cows, and the other provisions of Bromlet (which was the name
of the Methodist who had given him the things) are good, I have taken them and made use of
them, but his religion is worthless, I will have none of it."

In consequence of this we assembled the Indians in the church of Chezztecook, which was not
large enough to hold them all, and we made the king repeat his profession of faith in their
presence, so that they should no longer doubt his sincerity. He did this in a most edifying
manner. His example was followed by all his officers, who also made their profession of faith.
We remarked in particular one of his brothers who was conspicuous by the touching beauty and
eloquence of his speech, and by the earnestness of the gestures which he employed. Some fragments
of his discourse were rendered into our language by an Acadian interpreter, who understood
Mic-mac pretty well.

"How," said he, "could we leave our religion that will save our souls if we follow it, this
religion that comes from God, whose son died on the cross for our salvation? Shall we lose
our souls that have cost Him so dear, for which he suffered so much, and which he shed all
his blood to purchase? No, better die than change our faith and do such a great wrong."

I had written to Mr. Mignault to come so as to render the affair more imposing and dignified,
and he arrived in good time. He carried a large crucifix, which at the conclusion of the ceremony
the Indians came to venerate. The missionary then said a few words of instruction, after which
the Indians embraced each other as brothers and friends, in token of general satisfaction and
peace. I heard all their confessions, and a large number had the happiness of receiving Holy
Communion. On the eve of St. Anne's feast, they made a bonfire, and while the wood burned they
fired off guns and danced around the fire, clapping their hands in imitation of musical instruments.
This lasted for a great part of the night, however, they had previously said their evening
prayers, and sung hymns and canticles.

We can obtain almost anything from them in the name of our holy religion, so great is their
attachment to it, as will be seen by the following: One day while I was in Halifax, a number
of Indians came to the presbytery to complain to me of the Governor who resided in the town.
They clamored for the guns and powder which had been promised to them, and which they were
accustomed to receive every year from the English Government in addition to their gifts of
woolen blankets. The missionaries distributed, or saw to the distribution of these latter.
I was obliged to go myself to see the Governor on the subject of this small rebellion, for
the Indians wore a threatening air. His Excellency begged me to pacify them and to tell them
that their demand would soon be granted. I returned and said a few words in the name of religion,
which at once quieted them.

Another time some barbarous and fanatical miscreants set a number of Indians against us, making
them believe that we only drew them around us in order to do them harm, and to emperil their
safety. This they apparently believed, for we were warned that they would attempt our lives.
I spoke to them instructing them as well as I was able. At last by the arguments of the religion
to which they are so attached, I turned them from their wicked purpose. I am sure that afterwards
they experienced a lively remorse for having entertained such a thought. Formerly, that is
to say, before priests came among them, they had the barbarous custom of killing their fathers
and mothers when they became old and infirm. Many of the bludgeons and war clubs with which
they killed their parents have been found quite recently. Now, however, they take care of them
until their death, respecting and loving them. It is thought that before they had any knowledge
of religion they were cannibals.

How is it that this people who were formerly so unnatural and so barbarous are to-day so different,
so humane, and quiet and tractible? What has rendered them so docile and submissive; in short,
what has worked this happy change if not the Catholic religion? Protestants, as we have shown
above, have tried to civilize them, and to imbue them with different sentiments, even going
so far as to live among them and entering into their pursuits, but their undertakings have
always failed, each attempt has met with the same result It is only the true religion and its
priests that have power to convert and civilize these savages and make them useful members
of society. Each year they have masses said for different intentions, and in this they give
evidence of generosity and nobleness of sentiment. The first mass that they recommend is for
the human race, that is for all men living; the second is for the souls in purgatory; the third
for all Indians and others who have died during the year; the fourth to thank God for all benefits
received from His hand during the year, and the fifth to offer up to Him the coming year so
that he may bless it. For this object they save their money, sometimes to the end of the year,
sometimes to the feast of St. Anne, when they have an opportunity to come to their religious
duties. This, however, does not prevent their having a special mass said, should any of their
near relatives die. They generally recommend high masses for these general intentions, and
for thanksgiving.

Before the French took possession of Nova Scotia, which they called Acadia, the Indians lived
only by hunting and fishing, and had no clothing, but such as they made of the skins of wild
beasts. Their houses were hut-like in form, as they are at the present time, for they have
not changed their ancient manner of living. I have often slept in their cabins, which are very
uncomfortable for civilized people, such as Frenchmen, although the Indians prefer them to
our houses. A proof of this is that, notwithstanding the length of time they have lived among
Europeans, they have not made up their mind to imitate them. This may possibly arise from idleness,
for it would cost them much labor as well as time and money were they to erect houses such
as ours. They are not rich enough to employ workmen, but in less than a day, without expense
and with little labor, they can build the house in which they live, sleep, cook, &c., and which
is much less trouble for them. They cut fifteen or twenty little trees of about the same size
as the arm of a youth of fifteen. From these they remove the branches, if there be any, and
make them into posts of nine or ten feet in length. They then plant them in the earth at equal
distances, in the form of a circle, placing them so that they may incline inwards, so that
the base is much larger than the summit. An opening is left at the apex sufficient to admit
of the escape of the smoke from the fire, which is always made in the middle of the cabin.
They then cover these poles with the bark of trees, leaving an open space for the entrance.
If they are not too poor, they cover this space with some pieces of old blankets. Their houses
are built in the shape of a sugar loaf, their bed is the naked earth, or some small branches
of trees, shreded fine, that serve as a mattrass. These cabins are never more than fifteen
or twenty feet in diameter.

Their cookery consists chiefly in suspending above their fire some eels or hares that they
have killed. These they eat almost before they have changed color, (what the Acadians term
boucare). There are some who have kettles, and who cook their fish in water, with potatoes,
which vegetable for some time past the Indians of Nova Scotia have planted, and which now forms
almost their principle nourishment. Many have boats in which they go codfishing. Although they
are generally rather idle, they occupy themselves nevertheless at work which requires attention
and a certain kind of application, such as making pretty boats out of bark and pretty boxes
of different shapes and colors, and elegant and highly ornamented baskets. For this ornamentation
they use the quills of the porcupine, an animal very common in America. These quills they die
black, red, blue, &c. They make these colors themselves by means of certain barks which they
boil in water. They then fasten the colored quills on the bark of their boxes in tasteful and
varied patterns. This is generally considered to be women's work. That of the men is heavier,
such as the making of churns and other wooden utensils for domestic use. They tan the skins
of the animals they kill and make their shoes or moccasins out of them. These are very thin
and do not last long. As, regards their dress, both men and women are oddly attired. Their
clothes are fashioned somewhat after the manner of ours, but the sewing is all on the outside
and the stitches are very large. The selvedge of the cloth, (which they are always careful
to secure when buying it) also shews on the outside, from their shoulders to their heels, and
is considered ornamental. The squaws' dresses are similar, with the addition of a hood, which,
when turned up, completely covers their head. The more elegant are ornamented with ribbons,
flowers, beads, &c. It is more particularly when they come to their devotions that they decorate
themselves thus. The men also at such times dress themselves with more than usual care. They
live very peaceably together, willingly lend to each other, and have almost everything in common.
If one receives a gift of anything, bread for example, all the others, men and women, regard
it as a present made to all, and are as grateful as if each had received it, consequently there
is no such thing as jealousy among them. A beautiful example for all Christians!

We will now speak of their dexterity. It is wonderful to see them manage their bark canoes,
which are extremely light. These little boats are narrow at both ends, a little wider in the
middle, and generally about nine or ten feet long. They move with surprising quickness in the
midst of the angry waves. Two persons are sufficient to propel them, and it can be done by
one. When fishing eels they stand at the end of their canoes and spear the eels with a long
stick, to the end of which is fastened a sharp pointed iron. This instrument they call higogue.
They are so long sighted that they can see to the bottom, of water twenty feet in depth. They
wait until the fish rise, then spear them as they go along. Their dexterity is such that they
seldom miss their aim. I have often gone with them; we have journeyed together by sea and by
land. When there are portages, that is to say lands to cross, in order to regain the sea or
lakes, they put their canoes on their heads and carry them to the water, and if they are overtaken
by rain or by bad weather, they turn them over and take shelter underneath them.

Without counting the Indians who in 1818 numbered many thousand souls in Nova Scotia and in
Cape Breton, which Province alone, is almost as large as France, there were at least twelve
hundred and fifty Catholic families scattered over these two large Provinces. At that time
we numbered only seven priests, two of whom were very infirm, which was the reason of my being
obliged to leave the Halifax mission and to repair to a place two hundred miles from there,
on the coast of the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and in the neighborhood of Cape Breton, This part
of Nova Scotia (to which I was sent by Bishop Burke on his return from his visit to Europe,
where he had been made Bishop of Sion and Vicar Apostolic of this Province), was without a
priest, although it contained a great number of Catholics. On my arrival I found three parishes
abandoned and deprived of the precious consolations of religion. Many children were brought
to me for baptism, and I had numerous confessions to hear, &c. They came from great distances
to take me to visit the sick who had ample time to die before I could get near them.

I was given especial charge of three parishes composed of Acadians and of natives of France,
to whom the English Government had given land, and who still remain in this country. The Acadian
portion of my charge having intermarried with the Indians, had become half savage, and had
adopted many of the Indian customs. [Footnote: Le peuple Acadien s'etant allie avec les Sauvages,
est devenu moitie Sauvage, et a pris beaucoup de leurs manieres.] There is a tribe of the Indians
called Micmacs in one of these three parishes that is named Pomquet (an Indian word) and I
was in a position to observe them as they were only ten miles from Tracadie, which was my ordinary
place of residence. They there possessed a considerable property given to them by the Government.
They cultivated it, planted potatoes and cut hay. When I arrived among them I found great disorder.
Many had given themselves up to drunkeness, and they were without a chief. One day I assembled
them together and spoke to them strongly about these matters. Since then I have seen with pleasure
that they have not opposed me, but that they have chosen among themselves a chief whom they
obey,--not all of them unfortunately, for there are some of them who are wicked and have always
given me much trouble; their love for brandy is their ruin.

