Thus Louisbourg was completely isolated, both by land and sea. It was stronger and more extensive
than during the first siege. It had a better governor, Drucour, a better and a larger garrison,
more food and ammunition, and, what it formerly lacked altogether, the support of a considerable
fleet. Drucour was a gallant soldier. His garrison numbered nearly 3,000 effective regulars,
with about 1,000 militiamen and some 500 Indians. Seventeen mortars and over two hundred cannon
were mounted on the walls, as well as on the outworks at the Royal, Island, and Lighthouse
Batteries. There were thirteen vessels in the fleet, mounting 590 guns, and carrying over 3,500
men. This made the French grand total about 800 guns and 8,000 men. But not all these were
really effective. Ships at anchor lose a good deal of their fighting value. Crews are less
efficient when ashore than when they are afloat; and the French ships were mostly fought at
anchor, while the crews were gradually landed for the defence of the crowded little town. Then,
the Indians were comparatively useless in a fort. The militia were not good soldiers anywhere.
Moreover, the three kinds of regulars--French, Canadian, and foreign--did not get on very well
together; while the fleet, as a whole, got on no better with the army as a whole.

The British amphibious force presented a striking contrast to this. Its naval and military
parts worked together like the two branches of one United Service. The Army and Navy naturally
understood each other better than the two services of less amphibious countries; and when a
statesman like Pitt and a first lord of the Admiralty like Anson were together at headquarters
there was no excuse for misunderstandings at the front. Boscawen and Amherst, both distinguished
members of distinguished Service families, were the best of colleagues. Most admirable of all,
perhaps, is a strange faculty she has shown for making one satisfied that her people should
remain perennially rather poor and unambitious and dull, and should even grow old without occasioning
us regret. With the deep under-drift of the writer's philosophy one may not be completely in accord,
but certainly it will worry nobody, while the unity and beauty of her methods hold one in willing
bondage from beginning to end.

This is real literature, and everyone should read it.

* * * * *
Without any very exceptional gifts as a story-teller Fleet-Surgeon
T.T. JEANS, R.N., scores heavily off most writers of boys' adventure
tales by having actually lived the life he describes. If for two months, then Quebec and New France
were safe until the following year.

Boscawen left England in February. Amherst followed separately. One of the three brigadier-generals
in Amherst's army was Wolfe, of whom we shall hear more presently. The rendezvous was Halifax,
where boat work and landing exercises were sedulously carried out by the troops. Towards the
end of May Boscawen sailed out of Halifax, though Amherst had not yet arrived. They met at
sea. The Dublin, which had brought Amherst across so slowly, then 'went very sickly into Halifax,'
while Amherst joined Boscawen, and the whole fleet and convoy bore away for Louisbourg. The
French had been expecting them for at least a month; as scouts kept appearing almost every
day, while Hardy's squadron of nine sail had been maintaining a sort of open blockade.

On the night of June 1 the French look-outs in Gabarus Bay saw more lights than usual to the
southward. Next morning Louisbourg was early astir, anxiously eager to catch the first glimpse
of this great destroying armada, which for several expectant hours lay invisible and dread
behind a curtain of dense fog. Then a light sea breeze came in from the Atlantic. The curtain
drew back at its touch. And there, in one white, enormous crescent, all round the deep-blue
offing, stood the mighty fleet, closing in for the final death-grip on its prey.

Nearly a whole week went by before the British landed. Each day the scouting boats and vessels
stood in as close as possible along the shore. But they always found the smashing surf too
high. At last, on the 8th, the whole army put off in three brigades of boats, supported by
the frigates, which fired at the French defences. All three landing-places were threatened
simultaneously, White Point, Flat Point, and Kennington Cove. These landing-places were, respectively,
one, two, and four miles west of Louisbourg. The intervening ground mostly hid them from the
ramparts, and they had to depend upon their own defences. Drucour had sent out two-thirds of
his garrison to oppose the landing. Each point was protected by artillery and entrenchments.
Eight guns were mounted and a thousand men stood guard over the quarter-mile of beach which
lay between the two little surf-lashed promontories of Kennington Cove. But Wolfe's brigade
made straight for shore. The French held their fire until the leading boats were well within
short musket-shot. Then they began so furiously that Wolfe, whose tall, lank figure was most
conspicuous as he stood up in the stern-sheets, waved his cane to make the boats sheer off.

It looked as if the first successful landing would have to be made elsewhere, a bitter disappointment
to this young and ardent brigadier, whose command included the pick of the grenadiers, light
infantry, and Highlanders. But three boatloads of light infantry pushed on against the inner
point of the cove. Perhaps their officers turned their blind eye on Wolfe's signal, as Nelson
did on Parker's recall at Copenhagen. But, whatever the reason, these three boats went in smash
against the rocks and put their men ashore, drenched to the skin. Here, for instance, in A Naval
Venture (BLACKIE) we do get the real thing, and boys would be well-advised to sample it and see
if it is not preferable to the kind of adventurous fiction produced so prolifically for their
amusement. He pushed his own boat through, jumped in waist-deep, and waded ashore.

This sudden change, quite unexpected by either friend or foe, greatly disconcerted the French.
They attacked Major Scott, who withstood them with a handful of men till reinforcements came
clambering up the rocks behind him. With these reinforcements came Wolfe, who formed the men
into line and carried the nearest battery with the bayonet. The remaining French, seeing that
Wolfe had effected a lodgment on their inner flank, were so afraid of being cut off from Louisbourg
that they ran back and round towards the next position at Flat Point. But before they reached
it they saw its own defenders running back, because the British were also landing at White
Point. Here too the defences were abandoned as soon as the little garrison found itself faced
by greatly superior numbers afloat and deserted by its fellow-garrisons ashore. The retreating
French kept up a sort of running fight till they got under the covering fire of Louisbourg,
when the pursuing British immediately drew off.

Considering the number of boats that were stove and the intensity of the first French fire,
the British loss was remarkably small, only one hundred and nine killed, wounded, and drowned.
The French loss was still less; but, in view of the difference between the respective grand
totals, it was a good deal heavier in proportion.

