The confinement of Fouquet was a little relieved before that of Lauzun. His wife and some officers
of the chateau of Pignerol had permission to see him, and to tell him the news of the day.
One of the first things he did was to tell them of this poor Puyguilhem, whom he had left young,
and on a tolerably good footing for his age, at the Court, and whose head was now completely
turned, his madness hidden within the prison walls; but what was his astonishment when they
all assured him that what he had heard was perfectly true!  He did not return to the subject,
and was tempted to believe them all mad together.  It was some time before he was persuaded.

In his turn, Lauzun was taken from his dungeon, and had a chamber, and soon after had the same
liberty that had been given to Fouquet; finally, they were allowed to see each other as much
as they liked.  I have never known what displeased Lauzun, but he left Pignerol the enemy of
Fouquet, and did him afterwards all the harm he could, and after his death extended his animosity
to his family.

During the long imprisonment of Lauzun, Madame de Nogent, one of his sisters, took such care
of his revenues that he left Pignerol extremely rich.

Mademoiselle, meanwhile, was inconsolable at this long and harsh imprisonment, and took all
possible measures to deliver Lauzun.  The King at last resolved to turn this to the profit
of the Duc du Maine, and to make Mademoiselle pay dear for the release of her lover.  He caused
a proposition to be made to her, which was nothing less than to assure to the Duc du Maine,
and his posterity after her death, the countdom of Eu, the Duchy of Aumale, and the principality
of Domfes!  The gift was enormous, not only as regards the value, but the dignity and extent
of these three slices.  Moreover, she had given the first two to Lauzun, with the Duchy of
Saint-Forgeon, and the fine estate of Thiers, in Auvergne, when their marriage was broken off,
and she would have been obliged to make him renounce Eu and Aumale before she could have disposed
of them in favour of the Duc du Maine.  Mademoiselle could not, make up her mind to this yoke,
or to strip Lauzun of such considerable benefits. She was importuned to the utmost, finally
menaced by the ministers, now Louvois, now Colbert.  With the latter she was better pleased,
because he had always been on good terms with Lauzun, and because he handled her more gently
than Louvois, who, an enemy of her lover, always spoke in the harshest terms.  Mademoiselle
unceasingly felt that the King did not like her, and that he had never pardoned her the Orleans
journey, still less her doings at the Bastille, when she fired its cannons upon the King's
troops, and saved thus M. le Prince and his people, at the combat of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine.
Feeling, therefore, that the King, hopelessly estranged from her, and consenting to give liberty
to Lauzun only from his passion for elevating and enriching his bastards, would not cease to
persecute her until she had consented--despairing of better terms, she agreed to the gift,
with the most bitter tears and complaints.  But it was found that, in order to make valid the
renunciation of Lauzun, he must be set at liberty, so that it was pretended he had need of
the waters of Bourbon, and Madame de Montespan also, in order that they might confer together
upon this affair.

Lauzun was taken guarded to Bourbon by a detachment of musketeers, commanded by Maupertuis.
Lauzun saw Madame de Montespan at Bourbon; but he was so indignant at the terms proposed to
him as the condition of his liberty, that after long disputes he would hear nothing more on
the subject, and was reconducted to Pignerol as he had been brought.

This firmness did not suit the King, intent upon the fortune of his well- beloved bastard.
He sent Madame de Nogent to Pignerol; then Borin (a friend of Lauzun, and who was mixed up
in all his affairs), with menaces and promises.  Borin, with great trouble, obtained the consent
of Lauzun, and brought about a second journey to Bourbon for him and Madame de Montespan, with
the same pretext of the waters.  Lauzun was conducted there as before, and never pardoned Maupertuis
the severe pedantry of his exactitude.  This last journey was made in the autumn of 1680. 
Lauzun consented to everything.  Madame de Montespan returned triumphant. Maupertuis and his
musketeers took leave of Lauzun at Bourbon, whence he had permission to go and reside at Angers;
and immediately after, this exile was enlarged, so that he had the liberty of all Anjou and
Lorraine. The consummation of the affair was deferred until the commencement of February, 1681,
in order to give him a greater air of liberty.  Thus Lauzun had from Mademoiselle only Saint-Forgeon
and Thiers, after having been on the point of marrying her, and of succeeding to all her immense
wealth.  The Duc du Maine was instructed to make his court to Mademoiselle, who always received
him very coldly, and who saw him take her arms, with much vexation, as a mark of his gratitude,
in reality for the Sake of the honour it brought him; for the arms were those of Gaston, which
the Comte de Toulouse afterwards took, not for the same reason, but under pretext of conformity
with his brother; and they have handed them down to their children.

Lauzun, who had been led to expect much more gentle treatment, remained four years in these
two provinces, of which he grew as weary as was Mademoiselle at his absence.  She cried out
in anger against Madame de Montespan and her son; complained loudly that after having been
so pitilessly fleeced, Lauzun was still kept removed from her; and made such a stir that at
last she obtained permission for him to return to Paris, with entire liberty; on condition,
however, that he did not approach within two leagues of any place where the King might be.

Lauzun came, therefore, to Paris, and assiduously visited his benefactors.  The weariness of
this kind of exile, although so softened, led him into high play, at which he was extremely
successful; always a good and sure player, and very straightforward, he gained largely. Monsieur,
who sometimes made little visits to Paris, and who played very high, permitted him to join
the gambling parties of the Palais Royal, then those of Saint-Cloud.  Lauzun passed thus several
years, gaining and lending much money very nobly; but the nearer he found himself to the Court,
and to the great world, the more insupportable became to him the prohibition he had received.

Finally, being no longer able to bear it, he asked the King for permission to go to England,
where high play was much in vogue.  He obtained it, and took with him a good deal of money,
which secured him an open-armed reception in London, where he was not less successful than
in Paris.

James II., then reigning, received Lauzun with distinction.  But the Revolution was already
brewing.  It burst after Lauzun had been in England eight or ten months.  It seemed made expressly
for him, by the success he derived from it, as everybody is aware.  James II., no longer knowing
what was to become of him--betrayed by his favourites and his ministers, abandoned by all his
nation, the Prince of Orange master of all hearts, the troops, the navy, and ready to enter
London--the unhappy monarch confided to Lauzun what he held most dear--the Queen and the Prince
of Wales, whom Lauzun happily conducted to Calais.  The Queen at once despatched a courier
to the King, in the midst of the compliments of which she insinuated that by the side of her
joy at finding herself and her son in security under his protection, was her grief at not daring
to bring with her him to whom she owed her safety.

The reply of the King, after much generous and gallant sentiment, was, that he shared this
obligation with her, and that he hastened to show it to her, by restoring the Comte de Lauzun
to favour.

In effect, when the Queen presented Lauzun to the King, in the Palace of Saint-Germain (where
the King, with all the family and all the Court, came to meet her), he treated him as of old,
gave him the privilege of the grandes entrees, and promised him a lodging at Versailles, which
he received immediately after.  From that day he always went to Marly, and to Fontainebleau,
and, in fact, never after quitted the Court.  It may be imagined what was the delight of such
an ambitious courtier, so completely re-established in such a sudden and brilliant manner.
He had also a lodging in the chateau of Saint-Germain, chosen as the residence of this fugitive
Court, at which King James soon arrived.

Lauzun, like a skilful courtier, made all possible use of the two Courts, and procured for
himself many interviews with the King, in which he received minor commissions.  Finally, he
played his cards so well that the King permitted him to receive in Notre Dame, at Paris, the
Order of the Garter, from the hands of the King of England, accorded to him at his second passage
into Ireland the rank of lieutenant-general of his auxiliary army, and permitted at the same
time that he should be of the staff of the King of England, who lost Ireland during the same
campaign at the battle of the Boyne. Dirigible balloons have thrown bombs at night upon Antwerp.
It cannot be maintained by those who were in the balloons that they were trying to hit the
forts, as the forts are outside the boundaries of the town, and a good distance outside them
as well. Nor could the bombs thrown have had any effect upon the forts, which are even stronger
than those of Liége. There was no warning of this bombardment, a fact which constitutes a violation
of Article 26 of the Fourth Convention of The Hague, and more than
a dozen people were killed, all of them non-combatants and several
of them women and children.

The town of Louvain, with its 42,000 inhabitants, was one of the
centres of Belgian culture. It had no mercy shown to it and has been
nearly obliterated.

He enjoyed, during the rest of his long life, intimacy with the King, distinction at the Court,
great consideration, extreme abundance, kept up the state of a great nobleman, with one of
the most magnificent houses of the Court, and the best table, morning and evening, most honourably
frequented, and at Paris the same, after the King's death: All this did not content him.  He
could only approach the King with outside familiarity; he felt that the mind and the heart
of that monarch were on their guard against him, and in an estrangement that not all his art
nor all his application could ever overcome.  This is what made him marry my sister-in-law,
hoping thus to re-establish himself in serious intercourse with the King by means of the army
that M. le Marechal de Lorge commanded in Germany; but his project failed, as has been seen.
This is what made him bring about the marriage of the Duc de Lorge with the daughter of Chamillart,
in order to reinstate himself by means of that ministry; but without success.  This is what
made him undertake the journey to Aix- la-Chapelle, under the pretext of the waters, to obtain
information which might lead to private interviews with the King, respecting the peace; but
he was again unsuccessful.  All his projects failed; in fact, he unceasingly sorrowed, and
believed himself in profound disgrace--even saying so.  He left nothing undone in order to
pay his court, at bottom with meanness, but externally with dignity; and he every year celebrated
a sort of anniversary of his disgrace, by extraordinary acts, of which ill-humour and solitude
were oftentimes absurdly the fruit.  He himself spoke of it, and used to say that he was not
rational at the annual return of this epoch, which was stronger than he.  He thought he pleased
the King by this refinement of attention, without perceiving he was laughed at.

By nature he was extraordinary in everything, and took pleasure in affecting to be more so,
even at home, and among his valets.  He counterfeited the deaf and the blind, the better to
see and hear without exciting suspicion, and diverted himself by laughing at fools, even the
most elevated, by holding with them a language which had no sense.  His manners were measured,
reserved, gentle, even respectful; and from his low and honeyed tongue, came piercing remarks,
overwhelming by their justice, their force, or their satire, composed of two or three words,
perhaps, and sometimes uttered with an air of naivete or of distraction, as though he was not
thinking of what he said.  Thus he was feared, without exception, by everybody, and with many
acquaintances he had few or no friends, although he merited them by his ardor in seeing everybody
as much as he could, and by his readiness in opening his purse.  He liked to gather together
foreigners of any distinction, and perfectly did the honours of the Court.  But devouring ambition
poisoned his life; yet he was a very good and useful relative.

During the summer which followed the death of Louis XIV. there was a review of the King's household
troops, led by M. le Duc d'Orleans, in the plain by the side of the Bois de Boulogne.  Passy,
where M. de Lauzun had a pretty house, is on the other side.  Madame de Lauzun was there with
company, and I slept there the evening before the review.  Madame de Poitiers, a young widow,
and one of our relatives, was there too, and was dying to see the review, like a young person
who has seen nothing, but who dares not show herself in public in the first months of her mourning.

How she could be taken was discussed in the company, and it was decided that Madame de Lauzun
could conduct her a little way, buried in her carriage.  In the midst of the gaiety of this
party, M. de Lauzun arrived from Paris, where he had gone in the morning.  He was told what
had just been decided.  As soon as he learnt it he flew into a fury, was no longer master of
himself, broke off the engagement, almost foaming at the mouth; said the most disagreeable
things to his wife in the strongest, the harshest, the most insulting, and the most foolish
terms.  She gently wept; Madame de Poitiers sobbed outright, and all the company felt the utmost
embarrassment.  The evening appeared an age, and the saddest refectory repast a gay meal by
the side of our supper.  He was wild in the midst of the profoundest silence; scarcely a word
was said.  He quitted the table, as usual, at the fruit, and went to bed.  An attempt was made
to say something afterwards by way of relief, but Madame de Lauzun politely and wisely stopped
the conversation, and brought out cards in order to turn the subject.

The next morning I went to M. de Lauzun, in order to tell him in plain language my opinion
of the scene of the previous evening.  I had not the time.  As soon as he saw me enter he extended
his arms, and cried that I saw a madman, who did not deserve my visit, but an asylum; passed
the strongest eulogies upon his wife (which assuredly she merited), said he was not worthy
of her, and that he ought to kiss the ground upon which she walked; overwhelmed himself with
blame; then, with tears in his eyes, said he was more worthy of pity than of anger; that he
must admit to me all his shame and misery; that he was more than eighty years of age; that
he had neither children nor survivors; that he had been captain of the guards; that though
he might be so again, he should be incapable of the function; that he unceasingly said this
to himself, and that yet with all this he could not console himself for having been so no longer
during the many years since he had lost his post; that he had never been able to draw the dagger
from his heart; that everything which recalled the memory of the past made him beside himself,
and that to hear that his wife was going to take Madame de Poitiers to see a review of the
body-guards, in which he now counted for nothing, had turned his head, and had rendered him
wild to the extent I had seen; that he no longer dared show himself before any one after this
evidence of madness; that he was going to lock himself up in his chamber, and that he threw
himself at my feet in order to conjure me to go and find his wife, and try to induce her to
take pity on and pardon a senseless old man, who was dying with grief and shame. This admission,
so sincere and so dolorous to make, penetrated me.  I sought only to console him and compose
him.  The reconciliation was not difficult; we drew him from his chamber, not without trouble,
and he evinced during several days as much disinclination to show himself, as I was told, for
I went away in the evening, my occupations keeping me very busy.

I have often reflected, apropos of this, upon the extreme misfortune of allowing ourselves
to be carried away by the intoxication of the world, and into the formidable state of an ambitious
man, whom neither riches nor comfort, neither dignity acquired nor age, can satisfy, and who,
instead of tranquilly enjoying what he possesses, and appreciating the happiness of it, exhausts
himself in regrets, and in useless and continual bitterness.  But we die as we have lived,
and 'tis rare it happens otherwise.  This madness respecting the captaincy of the guards so
cruelly dominated M. de Lauzun, that he often dressed himself in a blue coat, with silver lace,
which, without being exactly the uniform of the captain of, the body-guards, resembled it closely,
and would have rendered him ridiculous if he had not accustomed people to it, made himself
feared, and risen above all ridicule.

With all his scheming and cringing he fell foul of everybody, always saying some biting remark
with dove-like gentleness.  Ministers, generals, fortunate people and their families, were
the most ill-treated. He had, as it were, usurped the right of saying and doing what he pleased;
nobody daring to be angry with him.  The Grammonts alone were excepted.  He always remembered
the hospitality and the protection he had received from them at the outset of his life.  He
liked them; he interested himself in them; he was in respect before them.  Old Comte Grammont
took advantage of this and revenged the Court by the sallies he constantly made against Lauzun,
who never returned them or grew angry, but gently avoided him.  He always did a good deal for
the children of his sisters.

During the plague the Bishop of Marseilles had much signalised himself by wealth spent and
danger incurred.  When the plague had completely passed away, M. de Lauzun asked M. le Duc
d'Orleans for an abbey for the Bishop. The Regent gave away some livings soon after, and forgot
M. de Marseilles.  Lauzun pretended to be ignorant of it, and asked M. le Duc d'Orleans if
he had had the goodness to remember him.  The Regent was embarrassed.  The Duc de Lauzun, as
though to relieve him from his embarrassment, said, in a gentle and respectful tone, "Monsieur,
he will do better another time," and with this sarcasm rendered the Regent dumb, and went away
smiling.  The story got abroad, and M. le Duc d'Orleans repaired his forgetfulness by the bishopric
of Laon, and upon the refusal of M. de Marseilles to change, gave him a fat abbey.

