FROM A GIRL'S POINT OF VIEW

BY

LILIAN BELL

1897

       *       *       *       *       *

BY LILIAN BELL

THE LOVE AFFAIRS OF AN OLD MAID. 16mo, Cloth, Ornamental, Uncut Edges and Gilt Top, $1 25.

... The love affairs of an old maid are not her own, but other people's, and in this volume
we have the love trials and joys of a variety of persons described and analyzed.... The peculiarity
of this book is that each type is perfectly distinct, clear, and interesting.... Altogether
the book is by far the best of those recently written on the tender passion.--Cincinnati Commercial-Gazette.

THE UNDER SIDE OF THINGS. A Novel.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dedicated

WITH MANY APPREHENSIONS TO

THE DULL READER

WHO WILL INSIST UPON TAKING THIS BOOK LITERALLY

CONTENTS

THE UNTRAINED MAN UNDER THIRTY-FIVE

THE PHILOSOPHY OF CLOTHES

WOMAN'S RIGHTS IN LOVE

MEN AS LOVERS

LOVE-MAKING AS A FINE ART

GIRLS AND OTHER GIRLS

ON THE SUBJECT OF HUSBANDS

A FEW MEN WHO BORE US:

  THE SELF-MADE MAN

  THE DYSPEPTIC

  THE TOO-ACCURATE MAN

  THE IRRESISTIBLE MAN

  THE STUPID MAN

THE NEW WOMAN

THE UNTRAINED MAN UNDER THIRTY-FIVE

 "Since we deserved the name of friends,
    And thine effect so lives in me,
    A part of mine may live in thee,
  And move thee on to noble ends."

Every woman has had, at some time in her life, an experience with man in the raw. In reality,
one cannot set down with any degree of accuracy the age when his rawness attacks him, or the
time when he has got the last remnant of it out of his system. But a close study of the complaint,
and the necessity for pigeon-holing everything and everybody, lead one to declare that somewhere
in the vicinity of the age of thirty-five man emerges from his rawness and becomes a part of
trained humanity--a humanity composed of men and women trained in the art of living together. 

The actual age and origin of the two have, of course, occupied many modern scholars; and the
favourite opinion seems to be that Dictys may have been originally written by some Greek about
the time of Nero (the Latin translation cannot well be earlier than the fourth century and may be
much later), while Dares may possibly be as late as the twelfth. Neither book is of the very
slightest interest intrinsically. Dictys (the full title of whose book is Ephemeris Belli Trojani)
is not only the longer but the better written of the two.

"But an art of so much practical moment deserves a little more consideration. It should not
be taught by chance, or in fragments, but duly deployed, expounded, and enforced. It is of
far more pressing importance, for example, than the art of playing the piano or the violin,
and is quite as difficult to learn.

"It is written, 'It is not good that man should be alone'; but, on the other hand, it is often
far from good to be with him. A docile cat is preferable, a mongoose, or even a canary. Indeed,
for want of proper instruction, a large number of the human race, as they are known in this
damp and foggy island, are 'gey ill to live wi',' and no one would attempt it but for charity
and the love of God."

Now who but women are responsible for the training of men? If the mother has neglected her
obvious duty in training her son to be a livable portion of humanity, who but the girls must
take up her lost opportunities? It is with the class of men whose mothers have neglected to
train them in the art of living that we have to deal; the man with whom feminine influence--refining,
broadening, softening, graciously smoothing out soul-wrinkles, and generously polishing off
sharp mental corners--has had no part. It need not necessarily mean men who have not encountered
feminine influence, but it does mean those who never have yielded to it. The natural and to-be-looked-for
conceit of youth may have been the barrier which prevented their yielding. There is a time
when the youth of twenty knows more than any one on earth could teach him, and more than he
ever will know again; a time when, no matter how kind his heart, he is incased in a mental
haughtiness before which plain Wisdom is dumb. But a time will come when the keenness of some
girl's stiletto of wit will prick the empty bubble of his flamboyant egoism, and he will, for
the first time, learn that he is but an untrained man under thirty-five.

This elastic classification does not obtain with either geniuses or fools. It deals with the
average man as the average girl knows him, and may refer to every man in her acquaintance or
only to one. It certainly must refer to one! Misery loves company to such an extent that I
could not bear to think that there was any girl living who did not occasionally have to grapple
with the problem of at least one man in the raw, if only for her own discipline.

You cannot argue with the untrained man under thirty-five. In fact, I never argue with anybody,
either man or woman, because women are not reasonable beings and men are too reasonable. I
never am willing to follow a chain of reasoning to its logical conclusion, because, if I do,
men can make me admit so many things that are not true. I abhor a syllogism. Alas, how often
have I picked my cautious way through three-quarters of one, only to sit down at the critical
moment, declaring I would not go another step, and then to hear some argumentative man cry,
"But you admitted all previous steps. Don't you know that this naturally must follow?" Well,
perhaps it does follow, only I don't believe it is true. It may be very clever of the men to
reason, and perhaps I am very stupid not to be able to admit the truth of their conclusions,
but I feel like declaring with Josh Billings, "I'd rather not know so much than to know so
much that ain't so."

Conversation with the untrained man under thirty-five is equally impossible, because he never
converses; he only talks. And your chief accomplishment of being a good listener is entirely
thrown away on him, because a mere talker never cares whether you listen or not as long as
you do not interrupt him. He only wants the floor and the sound of his own voice. It is the
trained man over thirty-five who can converse and who wishes you to respond.

The untrained man desires to be amused. The trained man wishes to amuse. A man under thirty-five
is in this world to be made happy. The man over thirty-five tries to make you happy.

There is no use of uttering a protest. You simply must wait, and let life take it out of him.
The man under thirty-five is being trained in a thousand ways every day that he lives. Some
learn more quickly than others. It depends on the type of man and on the length of time he
is willing to remain in the raw.

You can do little to help him, if you are the first girl to take a hand at him. You can but
prepare him to be a little more amenable to the next girl. His mind is not on you. It is centred
on himself. You are only an entity to him, not an individual. He cares nothing for your likes
and dislikes, your cares or hopes or fears. He only wishes you to be pretty and well dressed.
Have a mind if you will. He will not know it. Have a heart and a soul. They do not concern
him, because he cannot see them. He likes to have you tailor-made. You are a Girl to him. That's
all. The eyes of the untrained man under thirty-five are never taken off himself. They are
always turned in. He is studying himself first and foremost, and the world at large is interesting
to him only inasmuch as it bears relation to himself as the pivotal point. He fully indorses
Pope's line, "The proper study of mankind is man," and he is that man. Join in his pursuit
if you will; show the wildest enthusiasm in his golf record or how many lumps of sugar he takes
in his coffee, and he will evince neither surprise nor gratitude for your interest. You are
only showing your good taste.

Try to talk to the untrained man under thirty-five upon any subject except himself. Bait him
with different topics of universal interest, and try to persuade him to leave his own point
of view long enough to look through the eyes of the world. And then notice the hopeless persistence
with which he avoids your dexterous efforts and mentally lies down to worry his Ego again,
like a dog with a bone.

The conceit of one of these men is the most colossal specimen of psychological architecture
in existence. As a social study, when I have him under the microscope, I can enjoy this. I
revel in it, just as I do in a view of the ocean or the heavens at night--anything so vast
that I cannot see to the end of it. It suggests eternity or space. But oh! what I have suffered
from a mental contact with this phase of him in society! Sometimes he really is ignorant--has
no brains at all--and then my suffering is lingering. Sometimes he really knows a great deal--has
the making of a man in him, only it lies fallow for want of training--and then my suffering
is acute. When success--business or social or athletic or literary or artistic--comes to the
untrained man under thirty-five, it comes pitifully near being his ruin. The adulation of the
world is more intoxicating and more deadly than to drink absinthe out of a stein; more insidious
than opium; more fatal than poison. It unsettles the steadiest brain and feeds the too-ravenous
Ego with a food which at first he deemed nectar and ambrosia, but which he soon comes to feel
is the staff of life, and no more than he deserves. With success should come the determination,
be you man or woman, to fall upon your knees every day and pray Heaven for strength to keep
from believing what people tell you, so that you still may be bearable to your friends and
livable to your family.

I know that all this will fall unkindly upon the ears of many a worthy man under thirty-five
whose charm is still in embryo, and that, unless he is very clever, he will be mortally offended,
and never believe my solemn assertion that I am the stanchest friend the man of possibilities
has. Let him take care how he resents my amiable brutality, or how he denounces me as his enemy,
for if I were not interested in the untrained man under thirty-five I wouldn't bother with
him, would I?

I know, too, that a diplomatic feminine contingency will raise a howl of protest, and will
read this aloud to men under thirty-five for the express purpose of disclaiming all complicity
with such heterodox views, and doubtless will be able to make the men believe them. Tactful
girls are a necessity, and I approve of them. I do not in the least mind their disclaiming
my views to specific men, especially if I can catch their eye for one subtle moment when the
men are not looking. On this subject there is a certain delicately veiled, comprehending, soul-satisfying,
mental wink going the rounds of the girls, indicating our comradeship and unanimity of thought
quite as understandingly as the fraternal grip stands for fellowship among masons. We girls
have been thinking these things for a long time, and, with this declaration of independence,
the shackles will fall from many a girl's soul, because another girl has dared to speak out
in meeting.

Of course, I know, too, that girls with nice brothers and cousins and husbands under thirty-five
will also offer violent protest. I am perfectly willing. Doubtless their feminine influence
has circumvented nature to such an extent that no one would suspect that their men were under
thirty-five. I only beg of them to remember that I am not discussing girl-trained men or widowers.
Both of these types are as near perfection as a man can become.

A man whom girls have trained is really modest. Even at twenty he does not think that he knows
it all. He is willing to admit that his father and mother have brains, and that thirty years'
experience entitles them to a hearing. He also is willing to give the girls a show, to humor
them, to find them interesting as studies, but never to claim to understand them. In short,
he has many of the charming qualities of the man over thirty-five and the widower. That is
the man who is girl-trained. But Heaven help the man who is girl-spoiled.

Far be it from me to say that the untrained man under thirty-five, at his worst, is of no use
in this world. He is excellent for a two-step. I have used a number of them very successfully
in this way. But I know the awful thought has already pierced some people's brains--what if
the man under thirty-five does not dance?

Sometimes an untrained man under thirty-five will actually have the audacity to say to me that
he takes small pleasure in society because the girls he meets are so silly, and he must use
small-talk in order to meet them on their own ground. I am aghast at his temerity, as he, too,
will be when he has heard our side of the subject. We girls never have allowed ourselves the
luxury of vindicating ourselves, or refuting this charge. It is the clever girl who suffers
most of all--not the brilliant, meteoric girl--but just the ordinarily clever girl, as other
girls know her. It is this sort of a girl who drags upon my sympathies, because she occupies
an anomalous position.

Being a real woman, she likes to be liked. She wishes to please men. We all do. But what kind
of men are we to please? Untrained men under thirty-five? Owing to the horrible prevalence
of these men, some girls become neither fish nor flesh nor good red herring. They see their
silly, pink-cheeked sisters followed and admired. They know either how shallow these girls
are or how cleverly hypocritical. Clever girls are also human. They love to go about and wear
pretty clothes, and dance, and be admired quite as much as anybody.

The result is that they adopt the only course left to them, and, bringing themselves down to
the level of the men, feign a frivolity and a levity which occasionally call forth from a thinking
man a criticism which is, in a sense, totally undeserved. What will not the untrained man under
thirty-five have to answer for on the Day of Judgment!

It is of no use to argue about this state of things. Facts are facts. Men make no secret of
the kind of women they want us to be. We get preached at from pulpits and lectured at from
platforms and written about by "The Saunterer" and "The Man About Town" and "The One Who Knows
It All," telling us how to be womanly, how to look to please men, how to behave to please men,
and how to save our souls to please men, until, if we were not a sweet, amiable set, we would
rebel as a sex and declare that we thought we were lovely just the way we were, and that we
were not going to change for anybody.

You lords of creation ought to be very complaisant, or else very much ashamed of yourselves.
You send in an order: "The kind of girl that I like is a Methodist without bangs." And some
nice girl begins to look up Methodist tenets and buys invisible hairpins and side combs. Or
you say, "Give me an athletic girl." And, presto! some girl who would much rather read buys
a wheel, and learns golf, and lets out the waists to her gowns, and revels in tan and freckles.
We do what you men want us to. And, then, when you complain about our lack of brains, that
we cannot discuss current events, and that you have to give us society small-talk, I feel like
saying: "Well, whose fault is it? If you demand brains, we will cultivate them. If you want
good looks, we will try to scare up some. If you want nobility, we will let you know how much
we have concealed about us."

Often it is not that we are not secretly much more of women, and better and cleverer women,
than you think us. But there is no call for such wares, so we lay character and brain on the
shelves to mildew, and fill the show-windows with confectionery and illusion. We supply the
demand. We always have supplied it, and we always will.

Of course, some of us get very much disgusted with the débutantes. But, aside from the great
superiority they have over girls with thinking powers (in regard to the number of men who admire
them, for all men admire cooing girls with dimples)--aside from this, I say, there is something
to be said on their behalf. Don't you believe, you dear, unsuspicious men, who dote upon their
pliability and the trustfulness of their innocent, limpid blue or brown-eyed gaze, which meets
your own with such implied flattery to your superior strength and intelligence--don't you believe
for one moment that the simple little dears do not know exactly the part they are playing.
They are twice as clever as the cleverest of you. They feel that they are needed just as they
are. The fashionable schools are turning them out every year exactly as the untrained men under
thirty-five would wish them to be. They know this. Therefore they remain as art has made them.
Feeling themselves admired by the class of men they most wish to attract, they have no incentive
to improve.

And yet, I suppose, untrained men under thirty-five have their use in the world, aside from
the part they play in the discipline of discriminating young women. Girls even marry these
men. Lovely girls, too. Clever girls--girls who know a hundred times more than their husbands,
and are ten times finer grained. I wonder if they love them, if they are satisfied with them,
if ennui of the soul is not a bitter thing to bear?

I am always wondering why girls marry them. Every week brings me knowledge that some lovely
girl I know has found another man under thirty-five, or that some of my men friends of that
persuasion have married out-of-town girls. It does not surprise me so much when girls from
another city marry them. Most men do not like to write letters, and visits are only for over
Sunday.

Men are always saying, "Well, why don't you tell us the kind of men you would like us to be?"
And their attitude when they say it is with their thumbs in the arm-holes of their waistcoats.
When a man is thoroughly satisfied with himself he always expands his chest.

There is something very funny to me in that question, because I suppose they really think they
would change to please us. I do not mind talking about it, because I am sociable, and I like
conversation; but I never for a moment dream that they will do it. They intend to, and their
inclination is always to please us, even to spoil us; but they either cannot or will not change;
and they think if they can refuse pleasantly, and mentally chuck us under the chin and make
us smile, that they have succeeded in getting our minds off a troublesome subject.

Of course, it is partly our fault that we do not insist, but no one wants to be disagreeable.
Therefore we choose personal discomfort for ourselves rather than to demand radical changes
in the men, which might bring on contention.

But women wish to please men, aside from their power of winning them. Whereas if men can get
the girls without any change on their part, they consider themselves a howling success. But
they might be a little bit surprised if they could read the minds of these very wives whom
they have won, whose life-work often may be only to improve them so that they will make some
other woman the kind of a husband they should have made at first, and then to lie down and die.

So let men beware how they criticise us unfavorably, no matter what their ages, for the truth
of the matter is that, be we frivolous or serious, vain or sensible, clever or stupid, rich
or poor, we are what the American man has made us. We are supremely grateful to him for the
most part, for he has literally made us what we are by the sweat of his brow. But let him beware
how he cavils at his own handiwork. 'Tis not for the untrained man under thirty-five to complain
of us, when now he knows why we are so.

"I'm not denyin' that women are foolish," says George Eliot. "God Almighty made 'em to match
the men."

THE PHILOSOPHY OF CLOTHES

 "Last night in blue my little love was dressed;
    And as she walked the room in maiden grace,
    I looked into her fair and smiling face.
  And said that blue became my darling best.
  But when, this morn, a spotless virgin vest
    And robe of white did the blue one displace,
    She seemed a pearl-tinged-cloud, and I was--space!
  She filled my soul as cloud-shapes fill the West.

 "And so it is that, changing day by day--
    Changing her robe, but not her loveliness--
  Whether the gown be blue or white or gray,
    I deem that one her most becoming dress.
  The truth is this: In any robe or way,
    I love her just the same, and cannot love her less!"

If you are interested in the spectacle of letting people paint their own portraits, at the
same time entirely unconscious that they are doing so, ask a number of women and girls whether
they dress to please men or other women, and then listen carefully to what they say and watch
their faces well while they are saying it. Most of the girls will say they dress to please
women; and the reason I ask you to watch their faces is that you may see the subtle changes
going on by which they persuade themselves that they are telling the truth. Women--nice, sweet
women, the kind we know--seldom tell a real untruth. But they have a way of persuading themselves
that what they are about to say is the truth. Women must believe in themselves before they
can hope to make other people believe in them; therefore they have themselves to persuade first
of all. Now, when men are going to utter an untruth they never care whether they believe it
or not, as long as they can make other people believe it. And the so-called brutal honesty
of man is only brutal want of tact. That poor, patient, misused word, "honesty"! How sick it
must get of its abuse!

Yes, girls really believe, I suppose, that they dress for other girls. But they do not. They
dress for men. And only experience will teach them the highest wisdom in the matter. But that
they cannot acquire until they believe that only another woman will know just how well they
are dressed, and, above all, whether Doucet turned them out, or a dress-maker in the house
at two dollars a day.

Men only take in the effect. Women know how the effect is produced. Of course, now I am speaking
of the general run of men and women: neither the man who clerked at Cash & Silk's nor the one
who pays his wife's bills in Paris, but the man in his native state of charming ignorance of
materials; the man who always suggests a "gusset" as a remedy for too scant a gown, who calls
insertion "tatting," and who, in setting out for the opera, will tell his wife to put on her
"bonnet and shawl," although she may have on point-lace and diamonds. In his more modern aspect
he tells you that a girl at the Junior Promenade had on a blue dress with feathers around her
neck--which you must translate into meaning anything from blue satin to organdie, and that
between dances she wore a feather boa.

It is the effect only that men take in; and when a man goes into ecstasies over a gown of pale
green on a hot day just because you look so cool and fresh in it, when you know that you paid
but forty cents a yard for it, and only nods when you show him your velvet and ermine wrap,
which cost you two hundred dollars, I would just like to ask you if it pays to dress for him.
Women know this from a sorrowful experience. Girls have to learn it for themselves. A ball-dress
of white tarlatan, made up over white paper cambric, with a white sash, will satisfy a man
quite as well as a Paris muslin trimmed with a hundred dollars' worth of Valenciennes lace
and made up over silk. Most of them would never know the difference.

I do not know whether to be sorry for these men or not. It must be lovely not to agonize and
plan and worry to have everything the best of its kind. I would like to take in only the effect,
and never know why I was pleased. Too much analysis is death to unmitigated rapture. You always
are haunted by knowing exactly what is lacking, and just how it could be remedied. But these
dear men are singularly deluded in many ways, and upon these delusions clever women play, as
a master plays upon an organ. And young girls, who have not had time to study into the philosophy
of it--how should the poor things know that clothes have any philosophy?--as usual, have to
suffer for it.

One of these delusions is the "simple white muslin" delusion. When a man speaks of a "simple
white muslin" in the softly admiring tone which he generally adopts to go with it, he means
anything on earth in the line of a thin, light stuff which produces in his mind the effect
of youth and innocence. A ball-dress or a cotton morning-gown is to him a "simple white muslin."

Now a word with you, you dear, unsophisticated man. I have heard you, with the sound of your
hundred-and-fifty-dollar-a-month salary ringing in your ears, gurgle and splash about a girl
who wears "simple white muslins" to balls; and I have heard you set down, as extravagant, and
too rich for your purse, the girl who wears silk. There is no more extravagant or troublesome
gown in the world than what you call a "simple white muslin." In the first place, it never
is muslin, unless it is Paris muslin, which is no joke, if you are thinking of paying for it
yourself, as it necessitates a silk lining, which costs more than the outside. If it is trimmed
with lace, that would take as much of your salary as the coal for all winter would come to.
If trimmed with ribbons, they must be changed often to freshen the gown, whose only beauty
is its freshness. Deliver me from a soiled or stringy white party-dress! If it can be worn
five times during the winter, the girl is either a careful dancer or else a wallflower. In
either case, after every wearing she must have it pressed out and put away as daintily as if
it were egg-shells, all of which is the greatest nuisance on earth. Often such a gown is torn
all to pieces the first time it is worn. Scores of "simple white muslin" ball-gowns at a hundred
dollars apiece are only worn once or twice.

Now take the "extravagant" girl with her flowered taffeta silk, or plain satin, or brocade
dress. There is at once the effect of richness and elegance. No matter how sweet and pretty
she is, you at once decide that you never could afford to dress her. But that taffeta cost,
perhaps, only a dollar a yard. The satin, possibly a dollar and a half. They require almost
no trimming, because the material is so handsome and the effect must be as simple as possible.
Such a gown never need be lined with silk unless you wish to do it. Many a girl gets up such
a gown for fifty or sixty dollars. And then think of the service that there is in it. It does
not tear, it does not crush. When she comes home she looks as fresh as when she started. When
it soils at the edge of the skirt, she has it cleaned, and there she is with a new dress again.
Do you call that extravagant? Why, my dear sirs, it is only the very rich who can afford to
wear "simple white muslins!"

There is a hollowness about having a man praise your gowns when you know he doesn't know what
he is talking about. When a man praises your clothes he always is praising you in them. You
never will hear a man praise even the good dressing of a woman he dislikes; while girls who
positively hate another girl often will add, "But she certainly does know how to dress."

And so the experienced woman wears her expensive clothes for other women, and produces her
"effects" for men. She wears scarlet on a cold or raw day, and the eyes of the men light up
when they see her. It makes her look cheerful and bright and warm. She wears gray when she
wants to look demure. Let a man beware of a woman in silvery gray. She looks so quiet and dove-like
and gentle that she has disarmed him before she has spoken one word, and he will snuggle down
beside her and let her turn his mind and his pocket-book wrong side out. A woman could not
look designing in light gray if she tried. He dotes upon the girl in pale blue. Pale blue naturally
suggests to his mind the sort of girl who can wear it, which is generally a blonde with soft,
fluffy hair, fair skin, and blue eyes--appealing, trustful, baby-blue eyes. Did you ever notice
that men always instinctively put confidence in a girl with blue eyes, and have their suspicions
of a girl with brilliant black ones, and will you kindly tell me why? Is it that the limpid
blue eye, transparent and gentle, suggests all the soft, womanly virtues, and because he thinks
he can see through it, clear down into that blue-eyed girl's soul, that she is the kind of
girl he fancies she is? I think it is; but some of the greatest little frauds I know are the
purry, kitteny girls with big, innocent blue eyes.

Blazing black eyes, and the rich, warm colors which dark-skinned women have to wear, suggest
energy and brilliance and no end of intellect. Men look into such eyes and seem not to be able
to see below the surface. They have not the pleasure of a long, deep gaze into immeasurable
depths. And so they think her designing and clever, and (God save the mark!) even intellectual,
when perhaps she has a wealth of love and devotion and heroism stored up behind that impulsive
disposition and those dazzling black eyes which would do and dare more in a minute for some
man she had set that great heart of hers upon than your cool-blooded, tranquil blonde would
do in forty years. A mere question of pigment in the eye has settled many a man's fate in life,
and established him with a wife who turned out to be very different from the girl he fondly
thought he was getting.

Yet whenever I complain to experienced married women of how discouraging it is to wear your
good clothes for unappreciative men, they beg me not to be guilty of the heresy of wishing
things different. If they have married one of the noticing kind, they tell me harrowing tales
of gorgeous costumes having been cast aside because these critical men made fun of, or were
prejudiced against them, and "made remarks." And they point with envy to Mrs. So-and-So, whose
husband never knows what she has on, but who thinks she looks lovely in everything, so that
she is at liberty to dress as she pleases. When a woman defers to her husband's taste, she
sometimes is the best-dressed woman in the room. And sometimes another woman, dressing according
to another man's taste, is the worst-dressed. So you see you never can tell. "De mule don't
kick 'cordin' to no rule."

There is something rather pathetic to me about a man being so ignorant of why a woman's dress
is beautiful, but only the effect remaining in his memory. He remembers how she looked on a
certain day in a certain gown. He thinks he remembers her dress. He thinks he would know it
again if he saw it. But the truth is that he is remembering the woman herself, her face, her
voice, her eyes--above all, what she said, and how she said it. If she wore a scarlet ribbon
in her dark hair, a red rose in another woman's hair will most unaccountably bring it all back
to him, and he will not know why he suddenly sees the whole picture rise out of the past before
his eyes, nor why his throat aches with the memory of it.

I know one of these men, whose descriptions of a woman's dress are one of the experiences of
a lifetime. He loves the word bombazine. His mother must have worn a gown of black bombazine
during his impressionable age. And he never will be successful in describing a modern gown
until bombazines again become the rage. This same dear man brought back to his invalid wife
a description of a fashionable noon wedding, which consisted of the single item that the bride
wore a blue alpaca bonnet. It really would be of interest from a scientific point of view to
know what suggested that combination to any intelligence, even if it were masculine.

I have more evidence to go on, however, when I wonder why the idea of the cost penetrates this
same man's brain when shown a new gown by any member of his family, all of whom he is weak
enough to adore. His daughter will say, "Papa, do look here just one minute! How do you like
my new gown?" And the answer never varies: "Very pretty, indeed. I hope it's paid for." He
will say that of a cotton frock made two years ago--he never knows--of a silk négligé, or of
a ball-gown of the newest make. The fashion produces no impression upon him, nor the material,
nor the cut. But let his daughter put on any kind of a pale green dress, and stand before him
with the question, "Papa, how do you like my new gown?" While he is raising his head from his
book he begins the old formula, "Very pretty. I hope--" Then he stops and says, "I have seen
that dress before. Child, you grow to look more like your mother every day of your life." And
there is a little break in his voice, and before he goes on reading he takes off his glasses
and wipes them, and looks out of the window without seeing anything, and sits very still for
a moment. It was the sight of the pale green dress. When he came home from the war his lovely
young wife, whom he lost when she was still young and beautiful, came to meet him, holding
her baby son in her arms for his father to see, and she had worn a pale green gown.

Why certain kinds of clothes are associated in the public mind with certain kinds of women
is to me an amusing mystery. Why are old maids always supposed to wear black silks? And why
are they always supposed to be thin?--the old maids, I mean, not the silks. Why are literary
women always supposed to be frayed at the edges? And why, if they keep up with the fashions
and wear patent-leathers, do people say, in an exasperatingly astonished tone, "Can that woman
write books?" Why not, pray? Does a fragment of genius corrupt the aesthetic sense? Is writing
a hardening process? Must you wear shabby boots and carry a baggy umbrella just because you
can write? Not a bit of it. Little as some of you men may think it, literary women have souls,
and a woman with a soul must, of necessity, love laces and ruffled petticoats, and high heels,
and rosettes. Otherwise I question her possession of a soul.

WOMAN'S RIGHTS IN LOVE

 "She has laughed as softly as if she sighed!
    She has counted six and over,
  Of a purse well filled and a heart well tried--
    Oh, each a worthy lover!
  They 'give her time' for her soul must slip
    When the world has set the grooving;
  She will lie to none with her fair red lip--
    But love seeks truer loving.

       *       *       *       *       *

 "Unless you can muse in a crowd all day
    On the absent face that fixed you;
  Unless you can love as the angels may,
    With the breadth of heaven betwixt you;
  Unless you can dream that his faith is fast,
    Through behooving and unbehooving;
  Unless you can DIE when the dream is past--
    Oh, never call it loving!"

In love a woman's first right is to be protected from her friends while she considers the man
whom she contemplates loving. The well-meant blundering of vitally interested friends has spoiled
many a promising love affair, which might have resulted in a marriage so much above the ordinary
that it could be termed satisfactory even by the most captious.

At no time in a girl's life has she a greater right to work out her own salvation in fear and
trembling than during the period known among girls as "making up her mind." If she is the right
kind of a girl, honest and delicate minded, it is nerve-racking to be talked about, and sacrilege
to be talked to. Then the bloom is on the grape, which a rude touch mars forever.

Yet these kind friends never think of the delicate, touch-me-not influences at work in the
girl's soul, or that the instinct to hide her real interest in the man precludes the possibility
of her daring to ask to be let alone. So they, in their over-zeal and ambition, either make
the path of love so easy and inevitable that all the zest is taken out of it for both (for
lovers never want somebody to go ahead and baste the problem for them; they want to blind-stitch
it for themselves as they go along), or else, by critical nagging, and balancing the eligibility
of one suitor against another, these friends so harass and upset the poor girl that she doesn't
know which man she wants, and so turns her back upon all.

In point of fact, when a man is in love, and a girl does not yet know her own mind; when she
is weighing out their adaptability, and balancing his love for football against her passion
for Browning; during the delicate, tentative period, when the most affectionate solicitude
from friends is an irritation, there ought to be a law banishing the interested couple to an
island peopled with strangers, who would not discover the delicacy of the situation until it
was too late to spoil it.

"Woman's rights." I certainly agree with the men who think that those words have a masculine,
assertive, belligerent sound. "Equal suffrage" is much more lady-like, and we are by way of
getting all we wish of the men on any subject, under the gentlest title by which it may be
called. Strange, how, with strong men, force never avails, but the softest methods are the
surest and swiftest.

However, equal suffrage, wide as it is, is not all that I wish. It does well enough, but it
does not cover the entire ground. I never clamored very much for women to be recognized as
the equals of men, either in politics or in love, because, if I had clamored at all, I should
have clamored for infinitely more than that. I should have clamored for men to recognize us
as their superiors, and not for equal rights with themselves, but for more, many more rights
than they ever dreamed of possessing. 'Tis not justice I crave, but mercy. 'Tis not equality,
but chivalry.

In the whole history of the world, from nineteenth-century Public Opinion clear back to the
age of chivalry, men never have been inclined to deal out justice to women. It is their watchword
with each other, but with women it always is either injustice or mercy. And in spite of all
wrongs and all abuses, I say, Heaven bless the men that this is so. Human nature is more fundamental
than customs, and what would become of women if we only got our exact deserts, or had absolute
justice dealt to us, either by men or other women or on the Judgment Day?

In these latter days of this progressive, woman's century, however, the most thoughtful men
are valiant enough to re-adjust themselves to the idea of woman's development, and allow her
equality in progressive thought; at the same time maintaining the old-time chivalry of their
attitude towards her. If she asks for justice at the hands of these glorious men, she will
get it, and they will uncover in her presence and throw away their cigars while they are dispensing
it. Equality to them does not mean either rudeness or insolence. They are always gentlemen.

It requires bravery on their part to take this ground, because the sentiment has not as yet
grown popular. But a New Man has been created by the development of the New Woman, and he is
the highest type we have.

 "Courtesy wins woman as well
  As valor may, but he that closes both
  Is perfect."

Woman's rights! Why, the very first right we expect is to be treated better than anybody else!
Better than men treat each other as a body, and better by the individual man than he treats
all other women. I abominate the idea of equality, and to be mentally slapped on the shoulder
and told I am "a good fellow." I shrink from the idea of independence and cold, proud isolation
with my emancipated sister-women, who struggle into their own coats unassisted and get red
in the face putting on their own skates, and hang on to a strap in the street-car, in the proud
consciousness that they are independent and the equal of men. I never worry myself when a man
is on his knees in front of me, tying the ribbons of my slipper, as to whether he considers
me his equal politically or not. It is sufficient satisfaction for me to see him there. If
he hadn't wanted to save me the trouble, I suppose he wouldn't have offered. He may even think
I am not strong enough for such an arduous duty. That would not hurt my feelings either. I
have an idea that he likes it better to think that I cannot do anything troublesome for myself
than to believe that I could get along perfectly without him. In fact--here's heresy for you,
O ye emancipated!--I do not in the least mind being dependent on men--provided the men are
nice enough. Let them give us all the so-called rights they want to. I shall never get over
wanting to get behind some man if I see a cow. Let them give us a vote, if they will. I shall
want at least three men to go with me to the polls--one to hold my purse, one to hold my gloves,
and the third to show me how to cast my vote.

If women are serious in wanting to vote in politics, why do they not apply to the body politic
the same methods they use with the one man which an all-wise Destiny has committed to their
keeping?

If all the women in the world should make up their minds that they wanted to vote worse than
anything else on earth--worse even than they want their husbands to go to church with them--and
each woman would put on her prettiest clothes, and cuddle up to her own particular man in her
softest and most womanish way, when she was begging him to get suffrage for her--why, you all
know they would do it. Men would get it for us exactly as they would buy us a pair of horses.

Have you men ever thought about practising for suffrage in politics by giving women suffrage
in love? Surely you do not doubt that, should you do this, it would not occur to us to stuff
the ballot-boxes, or to put up a ticket with any but honorable candidates for our hands. We
do not ask nor wish to indicate who shall run for office. Let the men announce themselves candidates.
We would not take the initiative there if it were offered to us for a thousand years. All we
ask is to be given plenty of time to canvass the honor of the candidates, thoroughly to understand
and investigate the platform (with an eye to how near he will come to sticking to his promises
after election), and to be allowed to cast a free and untrammelled vote.

Now, men seem to think that if they allowed woman equal suffrage, the bright white light of
our honesty would be too strong a glare for their weak eyes--so long accustomed to darkness--to
bear. Um--possibly in politics. Hardly in love.

For myself, I consider absolute honesty most unpleasant. I never knew any really nice, lovable
women who were unflinchingly honest. But I have known a few iron-visaged, square-jawed women
who were so brutally honest that I have most ingloriously fled at the mention of their approach,
and solaced myself with a congenial spirit who is in the habit of skirting delicately around
painful truth, and a cozy corner in which to abuse the aforesaid iron-visaged carver of helpless
humanity, who loves to draw blood with her truth. Such an one will get a vote in politics long
before she gets it in love.

No; men need not fear to give us equal suffrage in love. Our honesty will not be disconcerting.
(I would even address a private query, at just this point, to the women, begging that the men
will skip it, asking women where in the world we would find ourselves if we were unflinchingly
honest with the men who love us?) No one will deny that we would even countenance a certain
amount of corruption. We fully agree with those men who tell us weakly questioning women that
campaign funds are a necessity. We never have been able to discover just where the money in
politics went to, but the expenses of a campaign in our line are more in evidence. I doubt
if the most straitlaced Puritan will gainsay me when I declare that bribery from the candidates,
in the form of theatres, opera-boxes, flowers, bonbons, and books, would not only be tolerated,
but even, in a modest manner, encouraged--having, of course, a keen eye as to the elasticity
of the campaign fund. But, of course, just as vulgar bribery, per se, only catches the easy
and unthinking voter in politics, so, in like manner, would these evidences of generosity only
capture the less desirable voter in love. When you men are trying for a woman's vote you need
give yourselves no uneasiness. If she is worth having, character wins every time. You don't
believe that. That is why you trust to bribery to do it all. And it is also why so many of
you get the girl you try for--which is about the richest punishment you could receive.

I adore Hamlet. Not because he was so noble as to give up his life to avenge his father's most
foul murder. Not because he was a chivalrous King Arthur, to protect Ophelia's womanly pride
from the jeers of a coarse court by openly declaring that he had loved her when he hadn't.
Not for any of Shakespeare's reasons for painting him a hero. But for two much more reasonable
reasons. One that he said, "I myself am indifferent honest"--oh, the humanity of Hamlet!--and
the other that, when under the spell of her beauty and in the tentative, interested stage when
he cared for her all but enough to ask her to marry him, he had the wit to discover that she
was a fool. Imagine the calamity of Hamlet married to Ophelia! That would have been a tragedy.
Think of a man clever enough to discover that his idol was made of putty--that his sweetheart
was a Rosamond Vincy! Hamlet was a wise man. He withdrew in time. Most men have to be married
ten years to discover that they have married an Ophelia or a Rosamond.

It is a trite saying that the whole world is behind a woman urging her to marry. But I find
much to interest me in trite sayings. I like to get hold of them, and look them through, and
turn them wrong side out, and pull them to pieces to find how much life there is in them. Psychological
vivisection is not a subject for the humane society. A trite saying has my sympathy. It generally
is stupid and shop-worn, and consequently is banished to polite society and hated by the clever.
And only because it possessed a soul of truth and a wonderful vitality has it been kept from
dying long ago of a broken heart.

Books could be written of the truth of this particular trite saying. The urging, of course,
among people whom we know, is neither vulgar nor intentional. It takes the form of jests, of
pseudo-humorous questions if a man sends flowers two or three times. But it takes its worst
and most common form in the sudden melting away of the family if the man calls and finds them
all together. If a man has no specific intentions towards a girl, and has not determined in
his own mind that he wants to marry her; if he is only liking her a great deal, with but an
occasional wonder in the depths of his own heart whether this girl is the wife for him; to
call upon her casually and see the family scatter, and other callers hastily leave, is enough
to scare him to death. And the girl herself has a right to be furiously indignant. When eligible
young people are in that tentative stage, it is death to a love to make them self-conscious.

I myself am so afraid of brushing the down from the butterfly wings at this point that, occasionally,
when I have been calling, and the girl's possible lover has caught me before I could escape
in a natural manner, I have doggedly remained, even knowing that perhaps he wished me well
away among the angels, rather than to run the risk of making him conscious that I understood
his state of mind. Imagine my feelings of anguish, however, at holding on against my will and
against theirs, wanting somebody to help me let go! Much better, I solace myself afterwards,
that he should wish me away than to look after my retreating form and wish, in Heaven's name,
that I had stayed! Better for the girl, I mean. For my own feelings--but I do not count. I
am only giving a girl one of her rights in love. A few judicious obstacles but whet a man's
appetite--if he is worth having. And I do not mind being a judicious obstacle once in a while--if
I like the girl.

As to how far a girl has a right to encourage a man in love, opinions differ. I once asked
a clever literary friend of mine, whose husband is so satisfactory that it is quite a delightful
shock to discover it, how far men ought to be encouraged to make love.

"Encourage them all you can, my dear. The best of men require all the encouragement one is
capable of giving them."

I pondered over that statement. From her point of view it was, of course, perfectly proper.
Married men need all the encouragement they can get to keep them making love to their own wives.
But from our standpoint, of being girls--and very nice girls too, some of us, if I do say it
myself!--how far have we a right to encourage men to make love to us?

Now I like men; and I like girls. So that I never want anybody to be hurt at this very delicate
and dangerous game of love-making. But somebody always is getting hurt, and although she never
makes any fuss about it, it is generally the girl.

There are two reasons for this. One is that love means twice--yes, twenty, forty--times as
much to a girl as to a man; and the second is that we are a believing set of human geese, and
we believe a great deal of what you men say, which is wrong of us, and much more of what your
pronounced actions over us imply, which is worse. Girls are just the same along the main lines
of sentiment and hope and trust and belief in men now as they ever were, and most of this talk
about the new woman being different is mere stuff and nonsense.

Now, the men come in right at this point and declare that we ought not to believe so much;
that until they have actually proposed marriage, often they themselves do not know their own
minds; that a man has a perfect right to withdraw, à la Hamlet, if he finds insurmountable
flaws in the girl's nature, or, what is oftener the case, somebody whom he likes better; and
they intimate pretty strongly that broken hearts, or even slightly damaged affections, are
largely our own fault, which, from their standpoint, is true enough, and if we were men we
would all say so too.

But, looking at it from our standpoint, does it not seem as if the men had all the rights on
their side? And will they be as generous in this as they are in everything else where we are
concerned, and view the matter from our point of view, with the sidelights turned on?

In the first place, there is practically the whole world of women before men from which to
choose. Think of that! Thousands of women, and with the additional advantage of the right to
make the first advances! How many do we have to choose from? We can't roam around the world
by ourselves, even to see all the desirable men, much less manage to meet and study them. We
have to wait to be approached even by the meagre few which a gracious Providence casts in our
way. If a girl receives three proposals, that, I am told, is a fair average. If she receives
ten, she is either an heiress or a belle. If she receives more than ten, she must visit in
the West. Think now, reasonably, of the limited opportunities of the most fortunate of us,
compared with the limitless opportunities of the least fortunate of you.

Then, too, in order to make ourselves desirable, we are not to be forward or unduly prominent.
We are to sit quietly at home and wait to be asked. We are not to take a man's words, uttered
under the magnetism of our presence, for truth. We are not to judge by his manner if he does
not speak. We are not to flirt with any other man when one man is considering us as a possible
wife (although we don't know that he is, and it is dangerous to guess), because he does not
like that. It shows, he thinks, a "frivolous nature," or "a desire to attract," or a "tendency
to flirt," or, it is "unwomanly," or "unworthy a true woman." There are some other things men
say to us if several men are attentive at the same time, but I have forgotten the rest. They
are very convincing, however. Then, when the man has made up his mind that he wants us as his
wife (that grammar sounds polygamous, but my whole philosophy of life is against that idea),
why, we are to be ready to drop into his arms like a ripe plum and not keep him on tenter-hooks
of anxiety, because only coquettes do that.

Now I am not endeavoring to do an exceptional man justice, who will resent that somewhat broad
platform. I am only presenting the attitude of man in general, from a girl's standpoint. And
if you will view it as referring to "other men" and not to yourself, you will be quite willing
to admit that it is, in the main, true.

Now if, in order to avoid heartaches, and so be able to blame you for something you never intended
and which you are not willing to shoulder, we are not to let ourselves go, when we feel like
falling in love with you, do you give us leave to allow every one of you to get clear up to
the proposing-point and come flatly out with the words "Will you marry me?" before we let you
know whether we want you or not, or before we begin to let ourselves go?

Come now. Own up, you men. How well do we girls know you when you have called on us three hundred
and sixty-five times in succession? Not at all. We know only what we can see and hear. How
well do we know you when we have been engaged to you six months? Not at all. We know only what
you have been unable to conceal of your faults, and the virtues you have displayed in your
show-windows. How long must a woman be married to a man before she understands him thoroughly--as
thoroughly as she ought to have understood him before she ever dared to stand up at an altar
and promise to love him and live with him until death did them part?

A broken engagement ought to be considered a blessed thing as a preventive of further and worse
ills. But it is not. It militates seriously against a girl. Not so much with men as with women.
That is one of the times, and there are many others, when men are broader and more just than
women. The ordinary man, taken at random, will say, "Probably he was a worthless fellow." The
ordinary woman will say, "She ought to have known her own mind better."

The odd part of all this is that, even if you men, as a body, should say to all the girls:
"Go ahead. Encourage us to the top of your bent. Let us propose without any knowledge based
on your past actions or words as to whether we are going to be accepted or not, and we will
take the result cheerfully and won't rage or howl about it"--that not one of us would do it.

"How conscience doth make cowards of us all!" We might consider that you were only giving us
our rights in love. We might theorize beautifully about it, and even vow we were going to take
you at your word and do it. But we couldn't. It simply isn't in us. We could not be so unjust
to you--so untrue to ourselves. The great maternal heart of woman, which bears the greater
part of all the sufferings in this world that the men and little children may go free, prevents
us from taking any such so-called rights from you, at the cost of suffering on your part. Women
have tenderer hearts than men for a purpose, and if they are hurt oftener than men's, why,
that is for us to bear. We cannot make ourselves over and turn Amazons at your expense.

MEN AS LOVERS

 "God measures souls by their capacity
  For entertaining his best angel, Love."

       *       *       *       *       *

 "It is a common fate--a woman's lot--
    To waste on one the riches of her soul,
  Who takes the wealth she gives him, but cannot
    Repay the interest, and much less the whole.

  "Are you not kind? Ah, yes, so very kind.
    So thoughtful of my comfort, and so true.
  Yes, yes, dear heart, but I, not being blind.
    Know that I am not loved as I love you.

  "One tenderer word, a little longer kiss,
    Would fill my soul with music and with song;
  And if you seem abstracted, or I miss
    The heart-tone from your voice, my world goes wrong."

Men seldom make perfect lovers. I deeply regret being obliged to say this, as they are about
all we girls have to depend upon in that line; but it is the solemn truth. I do not pretend
to say why this is so. I suppose it is because a man never dwells upon the sentimental side
of life, nor understands the emotions, unless he is either a poet or a Miss Nancy, and it is
almost equally dangerous to marry either of those.

Pray, do not be offended, my friends the poets, at being mentioned in the same paragraph with
a Miss Nancy, until you discover the exact meaning of that effective term of opprobrium. A
Miss Nancy is a poet without genius, one who has a talent for discovering the fineness of life,
but who lacks the wit to keep his views from ridicule. It is not a step of the seven-league
boots between the sublime and the ridiculous. Sometimes it is only an invisible step of the
tiniest patent-leathers.

I never could understand why a man who plays a good game of whist should not know how to make
love. There are so many points in common. You can play a game of whist with only enough skill
to keep your partner's hands from your throat, or you can play it for all there is in it.

Now I am not a whist-player. Ask those who have played with me, and see the well-bred murder
in their eyes as they remember their wrongs. They will tell you that I can take all the tricks--not
just the odd, but three, four, and five tricks--yet I am not playing whist. I am just winning
the game, that is all. If my partner, in an unthinking moment, says, "Let's win this game,"
we win it. But it is like saying to the cab-driver, "You make that train." We make the train
and say nothing about taking off a wheel or two in the process. Once, after a game of this
kind, my partner said to me, "Allow me to congratulate you upon a most brilliant game--of cards!"

Now you must not think me either stupid or blundering. I play with magnificent effrontery,
often rushing in where angels fear to tread; but, somehow, effrontery is not the best qualification
for a whist-player. I am too lucky at holding the cards, and play each one to win. I am lavish
with trumps. I delight to lead them first hand round, but I have not the courage of my convictions,
for I always feel little quivers of fear when I do it, because when my trumps and aces are
gone, then I'm gone too. I have no skill in finesse, in the subtlety, the delicate moves which
are the inherent qualities of a game of whist. To tell the brutal truth, I play my own hand.
Could anything be worse, dear shade of Sarah Battle, even if I do win? In short, my manner
of playing whist is the way some men, most men, make love.

Now you know, brothers--I call you brothers to prove how very friendly my feelings are towards
you, even if I do show you up from our side--you know that a good whist-player is only slightly
interested in the play of the great cards. His fine instinct comes into play when the delicate
points of the game are in evidence; when it is a question of who holds the seven of clubs,
if he leads the six in the last hand, or of the lurking-place of the thirteenth trump. I never
can remember anything below the jack, and I give up playing whist forever at least once every
month. But I am so weak that I return to it again and again, as a smoker does to his brier-wood.
I feel partly vexed and partly sorry for myself when I realize that I cannot play--I can only
win. I have seen men win very superior girls, but they have done it in a manner which would
disgust a good whist-player. Yet they, too, keep on with their indifferent love-making with
the same fatal human weakness which sees me brave the baleful light in my partner's eyes night
after night--when I am in a whist-playing community. Many men make love because the girl is
convenient and they happen to think about it. It never would occur to me to hunt up three people
at a country-house and ask them to play whist. But if three are at a table, and there is no
one else, I drop into the vacant place, which could be filled much better by a skilled player,
with pathetic willingness.

I wonder if a man ever deliberately made up his mind to marry, and then hunted up his ideal
girl? Alas, alas, if he did, I never heard of him! But I have seen scores of them drop into
vacant chairs at the girls' sides, and make love just because they were handy.

We hate this "handy" love-making, we girls. You needn't think we don't know it when we hear
it. Sometimes we are not so stupid as we pretend. But we never let you see that we are clever
enough to understand you, because you don't want us to. And I must say that I cannot blame
you. If we girls are pretending to you that we have been waiting all our lives for just you,
we dislike to have you discover that we have employed those years of waiting very satisfactorily
to ourselves, so much so that a casual observer would not have suspected the emptiness of them.

So your funny little pretences are all very well, provided you do not let us catch you in them.
Only--possibly you do not know how many times we do catch you. That is one of the chief points.
You never know how many times we see through you and beyond, and know just why you did certain
things much better than you yourselves know it. Of course, it would not be wise for us to tell
you this individually, for that would break up the meeting; but there is no harm in letting
you know in bulk.

I suppose there is not a man in the world who would not be surprised if he knew that we do
not consider men good lovers. We have accepted them, and been engaged to them, and married
them, and pretended to them, and, what is worse still, pretended to ourselves that they were
satisfactory, but the truth is they were not, and they are not, and this is the first time
we have dared to say so.

Now don't expect, if you go to your wife or your sweetheart and ask her if this is so, that
she is going to tell you the truth about it. I wouldn't either. I would pretend that' the others
might be unsatisfactory as lovers, but that you--well, you just suited me, that's all. I would
have to, you understand, to keep you going. And that is what your sweetheart will do. If she
did not, you would get cross and sulky, and there would be a week of unhappiness for both of
you, and then the girl would apologize and back down from her position, and then you would
go on exactly as you did before.

No, if you are going to profit by this at all, do not talk it over with any woman you love.
Talk it over with some clever woman who will tell you the truth because she has nothing to
lose. A man will always take more from a woman whom he does not love than he will from his
own sweetheart or wife.

I wonder why things are so. Is it that ideal love is only founded upon the truth and the superstructure
is built of fabrications? Is it that we women are much more artistic and more clever at masquerading
the truth that we make so much better lovers than the men? Oh, the scores and scores of men
who have told me what their wives thought of them, and then the looks these wives have shot
at me across the flowers on the dinner-table! Only one glance, which no man caught, telegraphing,
"Do I, though? You are a woman and you know. You know what I would have if I could, but how
I have had to make him believe that he was all of that, because he is my husband." Not that
she is dissatisfied with him. Not that she would give him up. Not that she would leave him
or have anybody else if she could. She loves him all she can, and he loves her all he wants
to. He has won the game, but he has not played for all there was in it.

I never have been able to make up my mind whether ideal love was the best, or if love with
a great deal of common-sense in it was not the most philosophical and better in the long-run.
But to those of us who are romantic it is fearful to think of deliberately turning our backs
on terrapin and lobster and ice-cream, and meditating upon plain bread and cold potatoes. You
men do not recognize the romantic streak which, of more or less breadth and thickness, runs
through every woman, making her love good love-making. You are so terribly practical and common-sense
and every-day. We girls like flowers, and mental indigestibles, and occasional Sundays. We
do not know why we do, but we do, and we cannot help it, and if you are going to make love
according to Hoyle you must recognize this fact, and pamper us in our folly. Don't we pamper you?

Now I know perfectly well how some of you are going to work at it. You will begin by thinking,
"Yes, that's true. I've got a girl like that, and, by Jove, I'll humor her!" Bless your dear
hearts! Your intentions are always of the best. If only you knew how to carry them out! But
the first time you come across a little unreasonable, sentimental folly of hers, you will take
her hand in yours and say, "Yes, dear, I understand just what you mean. I know exactly how
you feel on the subject, and I am perfectly willing to do what you want me to. But, don't you
see, if I do, it would look just a little queer to mother"--(or the boys, or the other fellows,
or to Jessie and the girls, or to--you may insert the name for yourself)--"and, while I want
to please you, I hardly think that is quite the way to go about it; so, if you will be the
dear, sensible little woman that you always are, we will simply take a nice little walk, instead
of going to Europe, and I will try to make it just as enjoyable to you. You know I shall be
with you, darling, and haven't you often said that you were perfectly happy wherever I was?"
And darling will begin a weak argument in favor of her little unreasonable, sentimental whim
represented by "Europe," although she sees that your mind is made up. But you have seen her
weaken at your smooth talk, and you give her some more; and if that doesn't do, why, you kiss
her, and then she's gone. And before you leave her she has assured you that she really would
"just as soon" or "much rather" take a walk than go to Europe; and you come out whistling and
thinking what a dear little thing she is, and how much you love her. Oh, you have won! Nobody
denies that; but look at your partners face if you want to know how you have done it.

Why didn't you do as you said you were going to? Why didn't you do it her way? Why don't you
study your sweetheart, and learn to know her, and to know the real woman--the side she never
shows to you nowadays Because, just as soon as she sees your way of doing, she is going to
hunt up a new way of managing you. It is all your own fault that you are managed (as you all
know you are), and your fault that you get pale-gray truth instead of the pure white. It starts
out pure white, but it is doctored before it reaches you.

You never are satisfied to do anything else in the slovenly way in which you make love. I know
a man who is just an ordinary man in everything else; but to see him drive a spirited horse
is to know that he has the making of a good lover in him. He is full of enthusiasm in studying
his horse's disposition. He will interrupt the most interesting conversation to say, "There,
Pet, that pile of stones won't hurt you. Go on, now, like the pretty little lady that you are.
Here's a nice bit of road. Hold your head up and just show what you can do. That's right. That's
my beauty. See how she reaches out. Isn't she handsome? Quiet, now, Pet. Take this hill easily.
We know you could keep up that pace for an hour, but you mustn't tire yourself all out just
because you have a willing spirit. See her look around to see if I am pleased with her!" "Dear
me, that's nothing," I said. "Any woman would do as much, if you treated her that way." He
is responsive, so he grinned appreciatively. He spends hours studying that horse's traits.
He is always saying that she won't back, or that she hates this and is afraid of that. His
horse, never has to do anything that she doesn't want to; but his wife does.

You men would not do business, or even play golf, without many times the thought you put into
your love-making. Of course, now, I am not talking of the sleepless nights or the anxious days
you spent before you knew whether she loved you. No, indeed; you did enough thinking and worrying
then to please anybody. But I am referring to the girl to whom you are engaged, perhaps you
are married to her, and have been for forty years. You are not too old yet to know that you
have not been a perfect lover. I know that old story, that men are so fond of telling just
here, about a man running for a car before he has caught it. Yes, we know all that. But we
want you to keep on running.

However, on the other hand, I know that ideal love is a difficult thing to manage, from our
point of view. It is a fearful strain to live up to it. In fact, nobody can do it. But I never
could see why you had to stick to one or the other. Why can't you mix the two?

Ideal love is a beautiful thing to think about or to live in for a few weeks or months--according
to your temperament. It cannot be equalled for the first part of an engagement or the honeymoon.
But it is like going to the theatre and seeing the grandeur of the old gray castle, and the
perpetual moonlight, and the devoted love of the satin duchess for the velvet duke. You know
that it is just acting, and that the villain is not really going to swim the moat with his
band of steel warriors, and burn the castle, and capture the duchess and marry her by force.
Yet I love to pretend. I dearly love to take two pocket-handkerchiefs with me and sop them
both--and I would like to cry out loud, only I never do; but I always have to pull my veil
down and feel my way out of the theatre. I love to throw myself into it, and it always annoys
me when the acting is so bad that I cannot. If any man sees any moral in that, let him heed
it, and believe that I am only one of ten thousand other girls who would like to throw ourselves
into the illusion of it only your acting is so bad that we cannot.

If men would only realize that the material side is what we girls care the least for. Pray
do not think, just because you have built us Colonial houses, and have our clothes made for
us, and never allow butchers' bills to annoy us, that you have done your whole duty by us.
It never occurs to most of us who have those dear American men for husbands and lovers that
we ever really could become cold or hungry. You would be very unhappy if you thought anybody
belonging to you did not have all the clothes she wanted, and the best in the market. But you
think it is a huge joke when we say that we are mentally cold and hungry a great deal of the
time, and that you are a storehouse, with all that we need right within your hearts and brains,
only you will not give it to us.

When you want to surprise us with a present, what do you do? You buy us a sealskin or a diamond-ring.
Is that what you think we want? Perhaps some of you have a wife who only wants such things,
and who cares for nothing else so much. If so, give them to her. If her higher nature is satisfied
with plush, let her have it. Smother her in sealskins, weigh her down to earth with jewels.
But the rest of us? What are you going to give us?

LOVE-MAKING AS A FINE ART

 "If thou must love me, let it be for naught
    Except for love's sake only. Do not say
    'I love her for her smile--her look--her way
  Of speaking gently--for a trick of thought
  That falls in well with mine, and certes brought
    A sense of pleasant ease on such a day.'
    For these things, in themselves, beloved, may
  Be changed or change for thee--and love so wrought
  May be unwrought so. Neither love me for
    Thine own dear pity's wiping my cheeks dry;
  A creature might forget to weep, who bore
    Thy comfort long, and lose thy love thereby.
  But love me for love's sake, that evermore
    Thou mayst love on through love's eternity"

Of course, to begin with, every man honestly believes that he has made, is making, or could
make a good lover.

So I admit at the outset that I am talking to the lover who not only is successful in his own
estimation, but the one who has been encouraged in that belief by his own sweetheart or wife
until he has every right to believe in himself.

You are about to be told the honest truth for once in your life, so much so that your wives
and sweethearts will tell me behind your back that every word of it is true. But after you
have clamored for years to know "how women honestly felt on such subjects," and when, nettled
at not getting the truth from us individually, you have declared that "the best of women are
naturally a little bit hypocritical," the loveliest part of it all is that you will not believe
a word of what I have said, and, in accordance with that belief, will calmly announce that
I don't know what I am talking about.

Well, perhaps I don't. A woman's aim is never quite true. I could not hit the bull's-eye. But
in this case, please to remember that I am firing at a barn-door with bird-shot.

I don't blame you for not believing me. It is against your whole theory of life. Not to believe
in yourself were a great calamity. My grandfather was so unfortunately accurate that with advancing
years he came whimsically to consider himself infallible. [Sidenote: Attractions of the Arthurian
Legend.]

To English readers, and perhaps not to English readers only, the middle division of the three
great romance-subjects[43] ought to be of far higher interest than the others; and that not
merely, even in the English case, for reasons of local patriotism. The mediæval versions of
classical story, though attractive to the highest degree as evidence
of the extraordinary plastic power of the period, which could transform
all art to its own image and guise, and though not destitute of individual
charm here and there, must always be mainly curiosities.

The cycle of Charlemagne, a genuine growth and not merely an incrustation or transformation, illustrated,
moreover, by particular examples of the highest merit, is exposed on the one hand to the charge
of a certain monotony, and on the other to the objection that, beautiful
as it is, it is dead.

For centuries, except in a few deliberate literary exercises, the king à la barbe florie has
inspired no modern singer--his geste is extinct. But the Legend of Arthur, the latest to take
definite form of the three, has shown by far the greatest vitality. From generation to generation
it has taken new forms, inspired new poetries.

The very latest of the centuries has been the most prolific in contributions of any since
the end of the Middle Ages; and there is no sufficient reason why the lineage should ever
stop.

For while the romance of antiquity is a mere "sport," an accident of time and circumstance, the chanson
de geste, majestic and interesting as it is, representative as it
is to a certain extent of a nation and a language, has the capital
defect of not being adaptable.

Having little or no allegorical capacity, little "soul," so to speak, it was left by the tide
of time on the shores thereof without much hope of floating and living again. The Arthurian
Legend, if not from the very first, yet from the first moment when it assumed vernacular forms,
lent itself to that double meaning which, though it is open to abuse, and was terribly abused
in these very ages, is after all the salvation of things literary, since every age adopting
the first and outer meaning can suit the second and inner to its own taste and need.

[Footnote 43: See the quotation from Jean Bodel, p. 26, note. The literature of the Arthurian
question is very large; and besides the drawbacks referred to in the text, much of it is scattered
in periodicals.

The most useful recent things in English are Mr Nutt's Studies on the Legend of the Holy Grail (London,
1888); Professor Rhys's Arthurian Legend (Oxford, 1891); and the extensive introduction to Dr
Sommer's Malory (London, 1890). In French the elaborate papers on different parts which M. Gaston
Paris brings out at intervals in Romania cannot be neglected; and M. Loth's surveys of the subject
there and in the Revue Celtique (October 1892) are valuable. Naturally, there has been a great
deal in German, the best being, perhaps, Dr Kölbing's long introduction
to his reprint of Arthour and Merlin (Leipzig, 1890).

Other books will be mentioned in subsequent notes; but a complete
and impartial history of the whole subject, giving the contents, with
strictly literary criticism only, of all the texts, and merely summarising
theories as to origin, &c., is still wanting, and sorely wanted.

Probably there is still no better, as there is certainly no more delightful, book on the matter
than M. Paulin Paris's Romans de la Table Ronde (5 vols., Paris, 1868-77). The monograph by
M. Clédat on the subject in M. Petit de Julleville's new History (v. supra, p. 23, note) is
unfortunately not by any means one of the best of these studies.]

[Sidenote: Discussions on their sources.]

That the vitality of the Legend is in part, if not wholly, due to the strange crossing and
blending of its sources, I at least have no doubt. To discuss these sources at all, much more
to express any definite opinion on the proportions and order of their blending, is a difficult
matter for any literary student, and dangerous withal; but the adventure is of course not to be
wholly shirked here. The matter has, both in England and abroad, been quite recently the subject
of that rather acrimonious debating by which scholars in modern tongues seem to think it a point
of honour to rival the scholars of a former day in the classics, though the vocabulary used is
less picturesque. A great deal of this debate, too, turns on matters of sheer opinion, in regard
to which language only appropriate to matters of sheer knowledge is too often used. The candid
inquirer, informed that Mr, or M., or Herr So-and-so, has "proved" such and such a thing in
such and such a book or dissertation, turns to the text, to find to his grievous disappointment
that nothing is "proved"--but that more or less probable arguments are advanced with less or more
temper against or in favour of this or that hypothesis. Even the dates of MSS., which in all
such cases must be regarded as the primary data, are very rarely data at all, but only (to coin,
or rather adapt, a much-needed term) speculata.

And the matter is further complicated by the facts that extremely few scholars possess equal
and adequate knowledge of Celtic, English, French, German, and Latin, and that the best palæographers
are by no means always the best literary critics.

Where every one who has handled the subject has had to confess, or should have confessed, imperfect
equipment in one or more respects, there is no shame in confessing
one's own shortcomings.

I cannot speak as a Celtic scholar; and I do not pretend to have examined MSS. But for a good
many years I have been familiar with the printed texts and documents in Latin, English, French,
and German, and I believe that I have not neglected any important modern discussions of the
subject. To have no Celtic is the less disqualification in that all the most qualified Celtic
scholars themselves admit, however highly they may rate the presence of the Celtic element in
spirit, that no texts of the legend in its romantic form at present existing in the Celtic tongues
are really ancient. And it is understood that there is now very little left unprinted that can throw
much light on the general question. I shall therefore endeavour, without entering into discussions
on minor points which would be unsuitable to the book, to give what seems to me the most probable
view of the case, corrected by (though not by any means adjusted in a hopeless zigzag of deference
to) the various authorities, from Ritson to Professor Rhys, from
Paulin Paris to M. Loth, and from San Marte to Drs Förster and Zimmer.

The first and the most important thing--a thing which has been by no means always or often
done--is to keep the question of Arthur apart from the question of the Arthurian Legend.

[Sidenote: The personality of Arthur.]

That there was no such a person as Arthur in reality was at one time a not very uncommon opinion
among men who could call themselves scholars, though of late it has yielded to probable if not
certain arguments. The two most damaging facts are the entire silence of Bede and that of Gildas
in regard to him. The silence of Bede might be accidental, and he wrote ex hypothesi nearly two
centuries after Arthur's day. Yet his collections were extremely careful, and the neighbourhood
of his own Northumbria was certainly not that in which traditions of Arthur should have been least
rife. That Gildas should say nothing is more surprising and more difficult of explanation. For
putting aside altogether the positive testimony of the Vita Gildæ, to which we shall come presently,
Gildas was, again ex hypothesi, a contemporary of Arthur's, and must have known all about him.
If the compound of scolding and lamentation known as De Excidio Britanniæ
is late and a forgery, we should expect it to contain some reference
to the king; if it is early and genuine, it is difficult to see how
such reference could possibly be omitted.

[Sidenote: The four witnesses.]

At the same time, mere silence can never establish anything but a presumption; and the presumption is in
this case rebutted by far stronger probabilities on the other side. The evidence is here drawn
from four main sources, which we may range in the order of their
chronological bearing.

First, there are the Arthurian place-names, and the traditions respecting them; secondly, the fragments
of genuine early Welsh reference to Arthur; thirdly, the famous passage of Nennius, which introduces
him for the first time to probably dated literature; fourthly, the curious references in the
above-referred-to Vita Gildæ of, or attributed to, Caradoc of Lancarvan. After this last, or at a time
contemporary with it, we come to the comparatively detailed account of Geoffrey of Monmouth, and
the beginning of the Legend proper.

[Sidenote: Their testimony.]

To summarise this evidence as carefully but as briefly as possible,
we find, in almost all parts of Britain beyond the range of the first
Saxon conquests, but especially in West Wales, Strathclyde, and Lothian,
certain place-names connecting themselves either with Arthur himself
or with the early catalogue of his battles.[44] We find allusions
to him in Welsh poetry which may be as old as the sixth century--allusions,
it is true, of the vaguest and most meagre kind, and touching no point
of his received story except his mysterious death or no-death, but
fairly corroborative of his actual existence.

                            Nennius--the much-debated
  Nennius, whom general opinion attributes to the ninth century, but
who may be as early as the eighth, and cannot well be later than the
tenth--gives us the catalogue of the twelve battles, and the exploits
of Arthur against the Saxons, in a single paragraph containing no
reference to any but military matters, and speaking of Arthur not
as king but as a dux bellorum commanding kings, many of whom were
more noble than himself.

[Footnote 44: The late Mr Skene, with great learning and ingenuity, endeavoured in his Four Ancient
Books of Wales to claim all or almost all these place-names for Scotland in the wide sense. This can
hardly be admitted: but impartial students of the historical references and the romances together
will observe the constant introduction of northern localities in the latter, and the express
testimony in the former to the effect that Arthur was general of all the British forces. We need
not rob Cornwall to pay Lothian. For the really old references in Welsh poetry see, besides Skene,
Professor Rhys, op. cit. Gildas and Nennius (but not the Vita Gildæ) will be found conveniently
translated, with Geoffrey himself, in a volume of Bohn's Historical Library, Six Old English Chronicles.
The E.E.T.S. edition of Merlin contains a very long excursus by Mr Stuart-Glennie on the place-name
question.]

The first authority from whom we get any personal account of Arthur is Caradoc, if Caradoc it
be.

The biographer makes his hero St Gildas (I put minor and irrelevant discrepancies aside) contemporary
with Arthur, whom he loved, and who was king of all Greater Britain. But his brother kings did
not admit this sovereignty quietly, and often put him to flight. At last Arthur overthrew and
slew Hoel, who was his major natu, and became unquestioned rex universalis
Britanniæ, but incurred the censure of the Church for killing Hoel.

From this sin Gildas himself at length absolved him. But King Melvas carried off King Arthur's queen,
and it was only after a year that Arthur found her at Glastonbury and laid siege to that place. Gildas
and the abbot, however, arranged matters, and the queen was given up. It is most proper to add in
this place that probably at much the same time as the writings of Caradoc and of Geoffrey (v. infra),
or at a time not very distant, William of Malmesbury and Giraldus
Cambrensis give us Glastonbury traditions as to the tomb of Arthur,
&c., which show that by the middle of the twelfth century such traditions
were clustering thickly about the Isle of Avalon.

All this time, however, it is very important to notice that there is hardly the germ, and, except
in Caradoc, not even the germ, of what makes the Arthurian Legend interesting to us, even of
what we call the Arthurian Legend.

Although the fighting with the Saxons plays an important part in the Merlin branches of the
story, it has extremely little to do with the local traditions, and was continually reduced
in importance by the men of real genius, especially Mapes, Chrestien, and, long afterwards,
Malory, who handled them. The escapade of Melvas communicates a touch rather nearer to the perfect
form, but only a little nearer to it. In fact, there is hardly more in the story at this point
than in hundreds of other references in early history or fiction to obscure kinglets who fought
against invaders.

[Sidenote: The version of Geoffrey.]

And it is again very important to observe that, though under the hands of Geoffrey of Monmouth
the story at once acquires more romantic proportions, it is still not in the least, or only
in the least, the story that we know.

The advance is indeed great. The wonder-working of Merlin is brought in to help the patriotism
of Arthur. The story of Uther's love for Igraine at once alters the mere chronicle into a romance.
Arthur, the fruit of this passion, succeeds his father, carries on victorious war at home and
abroad, is crowned with magnificence at Caerleon, is challenged by and defeats the Romans,
is about to pass the Alps when he hears that his nephew Mordred,
left in charge of the kingdom, has assumed the crown, and that Guinevere
(Guanhumara, of whom we have only heard before as "of a noble Roman
family, and surpassing in beauty all the women of the island") has
wickedly married him.

Arthur returns, defeats Mordred at Rutupiæ (after this battle Guinevere
takes the veil), and, at Winchester, drives him to the extremity of
Cornwall, and there overthrows and kills him.

 But the renowned King Arthur himself
    was mortally wounded, and "being
  carried thence to the Isle of
    Avallon to be cured of his wounds, he gave up the crown to his kinsman
Constantine."

 And so Arthur passes out of Geoffrey's
    story, in obedience to one of the
  oldest, and certainly the most
    interesting, of what seem to be the genuine Welsh notices of the
king--"Not wise is it to seek the grave of Arthur."

       

       

 [Sidenote: Its lacunæ.]
  

A few people, perhaps, who read this little book will need to be told that Geoffrey attributed
the new and striking facts which he sprung upon his contemporaries
to a British book which Walter, Archdeacon of Oxford, had brought
out of Armorica: and that not the slightest trace of this most interesting
and important work has ever been found.

It is a thousand pities that it has not survived, inasmuch as it
was not only "a very ancient book in the British tongue," but contained
"a continuous story in an elegant style."

However, the inquiry whether Walter, Archdeacon of Oxford, did or did not belong to the ancient
British family of Harris may be left to historians proper. To the specially literary historian the
chief point of interest is first to notice how little, if Geoffrey really did take his book from
"British" sources, those sources apparently contained of the Arthurian
Legend proper as we now know it.

An extension of the fighting with Saxons at home, and the addition of that with Romans abroad, the Igraine
episode, or rather overture, the doubtless valuable introduction of Merlin, the treason of
Mordred and Guinevere, and the retirement to Avalon--that is practically all. No Round Table; no
knights (though "Walgan, the king's nephew," is, of course, an early appearance of Gawain);
none of the interesting difficulties about Arthur's succession: an
entire absence of personal characteristics about Guinevere (even that
peculiarity of hers which a French critic has politely described as
her being "very subject to be carried off," and which already appears
in Caradoc, being changed to a commonplace act of ambitious infidelity
with Mordred): and, most remarkable of all, no Lancelot, and no Holy
Grail.

Nevertheless Geoffrey had, as it has been the fashion to say of late years, "set the heather
on fire," and perhaps in no literary instance on record did the blaze spread and heighten itself
with such extraordinary speed and intensity.

His book must have been written a little before the middle of the twelfth century: by the end
thereof the legend was, except for the embellishments and amplifications which the Middle Age
was always giving, complete.

[Sidenote: How the Legend grew.]

In the account of its probable origins and growth which follows nothing can be further from
the writer's wish than to emulate the confident dogmatism of those who claim to have proved
or disproved this or that fact or hypothesis.

In the nature of the case proof is impossible; we cannot go further than probability. It is unfortunate
that some of the disputants on this, as on other kindred subjects, have not more frequently remembered
the admirable words of the greatest modern practitioner and though he lacked some more recent
information, the shrewdest modern critic of romance itself.[45] I need only say that though I
have not in the least borrowed from either, and though I make neither
responsible for my views, these latter, as they are about to be stated,
will be found most to resemble those of Sir Frederic Madden in England
and M. Paulin Paris in France--the two critics who, coming after the
age of wild guesswork and imperfect reading, and before that of a
scholarship which, sometimes at least, endeavours to vindicate itself
by innovation for the sake of innovation, certainly equalled, and
perhaps exceeded, any others in their familiarity with the actual
texts.

With that familiarity, so far as MSS. go, I repeat that I do not pretend to vie. But long and diligent
reading of the printed material, assisted by such critical lights as critical practice in more
literatures than one or two for many years may give, has led me to
the belief that when they agreed they were pretty sure to be right,
and that when they differed, the authority of either was at least
equal, as authority, to anything subsequent.

Before the middle of the twelfth century we have nothing that can be called a story. At almost
that exact point (the subject of the dedication of the Historia Britonum died in 1146) Geoffrey
supplies the outlines of such a story.

 They were at once seized upon for filling
  in.

Before many years two well-known writers had translated Geoffrey's
Latin into French, another Geoffrey, Gaimar, and Wace of Jersey.

Gaimar's Brut (a title which in a short time became generic) has not come down to us: Wace's
(written in 1155) has, and though there is, as yet, no special attention bestowed upon Arthur,
the Arthurian part of the story shares the process of dilatation and amplification usual in
the Middle Ages. The most important of these additions is the appearance
of the Round Table.

[Sidenote: Layamon.]

As Geoffrey fell into the hands of Wace, so did Wace fall into those of Layamon; but here the
result is far more interesting, both for the history of the legend itself and for its connection
with England. Not only did the priest of Ernley or Arley-on-Severn do the English tongue the
inestimable service of introducing Arthur to it, not only did he write the most important book
by far, both in size, in form, and in matter, that was written in English between the Conquest
and the fourteenth century, but he added immensely to the actual
legend.

It is true that these additions still do not exactly give us the Arthur whom we know, for they still
concern the wars with the Saxons and Romans chiefly.

But if it were only that we find first[46] in Layamon the introduction of "elves" at Arthur's
birth, and his conveyance by them at death in a magic boat to Queen "Argante" at Avalon, it
would be almost enough. But there is much more.

The Uther story is enlarged, and with it the appearances of Merlin; the foundation of the Round
Table receives added attention; the voluntary yielding of Guinevere, here called Wenhaver, is
insisted upon, and Gawain (Walwain) and Bedivere (Beduer) make their
appearance.

But there is still no Lancelot, and still no Grail.

[Footnote 46: A caution may be necessary as to this word "first." Nearly all the dates are extremely
uncertain, and it is highly probable that intermediate texts of great importance are lost, or
not yet found. But Layamon gives us Wace as an authority, and this is not in Wace. See Madden's
edition (London, 1847).]

[Sidenote: The Romances proper.]

These additions, which on the one side gave the greatest part of the secular interest, on the
other almost the whole of the mystical attraction, to the complete story, had, however, it seems
probable, been actually added before Layamon wrote. For the date of the earlier version of his
Brut is put by the best authorities at not earlier than 1200, and
it is also, according to such authorities, almost certain that the
great French romances (which contain the whole legend with the exception
of part of the Tristram story, and of hitherto untraced excursions
like Malory's Beaumains) had been thrown into shape.

But the origin, the authorship, and the order of Merlin in its various forms, of the Saint Graal and
the Quest for it, of Lancelot and the Mort Artus,--these things are the centre of nearly all
the disputes upon the subject.

[Sidenote: Walter Map.]

A consensus of MS. authority ascribes the best and largest part of the prose romances,[47]
especially those dealing with Lancelot and the later fortunes of the Graal and the Round Table
company, to no less a person than the famous Englishman Walter Mapes,
or Map, the author of De Nugis Curialium, the reputed author (v. chap.
i.) of divers ingenious Latin poems, friend of Becket, Archdeacon
of Oxford, churchman, statesman, and wit.

No valid reason whatever has yet been shown for questioning this attribution, especially considering
the number, antiquity, and strength of the documents by which it is attested. Map's date (1137-96)
is the right one; his abilities were equal to any literary performance; his evident familiarity
with things Welsh (he seems to have been a Herefordshire man) would have informed him of Welsh
tradition, if there was any, and the De Nugis Curialium shows us in him, side by side with a satirical
and humorous bent, the leaning to romance and to the marvellous which only extremely shallow people
believe to be alien from humour. But it is necessary for scholarship of the kind just referred
to to be always devising some new thing. Frenchmen, Germans, and Celticising partisans have grudged
an Englishman the glory of the exploit; and there has been of late
a tendency to deny or slight Map's claims.

His deposition, however, rests upon no solid argument, and though it would be exceedingly
rash, considering the levity with which the copyists in mediæval MSS. attributed authorship,
to assert positively that Map wrote Lancelot, or the Quest of the
Saint Graal, it may be asserted with the utmost confidence that it
has not been proved that he did not.

[Footnote 47: These, both Map's and Borron's (v. infra), with some
of the verse forms connected with them, are in a very puzzling condition
for study.

M. Paulin Paris's book, above referred to, abstracts most of them;
the actual texts, as far as published, are chiefly to be found in
Hucher, Le Saint Graal (3 vols., Le Mans, 1875-78); in Michel's Petit
Saint Graal (Paris, 1841); in the Merlin of MM. G. Paris and Ulrich
(Paris, 1886).

But Lancelot and the later parts are practically inaccessible in any modern edition.]

[Sidenote: Robert de Borron.]

The other claimant for the authorship of a main part of the story--in this case the Merlin part,
and the long history of the Graal from the days of Joseph of Arimathea
downwards--is a much more shadowy person, a certain Robert de Borron,
a knight of the north of France.

Nobody has much interest in disturbing Borron's claims, though they also have been attacked;
and it is only necessary to say that there is not the slightest ground for supposing that
he was an ancestor of Lord Byron, as was once very gratuitously done,
the time when he was first heard of happening to coincide with the
popularity of that poet.

[Sidenote: Chrestien de Troyes.]

The third personage who is certainly or uncertainly connected by name with the original framework
of the legend is again more substantial than Robert de Borron, though less so than Walter Map.
 Girls who do not
know anything and who never study are always pretty. It is only the plain girl who is obliged
to be clever. The first time she sees the lover of her dear friend she begins to laud her to
the sky. She herself is looking so pretty, and she shows off in the most favorable light, while
all the time singing her dear friend's praise with such fatal persistency that she fairly makes
him sick of the sound of her name and of her namby-pamby virtues. Now the man would hardly
be human if he did not tell this artless little creature that he had had enough of her dear
friend, and that he would much prefer to talk about herself. Pouts of hurt surprise. She "thought
you were such a friend of hers!" She "only wanted to entertain you by the only subject" she
"thought would interest you." Presto! The entering wedge! She knows it, but the man does not.
He has no idea of being disloyal to his sweetheart, but he is a lost man nevertheless--lost
to the first girl and won by the second. Won in a perfectly harmless and legitimate way too.
Won while doing her duty, keeping her promise, helping her friend. Her conscience acquits her.
She has only observed and made use of her cleverness to know that too smooth and easy a course
to true love generally gives him to the other girl.

But in reality she has stolen him--she has committed a real theft. And, personally, I should
prefer to know her had she stolen money. You can jail a man who steals your watch, but the
girl who steals a man's heart away from his sweetheart walks free, and uncondemned even--to
their shame be it spoken--by those who know what she has done.

Nobody dares condemn her--even the friends of the robbed girl, for that presupposes some lack
in her charm, and gives publicity to her loss. The wronged girl, because of her pride and conventionality
and civilization, makes no outcry. A barbarian in her place would have fallen on the robber
girl in a fury and scratched her eyes out. Sometimes I am sorry that our barbaric days are over.

Some of the greatest tragedies in life have come from this disloyalty among girls in their
relations with each other.

I have no patience with those people who fall in love with forbidden property and give as their
excuse, "I couldn't help it." Such culpable weakness is more dangerous to society than real
wickedness.

Love is not a matter of infatuation. It is not the temptation which is wrong. It is the deliberate
following it up, simply because the temptation is agreeable. Of course, it is agreeable! You
are not often irresistibly tempted to go and have your teeth filled!

Men never will have done with their strictures on girls until girls achieve two things. One
is to observe more honor in their relations with each other, and the other is to learn to think.

ON THE SUBJECT OF HUSBANDS

 "All that I am, my mother made me"

Perhaps you think that girls do not know enough about other girls' husbands to discuss them
with any profit. But if there has been a dinner or theatre party within our memory where the
married girls did not take the bachelors and leave their husbands for us, we would just like
to know when it was, that's all.

I dare say it never occurred to these wives what an opportunity this custom gives us to study
social problems at close range. We girls are supposed to be blind and deaf and dumb; but we
are none of the three. We try to see all there is to see, and hear all there is to hear, and
then, when we get together, we wouldn't be human if we didn't talk it over and tell each other
how infinitely better we could manage Jessie's husband than she does, and that it seems a pity
that Carrie doesn't understand George.

I suppose it would be rather handsome of us always to pretend that we did not hear the covert
rebuke or the open sarcasm bandied about between these husbands and wives. On the whole, I
think it would be chivalrous for us to be utterly oblivious, and talk about the weather, if
anybody asked us if we knew that Mary never could spend a cent without having John ask her
what she did with it.

That is the way men do when they do not wish to tell on each other. I think men are fine in
that way. We girls all think so, only we seldom have the moral courage to emulate their admirable
example. We are so fond of "talking things over." And if the married women do not wish us to
talk their husbands over, just let them give us our own rightful property, the bachelors, and
we will never utter another cheep.

However, I would not give up my small experience with other girls' husbands for a great deal.
It has convinced me of something of which I always have been reasonably sure, and that is that
American men make the best husbands in the world, and that women who cannot get along with
Americans, and who think men of another race, who have more polish, more finesse, more veneer,
would suit them better, could not manage to live happily with the Angel Gabriel.

Dear me! If these dissatisfied American wives could only realize that an all-wise Providence
had, in the American man, given us the best article in the market, and that when we rebel at
our lot we are simply proving that we do not deserve our good fortune, they would never even
discuss the subject of having men of any other nationality.

Of course, in every nation there is a class of men who are as noble, as high-minded, as chivalrous
as even the most captious American girl could wish. But I refer to the general run of men when
I say that there is something about men born outside of America, a native selfishness or callousness,
a lack of perception and appreciation of the fineness of womanhood, amounting to a sort of
mental brutality, which wellnigh unfits them for close social contact with the super-sensitive
American woman. And just as surely as American women persist in disregarding this subtle yet
unmistakable truth, just so surely will they lay themselves open to these soul-bruises from
foreign husbands which American men, as a race, are incapable of inflicting. I say they are
incapable of inflicting them, because American men, in the face of everything said and written
to the contrary, are, in regard to women, the finest-grained race of men in the world.

Now in this generalizing, I beg that you will not accuse me of asserting that these strictures
are true of every man who is not an American, or that all American men are perfect. But I do
wish to state clearly and frankly my admiration for American men as a race. When an American
man is a gentleman, he is to my mind the most perfect gentleman that any race can produce,
because his good manners spring from his heart, and there are a few of us old-fashioned enough
to plead that politeness should go deeper than the skin.

Now if the assertion is made that the American man makes the best husband in the world, let
him not think that there is no room for improvement, for with him it is much the same as it
is with the wild strawberry. At first blush one would say that there could be no more delicious
flavor than that of the wild strawberry. Yet everybody knows what the skilled gardeners have
made of it in the form of the cultivated fruit. Nevertheless, the crude article, found growing
wild upon its native heath, is much to be preferred to the candied ginger of other nations.

After admitting that the wild strawberry is capable of cultivation, and even attaining, under
skilful care, the highest type of perfection, let no one make the mistake of thinking that
the time for such improvement is after they have been grown and placed upon the market. If
they are found to be knotty, half green, or in a state of decadence, and you are bound to buy
strawberries, you can take them, and, by your native woman's wit, you can dress them into a
state of palatableness, even if you have to reduce them to a pulp in the sacred mysteries of
a short-cake.

But in order to take all the comfort which strawberries are capable of giving to mankind, they
should be perfect in themselves when they come from the hand of the gardener--just as it was
his mother's duty to have trained that husband of yours before he came under your influence.

It really is asking too much of a woman to expect her to bring up a husband and her children
too. She vainly imagines, when she marries this piece of perfection, with whom she is so blindly
in love, that he is already trained, or, rather, that he is the one human being in the world
who has been perfect from infancy, and who never needed training. She never dreams of the curious
fact that mothers always train their daughters to make good wives, yet rarely ever think of
training their boys to make good husbands.

Therefore, unless, like Topsy, they have "just growed" good and kind and considerate, a woman
has a life-work before her in training her own husband.

But the fact of the matter is that while we girls receive specific training, to the express
end of making good wives, the boys of the family receive only general training of chivalry
and courtesy towards all women--not with a view of having to spend the greater part of their
lives with one woman, or the tact with which this one woman must be treated.

I wonder what would happen if somebody should open a Select Kindergarten for Embryo Husbands?
Yet we girls have been in a similar institution for embryo wives since childhood. We are told
in our early teens: "Well, only your mother would bear that. No husband would;" or, "You will
have to be more gentle and unselfish with your brother, if you want to make some man a good wife."

A good wife! It has a magic sound!

Of course, every girl expects to marry, and the shadowy idea of making a good wife to this
mysterious but delightfully interesting personage, who is growing up somewhere in the world,
and waiting for her, even as she is waiting for him, makes the hard task of self-discipline
easier, for we all wish to make "a good wife."

Nor are we taught alone to be gentle and sweet and faithful. We girls have to learn that all-potent
factor in a happy life--tact. We are early taught that it is not enough to master the fundamental
principles which govern the genus man. We have to discover that each man must be treated differently.
We must cater to individual tastes. We must learn individual needs, and fill them. In short,
we are taught to observe men, to study them, and then to hold ourselves accordingly.

Pray do not imagine that all this is put into words, or that we have certain hours for studying
how to make good wives, or that it is as rigid or exhausting as a broom drill. It is the intangible,
esoteric philosophy which permeates the households of thousands of American families, where
the mothers are the companions and confidantes of the daughters. It is an understood thing.
You would be surprised to know how young some girls are when they have thoroughly mastered
this wonderful tact with men. And what is it that makes the American girl so dangerous for
all the other women in the world to compete with? It is because she studies her man. And how
did she learn it? By seeing her mother manage her father--or, perhaps, by seeing how easily
her father could be managed, if her mother only understood him better.

There is a good deal of progressive thought among girls in this generation.

Why in the world mothers train their girls and boys alike up to a certain point in general
courtesy and consideration for each other, and then go on with the girls, teaching them the
gentle, faithful finesse which every wife has to understand, yet leaves her boy to "gang his
ain gait" just at the formative period of his life, I am not able to say.

If I could only hear some mother say to her son, "Don't let your slate-pencil squeak so! Try
not to make distracting noises. You may have a nervous wife, and you might just as well learn
to be quiet. There is no sense in thinking just because you are a boy that you can make unnecessary
and superfluous noises!" I think I should die of joy! Or how would it sound to hear her say,
"Whenever you come in and find your sister irritable, don't simply take yourself out of her
way. Look around and do something kind for her. Make a point of knowing what she likes and
of doing it. Life is so much more monotonous for women than for men, you should be especially
generous with your sister, so that some day you will make some sweet girl a good husband."

Can't you just see what kind of a husband that boy would make?

Romance comes later to a boy than to a girl, but it hits him just as hard when it does come,
and a boy is quite as responsive as a girl to the suggestion of a personal chivalry which shall
prepare him to be a better husband to a shadowy personality which he cannot do better than
to keep in his mind and heart.

Why does a woman, who finds it difficult, perhaps even impossible, to persuade her husband
to do certain essential things, never take pity on the poor little girl across the street,
who, in ten or fifteen years, is going to marry her son?

Take, at random, the subject of a wife's having an allowance. Thousands of wives have it, and
therefore they are not the ones we are to consider. But where there are thousands who possess
an allowance from their husbands, or who have money in their own right, there are millions
who never have a cent they are not obliged to ask their husbands for.

There is no question of gift about it. At the altar he endowed her with all his worldly goods,
and he thinks he has lived up to the letter of his vow when he tells her that all he has is
as much hers as his. But unless that oft-quoted saying is followed up by a certain sum, no
matter how small, which is in truth her very own, she feels that that clause in the marriage
service might as well be stricken out.

When wives as universally share in adding to the general prosperity of the home--by managing
the house, keeping their husband's clothes in order, and caring for the children--as men always
admit is the case, wives are actually adding dollars to their husband's income. Then ought
not a man to divide that same income with her in the form of an allowance, for which, if only
to add to her self-respect, he has no more right to call her to account than she has to insist
on seeing a list of his expenditures?

I have nothing to say about extravagant or untrustworthy wives, who do not come into the subject
at all. I am only referring to the magnificent multitude of good, careful, thrifty, typical
American wives, whose sole aim in life is to make a happy home for husband and children. Nor
am I denying that these women have all their wishes granted, and are allowed to spend their
husbands' money with reasonable freedom, provided they account for it afterwards. I am only
asserting that every married woman, from the farmer's wife to that of the bank president, should
have some money regularly which is sacredly her own.

Perhaps men think I am exaggerating the evil. Perhaps they do not know that the only advice
married women give to engaged girls which never varies is: "Be sure you ask for an allowance
from the first, because, if you don't, you may never get it."

I suppose that the majority of men do not know that their wives hate to ask them for money.
Of course it does not seem so terrible to those of us whose fathers occasionally want to keep
back enough money to buy coal when our daughterly demands get refused. But it never occurs
to us that a girl's lover-husband, this courteous stranger whom she has loved and married,
would ever forget his theatre and American-Beauty days sufficiently to say: "What did you do
with that dollar I gave you yesterday?"

Now, frankly speaking, it never occurs to unmarried girls that the honeymoon can ever wear
off. We look upon husbands as only married sweethearts. We sort of halfway believe them--at
least we used to, before we observed other girls' husbands--when they tell us that they long
for the time when they can pay our bills and buy clothes for us. We never thought, until we
were told, that any little generous arrangement, which we expected to last, must be fixed during
the first few weeks of marriage. I dare say most of us had planned to say, in answer to the
money question, "Just as you like, dear. I'd rather have you manage such matters for me. You
know so much more about them than I do." It is a horrible shock, from a sentimental point of
view, to be told to say, "I'll take an allowance, please," and then, if two amounts are mentioned,
to grab for the biggest. Oh, it is a shame! It is a shame to be told that we shall be sorry
if we don't, and to know that we shall have no opportunity to show how unselfish and trusting
we are.

It is all your fault, you men, that you do not think of these things more. You might stop a
moment to consider that it is rather a delicate matter for a woman to ask money of a man. If
your wife is like most wives, she is doing as much to help you make your money as you are.
She is keeping you well and happy and your home beautiful. You could not keep your mind on
business an hour if she did not. Therefore she deserves every dollar which, after discussing
your future life together, you feel that you can afford to give her. She ought to be made to
feel that she has earned it, and that she may spend it freely and happily, or invest it, just
as she chooses. Do you think that you would not get the whole of it back if you were ill and
needed it? It is an ungracious thing to call her to account for every dollar. How do you know
but that she wants to save a little out of the market-money to buy you a nicer birthday present
than usual?

American men are the most lavish husbands in the world. It is only that they do not think what
a joy it is to a woman to have even the smallest amount of money of her very own, concerning
which no one on earth has a right to question her.

And yet, what is the use of trying to train a husband into a habit of thought like this, when
he has been used to hearing his mother argue his father into giving her money, and yet to know
that she and all the world considered him generous, and that, in truth, he was?

A woman who suffers heartache because her husband never apologizes to her, or who endures mortification
unspeakable because she has not a penny of her own, has no right to rebel, even in her own
heart, unless she is training her son to make the sort of husband for some little girl, now
in pinafores, which she would have wished for herself.

A FEW MEN WHO BORE US

THE SELF-MADE MAN

Somebody has cleverly defined a bore as "a man who talks so much about himself that I never
can get a chance to talk about myself." But that is too narrow. I am broad-minded. I want somebody
to find a definition large enough (if possible) to include all the bores. I do not know, however,
but that I am asking too much.

Neither is this definition entirely true. For I have heard men talk about themselves for hours
at a time, and they talked so well and kept their Ego so carefully hidden that I was enchanted,
and never mentioned myself, even when they paused for breath. Then, too, I have been bored
to the verge of suicide by some worthy soul who insisted upon talking to me of (presumably)
my pet subject--myself--and who was doing his poor little best to say nice things and to be
entertaining.

A bore is a man or a woman who never knows How or When. There are times in the lives of all
of us when it bores us to be talked to of home or friends or wife or husband or mother or religion.
There are times when nothing but a large, comfortable silence can soothe the worry and fret
of a trying day. At such times let the tactless woman and the thoughtless man beware, because
everything they say will be a bore.

It is not wilful cruelty which makes us say that (to a woman) the word "bore" is in the masculine
gender and objective case, object of our deepest detestation. Men are oftener bores than women,
for two reasons: One is that they seldom stop to think that they could be a bore to anybody;
and the second is that we women never let them see that we are being bored, for it is our aim
in life to look pleasant and to keep the men's vanity done up in pink cotton, no matter if
we are secretly almost dropping from our chairs with weariness--the utter, unspeakable weariness
of the soul, compared to which weariness of the body is a luxury.

Women are too tender-hearted. A woman cannot bear to hurt a man's feelings by letting him know
that he is killing her by his stupidity. And even if she did, in the noble spirit of altruism,
rather than selfishness, the next woman, with one reproachful glance at her, would pick up
the mutilated remains of the man's vanity and apply the splints of her respectful attention
and the balm of her admiration, partly to add a new scalp to her belt, and partly to show off
the unamiability of her sister woman.

So it is of no use to kick against the pricks. Bores are in this world for a purpose--to chasten
the proud spirit of women, who otherwise might become too indolent and ease-loving to be of
any use--and they are here to stay. We have no conscience concerning women bores. We escape
from them ruthlessly. And, perhaps, because women are quicker to take a hint is the reason
there are fewer of them. It is only the men who are left helpless in their ignorance, because
no woman has the courage to tell them.

Our only defence is in telling the men in bulk what we have not the courage nor the wish to
tell the individual, and letting them sit down and think hard, applying the relentless microscope
of self-analysis to their carefully tended Ego, to see if, haply, any of these things we say
apply to themselves.

Of course, this is hard on men, because very likely some of those who have been led by women
to believe that they are entertaining, even to the verge of fascination, are the very ones
who are the greatest bores. But we women do our best. We are hampered by our supposed amiability,
and bound up by a thousand invisible cords of tact and policy to a line of action which dupes
the cleverest of men. And we are shrewd enough to know that if we should become what they now,
in the smart of their wounded vanity, would call honest, they would simply turn their broadcloth
backs upon our uncalled-for frankness and seek the honeyed society of some sweet woman who
flattered them exactly as we used to flatter them before we became so "honest."

Ah, well-a-day! Enter the self-made man. And with him the commercial spirit of the age. Enter
the clink of coin and the unctuous corpulence of a roll of bills. Enter the essence of self-satisfaction,
the glorious spectacle of a man who spells "myself" with a capital M.

Have you never noticed the change in conversation with the entrance of a new person? How, when
a lovely girl enters, the men all straighten their ties and the women moisten their lips? How,
when the new person is a self-made man, with his newness so apparent that he seems to exhale
the odor of varnish and gilt--how all repose vanishes, and whatever of crudity there is anywhere
suddenly makes itself known, and rushes forth to meet the wave of self-boasting which sweeps
all before it when the self-made man speaks?

And yet I approve of the self-made man in the abstract. It is the true spirit of Americanism
which caused him to raise himself from the ranks of the poor and obscure, and educate himself,
or, more likely still, grow rich without education. But is it necessary for him to have the
bad taste to boast of it, and never let you forget for one moment that he is the product of
man's hand and that the Creator only acted in the capacity of sponsor?

I admire the pluck, the perseverance, the indomitable energy, the ambition which produced the
man of prominence from the raw boy; but, kind Heaven, let us forget for one brief moment, if
we can, that he did this thing.

It is not the fact that he is a self-made man that bores us--we honor him for that. But it
is his vain boasting--the tactless forcing of his unwelcome personality into general conversation,
his weak vanity, which demands our admiration for the toil and hardships he has undergone,
which, if they had served the purpose they should have done, would have made him too strong
a man, and too much of a man, to force either pity or admiration from people when it was not
freely offered.

The favorite gibe of the self-made man is directed against the college graduate. Let there
be a young fellow present who is fresh from college, and let him mention any subject connected
with college life, from honors to athletics, and then, if you are hostess, sit still and let
the icy waves of misery creep over your sensitive soul, for this is the opportunity of his
life to the self-made man. Hear him tear colleges limb from limb, and cite all the failures
of which he ever has known to be those of college men. Hear him tell of the futile efforts
of college boys to get into business. Hear him drag in all the evidences of shattered constitutions,
ruined by study, and then hold your breath; for all this is but preliminary to the telling
of the story of a colossal success--the history of the self-made man. You might as well lean
back and let him have his say, for he has only been waiting all this time for an opening in
the conversation to insert the wedge of his Ego.

It seems to be the prerogative of some self-made men not only to boast of themselves, their
wives, their sons, their daughters, their houses, their horses--everything!--but to decry all
methods of achievement not their own, and all successes not won by their methods. These are
the self-made men who bring into disrepute all the grandeur and glorious achievement of their
kind. Why must they spoil it? I implore them to assume a virtue if they have it not. I beg
them, with all their getting, to get understanding. And if they will not open their eyes and
see the anguish they are causing, if they cannot detect the fixed smile of polite endurance
on the tired faces of their patient women friends, there will come a day, and we can already
see its faint glimmering in the East, when we shall not care whether they are self-made, and
we could even live through it if they were not made at all.

THE DYSPEPTIC

The dyspeptic generally wants to tell you all about it. That is a bore to begin with; for nobody
in the world wants to hear anybody in the world tell all about anything in the world. Oh, those
wearisome, breathless people, who insist upon giving you the tiresome details of insipid trivialities!
There is no escape from them; they are everywhere. They are to be found on farms, in mining-camps,
in women's clubs, in churches, jails, and lunatic asylums, and the nearest approach to a release
from them is to be fashionable, for in society nobody ever is allowed to finish a sentence.

This sort of a bore can only be explained on the microbe theory. None other can account for
its universality. You can carry contagion of it in your clothes and inoculate a person of weak
mental constitution, who is of a build to take anything, until, in a fortnight, he or she will
be a hopeless slave to the tell-all-about-everything habit. There is nothing like the pleasing
swiftness of some of our modern diseases about it--such as heart failure, which nips you off
painlessly. It is rather like the old-fashioned New England consumption, which gives you a
hectic flush and an irritating hack, but which you can thrive on for fifty years and then die
of something else.

I never heard of a yacht which did not carry at least one of this particular breed of bores
upon every trip. I never heard of a private-car party which was free from it. Or, if you do
not carry them with you, you meet them on the way, and they ruin the sunset for the whole party.

Something ought to be done about it. There ought to be a poll-tax on bores. Mothers ought to
train their children to avoid lying and boring people with equal earnestness. Infirmaries should
be established for the purpose of making the stupid interesting, or classes organized on "How
to be Brief," or on "The Art of Relating Salient Points," or on "The Best Method of Skipping
the Unessentials in Conversation." I would go, for one.

I quite envy a man who is an acknowledged bore. He is so free from responsibility. He does
not care that the conversation dies every time he shows his face. He is used to it. It is nothing
to him that clever men and women ache audibly in his presence. He has no reputation to lose.
The hostess is not a friend of his, for whom he feels that he must exert himself. A bore has
no friends. He is a social leech.

It implies, first of all, a superb conceit to think anybody wishes one to tell all about anything,
but conceit is a natural attribute--a twin brother of its sister, vanity--and everybody has
it to a greater or less degree. Indeed, the cleverest man I know--quite the cleverest--is one
who always panders to this particular foible because he recognizes its universality. He has
a country-house, which is always full of guests, with a great many girls among them. Every
afternoon, when he drives out from town, his first sentence is, "Now come, children, and tell
me all about everything. Who has been here, and what they said, and what you thought, and everything
that has happened, including all that is going to happen. Don't skip a word."

See the base flattery of that! Is it any wonder that his house is always full? What bores he
would be responsible for making if we were stupid enough to do as he asks! The chief reason
people do not is that ten people cannot tell all they know about everything, even if they want
to. He is only furnished with two ears.

The dyspeptic is one who makes the most valiant effort to try. His dyspepsia is the most important
issue of the world with him, and he will talk about it. He cannot keep still and let other
people enjoy their sound digestion and healthful sleep. He will not even let other people eat
in peace. When he refuses a dish at table he must needs tell you why--just as if you cared!

"Have some coffee, Mr. Bore?"

"No, I thank you, Madame Sans-Gene. I like coffee, but it doesn't like me!"

Irritating, maddeningly reiterated words--the trade-mark of the dyspeptic bore! I feel like
saying, "I agree with the coffee. I don't like you either!"

A dyspeptic disagrees with me as religiously as if I had eaten him.

No wonder a man is ill who never thinks or talks of anything but the seat of his ailment, for
talk about it he will, and tell you that he cannot eat hot breads or pastry or griddle-cakes
or waffles. And if any of those adorable things which your soul loves are on the table, he
will sit and watch you eat them, with his hand on his own pulse, and will entertain you with
cheerful statements of how he would be feeling if he were eating any of the deadly poisons,
until it nearly gives you indigestion to hear him describe it.

I dare say I know plenty of women dyspeptics, as long as dyspepsia is said to be our national
ailment, but if I do I never hear them talk about it.

Of course every woman knows that a sick man is sicker than a thousand sick women, each of whom
is twice as sick as he is. We all know that he can groan louder and roll his eyes higher and
keep more people flying about, and all this with just a plain pain, than his wife would do
with seven fatal ailments. Then to hear him tell about it, after he has recovered, is to imagine
that he is Lazarus over again, and that the day of miracles has returned, that he ever lived
to tell the tale. All this refers to an acute attack. But when his trouble is chronic, and
it has to do, like dyspepsia, with a man's eating!--you cannot escape. He will tell you all
about it.

In the first place, dyspepsia is such a refined and lady-like trouble. It has no disgusting
details. You can refer to it at all times without fear of nauseating your hearers. In the second
place, you can count on nearly half of your hearers having it too, as dyspepsia is almost as
catching as Christian Science.

Carlyle was the most famous of dyspeptics. But magnificent as he was in his growling, I fancy
it is more bearable to read about it than it was for that adorable wife of his to hear him
talk about it. How well we can imagine her feelings when she wrote, "The amount of bile that
he brings home is awfully grand."

I really do feel sorry for dyspeptics when I read a thing like that. I am not heartless. It
must be a sad thing not to be able to eat lobster and ice-cream together, and to have to say
"No" to broiled mushrooms, and not to dare to eat Welsh-rarebits after the theatre, and to
have to lock up your chafing-dish. But I do say this: unless a man can talk of his trouble
as cleverly as Carlyle--and some of the choice dyspeptics I know can almost do that--I want
them not to talk at all. If they suffer, let them do it in silence. If they die, let them die
entertainingly, or else, I say, don't die in public.

THE TOO-ACCURATE MAN

Women often complain that men in society will not return measure for measure in conversation,
but stalk about dumb and unanswering, leaving women gasping from the fatigue of entertaining them.

But I am on the side of the men. I always am. They are a misjudged and maligned set. I approve
of men keeping silence when they have nothing to say. It shows that they recognize their limitations
and refuse to rush in where angels fear to tread.

Is not a wise silence sometimes to be preferred to the wisest speech? Is there not often a
finer eloquence in an answering silence than the cleverest words could express?

A man who talks constantly has a thousand ways always at hand in which to make a fool of himself.
A silent man has but one, and even then there are always those who insist upon thinking that
he is silent because of his wisdom, and not from lack of it, although Eliza Leslie says, "We
cannot help thinking that when a head is full of ideas some of them must involuntarily ooze out."

But as a stimulus to conversation, an intelligently silent man is as instantaneous in his effect
as music or eating. Men have become famous as conversationists who only sat and looked admiringly
at vivacious women. It is a rare accomplishment, that of wise silence. It is more of a delicate
compliment, more condensed and boiled-down flattery, more scent of incense than the most fulsome
speech. And if one's victim is rather a voluble talker, with a reputation for wit, a man need
never rack his brains beforehand, wondering what to say, or how he can keep up with her. Let
him listen to her, with his metaphorical mouth open in wrapt admiration, and she is his.

Silence is a weapon. It is a powerful corrective when used against a silent person, who then
sees himself as others see him. It is a defence, used against the indiscreet, and in the hands
of wise men it is a suit of armor. Silence is never dangerous, unless, like a gun, in the hands
of a fool. How, then, can women complain of silent men, unless they mean fools, and if they
do, why not say so, and fortify their drawing-rooms with music-boxes or magic lanterns?

But anything so negatively unhappy as silence is the least of one's bores. One is seldom annoyed
by the persistence of a silent man, for silence often means shyness; therefore it is in our
power to curtail his usefulness. But, on the other hand, take a type of the talkative man,
the literal, too-accurate man, who insists upon finishing his sentences, and who will stop
to dot his i's and to cross his t's, and whose dates are of more moment than his soul's salvation--can
anything be done for him?

"Avoid giving invitations to bores," says a clever woman, "they will come without."

Alas, how true! The too-accurate man is ubiquitous. If you hear of him, and refuse to meet
him, it is only to find that he has married your best friend, whom worlds could not bribe you
to give up. If you weed him out of your acquaintance, it is only to realize that he was born
into your relationship a generation ago, before you could prevent it. Sometimes he is your
father, sometimes your brother. Both of these, however, can be lived down. But occasionally
you discover that, in a moment of frenzy, you have married him! Heaven help you then, for "marriage
stays with one like a murder!"

Imagine living all one's life with a man who relates thus the trivial incident of having walked
with a friend up Broadway last Thursday afternoon, when he met two little boys about ten years
old who asked him to buy a paper:

"Last week--Thursday, I think it was, though perhaps it was Friday, or, maybe, Saturday. Let
me see: when did I leave my office early? It must have been Thursday, because Friday I stayed
later than usual. Yes, it was Thursday. It was about four o'clock, perhaps a little later--a
quarter after four, or maybe half-past, but I hardly think it could have been as late as that.
I think it was nearer four than half-past. Anyway, I was walking up Broadway with a man by
the name of Bigelow. Bigelow? Bigelow? Was that his name? It commenced with B, and had two
syllables. Boswell? Blackwell? Blayney? What was that fellow's name? I never can tell a story
unless I get the man's name right. Bilton? Bashforth? Buckby? No, not Buckby, but that sounds
like it. Buckley? That's it. That was his name! I knew I'd get it. Well, I was walking up Broadway
with Buckley, and at about Thirty-fourth Street--Wait a moment--was it Thirty-fourth Street?
It couldn't have been that far up. About Thirty-second Street, I think. I don't quite remember
whether we had passed the Imperial or not. But it was within a block of it, anyway, when we
met two little boys about ten years old--perhaps one was a little older; one looked about ten,
and the other about eleven, or perhaps even twelve, although I think ten would come nearer
to it--and they asked us in a tone between a whine and a cry--the word whimper more nearly
describes it--if we would buy either a Sun or a World--I've forgotten which."

Delectable as honesty is in a bank clerk, or would be in a lawyer, one yearns for a little
less accuracy in the moral makeup of the too-accurate man; for a little of the celestial leaven
of exaggeration in the dusty dryness of his dead-level garrulousness. What difference does
it make whether the Revolutionary War took place before or after the discovery of America,
as long as you make your war anecdote interesting? Who cares whether Napoleon or Wellington
came out ahead at Waterloo, as long as your listener is kept awake by your recital?

I related a sprightly incident only last night about a watch which Francis the Second gave
to Mary Stuart, only with my usual airy touch I said Francis the Second gave it to Marie Antoinette!
What difference does it make? They were both Marys, and they are both dead.

A most unpleasant old party corrected me, and added: "Francis died about two hundred years
before Marie Antoinette was born."

"Then all the more of a compliment that he should have given her the watch!" I said. And I
fancy I had him there.

That is the sort of man who interrupts his wife's dinner-stories all the way through with,
"1812, my dear"; "Ouida, not Emerson"; "Herod, not Homer"; until I shouldn't be surprised to
see her throw a plate at his head. Oh, isn't it fine that one does not dare to do all the things
one feels like doing in society?

There is only one way to get even with the too-accurate man, and that is, when he has finished
his most exciting story, to say, "And then what happened next?"

Accuracy is almost fatal to a flow of spirits. If one is obliged to weigh one's words, one
may live to be called a worthy old soul, but one will not be in demand at dinner-parties.

The too-accurate man need not pride himself upon his honesty above his fellow-men. Oftenest
he is to be found paying lithe of mint, anise, and cumin, and neglecting the weightier matters
of the law--justice, mercy, and truth. He strains at a gnat and swallows a camel. He is not
more trustworthy than the man whose conversation is embellished with hyperbole, because he
at least has the wit to discriminate, and the too-accurate man is only stupid.

In essentials, the man who decorates his conversation with mild but pleasing patterns of that
style of statement made famous by one Ananias, is to be depended upon quite as surely as the
man who takes all the sunshine from the day, and leads one's thoughts to dwell on high, by
spending ten minutes trying to recall whether he dropped that stone on his foot before or after
dinner. He, and not your own evil nature, should be responsible for your instinctive wish that
he had happened to be toying with a bowlder instead of a small stone which could only mutilate.

The painful accuracy which makes some men such deadly bores is a form of monomania. It is the
same sort of trouble which afflicts a kleptomaniac. She will steal the veriest trash, just
so she can be stealing. He hoards the most useless trifles until his mind is nothing but a
garret filled with isolated bits of rubbish that nobody wants to hear, unless one has an essay
to write; and even then it is easier to consult the encyclopaedia.

I never believe a statement made by a too-accurate man one bit more quickly than one made by
a genial, entertaining diner-out. If it were on the subject of timetables, just between ourselves,
I should take the trouble to verify both.

THE IRRESISTIBLE MAN

To other men, the irresistible man too often means the man who publicly ogles women. That is
because men can see him. But to women, what we can see forms but a small portion of our lives.
We hear more than we see, and feel more than we hear. George Eliot says: "The best of us go
about well wadded with stupidity, otherwise we would die of the roar that lies on the other
side of silence."

But most men have to see things, and they can always see the ogling man, and he always makes
them perfectly furious. Queer, isn't it, when the Simon Tappertits of this life are the least
of the men who bore us? In fact, I never should have thought of him if some man had not spoken
of him. And while I occasionally have been honored by the exertions of one of these insects
to attract my attention, thereby proving that I am a woman, I can honestly say that I never
remember seeing one. Women who are capable of being really bored never even see such men; any
more than if you were being roasted alive you would care if a hairpin pulled.

It is a mistake to confound the irresistible man with the fool. Neither is he stupid. Very
often he is a man of no small amount of brain. He is, of course, always conceited, and generally,
though not always, handsome. I am not describing the soft, sapient, pretty man who lisps, nor
the weak-kneed young gentleman with pink cheeks who sings tenor. Far worse. The irresistible
man, as we know him, is often a man who is doing a man's work in the world, and doing it well.
He is frequently a man of character, but through that character runs this strange, irritating
thread of conceit, which blinds our eyes to whatever of real worth may be within, because of
his exasperatingly confident exterior.

We should brush him aside as carelessly as if he were a fly should there be nothing to him
worth hating. But the maddening part of it to us is that the irresistible man is worth saving,
only he will not be saved. He thinks he is perfect as he is. If he could get our point of view
and let some woman take a hand at him, she might efface his irresistibleness and make a man
of him. But no, the irresistible man is in this world to give points--not take them.

A queer thing about this particular type of the irresistible man is that he nearly always has
grown up in a small town and has only come to the city because his village got too small for
his talents. That of itself explains his whole attitude towards the world. Having probably
been the "show pupil" at school, having taken prizes and ranked first among his fellows until
he was twenty-one, he brings that confident attitude with him and plants himself in the heart
of the great city, like Ajax defying the lightning, without the thought that changed environments
might demand change of conduct as well as change in clothes.

Doubtless the whole town helped to spoil him. Doubtless he has heard all his life that the
town was too small for him, and that a man like himself ought to go to the city, where there
would be a market for his talents. Doubtless he has conquered the hearts of all the village
maidens; therefore he expects the same arts to win among city girls. This system of easy victory
and of yearning for other worlds to conquer, instead of making him fit himself capably for
a larger field, has, on account of this absurd fault of irresistibleness, only made him superficial.
His crudeness is, to the uninitiated, almost pitiful. Having never been obliged to work for
pre-eminence, he descries exertion, and never admits that he has to try hard to win anything.
His cheap little accomplishments of singing--badly--possibly even of reciting dialect with
realistic effects, he is accustomed to say he "just picked up." I often have thought that he
must have picked them up after somebody else had thrown them away. But they have been efficacious
in his town, and in a larger field, with foemen more worthy of his steel, they are intended
to enslave.

The irresistible man is too pitiful to laugh at with any degree of comfort. The pathos of the
situation is almost too apparent. That is one reason why he is allowed to go on as he is. It
is why no one has the heart to try to correct him. What can you say to a man whose confidence
in his power to please you is such that at parting he says: "I cannot spare you another evening
this week, but I'll come next Thursday if I can. Don't expect me, however, until I let you
know, and don't be disappointed if you find that I can't come, after all."

To be sure, you have not asked him to repeat his visit at all. To be sure, you have nearly
died during this call which is just over. But what are you going to do? We have a white bulldog
whose confident attitude towards the world is quite like that of the irresistible man. Jack
blunders in where nobody wants him, and puts his great, heavy paw on our best gowns, and scratches
at the door when we want to sleep, and gets under our feet when we are trying to catch a train,
and makes a nuisance of himself generally. But he is so sure that we love him that we haven't
the heart to turn him out-of-doors. We simply endure him, because he is a dumb brute who is
so used to being petted that everybody tolerates him, and nobody tries to improve him or teach
him better manners.

Confidence is a beautiful thing. But it is also one of the most delicate of attributes, and
requires the daintiest handling. The man who is confident with women must be very sure of a
personal magnetism, or of sufficient merit to insure success, otherwise his confidence will
prove the flattest of failures. The only difference between the irresistible man who bores
us to death and the successful man who is so fascinating that he cannot come too often, is
that one has confidence with nothing to base it on, and the other bases his confidence on fact.

Women are not looking for flaws in men. They are only too anxious to make the best of sorry
specimens, and shut their eyes to faults, and to coax virtues into prominence. Men have nothing
to complain of in the way women in society treat them. They get better than they deserve and
much better than they give. So all they will have to do to win a better opinion will be to
deserve it, and, if they make never so slight an advance, they will see that they are met more
than half-way by even the most captious critics of their acquaintance.

Adaptability is a heaven-sent gift. It is like the straw used in packing china. It not only
saves jarring, but it prevents worse disasters, and without it a man is only safe when he is
alone. The moment he comes into smart contact with his fellow-beings there is a crash, and
the assembled company have a vision of broken fragments of humanity, which might have remained
whole and suffered no more injury than a possible nick had the combatants been padded with
adaptability. The irresistible man is the man who thinks he can get through the world without
it. The irresistible man is the one who is so perfect in his own estimation that he needs no
change. He is beyond human help.

THE STUPID MAN

His opposite, the clever man, said to me yesterday: "You know, to be actually interested is
as likely to make one grateful as anything in this world, unless it be a realization of the
kindness of Fate in sparing us the perpetual society of fools."

The perpetual society of fools! Think of it, and then revel, you women, in the thought that
we are only bored occasionally--once a week, say, or once a day, or once every two hours, taking
our bores as we do ill-flavored medicine. It never occurred to me before I heard that phrase
that life held anything more wearisome than to be bored occasionally.

I have read Ben-Hur, and thought how awful it would be to be a galley-slave. I have read The
Seats of the Mighty, and shuddered at the idea of being imprisoned for five years alone and
without a light. I have seen a flock of sheep driven by shouting, panting, racing little boys,
and have been glad I did not have to drive sheep for my daily bread. I have rejoiced that my
lot was not that of a Paris cab-horse, but I never in all my life thought of any fate so appalling
as that contained in those words--the perpetual society of fools.

Why not reform our penitentiary methods? What is a prison cell to a clever embezzler, if he
can have books and a pipe? Nothing but a long rest for his worn-out nerves--possibly a grateful
change.

But what would be the feelings of a man of brilliant intellect--for the accomplished villain
is always clever--who was detected in his crime, and who stood breathless before his accusers,
waiting for and expecting a life sentence at hard labor, to hear the judge's voice pronounce
sentence, "Condemned for life to the perpetual society of fools!"

I believe the man would be taken from the court-room a raving maniac.

I cannot but think that a real fool is conscious of his own foolishness. He must realize his
aloofness from the rest of mankind, and in moments of such bitter self-knowledge I can picture
many whom the world regards as too far gone to comprehend their calamity praying the prayer
of the court-jester, "God be merciful to me a fool." I am a little tender towards such. I do
not condemn them. They have reached the stage when they are the victims of human pity--a lamentable
condition. But those dense persons inhabiting the thickly populated region bordering on foolishness--those
self-satisfied, uncomprehending egotists occupying the half-way house between wisdom and folly,
known as stupidity--against such my wrath burns fiercely. They are deceptive--so un-get-at-able.
They wear the semblance of wisdom, yet it is but a cloak to snare and delude mankind into testing
their intelligence. They are not labelled by Heaven, like the fools we may avoid if we will,
or to whom we may go in a spirit of philanthropy. They do not wear straw in their hair like
maniacs, nor drool like simpletons. Now they infest society clad in the most immaculate of
evening clothes. Often they are college graduates, and get along very well with other men.
They are frequently found among the rich, sometimes even among the poor. Sometimes they are
stolid and cannot understand. Sometimes they are indifferent and won't understand. Sometimes
they are English.

We women are those upon whose souls their stupidity bears most heavily. But stay--they do not
oppress all women alike! There are women whose spiritual needs never soar above the alphabet.
When these men are men of family, and one expects to find their wives sitting with clinched
hands and set teeth, simply enduring life and praying for death, one is often surprised to
see that they are generally stout women, who wear many diamonds and a bovine expression in
their eyes. Evidently there is no nervous tension in their house, and the dense man is quite
capable of comprehending the a b c of human nature and of keeping his family in flannels.

In strictly fashionable society the stupid man is not conspicuous, because one never has time
to comprehend that one is not understood. If he nods his head sagely and says nothing, one
is probably grateful and passes on to the next, thinking that he is most entertaining. But
in that society where one sometimes sits down and breathes, where conversation is considered
as a fine art, and where talk is a mutual game of battledoor and shuttlecock, then it is that
your stupid man looms up on the horizon like a blanket of clouds. 

It was at this time that Jacopone da Todi, in the intervals of his eccentric vernacular exercises,
was inspired to write the Stabat Mater. From this time comes that glorious descant of Bernard of
Morlaix, in which, the more its famous and very elegant English paraphrase is read beside it,
the more does the greatness and the beauty of the original appear. And from this time comes
the greatest of all hymns, and one of the greatest of all poems, the Dies Iræ. There have been
attempts--more than one of them--to make out that the Dies Iræ is no such wonderful thing after
all: attempts which are, perhaps, the extreme examples of that cheap
and despicable paradox which thinks to escape the charge of blind
docility by the affectation of heterodox independence.

The judgment of the greatest (and not always of the most pious) men of letters of modern times
may confirm those who are uncomfortable without authority in a different opinion. Fortunately
there is not likely ever to be lack of those who, authority or no
authority, in youth and in age, after much reading or without much,
in all time of their tribulation and in all time of their wealth,
will hold these wonderful triplets, be they Thomas of Celano's or
another's, as nearly or quite the most perfect wedding of sound to
sense that they know.

[Footnote 8: A few more precise dates may be useful. St Bernard, 1091-1153; Bernard of Morlaix,
exact years uncertain, but twelfth century; Adam of St Victor, ob. cir. 1190; Jacopone da Todi,
ob. 1306; St Bonaventura, 1221-1274; Thomas of Celano, fl. c. 1226. The two great storehouses
of Latin hymn-texts are the well-known books of Daniel, Thesaurus Hymnologicus, and Mone, Hymni
Latini Medii Ævi.

And on this, as on all matters connected with hymns, the exhaustive Dictionary of Hymnology (London,
1892) of the Rev. John Julian will be found most valuable.]

[Sidenote: The Dies Iræ.]

It would be possible, indeed, to illustrate a complete dissertation on the methods of expression
in serious poetry from the fifty-one lines of the Dies Iræ. Rhyme, alliteration, cadence,
and adjustment of vowel and consonant values,--all these things receive
perfect expression in it, or, at least, in the first thirteen stanzas,
for the last four are a little inferior.

It is quite astonishing to reflect upon the careful art or the felicitous accident of such a
line as

"Tuba mirum spargens sonum,"

with the thud of the trochee[9] falling in each instance in a different vowel; and still more
on the continuous sequence of five stanzas, from Judex ergo to non
sit cassus, in which not a word could be displaced or replaced by
another without loss.

This latter effect can rarely be attempted without a jingle: there
is no jingle here, only an ineffable melody.

After the Dies Iræ, no poet could say that any effect of poetry was, as far as sound goes, unattainable,
though few could have hoped to equal it, and perhaps no one except Dante and Shakespeare has
fully done so.

[Footnote 9: Of course no one of the four is a pure classical trochee; but all obey the trochaic
rhythm.]

Beside the grace and the grandeur, the passion and the art, of this wonderful composition, even
the best remaining examples of mediæval hymn-writing may look a little pale. It is possible
for criticism, which is not hypercriticism, to object to the pathos
of the Stabat, that it is a trifle luscious, to find fault with the
rhyme-scheme of Jesu dulcis memoria, that it is a little faint and
frittered; while, of course, those who do not like conceits and far-fetched
interpretations can always quarrel with the substance of Adam of St
Victor.

But those who care for merits rather than for defects will never
be weary of admiring the best of these hymns, or of noticing and,
as far as possible, understanding their perfection.

Although the language they use is old, and their subjects are those which very competent and not
at all irreligious critics have denounced as unfavourable to poetry,
the special poetical charm, as we conceive it in modern days, is not
merely present in them, but is present in a manner of which few traces
can be found in classical times.

And some such students, at least, will probably go on to examine
the details of the hymn-writers' method, with the result of finding
more such things as have been pointed out above.

[Sidenote: The rhythm of Bernard.]

Let us, for instance, take the
rhythm of Bernard the Englishman (as he was really, though called
of Morlaix).

"Jerusalem the Golden" has made some of its merits common property,
while its practical discoverer, Archbishop Trench, has set those of
the original forth with a judicious enthusiasm which cannot be bettered.[10]
The point is, how these merits, these effects, are produced.

The piece is a crucial one, because, grotesque as its arrangement would probably have seemed
to an Augustan, its peculiarities are superadded to, not substituted for, the requirements of classical
prosody

.


"I do," I said, with ominous distinctness.

My manner indicated his stupidity, and he resented it. He grew excited.

"Now, tell me, on your honor, do you really see anything funnier in the under side of that
sofa than in the top side?"

I could have screamed with anguish. But, being in company, I only smote my hands together in
my impotence and prayed for death.

The tension was relieved by the young son of our hostess in the library just beyond having
overheard our conversation. He laid his hand over his mouth and went into such convulsions
of silent laughter, all the time writhing and twisting his lean body into such contortions
that in watching his extraordinary gymnastics over the head of my unconscious vis-à-vis, and
wondering if the boy ever could untie himself, I forgot my suffering. I even relaxed my mental
strain and forgot the stupid man.

Would I could keep on forgetting him.

THE NEW WOMAN

            "You have taught me
  To be in love with noble thoughts."

That clever bon-mot, "To say 'everybody is talking about him' is a eulogy. To say 'every one
is talking about her' is an elegy," is no longer true, more's the pity. More's the pity, I
mean, because such a delicious bit deserves a longer life. I could weep over the early death
of an epigram with a hearty spirit, which is second only to the grief I feel at a good story
spoiled for relation's sake. Cleverness, like beauty, is its own excuse for being, and the
first attribute of the new woman is her cleverness. It is the new woman who is responsible
for the death of that epigram. But as she did not take an active part in the murder, but was
only an accessory after the fact, let us hope that she will escape with as light a sentence
as possible from that stern old judge, public opinion, who is not her friend.

The newspapers have ridiculed the new woman to such an extent, and their ridicule is so popular,
that it requires an act of physical courage to stand up in her defence and to tell the public
that the bloomer girl is not new; that they have had the newspaper creation--like the poor--with
them always; that they have passed over the real new woman without a second glance. In other
words, to assure them as delicately as possible that they have been barking up the wrong tree.

The first thing which endears the new woman to me personally, more even than her cleverness,
is that she has a sense of humor. You may deny that, if you want to. I firmly believe it, but
I am not infallible. Thank Heaven that I am not. I abominate those people who are always right.
You can't amuse yourself by picking flaws in them. They are so irritatingly conclusive. Now
I am never conclusive, and you ought to be glad of it. It makes it so much pleasanter for you
to be able to disagree with me logically.

Why have men always possessed an exclusive right to the sense of humor? I believe it is because
they live out-of-doors more. Humor is an out-of-door virtue. It requires ozone and the light
of the sun. And when the new woman came out-of-doors to live, and mingled with men and newer
women, she saw funny things, and her sense of humor began to grow and thrive. The fun of the
situation is entirely lost if you stay at home too much.

Now don't let the supersensitive men--who always want women to pursue the perfectly lady-like
employment of knitting gray socks--don't let them have a fit right here for fear women have
come out-of-doors to stay and are never going in-doors again. Even women, my dear sirs, know
enough to go in when it rains. They love a hearth-rug quite as well as a cat does. A cat and
a woman always come home to the hearth-rug. But there is very little mental exhilaration in
a hearth-rug. Lots of comfort, but little humor. The real excitement of life, at least to a
cat, is when in a morning stroll abroad she goes out of her sphere--the hearth-rug--and meets
some feline friend to whom she extends a claw, playful or otherwise; or possibly meets some
merry puppy which induces her to move rapidly up the nearest tree with an agility which you
never would believe the mother of a family could boast if you had not been an eye-witness to
the interesting scene. Such an encounter will not induce her to want to stay up a tree. It
only makes the safety of the hearth-rug more inviting. Now, if she always remained on the hearth-rug,
how could we tell, should the hearth-rug be invaded in the absence of her natural protectors,
that she could defend herself? For my part, I am glad to know, when I leave her, that she is
not so helpless or so sleepy as she looks. It is a great thing to know that a cat's tree-climbing
abilities are not hopelessly dormant. It does not make her purr the less when she is stroked.
Her fur is as soft, her ways are as gentle as they ever were, and as she lies there so quietly
upon the hearth-rug she looks as though she never had left it. Only once in a while she regards
you out of one eye in a companionable way, as who should say, "That's all right. You know I
can climb a tree when occasion requires."

The dear new woman! I like her. Perhaps she is crude in her newness. Give her time. Perhaps
she makes a little too much of her freedom. How do you know what she suffered before she became
new? Perhaps she has her faults. Are you perfect?

Of course there is the woman who shrieks on political platforms and neglects her husband, and
lets her children grow up like little ruffians; the woman who wears bloomers and bends over
her handle-bar like a monkey on a stick; the woman who wants to hold office with men and smoke
and talk like men--alas, that there is that variety of woman--but she is not new. Pray did
you never see her before she wore bloomers? Bloomers are no worse than the sort of clothes
she used to wear. Her swagger is no more pronounced now than it used to be in skirts. She has
always had bloomer instincts. You don't pretend to declare, do you, that there never were unconventional
women, ill-dressed and rowdy women, before the new woman was heard of? That is the great mistake
you make. These women are not new women. We've always had them. We never, unfortunately, have
been without them.

The real new woman is a creature quite different. She is one whom you would wish to know. She
is one whom you would invite to your most select dinners. You would be better men if you had
more friends like her, and broader-minded women if you dropped a few of those who hand you
doughnut recipes over the back fence, and who entertain you with the history of the baby's
measles, and how they are managing to meet the payments on their little house. I am not unsympathetic,
either, with the measles or the payments, but I prefer the subjects of conversation which a
new woman selects. There is more ozone in them.

The new woman whom I mean is silk-lined. She is nearly always pretty. She is always clever.
She is always a lady, and she is always good. Perhaps, to the cynical, that combination sounds
as if she might not be interesting; but she is. Of course not always. One may have all those
gifts, and yet not know how to make use of them for other people's benefit. The gift of being
interesting is a distinct one by itself. But the new woman, having fresh and outside interests,
is generally able to talk of them delightfully.

The new woman is new only in the sense that she has opened her eyes and has begun to see the
value of the simple, common, everyday truths which lie nearest to her. The whole world becomes
new to those who suddenly awake to the beauties which they never had thought of before.

Once women taught their daughters housekeeping and sewing from stern principle, and made it
neither beautiful nor attractive.

Then house-keeping went out of fashion.

Feather-headed boys married trivial girls, and began to make a home without the first gleam
of knowledge as to how the thing should be done. The foolish little wife knew not how to cook
or sew. The foolish little husband said he was glad of it. He didn't want his wife to wear
herself out in the kitchen. Servants could do such things. So they hired servants more ignorant
than themselves, "and the last state of that man was worse than the first." Children came to
them. That was the most pitiful part of all. A house may be badly managed and ignorantly cared
for, and people do not die of it, or become warped or crippled, but the soul of a child, to
say nothing of the helpless little body, can be ruined utterly through the irresponsibility
of the criminally ignorant people to whom the poor little thing is sent. Their ignorance is
so dense and deep-searching that they never know that they are ignorant. But back of it all
there is a reason. A bigoted, senseless, false, and misnamed delicacy. Mothers reared their
daughters and sent them to fulfil their mission in life, of being wives and mothers, versed
in everything except the two things they were destined to be. It was as if a physician were
taught architecture, music, and painting, and then sent out to practise his unskill in medicine
upon a helpless humanity.

Then the new woman opened her eyes.

It read like book-learning when applied to other women. Late Greek romance. Its difficulties as
a subject. Anna Comnena, &c. Hysminias and Hysmine. Its style. Its story. Its handling. Its "decadence."
Lateness of Italian. The "Saracen" theory. The "folk-song" theory. Ciullo d'Alcamo. Heavy debt to
France. Yet form and spirit both original. Love-lyric in different European countries. Position of
Spanish. Catalan-Provençal. Galician-Portuguese. Castilian. Ballads? The Poema del Cid. A Spanish
chanson de geste. In scheme and spirit. Difficulties of its prosody. Ballad-metre theory. Irregularity
of line. Other poems. Apollonius and Mary of Egypt. Berceo. Alfonso el Sabio 375

CHAPTER X.

CONCLUSION 412

INDEX 427

THE FLOURISHING OF ROMANCE

AND THE

RISE OF ALLEGORY.

[Sidenote: Reasons for not noticing the bulk of mediæval Latin literature.]

This series is intended to survey and illustrate the development of the vernacular literatures
of mediæval and Europe; and for that purpose it is unnecessary to busy ourselves with more than
a part of the Latin writing which, in a steadily decreasing but--until the end of the last century--an
always considerable proportion, served as the vehicle of literary
expression.

But with a part of it we are as necessarily concerned as we are necessarily compelled to decline
the whole. For not only was Latin for centuries the universal means
of communication between educated men of different languages, the
medium through which such men received their education, the court-language,
so to speak, of religion, and the vehicle of all the literature of
knowledge which did not directly stoop to the comprehension of the
unlearned; but it was indirectly as well as directly, unconsciously
as well as consciously, a schoolmaster to bring the vernacular languages
to literary accomplishment. They could not have helped imitating it,
if they would; and they did not think of avoiding imitation of it,
if they could. It modified, to a very large extent, their grammar;
it influenced, to an extent almost impossible to overestimate, the
prosody of their finished literature; it supplied their vocabulary;
it furnished models for all their first conscious literary efforts
of the more deliberate kind, and it conditioned those which were more
or less spontaneous.

But, even if we had room, it would profit us
little to busy ourselves with diplomatic Latin or with the Latin of
chronicles, with the Latin of such scientific treatises as were written
or with the Latin of theology. But take
these lovely girls who are tempted by society to idle away their days and waste their lives
listening to a flattery which may be but a thing of the moment, and let them have sense to
see through its hollowness, and want to be something and do something, and it becomes heroic.

Perhaps it is only a fad. Then Heaven send more fads. If it is the fashion to have a vocation
and to educate one's self along these lines which never were heard of a few years ago, then
for once fashion has accidentally become noble.

It strikes me rather that the reign of common-sense has begun--that the age of utility has
come. When nine out of every ten of the girls you meet in smart society have a distinct vocation
of their own; when a girl who only sings or plays or crochets is considered by her sister-women
to be a butterfly; when society girls are being trained nurses; when, if you are paying calls
upon a fashionable friend, you are quite apt to be told that she is living at Hull House this
month; when a girl whose face generally appears in the society column suddenly comes out as
the composer of a new song; when a girl who dances best at balls calmly announces that she
is taking a course at the university; when everything nowadays is gone into so seriously, the
time has come to look the question of the new woman squarely in the face--to put a stop to
cheap witticisms at her expense and to give her your honest respect.

The new woman has attacked the problem of how to live. Not how to live for show, not how to
veneer successfully, but how to get the most good out of life. She is not simply endeavoring
to kill time as she once was. She is trying to live each day for itself. She is not living
so much in the to-morrows which never come. Having begun to earn her own money, she is learning
the value of her father's--a thing the American father has been trying to teach her for fifty
or a hundred years, but she could not learn because she saw it come so easily and she let it
go so freely.

A man said to me not long ago, "What has got into the girls? Has it become the fashion to economize?
All the nicest girls I know are talking of the value of money and of how much is wasted unthinkingly.
Are we poor bachelors to take courage and believe that we can afford one of these beautiful
luxuries in wives?"

Alas, it is anything but a hint to take courage; for this heavenly phase of the new woman means
that when she has learned that she can support herself, so that in case her riches take wings
she need not be forced to drudge at uncongenial employment, or to marry for a home, she will
be more particular than ever in the kind of a man she marries. For in fitting herself for marriage
she is learning quite as well the kind of husband she ought to have. And she will not be as
apt to marry a man on account of his clothes or because he dances divinely as once she might
have done.

I do not mean to say that the new woman will not marry. In point of fact she will--if properly
urged by the right man. But she will not marry so early, so hurriedly, nor so ill-advisedly
as before. And therefore the men whom new women marry will do well to realize the compliment
of her choice; for it will mean that, according to her light, he has been weighed in the balance
and not found wanting. Of course the other women marry on that principle too. The only difference
between the new woman and her sisters is in the amount of her light and the use she makes of it.

It is the man who marries the new woman who is going to get the most out of this life; for
even in living there is everything in knowing how. And far from leaving man out of her problem
in life, her philosophy is teaching her to look for his possibilities with the same anxiety
that she employs in studying her own; that to adapt herself to his individuality need not necessarily
imperil her own; that the first element in the forming of this perfect home which it is her
ambition to establish is perfect congeniality of spirit between herself and her husband.

It is as if the new woman were striving, by making the best of her present environments, and
simply developing her woman nature instead of struggling to usurp man's, to enunciate a philosophy
of life which I shall so dignify homely duties and beautify the commonplace that her creed
might well be:

"We shall pass through this world but once. If there be any kindness we can show, or any good
thing we can do to any fellow-being, let us do it now. Let us not defer nor neglect it, for
we shall not pass this way again."

THE END

