JOHN CORWELL, SAILOR AND MINER; and POISONOUS FISH

By Louis Becke

T. Fisher Unwin, 1901

JOHN CORWELL, SAILOR AND MINER

I

"Am I to have no privacy at all?" demanded the Governor irritably as the orderly again tapped
at the open door and announced another visitor. "Who is he and what does he want?"

"Mr. John Corwell, your Excellency, master of the cutter Ceres, from the South Seas."

The Governor's brows relaxed somewhat. "Let him come in in ten minutes, Cleary, but tell him
at the same time that I am very tired--too tired to listen unless he has something of importance
to say."

The day had indeed been a most tiring one to the worthy Governor of the colony of New South
Wales, just then struggling weakly in its infancy, and only emerging from the horrors of actual
starvation, caused by the utter neglect of the Home authorities to send out further supplies
of provisions. Prisoners of both sexes came in plenty, but brought nothing to eat with them;
the military officers who should have helped him in his arduous labours were secretly plotting
against him, and their spare time--and they had plenty--was devoted to writing letters home
to highly-placed personages imploring them to induce the Government to break up the settlement
and not "waste the health and lives of even these abandoned convicts in trying to found a colony
in the most awful and hideous desert the eye of man had ever seen, a place which can never
be useful to man and is accursed by God." But the Governor took no heed. Mutiny and discontent
he had fought in his silent, determined way as he fought grim famine, sparing himself nothing,
toiling from dawn till dark, listening to complaints, remedying abuses, punishing with swift
severity those who deserved it, and yet always preserving the same cold, unbending dignity
of manner which covered a highly-sensitive and deeply sympathetic nature.

But on this particular day, fatigue, the intense heat, which had prevailed, a violent quarrel
between the intriguing major commanding the marines, and many other lesser worries, had been
almost more than he could bear, so it may well be imagined that he was more inclined for rest
than talk.

Ten, twenty minutes, and then the thin, spare figure raised itself wearily from the rude sofa.
He must see his visitor. He had promised to do so, and the sooner it was over the better. He
called to the orderly.

"Tell Mr.--Corwell you said?--to come in."

A heavy step sounded on the bare floor, and one ot the finest specimens of manhood Governor
Arthur Phillip had ever seen in all his long naval career stood before him and saluted. There
was something so pleasant and yet so manly in the handsome, cleanshaven and deeply-bronzed
face, that the Governor was at once attracted to him.

"Be seated, Mr. Corwell," he said in his low, yet clear tones. "I am very tired, so you must
not keep me long."

"Certainly not, your Excellency. But I thought, sir, that you would prefer to hear the report
of my voyage personally. I have discovered a magnificent harbour north of the Solomon Islands,
and----"

"Ha! And so you came to me. Very sensible, very sensible of you. I am obliged to you, sir.
Tell me all about it."

"Certainly, your Excellency; but I regret I have intruded on you this evening. Perhaps, sir,
you will permit me to call again to-morrow?"

"No, no, not at all," was the energetic reply. I am always ready to hear anything of this nature.

"I knew that, sir, for the masters of the Breckenbridge and another transport told me that
you were most anxious to learn of any discoveries in the Pacific Islands."

"Very true, sir. I am looking forward to hear from them and from the masters of other transports
which I am inducing to follow the whale fishery on their return voyage to England via Batavia.
But so far I have heard nothing from any one of them."

Encouraged and pleased at the Governor's manner, the master of the Ceres at once produced a
roughly executed plan and a detailed written description of the harbour, which, he asserted
with confidence, was one of the finest in that part of the Pacific. A broad, deep stream of
water ran from the lofty range of mountains which traversed the island north and south and
fell into a spacious bay, on the shores of which was a large and populous native village, whose
inhabitants had treated Cornell and the few men of his ship's company with considerable kindness,
furnishing them not only with wood and water, but an ample supply of fresh provisions as well.

During the two weeks that the Ceres lay at anchor, Corwell and two or three of his hands unhesitatingly
trusted themselves among the natives, who escorted them inland and around the coast. Everywhere
was evidence of the extraordinary fertility of the island, which, in the vicinity of the seashore,
was highly cultivated, each family's plantation being enclosed by stone fences, while their
houses were strongly built and neatly constructed. The broad belt of the slopes of the mountains
were covered with magnificent timber, which Corwell believed to be teak, equal in quality to
any he had seen in the East Indies, and which he said could be easily brought down to the seashore
for shipment owing to there being several other large streams beside the one on whose banks
the principal village was built.

The Governor was much interested, and complimented the young seaman on the manner in which
he had written out his description of the place and his observations on the character and customs
of the inhabitants.

"Such information as you have given me, Mr. Corwell, is always valuable, and I give you my
best thanks. I wish I could do more; and had I the means, men, and money to spare I should
send a vessel there and to other islands in the vicinity to make further examination, for I
believe that from those islands to the northward we can obtain invaluable food supplies in
the future. The winds are more favourable for making a quick voyage there and back than they
are to those groups to the eastward; but," and here he sighed, "our condition is such that
I fear it will be many years ere His Majesty will consent to such an undertaking. But much
may be done at private cost--perhaps in the near future."

The young man remained silent for a moment or two; then with some hesitation he said, as he
took a small paper packet from his coat pocket and handed it to the Governor, "Will your Excellency
look at this and tell me what it is. I--I imagine it is pure gold, sir."

"Gold, gold!" and something like a frown contracted the Governor's pale brows; "ever since
the settlement was formed I've been pestered with tales of gold, and a pretty expense it has
run me into sending parties out to search for it. Why, only six months ago a rascally prisoner
gulled one of my officers into letting him lead an expedition into the bush--the fellow had
filed down a brass bolt--" he looked up and caught sight of the dark flush which had suddenly
suffused his visitor's face--"but I do not for a moment imagine you are playing upon my credulity,
Mr. Corwell."

He untied the string and opened the packet, and in an instant an exclamation of astonishment
and pleasure escaped as he saw that the folds of paper held quite three ounces of bright and
flaky water-worn gold.

"This certainly is gold, sir. May I ask where you obtained it?"

"I made the voyage to Sydney Cove to tell your Excellency of two discoveries--one was of the
fine harbour, the other was of this gold, which my wife (who is a native of Ternate) and myself
ourselves washed out of the bed of a small stream; the natives helped us, but attached not
the slightest value to our discovery. In fact, sir, they assured us as well as they could that
much more was to be had in every river on the island."

"Your wife was it, then, or yourself, who first recognised what it was?"

"She did, sir. She has seen much of it in the hands of the Bugis and Arab traders in her native
country."

The Governor moved his slender forefinger to and fro amid the shining, heavy particles, then
he pondered deeply for some minutes.

"Tell me frankly, Mr. Corwell--why did you make a long voyage to this settlement to tell me
of your discovery?"

"In the hope, sir, that you would advise and perhaps assist me. My crew are Malays and Chinese
and would have murdered me if they knew what I knew. Will your Excellency tell me the proper
course to pursue so that I may be protected in my discovery? I am a poor man, though my ship
is my own, but she is old and leaky and must undergo heavy repairs before she leaves Sydney
Cove again; my present crew I wish to replace by half a dozen respectable Englishmen, and----" 

Unfortunately, he had not Boswell's address and talent for recording gossip, or the Anecdotes
would have been a much more racy book. Spence was certainly an amiable, but I think a very
weak man; and it appears to me that his learning has been overrated. He might indeed have been
well designated as "a fiddle-faddle bit of sterling."
I have the original MS. of the two last Dialogues of the Essay on
the Odyssey as written by Spence, and on the first page is the following
note:--"The two last Evenings corrected by Mr. Pope." Yet, if such an officer were available, Mr. Corwell,
I would be strongly tempted to send him with you, hoist the British flag, and then urge the
Home Government to confirm my action and secure to you the right, subject to the King's royalties,
to work these gold deposits. But I am powerless--much as I wish to aid you."

A look of disappointment clouded the young captain's handsome features.

"Would your Excellency permit me to endeavour to find three or four seamen myself? There is
a transport ready to sail for England, and I may be able to get some men from her."

"I doubt it. Unless you revealed the object of your voyage--which would be exceedingly foolish
of you--you could not induce them to make a voyage in such a small vessel as yours to islands
inhabited mostly by ferocious savages. But this much I can and will do for you. I will direct
Captain Hunter of the Sirius, the only King's ship I have here, to set his carpenters to work
on your vessel as soon as ever you careen her; I will supply you at my own private cost with
arms and ammunition and a new suit of sails. Provisions I cannot give you--God knows we want
them badly enough ourselves, although we are not now in such a bad plight as we were ten months
ago. Yet for all that I may be able to get you a cask or two of beef."

"That is most generous of you, sir. I will not, however, take the beef, your Excellency. But
for the sails and the repairs to my poor little vessel I thank you, sir, most heartily and
sincerely. And I pledge you my word of honour, as well as giving you my written bond, that
I will redeem my obligations to you."

"And if you fail I shall be content, for I well know that it will be no fault of yours. But
stay, Mr. Corwell; I must have one condition."

"Name it, sir."

"You too must pledge me your honour that you will not reveal the secret of your discovery of
gold to any one in the settlement. This I do not demand--I ask it as a favour."

Then the Governor took him, guardedly enough, into his confidence. With a thousand convicts,
most of them utter ruffians, guarded by a scanty force or marines, the news of gold having
been found would, he was sure, have a disastrous effect, and lead to open revolt. The few small
merchant ships which were in port were partly manned by convict seamen, and there was every
likelihood of them being seized by gangs of desperate criminals, fired with the idea of reaching
the golden island. Already a party of convicts had escaped with the mad idea of walking to
China, which they believed was only separated from Australia by a large river which existed
a few hundred miles to the northward of the settlement. Some of them died of thirst, others
were slaughtered by the blacks, and the wounded and exhausted survivors were glad to make their
way back again to their gaolers.

Cornell listened intently, and gave his promise readily. Then he rose to go, and the Governor
held out his hand.

"Good evening, Mr. Cornell. I must see you again before you sail."

II

One evening, three weeks later--so vigorously had the carpenter's mates from the old frigate
Sirius got through their work--the Ceres was ready for sea. She was to sail on the following
morning, and Corwell, having just returned from the shore, where he had been to say goodbye
to the kind-hearted Governor, was pacing the deck with his wife, his smiling face and eager
tones showing that he was well pleased.

He had reason to be pleased, for unusual luck had attended him. Not only had his ship been
thoroughly and efficiently repaired, but he had replaced six of his untrustworthy Malays by
four good, sturdy British seamen, one of whom he had appointed mate. These men had arrived
at Sydney Cove in a transport a few days after his interview with the Governor; the transport
had been condemned, and Corwell, much to his delight, found that out of her crew of thirty,
four were willing to come with him on what he cautiously described as a "voyage of venture
to the South Seas." All of them had served in the navy, and the captain of the transport and
his officers gave them excellent characters for sobriety and seamanship. Out of the sixty or
seventy pounds which still remained to him he had given them a substantial advance, and the
cheerful manner in which they turned to and helped the carpenters from the frigate convinced
him that he had secured decent, reliable men, to whom he thought he could reveal the real object
of his voyage later on.

*****

Two years before Cornell had been mate of a "country" ship employed in trading between Calcutta
and the Moluccas. The Ternate agent of the owners of the ship was an Englishman named Leighton,
a widower with one daughter, whose mother had died when the girl was fifteen. With this man
the young officer struck up a friendship, and before six months had passed he was the acknowledged
suitor of Mary Leighton, with whom he had fallen in love at first sight, and who quickly responded
to his affection. She was then twenty-two years of age, tall and fair, with dark hazel eyes,
like her English mother, and possessed of such indomitable spirit and courage that her father
often laughingly declared it was she, and not he, who really managed the business which he
controlled.

And she really did much to help him; she knew his weak, vacillating, and speculative nature
would long since have left them penniless had he not yielded to her advice and protests on
many occasions, Generous and extravagantly hospitable, he spent his money lavishly, and had
squandered two or three fortunes in wild business ventures in the Indian Seas instead of saving
one. Latterly, however, he had been more careful, and when Corwell had made his acquaintance
he had two vessels--a barque and a brig--both of which were very profitably engaged in the
Manila-China trade, and he was now sanguine or mending his broken fortunes.

Isolated as were father and daughter from the advantages of constant intercourse with European
society, the duty of educating the girl was a task of love to her remaining parent, who, before
he entered "John Company's" service, had travelled much in Europe. Yet, devoted as he was to
her, and looking forward with some dread to the coming loneliness of life which would be his
when she married, he cheerfully gave his consent to her union with John Cornell, for whom he
had conceived a strong liking, and who, he knew, would make her a good husband.

They were married at Batavia, to which port they were accompanied by Mr. Leighton, who, during
the voyage, had pressed Corwell to leave his then employment and join him in a venture which
had occupied his mind for the past year. This was to despatch either the barque or brig, laden
with trade goods, to the Society Islands in the South Pacific, to barter for coconut oil and
pearl shell.

Leighton was certain that there was a fortune awaiting the man who entered upon the venture,
and his arguments so convinced the young man that he consented.

On arrival at Batavia they found there the officers and crew of a shipwrecked English vessel,
and one of the former eagerly took Corwell's place as chief mate, his captain offering no objection.
A few weeks after Mr. Leighton hired the Ceres to take himself, his daughter, and her husband
back to Ternate, eager to begin the work of fitting out one of his vessels for the voyage that
was to bring them fortune. He, it was arranged, was to remain at Ternate, Mary was to sail
with her husband to the South Seas.

But a terrible shock awaited them. As the Ceres sailed up to her anchorage before Mr. Leighton's
house, his Chinese clerk came on board with the news that the barque had foundered in a typhoon,
and the brig had been plundered and burnt by pirates within a few miles of Canton. The unfortunate
man gave one last appealing look at his daughter and then fell on the deck at her feet He never
spoke again, and died in a few hours. When his affairs came to be settled up, it was found
that, after paying his debts, there was less than four hundred pounds left--a sum little more
than that which Corwell had managed to save out of his own wages.

"Never mind, Jack," said Mary. "'Tis little enough, but yet 'tis enough. And, Jack, let us
go away from here. I should not care now to meet any of the people father knew in his prosperity."

Cornell kissed his wife, and then they at once discussed the future. Half an hour later he
had bought the Ceres from her captain (who was also the owner), paid him his money and taken
possession. Before the week was out he had bought all the trade goods he could afford to pay
for, shipped a crew of Malays and Chinese, and, with Mary by his side, watched Ternate sink
astern as the Ceres began her long voyage to the South Seas.

After a three weeks' voyage along the northern and eastern shores of New Guinea the Ceres came
to an anchor in the harbour which Cornell had described to the Governor. The rest of his story,
up to the time of his arrival in Sydney Cove, the reader knows. The longest remonstrance occurs at p. 6. of the Fifth Dialogue.

Spence had written:--"The Odyssey, as a moral poem, exceeds all the writings of the ancients: it
is perpetual in forming the manners, and in instructing the mind; it sets off the duties of
life more fully as well as more agreeably than the Academy or Lyceum. Horace ventured to say
thus much of the Iliad, and certainly it may be more justly said
of this later production by the same hand."

For the words in Italics Pope has substituted:--"Horace, who was so well acquainted with the
tenets of both, has given Homer's poems the preference to either:"
and says in a note:--"I think you are mistaken in limiting this commendation
and judgment of Horace to the Iliad.

At p. 34. Then telling the mate to keep
away a couple of points, he went below to pore over the plan of the harbour, a copy of which
had been taken by the Governor, As he studied it his wife's fingers passed lovingly through
and through his curly locks. He looked up, put his arm around her waist, and swung her to a
seat on his knees.

"I think, Mary, I can tell the men now."

"I'm sure you can! The sooner you take them into your confidence the better."

Corwell nodded. During the voyage he had watched the mate and three white seamen keenly, and
was thoroughly satisfied with them. The remainder of the crew--three Manila men and two Penang
Malays--did their duty well enough, but both he and his wife knew from long experience that
such people were not to be trusted when their avarice was aroused. He resolved, therefore,
to rely entirely upon his white crew and the natives of the island to help him in obtaining
the gold. Yet, as he could not possibly keep the operations a secret from the five men he distrusted,
he decided, as a safeguard against their possible and dangerous ill-will, to promise them double
wages from the day he found that gold was to be obtained in payable quantities. As for the
mate and three other white men, they should have one-fifth of all the gold won between them,
he keeping the remaining four-fifths for himself and wife.

He put his head up the companion-way and called to the man whom he had appointed mate.

"Come below, Mallett, and bring Totten, Harris, and Sam with you."

Wondering what was the matter the four men came into the cabin. As soon as they were standing
together at the head of the little table, the captain's wife went quietly on deck to see that
none of the coloured crew came aft to listen.

"Now, men," said Corwell, "I have something important to tell you. I believe I can trust you."

Then in as few words as possible he told them the object of the voyage and his intentions towards
them. At first they seemed somewhat incredulous, but when they were shown some of the gold
their doubts vanished, and they one and all swore to be honest and true to him and to obey
him faithfully whether afloat or ashore, in fair or evil fortune.

From his scanty store of liquor the captain took a bottle of rum, and they drank to their future
success; then Corwell shook each man's hand and sent him on deck.

Just before dusk the Ceres ran in and dropped her clumsy, wooden-stocked anchor in the crystal-clear
water, a few cables' length away from the village. As the natives recognised her a chorus of
welcoming shouts and cries pealed from the shore from five hundred dusky-hued throats.

III

A blazing, tropic sun shone in mid-heaven upon the motionless waters of the deep, land-locked
bay in which the Ceres lay, with top-mast struck and awnings spread fore and aft. A quarter
of a mile away was the beach, girdled with its thick belt of coco-palms whose fronds hung limp
and hot in the windless air as if gasping for breath. Here and there, among the long line of
white, lime-washed canoes, drawn up on the sand, snowy white and blue cranes stalked to and
fro seeking for the small thin-shelled soldier crabs burrowing under the loose débris of leaves
and fallen palm-branches to escape the heat.

A few yards back from the level of high-water mark clustered the houses of the native village,
built on both sides of the bright, fast-flowing stream which here, as it debouched into the
sea, was wide and shallow, showing a bottom composed of rounded black stones alternating with
rocky bars. Along the grassless banks, worn smooth by the constant tread of naked feet, grew
tall many-hued crotons, planted and carefully tended by their native owners, and shielded from
the rays of the sun by the ever-present coco-palms. From either side of the bank, looking westward
towards the forest, there was a clear stretch of water half a mile in length, then the river
was hidden from view, for in its course from the mountains through the heavily-jungled littoral
it took many bends and twists, sometimes running swiftly over rocky, gravelly beds, sometimes
flowing noiselessly through deep, muddy-bottomed pools and dank, steamy swamps, the haunt of
the silent, dreaded alligator.

At the head of the straight stretch of water of which I have spoken there was on the left-hand
bank of the river an open grassy sward, surrounded by clumps of areca and coco-palms, and in
the centre stood a large house, built by native hands, but showing by various external signs
that it was tenanted by people other than the wild inhabitants of the island. Just in front
of the house, and surrounded by a number of canoes, the boat belonging to the Ceres was moored
to the bank, and under a long open-sided, palm-thatched shed, were a number of brown-skinned
naked savages, some lying sleeping, others squatting on their hams, energetically chewing betel
nut.

As they talked and chewed and spat out the scarlet juice through their hideous red lips and
coaly black teeth, a canoe, paddled by two natives and steered by Mallet, the mate of the Ceres,
came up the river. The instant it was seen a chorus of yells arose from the natives in the
long hut, and Mary Corwell came to the open doorway of the house and looked out.

"Wake up, wake up, Jack!" she cried, turning her face inwards over her graceful shoulder, "here
is Mallet."

Her voice awoke her husband, who in an instant sprang from his couch and joined her, just as
Mallet--a short, square-built man of fifty--stepped out of the canoe and walked briskly towards
them, wiping his broad, honest face with a blue cotton handkerchief.

"Come inside, Mallet. 'Tis a bit cooler in here. I'm sorry I sent you down to the ship on such
a day as this."

Mallet laughed good-naturedly. "I didn't mind it, sir, though 'tis a powerful hot day, and
the natives are all lying asleep in their huts; they can't understand why us works as we do
in the sun. Lord, sir! How I should like to see old Kingsdown and Walmer Castle to-day, all
a-white with snow. I was born at Deal."

Mary Cornell brought the old seaman a young coconut to drink, and her husband added a little
rum; Mallet tossed it off and then sat down.

"Well, sir, the ship is all right, and those chaps aboard seem content enough. But I'm afeared
that the worms are a-getting into her although she is moored right abreast of the river. So
I took it on me to tell Totten and Harris to stay aboard whilst I came back to ask you if it
wouldn't be best for us to bring her right in to the fresh water, and moor her here, right
abreast o' the house. That'll kill any worms as has got into her timbers. And we can tow her
in the day after to-morrow, when there will be a big tide."

"You did quite right, Mallet. Very likely the worms have got into her timbers in spite of her
being abreast of the river's mouth. I should have thought of this before."

"Ah, Jack," said his wife, with a smile, "we have thought too much of our gold-getting and
too little of the poor old Ceres."

"Well, I shall think more of her now, Mary. And as the rains will be on us in a few days--so
the natives say--and we can do no more work for three months, I think it will be as well for
us to sail the Ceres over to that chain of lagoon islands about thirty miles from here. I fear
to remain here during the wet season, on account of the fever."

After further discussion it was decided that Jack and Mallet, with some natives, should make
an early start in the morning for their mining camp, six miles away, at the foot of the range,
and do a long, last day's work, returning to the house on the following day. Meanwhile a message
was to be sent to Harris and Totten to bring the vessel into the creek as soon as the tide
served, which would be in forty-eight hours. Then, whilst she lay for a week in the fresh water,
so as to kill the suspected teredo navalis worms, which Mallet feared had attacked her, she
was to be made ready for the short voyage of thirty miles over to a cluster of islands enclosing
a spacious lagoon, where Corwell intended to beach her till the rainy season was over, when
he would return to work a very promising stream in another locality. Already he and his men,
aided by the natives, had, in the four months that had passed since they arrived, won nearly
five hundred ounces of gold, crude as were their appliances.

"Jack," said his wife, "I think that, as you will be away all day and night, to-morrow I shall
go on board and see what I can do. I'll make the men turn to and give the cabin a thorough
overhauling. Marawa, the chiefs wife, has given me a lot of sleeping-mats, and I shall throw
those old horrible flock mattresses overboard, and we shall have nice clean mats instead to
lie on."

* * * * *

At daylight Mallet aroused the natives who were to accompany him and the captain, and then
told off two of them to make the boat ready for Mrs. Corwell. Then he returned to the house
and called out--

"The boat is ready, sir."

"So am I, Mallet," replied Mary, tying on her old-fashioned sun-hood. Then she turned to her
husband. "Jack, darling, this will be the very first time in our married life that I have ever
slept away from you, and it shall be the last, too. But I do want to surprise you when you
see our cabin again."

She put her lips up to him and kissed him half a dozen times. "There, that's a good-night and
good morning three times over. Now I'm ready."

Corwell and Mallet walked down to the boat with her and saw her get in. She kissed her hand
to them and in a few minutes was out of sight.

IV

A light, cool breeze, which had set in at daylight, was blowing when Mary Corwell boarded the
Ceres. Totten and Harris met her at the gangway, caps in hand. Poor Sam, their former shipmate,
had died of fever a month before. They were delighted to hear that she intended to remain on
board, and Harris at once told Miguel, the scoundrelly-faced Manila cook, to get breakfast ready.

"And you must have your breakfast with me," said Mary, "and after that you must obey my orders.
I am to be captain to-day."

* * * * *

As she and the two seamen sat aft under the awning, at their breakfast, Selak, the leading
Malay, and his fellows squatted on the fore-hatch and talked in whispers.

"I tell thee," said Selak, "that I have seen it. On the evening of the day when the man Sam
died and was buried, I was sitting outside the house. It was dark, and the Tuan Korwal thought
I had returned to the ship. I crept near and listened. They were speaking of what should be
done with the dead man's share of the gold. Then I looked through the cave side of the house,
and--dost remember that white basin of thine, Miguel?"

The Manila man nodded.

"The white woman, at a sign from her husband, went into the inner room and brought it out and
placed it on the table. It was full to the brim with gold! and there was more in a bag!"

His listeners drew nearer to him, their dark eyes gleaming with avarice.

"Then the Tuan said, 'None of Sam's gold will I or my wife touch. Let it be divided among you
three. It is but fair.'

"They talked again, and then Mallet said to the Tuan, 'Captain, it shall be as you wish. But
let it all go together till the time comes for thee to give us our share.'

"I watched the white woman take the basin and the bag, put them into a box, and place the box
in a hole in the ground in her sleeping-room. Then I came away, for my heart was on fire with
the wrong that hath been done to us."

He rose to his feet and peered round the corner of the galley. Mary and the two seamen were
eating very leisurely.

"Three of them are here now and will sleep aboard to-night. God hath given them into our hands!"

"And what of the other two?--they are strong men," asked a wizen, monkey-faced Malay, nicknamed
Nakoda (the captain).

"Bah! What is a giant if he sleeps and a kriss is swept across his throat, or a spear is thrust
into his back from behind? They, too, shall die as quickly as these who sit near us. Now listen.
But sit thou out on the deck, Miguel, so that thou canst warn us if either of those accursed
dogs approach."

The cook obeyed him silently.

"This it is to be. To-night these three here shall die in their sleep, silently and without
a sound. Then we, all but thou, Nakoda, shall take the boat and go to the house. Both the Tuan
and Mallet sleep heavily, and"--he drew his hand swiftly across his tawny throat.

"And then?" queried Nakoda.

"And then the gold--the gold, or our share of which we have been robbed--is ours, and the ship
is ours, and I, Selak, will guide ye all to Dobbo in the Aru Islands, where we shall be safe,
and become great men."

"But," muttered another man, "what if these black sons of Shaitan here of the Island turn upon
us after we have slain the white men?"

Selak laughed scornfully. "The sound of a gun terrifies them. They are cowards, and will not
seek to interfere with us."

*****

Night had fallen. The two white seamen, tired out with their day's work, had spread their mats
on the poop, and were sound in slumber. Below in the cabin, the captain's wife lay reading
by the light of a lamp; and Selak, standing in the waist, could see its faint reflection shining
through the cabin door, which opened on to the main deck. Sitting on the fore-deck, with their
hands clutching their knives, his companions watched him.

At last the light was lowered, and Mary closed her eyes and slept.

The Malay waited patiently. One by one the remaining native fires on the shore went out; and,
presently, a chill gust of air swept down from the mountains, and looking shoreward he saw
that the sky to the eastward was quickly darkening and hiding the stars--a heavy downpour of
rain was near.

He drew his kriss from its tortoiseshell sheath and felt the edge, made a gesture to the crouching
tigers for'ard, and then stepped lightly along the deck to the open cabin door; the other four
crept after him, then stopped and waited--for less than a minute.

A faint, choking cry came from the cabin, and then Selak came out, his kriss streaming with blood.

"It is done," he whispered, and pointing to the poop he sprang up.

"Hi, there! what's the matter?" cried Totten, who had heard the feint cry; and then, too late,
he drew his pistol from his belt and fired--as Selak's kriss plunged into his chest. Poor Harris
was slaughtered ere he had opened his eyes.

Spurning Totten's body with his naked foot, Selak cursed it. "Accursed Christian dog! Would
I could bring thee to life so that I might kill thee again!" Then, as he heard the rushing
hum of the coming rain squall, and saw that the shore was hidden from view, as if a solid wall
of white stone had suddenly arisen between it and the ship, he grinned.

"Bah! what does it matter? Had it been a cannon instead of a pistol it could scarce have been
heard on the shore in such a din."

Ordering the bodies of the two seamen to be thrown overboard, Selak, the most courageous, entered
the cabin, took a couple of muskets from the rack, and some powder and ball from the mate's
berth, and returning to his followers, bade them bring the boat alongside.

"Throw the woman after them," he cried to Nakoda, as the boat pushed off into the darkness,
just as the hissing rain began. "We shall return ere it is dawn."

Nakoda would have sprung over the side after the boat, but he feared the sharks even more than
Selak's kriss; so running for'ard, he crept into his bunk and lay there, too terrified to move.

* * * * *

Mallet and Corwell, with the natives, worked hard till near sunset, and then ceased.

"There's nearly five ounces in that lot, Mallet," said the captain, pointing to two buckets
of wash-dirt. "Let us have a bathe, and then get something to eat before it is too dark."

"The natives say we ought to get back to the house, sir, instead of sleeping here tonight.
They say a heavy storm is coming on, and we'll be washed out of the camp."

"Very well, Mallet I don't want to stay here, I can assure you. Tell them to hurry up, then.
Get the shovels and other gear, and let us start as quickly as possible. It will take us a
good three hours to get back to the house."

By sunset they started, walking in single file along the narrow, dangerous mountain-path, a
false step on which meant a fall of hundreds of feet.

Half-way down, the storm overtook them, but guided by the surefooted natives they pressed steadily
on, gained the level ground, and at last reached the house about ten o'clock.

"Now that we have come so far we might as well go on board and give my wife a surprise," said
Corwell to Mallet. "Look, the rain is taking off."

"Not for long, sir. But if we start at once we may get aboard afore it starts again."

Two willing natives, wet and shivering as they were, quickly baled out a canoe, and in a few
minutes they were off, paddling down towards the sea. But scarce had they gone a few hundred
yards when another sudden downpour of rain blotted out everything around them. But the natives
paddled steadily on amid the deafening roar; the river was wide, and there was no danger of
striking anything harder than the hanging branch of a tree or the soft banks.

"I thought I heard voices just now," shouted Mallet.

"Natives been out fishing," replied Corwell.

As the canoe shot out through the mouth of the river into the open bay the rain ceased as suddenly
as it began, and the Ceres loomed up right ahead.

"Don't hail them, Mallet. Let us go aboard quietly."

They clambered up the side, the two natives following, and, wet and dripping, entered the cabin.

Corwell stepped to the swinging lamp, which burnt dimly, and pricked up the wick. His wife
seemed to be sound asleep on the cushioned transom locker.

"Mary," he cried, "wake up, dearest. We---- ... Oh my God,Mallet!"

He sprang to her side, and kneeling beside the still figure, placed his hand on the blood-stained
bosom.

"Dead! Dead! Murdered!" He rose to his feet, and stared wildly at Mallet, swayed to and fro,
and then fell heavily forward.

As the two natives stood at the cabin door, gazing in wondering horror at the scene, they heard
a splash. Nakoda had jumped overboard and was swimming ashore.

*****

Long before dawn the native war-drums began to beat, and when Selak and his fellow-murderers
reached the mouth of the river they ran into a fleet of canoes which waited for them. They
fought like the tigers they were, but were soon overcome and made prisoners, tied hand and
foot, and carried ashore to the "House of the Young Men." The gold was taken care of by the
chief, who brought it on board to Corwell.

"When do these men die?" he asked,

"To-day," replied Corwell huskily; "to-day, after I have buried my wife."

On a little island just within the barrier reef, she was laid to rest, with the never-ending
cry of the surf for her requiem.

At sunset, Corwell and Mallet left the ship and landed at the village, and as their feet touched
the sand the war-drums broke out with deafening clamour. They each carried a cutlass, and walked
quickly through the thronging natives to the "House of the Young Men."

"Bring them out," said Corwell hoarsely to the chief.

One by one Selak and his fellow-prisoners were brought out and placed on their feet, the bonds
that held them were cut, and their hands seized and held widely apart. And then Corwell and
Mallet thrust their cutlasses through the cruel hearts.

*****

POISONOUS FISH OF THE PACIFIC ISLANDS

Many years ago I was sent with a wrecking party of native seamen to take possession of a Swedish
barque which had gone ashore on the reef of one of the Marshall Islands, in the North Pacific.
My employers, who had bought the vessel for £100, were in hopes that she might possibly be
floated, patched up, and brought to Sydney. However, on arriving at the island I found that
she was hopelessly bilged, so we at once set to work to strip her of everything of value, especially
her copper, which was new. It was during these operations that I made acquaintance with both
poisonous and stinging fish. There were not more than sixty or seventy natives living on the
island, and some of these, as soon as we anchored in the lagoon, asked me to caution my own
natives--who came from various other Pacific islands--not to eat any fish they might catch
in the lagoon until each one had been examined by a local man. I followed their injunction,
and for two or three weeks all went well; then came trouble.

I had brought down with me from Sydney a white carpenter--one of the most obstinate, cross-grained
old fellows that ever trod a deck, but an excellent workman if humoured a little. At his own
request he lived on board the wrecked barque, instead of taking up his quarters on shore in
the native village with the rest of the wrecking party. One evening as I was returning from
the shore to the schooner--I always slept on board--I saw the old man fishing from the waist
of the wreck, for it was high tide, and there was ten feet of water around the ship. I saw
him excitedly haul in a good-sized fish, and, hailing him, inquired how many he had caught,
and if he were sure they were not poisonous? He replied that he had caught five, and that "there
was nothin' the matter with them." Knowing what a self-willed, ignorant man he was, I thought
I should have a look at the fish and satisfy myself; so I ran the boat alongside and clambered
on board, followed by two of my native crew. The moment we opened the fishes' mouths and looked
down their throats we saw the infallible sign which denoted their highly poisonous condition--a
colouring of bright orange with thin reddish-brown streaks. The old fellow grumbled excessively
when I told him to throw them overboard, and then somewhat annoyed me by saying that all the
talk about them being unsafe was bunkum. Doubling the Cape, Od. 9. 90. Of Architraves, Colonnades,
and the like, Od. 3. 516." Pope has erased this and the references, and says:--"These are great
faults; pray don't point 'em out, but spare your servant."

At p. 16. Spence had written:--"Yellow is a proper epithet of fruit; but not of fruit that we
say at the same time is ripening into gold." Upon which Pope observes:--"I think yellow may be s'd
to ripen into gold, as gold is a deeper, fuller colour than yellow." Again: "What is proper in
one language, may not be so in another. Were Homer to call the sea a thousand times by the title
of [Greek: porphureos], 'purple deeps' would not sound well in English.
The reason's evident: the word 'purple' among us is confined to one
colour, and that not very applicable to the deep. His revolver lay on the deck near him--he had fired it to bring
assistance. I need not here describe the peculiarly drastic remedies adopted by the natives
to save the man's life. They at first thought the case was a hopeless one, but by daylight
the patient was out of danger. He was never able to turn to again as long as we were on the
island, and suffered from the effects of the fish for quite two or three years. He had, he
afterwards told me, made up his mind to eat some of the fish that evening to show me that he
was right and I was wrong.

A few weeks after this incident myself and a native lad named Viri, who was one of our crew
and always my companion in fishing or shooting excursions, went across the lagoon to some low
sandy islets, where we were pretty sure of getting a turtle or two. Viri's father and mother
were Samoans, but he had been born on Nassau Island, a lonely spot in the South Pacific, where
he had lived till he was thirteen years of age. He was now fifteen, and a smarter, more cheerful,
more intelligent native boy I had never met.

His knowledge of bird and fish life was a never-ending source of pleasure and instruction to
me, and the late Earl of Pembroke and Sir William Flower would have delighted in him.

It was dead low tide when we reached the islets, so taking our spears with us we set out along
the reef to look for turtle in the many deep and winding pools which broke up the surface of
the reef. After searching for some time together without success, Viri left me and went off
towards the sea, I keeping to the inner side of the lagoon. Presently in a shallow pool about
ten feet in circumference I espied a small but exceedingly beautiful fish. It was about four
inches in length, and two and a half inches in depth, and as it kept perfectly still I had
time to admire its brilliant hues--blue and yellow-banded sides with fins and tail tipped with
vivid crimson spots. Around the eyes were a number of dark yellowish or orange-coloured rings,
and the eyes themselves were large, bright, and staring. It displayed no alarm at my presence,
but presently swam slowly to the side of the pool and disappeared under the coral ledge. I
determined to catch and examine the creature, and in a few minutes I discovered it resting
in such a position that I could grasp it with my hand. I did so, and seizing it firmly by the
back and belly, whipped it up out of the water, but not before I felt several sharp pricks
from its fins. Holding it so as to study it closely, I suddenly dropped it in disgust, as strange
violent pains shot through my hand. In another two minutes they had so increased in their intensity
that I became alarmed and shouted to Viri to come back. Certainly not more than five or ten
minutes elapsed before he was with me; to me it seemed ages, for by this time the pain was
excruciating. A look at the fish told him nothing; he had never seen one like it before. How
I managed to get back to the schooner and live through the next five or six hours of agony
I cannot tell. Twice I fainted, and at times became delirious. The natives could do nothing
for me, but said that the pain would moderate before morning, especially if the fish was dead.
Had its fins struck into my foot instead of my hand I should have died, they asserted; and
then they told the mate and myself that one day a mischievous boy who had speared one of these
abominable fish threw it at a young woman who was standing some distance away. It struck her
on the foot, the spines penetrating a vein, and the poor girl died in terrible agony on the
following day. By midnight the pain I was enduring began to moderate, though my hand and arm
were swollen to double the proper size, and a splitting headache kept me awake till daylight.
The shock to the system affected me for quite a week afterward.

During many subsequent visits to the Marshall Group our crews were always cautioned by the
people of the various islands about eating fish or shell-fish without submitting them to local
examination. In the Radack chain of this widely spread out archipelago we found that the lagoons
were comparatively free from poisonous fish, while the Ralick lagoons were infested with them,
quite 30 per cent, being highly dangerous at all times of the year, and nearly 50 per cent
at other seasons. Jaluit Lagoon was, and is now, notorious for its poisonous fish. It is a
curious fact that fish of a species which you may eat with perfect safety, say, in the middle
of the month, will be pronounced by the expert natives to be dangerous a couple of weeks later,
and that in a "school" of pink rock bream numbering many hundreds some may have their poison
highly developed, others in but a minor degree, whilst many may be absolutely free from the
taint. In the year 1889 the crew of a large German ship anchored in one of the Marshall Islands
caught some very large and handsome fish of the bream kind, and the resident natives pronounced
them "good." Three or four days later some more were taken, and the cook did not trouble to
ask native opinion. The result was that eight or nine men were taken seriously ill, and for
some time the lives of several were despaired of. Two of them had not recovered the use of
their hands and feet at the end of ten weeks, and their faces, especially the eyes and mouth,
seemed to be permanently, though slightly distorted. All the men agreed in one particular,
that at midday they suffered most--agonising cramps, accompanied by shooting pains in the head
and continuous vomiting to the point of exhaustion, these symptoms being very pronounced during
the first week or eight days after the fish had been eaten.

That kind-hearted and unfortunate officer, Commodore J. G. Goodenough, took an interest in
the poisonous and stinging fish of the Pacific Islands, and one day showed me, preserved in
spirits of wine, a specimen of the dreaded no'u fish of the Hervey Group--one of the most repulsive-looking
creatures it is possible to imagine out of a child's fairy book. The deadly poison which this
fish ejects is contained in a series of sacs at the base of the spines, and the commodore intended
to submit it to an analyist. By a strange coincidence this gallant seaman a few months afterwards
died from the effects of a poisoned arrow shot into his side by the natives of Nukapu, one
of the Santa Cruz group of islands.

This no'u however, which is the nofu of the Samoans, and is widely known throughout Polynesia,
and Melanesia under different names, does not disguise its deadly character under a beautiful
exterior like the stinging fish of Micronesia, which I have described above. The nofu which
is also met with on the coasts of Australia, is a devil undisguised, and belongs to the angler
family. Like the octopus or the death-adder (Acanthopis antarctica) of Australia, he can assimilate
his colour to his environment. His hideous wrinkled head, with his staring goggle eyes, are
often covered with fine wavy seaweed, which in full-grown specimens sometimes extends right
down the back to the tail. From the top of the upper jaw, along the back and sides, are scores
of needle-pointed spines, every one of which is a machine for the ejection of the venom contained
at the root. As the creature lies hidden in a niche of coral awaiting its prey--it is a voracious
feeder--it cannot be distinguished except by the most careful scrutiny; then you may see that
under the softly waving and suspended piece of seaweed (as you imagine it to be) there are
fins and a tail. And, as the nofu has a huge mouth, which is carefully concealed by a fringe
of apparently harmless seaweed or other marine growth, he snaps up every unfortunate small
fish which comes near him. In the Pacific Islands the nofu (i.e., "the waiting one ") is generally
a dark brown, inclining to black, with splashes or blotches of orange, or marbled red and grey.
In Australian waters--I have caught them in the Parramatta river, Port Jackson--they are invariably
either a dark brown or a horrid, dulled yellow.

Despite its poison-injecting apparatus this fish is eaten by the natives of the Society, Hervey,
and Paumotu groups of islands, in the South Pacific, where its flesh is considered a delicacy.
It is prepared for cookery by being skinned, in which operation the venomous sacks are removed.
In 1882, when I was living on the island of Peru in the Gilbert Group (the Francis Island of
the Admiralty charts), a Chinese trader there constantly caught them in the lagoon and ate
them in preference to any other fish. Here in Peru the nofu would bury itself in the soft sand
and watch for its prey, and could always be taken with a hook. And yet in Eastern Polynesia
and in the Equatorial Islands of the Pacific many deaths have occurred through the sting of
this fish, children invariably succumbing to tetanus within twenty-four hours of being stung.

A little more about poisonous fish, i.e., fish which at one time of the year are good and palatable
food and at others deadly. In the lagoon island of Nukufetau (the "De Peyster Island" of the
charts), where the writer lived for twelve months, the fish both within the lagoon and outside
the barrier reef became highly poisonous at certain times of the year. Flying-fish (which were
never caught inside the lagoon) would be safe to eat if taken on the lee side of the island,
dangerous, or at least doubtful, if taken on the weather side; manini, a small striped fish
much relished by the natives, would be safe to eat if caught on the reef on the western side
of the island, slightly poisonous if taken four miles away on the inside shore of the eastern
islets encompassing the lagoon. Sharks captured outside the reef, if eaten, would produce symptoms
of poisoning--vomiting, excessive purging, and tetanus in a modified form; if caught inside
the reef and eaten no ill effects would follow. Crayfish on one side of the lagoon were safe;
three miles away they were highly impregnated with this mysterious poison, the origin of which
has not yet been well defined by scientists.

