The howling dervishes have already begun to howl as we open the portals leading into their
place of worship by the influence of a cherik placed in the open palm of a sable eunuch at
the door; but it is only the overture, for it is half an hour later when the interesting part
of the programme begins.  The first hour seems to be devoted to preliminary meditations and
comparatively quiet ceremonies; but the cruel-looking instruments of self-flagellation hanging
on the wall, and a choice and complete assortment of drums and other noise-producing but unmelodious
instruments, remind the visitor that he is in the presence of a peculiar people.  Sheepskin
mats almost cover the floor of the room, which is kept scrupulously clean, presumably to guard
against the worshippers soiling their lips whenever they kiss the floor, a ceremony which they
perform quite frequently during the first hour; and everyone who presumes to tread within that
holy precinct removes his over-shoes, if he is wearing any, otherwise he enters in his stockings.
At five o'clock the excitement begins; thirty or forty men are ranged around one end of the
room, bowing themselves about most violently, and keeping time to the movements of their bodies
with shouts of "Allah.  Allah." and then branching off into a howling chorus of Mussulman supplications,
that, unintelligible as they are to the infidel ear, are not altogether devoid of melody in
the expression, the Turkish language abounding in words in which there is a world of mellifluousness.
A dancing dervish, who has been patiently awaiting at the inner gate, now receives a nod of
permission from the priest, and, after laying aside an outer garment, waltzes nimbly into the
room, and straightway begins spinning round like a ballet-dancer in Italian opera, his arms
extended, his long skirt forming a complete circle around him as he revolves, and his eyes
fixed with a determined gaze into vacancy.  Among the howlers is a negro, who is six feet three
at least, not in his socks, but in the finest pair of under-shoes in the room, and whether
it be in the ceremony of kissing the floor, knocking foreheads against the same, kissing the
hand of the priest, or in the howling and bodily contortions, this towering son of Ham performs
his part with a grace that brings him conspicuously to the fore in this respect.  But as the
contortions gradually become more-violent, and the cry of "Allah akbar.  Allah hai!" degenerates
into violent grunts of " h-o-o-o-o-a-hoo-hoo," the half-exhausted devotees fling aside everything
but a white shroud, and the perspiration fairly streams off them, from such violent exercise
in the hot weather and close atmosphere of the small room.  The exercises make rapid inroads
upon the tall negro's powers of endurance, and he steps to one side and takes a breathing-spell
of five minutes, after which he resumes his place again, and, in spite of the ever-increasing
violence of both lung and muscular exercise, and the extra exertion imposed by his great height,
he keeps it up heroically to the end.

For twenty-five minutes by my watch, the one lone dancing dervish - who appears to be a visitor
merely, but is accorded the brotherly privilege of whirling round in silence while the others
howl-spins round and round like a tireless top, making not the slightest sound, spinning in
a long, persevering, continuous whirl, as though determined to prove himself holier than the
howlers, by spinning longer than they can keep up their howling - a fair test of fanatical
endurance, so to speak.  One cannot help admiring the religious fervor and determination of
purpose that impel this lone figure silently around on his axis for twenty-five minutes, at
a speed that would upset the equilibrium of anybody but a dancing dervish in thirty seconds;
and there is something really heroic in the manner in which he at last suddenly stops, and,
without uttering a sound or betraying any sense of dizziness whatever from the exercise, puts
on his coat again and departs in silence, conscious, no doubt, of being a holier person than
all the howlers put together, even though they are still keeping it up.  As unmistakable signals
of distress are involuntarily hoisted by the violently exercising devotees, and the weaker
ones quietly fall out of line, and the military precision of the twists of body and bobbing
and jerking of head begins to lose something of its regularity, the six "encouragers," ranged
on sheep-skins before the line of howling men, like non-commissioned officers before a squad
of new recruits, increase their encouraging cries of "Allah.  Allah akbar" as though fearful
that the din might subside, on account of the several already exhausted organs of articulation,
unless they chimed in more lustily and helped to swell the volume.

Little children now come trooping in, seeking with eager anticipation the happy privilege of
being ranged along the floor like sardines in a tin box, and having the priest walk along their
bodies, stepping from one to the other along the row, and returning the same way, while two
assistants steady him by holding his hands.  In the case of the smaller children, the priest
considerately steps on their thighs, to avoid throwing their internal apparatus out of gear;
but if the recipient of his holy attentions is, in his estimation, strong enough to run the
risk, he steps square on their backs, The little things jump up as sprightly as may be, kiss
the priest's hand fervently, and go trooping out of the door, apparently well pleased with
the novel performance.  Finally human nature can endure it no longer, and the performance terminates
in a long, despairing wail of "Allah.  Allah.  Allah!" The exhausted devotees, soaked wet with
perspiration, step forward, and receive what I take to be rather an inadequate reward for what
they have been subjecting themselves to - viz., the privilege of kissing the priest's already
much-kissed hand, and at 5.45 P.M. the performance is over.  I take my departure in time to
catch the six o'clock boat for Galata, well satisfied with the finest show I ever saw for a
cherik.  I have already made mention of there being many beautiful sea-side places to which
Constantinopolitans resort on Sundays and holidays, and among them all there is no lovelier
spot than the island of Prinkipo, one of the Prince's Islands group, situated some twelve miles
from Constantinople, down the Gulf of Ismidt.  Shelton Bey (Colonel Shelton), an English gentleman,
who superintends the Sultan's cannon-foundry at Tophana, and the well-known author of Shelton's
" Mechanic's Guide," owns the finest steam-yacht on the Bosphorus, and three Sundays out of
the five I remain here, this gentleman and his excellent lady kindly invite me to visit Prinkipo
with them for the day.

On the way over we usually race with the regular passenger steamer, and as the Bey's yacht
is no plaything for size and speed, we generally manage to keep close enough to amuse ourselves
with the comments on the beauty and speed of our little craft from the crowded deck of the
other boat.  Sometimes a very distinguished person or two is aboard the yacht with our little
company, personages known to the Bey, who having arrived on the passenger-boat, accept invitations
for a cruise around the island, or to dine aboard the yacht as she rides at anchor before the
town.  But the advent of the " Americanish Velocipediste " and his glistening machine, a wonderful
thing that Prinkipo never saw the like of before, creates a genuine sensation, and becomes
the subject of a nine-days' wonder.  Prinkipo is a delightful gossipy island, occupied during
the summer by the families of wealthy Constantinopolitans and leading business men, who go
to and fro daily between the little island and the city on the passenger-boats regularly plying
between them, and is visited every Sunday by crowds in search of the health and pleasure afforded
by a day's outing.  While here at Constantinople I received by mail from America a Butcher
spoke cyclometer, and on the second visit to Prinkipo I measured the road which has been made
around half the island; the distance is four English miles and a fraction.  The road was built
by refugees employed by the Sultan during the last Russo-Turkish war, and is a very good one;
for part of the distance it leads between splendid villas, on the verandas of which are seen
groups of the wealth and beauty of the Osmanli capital, Armenians, Greeks, and Turks - the
latter ladies sometimes take the privilege of dispensing with the yashmak during their visits
to the comparative seclusion of Prinkipo villas - with quite a sprinkling of English and Europeans.
The sort of impression made upon the imaginations of Prinkipo young ladies by the bicycle is
apparent from the following comment made by a bevy of them confidentially to Shelton Bey, and
kindly written out by him, together with the English interpretation thereof.  The Prinkipo
ladies' compliment to the first bicycle rider visiting their beautiful island is: "O Bizdan
kaydore ghyurulduzug em nezalcettt sadi bir dakika ulchum ghyuriorus nazaman bir dah backiorus
O bittum gitmush." (He glides noiselessly and gracefully past; we see him only for a moment;
when we look again he is quite gone.) The men are of course less poetical, their ideas running
more to the practical side of the possibilities of the new ox-rival, and they comment as follows:
"Onum beyghir hich-bir-shey yemiore hich-bir-shey ichmiore Inch yorumliore ma sheitan gibi
ghiti-ore," (His horse, he eats nothing, drinks nothing, never gets tired, and goes like the
very devil.) It is but fair to add, however, that any bold Occidental contemplating making
a descent on Prinkipo with a, "sociable" with a view to delightful moonlight rides with the
fair; authors of the above poetic contribution will find himself "all at sea" upon, his arrival,
unless he brings a three-seated machine, so that the mamma can be accommodated with a seat
behind, since the daughters of Prinkipo society never wander forth by moonlight, or any other
light, unless thus accompanied, or by some; equally staid and solicitous relative.

For the Asiatic tour I have invented a "bicycle tent" - a handy contrivance by which the bicycle
is made to answer the place of tent poles.  The material used is fine, strong sheeting, that
will roll up into a small space, and to make it thoroughly water-proof, I have dressed it with
boiled linseed oil.  My footgear henceforth will be Circassian moccasins, with the pointed
toes sticking up like the prow of a Venetian galley.  I have had a pair made to order by a
native shoemaker in Galata, and, for either walking or pedalling, they are ahead of any foot-gear
I ever wore; they are as easy as a three-year-old glove, and last indefinitely, and for fancifulness
in appearance, the shoes of civilization are nowhere. Three days before starting out I receive
friendly warnings from both the English and American consul that Turkey in Asia is infested
with brigands, the former going the length of saying that if he had the power he would refuse
me permission to meander forth upon so risky an undertaking.  I have every confidence, however,
that the bicycle will prove an effectual safeguard against any undue familiarity on the part
of these frisky citizens.  Since reaching Constantinople the papers here have published accounts
of recent exploits accomplished by brigands near Eski Baba.  I have little doubt but that more
than one brigand was among my highly interested audiences there on that memorable Sunday.

The Turkish authorities seem to have made themselves quite familiar with my intentions, and
upon making application for a teskere (Turkish passport) they required me to specify, as far
as possible, the precise route I intend traversing from Scutari to Ismidt, Angora, Erzeroum,
and beyond, to the Persian frontier.  An English gentleman who has lately travelled through
Persia and the Caucasus tells me that the Persians are quite agreeable people, their only fault
being the one common failing of the East: a disposition to charge whatever they think it possible
to obtain for anything.  The Circassians seem to be the great bugbear in Asiatic Turkey.  I
am told that once I get beyond the country that these people range over - who are regarded
as a sort of natural and half-privileged freebooters - I shall be reasonably safe from molestation.
It is a common thing in Constantinople when two men are quarrelling for one to threaten to
give a Circassian a couple of medjedis to kill the other.  The Circassian is to Turkey what
the mythical "bogie" is to England; mothers threaten undutiful daughters, fathers unruly sons,
and everybody their enemies generally, with the Circassian, who, however, unlike the "bogie"
of the English household, is a real material presence, popularly understood to be ready for
any devilment a person may hire him to do.

The bull-dog revolver, under the protecting presence of which I have travelled thus far, has
to be abandoned here at Constantinople, having proved itself quite a wayward weapon since it
came from the gunsmith's hands in Vienna, who seemed to have upset the internal mechanism in
some mysterious manner while boring out the chambers a trifle to accommodate European cartridges.
My experience thus far is that a revolver has been more ornamental than useful; but I am now
about penetrating far different countries to any I have yet traversed.  Plenty of excellently
finished German imitations of the Smith & Wesson revolver are found in the magazines of Constantinople;
but, apart from it being the duty of every Englishman or American to discourage, as far as
his power goes, the unscrupulousness of German manufacturers in placing upon foreign markets
what are, as far as outward appearance goes, the exact counterparts of our own goods, for half
the money, a genuine American revolver is a different weapon from its would-be imitators, and
I hesitate not to pay the price for the genuine article.  Remembering the narrow escape on
several occasions of having the bull-dog confiscated by the Turkish gendarmerie, and having
heard, moreover, in Constantinople, that the same class of officials in Turkey in Asia will
most assuredly want to confiscate the Smith & Wesson as a matter of private speculation and
enterprise, I obtain through the British consul a teskere giving me special permission to carry
a revolver. Subsequent events, however, proved this precaution to be unnecessary, for a more
courteous, obliging, and gentlemanly set of fellows, according to their enlightenment, I never
met any where, than the government officials of Asiatic Turkey.  Were I to make the simple
statement that I am starting into Asia with a pair of knee-breeches that are worth fourteen
English pounds (about sixty-eight dollars) and offer no further explanation, I should, in all
probability, be accused of a high order of prevarication. Nevertheless, such is the fact; for
among other subterfuges to outwit possible brigands, and kindred citizens, I have made cloth-covered
buttons out of Turkish liras (eighteen shillings English), and sewed them on in place of ordinary
buttons.  Pantaloon buttons at $54 a dozen are a luxury that my wildest dreams never soared
to before, and I am afraid many a thrifty person will condemn me for extravagance; but the
"splendor" of the Orient demands it; and the extreme handiness of being able to cut off a button,
and with it buy provisions enough to load down a mule, would be all the better appreciated
if one had just been released from the hands of the Philistines with nothing but his clothes
- and buttons - and the bicycle.  With these things left to him, one could afford to regard
the whole matter as a joke, expensive, perhaps, but nevertheless a joke compared with what
might have been.  The Constantinople papers have advertised me to start on Monday, August 10th,
"direct from Scutari." I have received friendly warnings from several Constantinople gentlemen,
that a band of brigands, under the leadership of an enterprising chief named Mahmoud Pehlivan,
operating about thirty miles out of Scutari, have beyond a doubt received intelligence of this
fact from spies here in the city, and, to avoid running direct into the lion's mouth, I decide
to make the start from Ismidt, about twenty-five miles beyond their rendezvous.  A Greek gentleman,
who is a British subject, a Mr. J.  T. Corpi, whom I have met here, fell into the hands of
this same gang, and being known to them as a wealthy gentleman, had to fork over 3,000 ransom;
and he says I would be in great danger of molestation in venturing from Scutari to Ismidt after
my intention to do so has been published.

CHAPTER X.

THE START THROUGH ASIA.

In addition to a cycler's ordinary outfit and the before-mentioned small wedge tent I provide
myself with a few extra spokes, a cake of tire cement, and an extra tire for the rear wheel.
This latter, together with twenty yards of small, stout rope, I wrap snugly around the front
axle; the tent and spare underclothing, a box of revolver cartridges, and a small bottle of
sewing-machine oil are consigned to a luggage-carrier behind; while my writing materials, a
few medicines and small sundries find a repository in my Whitehouse sole-leather case on a
Lamson carrier, which also accommodates a suit of gossamer rubber.

The result of my study of the various routes through Asia is a determination to push on to
Teheran, the capital of Persia, and there spend the approaching winter, completing my journey
to the Pacific next season.

Accordingly nine o'clock on Monday morning, August 10th, finds me aboard the little Turkish
steamer that plies semi-weekly between Ismidt and the Ottoman capital, my bicycle, as usual,
the centre of a crowd of wondering Orientals.  This Ismidt steamer, with its motley crowd of
passengers, presents a scene that upholds with more eloquence than words Constantinople's claim
of being the most cosmopolitan city in the world; and a casual observer, judging only from
the evidence aboard the boat, would pronounce it also the most democratic.  There appears to
be no first, second, or third class; everybody pays the same fare, and everybody wanders at
his own sweet will into every nook and corner of the upper deck, perches himself on top of
the paddle-boxes, loafs on the pilot's bridge, or reclines among the miscellaneous assortment
of freight piled up in a confused heap on the fore-deck; in short, everybody seems perfectly
free to follow the bent of his inclinations, except to penetrate behind the scenes of the aftmost
deck, where, carefully hidden from the rude gaze of the male passengers by a canvas partition,
the Moslem ladies have their little world of gossip and coffee, and fragrant cigarettes.  Every
public conveyance in the Orient has this walled-off retreat, in which Osmanli fair ones can
remove their yashmaks, smoke cigarettes, and comport themselves with as much freedom as though
in the seclusion of their apartments at home.

Greek and Armenian ladies mingle with the main-deck passengers, however, the picturesque costumes
of the former contributing not a little to the general Oriental effect of the scene.  The dress
of the Armenian ladies differs but little from Western costumes, and their deportment would
wreathe the benign countenance of the Lord Chamberlain with a serene smile of approval; but
the minds and inclinations of the gentle Hellenic dames seem to run in rather a contrary channel.
Singly, in twos, or in cosey, confidential coteries, arm in arm, they promenade here and there,
saying little to each other or to anybody else.  By the picturesqueness of their apparel and
their seemingly bold demeanor they attract to themselves more than their just share of attention;
but with well-feigned ignorance of this they divide most of their time and attention between
rolling cigarettes and smoking them.  Their heads are bound with jaunty silk handkerchiefs;
they wear rakish-looking short jackets, down the back of which their luxuriant black hair dangles
in two tresses; but the crowning masterpiece of their costume is that wonderful garment which
is neither petticoat nor pantaloons, and which can be most properly described as "indescribable,"
which tends to give the wearer rather an unfeminine appearance, and is not to be compared with
the really sensible and not unpicturesque nether garment of a Turkish lady.  The male companions
of these Greek women are not a bit behind them in the matter of gay colors and startling surprises
of the Levantine clothier's art, for they likewise are in all the bravery of holiday attire.
There is quite a number of them aboard, and they now appear at their best, for they are going
to take part in wedding festivities at one of the little Greek villages that nestle amid the
vine-clad slopes along the coast - white villages, that from the deck of the moving steamer
look as though they have been placed here and there by nature's artistic hand for the sole
purpose of embellishing the lovely green frame-work that surrounds the blue waters of the Ismidt
Gulf.  Several of these merry-makers enliven the passing hours with music and dancing, to the
delight of a numerous audience, while a second ever-changing but never-dispersing audience
is gathered around the bicycle.  The verbal comments and Solomon-like opinions, given in expressive
pantomime, of this latter garrulous gathering concerning the machine and myself, I can of course
but partly understand; but occasionally some wiseacre suddenly becomes inflated with the idea
that he has succeeded in unravelling the knotty problem, and forthwith proceeds to explain,
for the edification of his fellow-passengers, the modus operandi of riding it, supplementing
his words by the most extraordinary gestures.  The audience is usually very attentive and highly
interested in these explanations, and may be considerably enlightened by their self-constituted
tutors, whose sole advantage over their auditors, so far as bicycles are concerned, consists
simply in a belief in the superiority of their own particular powers of penetration.  But to
the only person aboard the steamer who really does know anything at all about the subject,
the chief end of their exposition seems to be gained when they have duly impressed upon the
minds of their hearers that the bicycle is to ride on, and that it goes at a rate of speed
quite beyond the comprehension of their - the auditors' - minds; "Bin, bin, bin. Chu, chu,
chu.  Haidi, haidi, haidi." being repeated with a vehemence that is intended to impress upon
them little less than flying-Dutchman speed.

The deck of a Constantinople steamer affords splendid opportunity for character study, and
the Ismidt packet is no exception.  Nearly every person aboard has some characteristic, peculiar
and distinct from any of the others.  At intervals of about fifteen minutes a couple of Armenians,
bare-footed, bare-legged, and ragged, clamber with much difficulty and scraping of shins over
a large pile of empty chicken-crates to visit one particular crate.  Their collective baggage
consists of a thin, half-grown chicken tied by both feet to a small bag of barley, which is
to prepare it for the useful but inglorious end of all chickendom.  They have imprisoned their
unhappy charge in a crate that is most difficult to get at.  Why they didn't put it in one
of the nearer crates, what their object is in climbing up to visit it so frequently, and why
they always go together, are problems of the knottiest kind.

A far less difficult riddle is the case of a middle-aged man, whose costume and avocation explain
nothing, save that he is not an Osmanli. He is a passenger homeward bound to one of the coast
villages, and he constantly circulates among the crowd with a basket of water-melons, which
he has brought aboard "on spec," to vend among his fellow-passengers, hoping thereby to gain
sufficient to defray the cost of his passage. Seated on whatever they can find to perch upon,
near the canvas partition, all unmoved by the gay and stirring scenes before them, is a group
of Mussulman pilgrims from some interior town, returning from a pilgrimage to Stamboul - fine-looking
Osmanli graybeards, whose haughty reserve not even the bicycle is able to completely overcome,
although it proves more efficacious in subduing it and waking them out of their habitual contemplative
attitude than anything else aboard.  Two of these men are of magnificent physique; their black
eyes, rather full lips, and swarthy skins betraying Arab blood.  In addition to the long daggers
and antiquated pistols so universally worn in the Orient, they are armed with fine, large,
pearl-handled revolvers, and they sit cross-legged, smoking cigarette after cigarette in silent
meditation, paying no heed even to the merry music and the dancing of the Greeks.

At Jelova, the first village the steamer halts at, a coupleof zaptiehs come aboard with two
prisoners whom they are conveying to Ismidt.  These men are lower-class criminals, and their
wretched appearance betrays the utter absence of hygienic considerations on the part of the
Turkish prison authorities; they evidently have had no cause to complain of any harsh measures
for the enforcement of personal cleanliness.  Their foot-gear consists of pieces of rawhide,
fastened on with odds and ends of string; and pieces of coarse sacking tacked on to what were
once clothes barely suffice to cover their nakedness; bare-headed - their bushy hair has not
for months felt the smoothing influence of a comb, and their hands and faces look as if they
had just endured a seven-years' famine of soap and water.  This latter feature is a sure sign
that they are not Turks, for prisoners are most likely allowed full liberty to keep themselves
clean, and a Turk would at least have come out into the world with a clean face.

The zaptiehs squat down together and smoke cigarettes, and allow their charges full liberty
to roam wheresoever they will while on board, and the two prisoners, to all appearances perfectly
oblivious of their rags, filth, and the degradation of their position, mingle freely with the
passengers; and, as they move about, asking and answering questions, I look in vain among the
latter for any sign of the spirit of social Pharisaism that in a Western crowd would have kept
them at a distance. Both these men have every appearance of being the lowest of criminals -
men capable of any deed in the calendar within their mental and physical capacities; they may
even be members of the very gang I am taking this steamer to avoid; but nobody seems to either
pity or condemn them; everybody acts toward them precisely as they act toward each other. Perhaps
in no other country in the world does this social and moral apathy obtain among the masses
to such a degree as in Turkey.

While we lie to for a few minutes to disembark passengers at the village where the before-mentioned
wedding festivities are in progress, four of the seven imperturbable Osmanlis actually arise
from the one position they have occupied unmoved since coming aboard, and follow me to the
foredeck, in order to be present while I explain the workings and mechanism of the bicycle
to some Arnienian students of Roberts College, who can speak a certain amount of English. 
Having listened to my explanations without understanding a word, and, without condescending
to question the Armenians, they survey the machine some minutes in silence and then return
to their former positions, their cigarettes, and their meditations, paying not the slightest
heed to several caique loads of Greek merry-makers who have rowed out to meet the new arrivals,
and are paddling around the steamer, filling the air with music.  Finding that there is someone
aboard that can converse with me, the Greeks, desirous of seeing the bicycle in action, and
of introducing a novelty into the festivities of the evening, ask me to come ashore and be
their guest until the arrival of the next Ismiclt boat - a matter of three days.  Offer declined
with thanks, but not without reluctance, for these Greek merry-makings are well worth seeing.
The Ismidt packet, like everything else in Turkey, moves at a snail's pace, and although we
got under way in something less than an hour after the advertised starting-time, which, for
Turkey, is quite commendable promptness, and the distance is but fifty-five miles, we call
at a number of villages en route, and it is 6 P.M. when we tie up at the Ismidt wharf.

"Five piastres, Effendi," says the ticket-collector, as, after waiting till the crowd has passed
the gang-plank, I follow with the bicycle and hand him my ticket.

"What are the five piastres for." I ask.  For answer, he points' to my wheel.  "Baggage," I
explain.

"Baggage yoke, cargo," he replies; and I have to pay it.  The fact is, that, never having seen
a bicycle before, he don't know whether it is cargo or baggage; but whenever a Turkish official
has no precedent to follow, he takes care to be on the right side in case there is any money
to be collected; otherwise he is not apt to be so particular.  This is, however, rather a matter
of private concern than of zealousness in the performance of his official duties; the possibilities
of peculation are ever before him.

While satisfying the claim of the ticket-collector a deck-hand comes forward and, pointing
to the bicycle, blandly asks me for backsheesh. He asks, not because he has put a finger to
the machine, or been asked to do so, but, being a thoughtful, far-sighted youth, he is looking
out for the future.  The bicycle is something he never saw on his boat before; but the idea
that these things may now become common among the passengers wanders through his mind, and
that obtaining backsheesh on this particular occasion will establish a precedent that may be
very handy hereafter; so he makes a most respectful salaam, calls me "Bey Effendi," and smilingly
requests two piastres backsheesh.  After him comes the passport officer, who, besides the teskeri
for myself, demands a special passport for the machine.  He likewise is in a puzzle (it don't
take much, by the by, to puzzle the brains of a Turkish official), because the bicycle is something
he has had no previous dealings with; but as this is a matter in which finances play no legitimate
part - though probably his demand for a passport is made for no other purpose than that of
getting backsheesh - a vigorous protest, backed up by the unanimous, and most certainly vociferous,
support of a crowd of wharf-loafers, and my fellow-passengers, who, having disembarked, are
waiting patiently for me to come and ride down the street, either overrules or overawes the
officer and secures my relief.  Impatient at consuming a whole day in reaching Ismidt, I have
been thinking of taking to the road immediately upon landing, and continuing till dark, taking
my chances of reaching some suitable stopping- place for the night.  But the good people of
Ismidt raise their voices in protest against what they professedly regard as a rash and dangerous
proposition.  As I evince a disposition to override their well-meant interference and pull
out, they hurriedly send for a Frenchman, who can speak sufficient English to make himself
intelligible.  Speaking for himself, and acting as interpreter in echoing the words and sentiments
of the others, the Frenchman straightway warns me not to start into the interior so late in
the day, and run the risk of getting benighted in the brush; for "Much very bad people, very
bad people! are between Ismidt and Angora; Circassians plenty," he says, adding that the worst
characters are near Ismidt, and that the nearer I get to Angora the better I shall find the
people.  As by this time the sun is already setting behind the hills, I conclude that an early
start in the morning will, after all, be the most sensible course.

During the last Russo-Turkish war thousands of Circassian refugees migrated to this part of
Asia Minor.  Having a restless, roving disposition, that unfits them for the laborious and
uneventful life of a husbandman, many of them remain even to the present day loafers about
the villages, maintaining themselves nobody seems to know how.  The belief appears to be unanimous,
however, that they are capable of any deviltry under the sun, and that, while their great specialty
and favorite occupation is stealing horses, if this becomes slack or unprofitable, or even
for the sake of a little pleasant variety, these freebooters from the Caucasus have no hesitation
about turning highwaymen whenever a tempting occasion offers.  All sorts of advice about the
best way to avoid being robbed is volunteered by the people of Ismidt.  My watch-chain, L.A.W.
badge, and everything that appears of any value, they tell me, must be kept strictly out of
sight, so as not to excite the latent cupidity of such Circassians as I meet on the road or
in the villages.  Some advocate the plan of adorning my coat with Turkish official buttons,
shoulder-straps, and trappings, to make myself, look like a government officer; others think
it would be best to rig myself up as a full-blown zaptieh, with whom, of course, neither Circassian
nor any other guilty person would attempt to interfere.  To these latter suggestions I point
out that, while they are very good, especially the zaplieh idea, so far as warding off Circassians
is concerned, my adoption of a uniform would most certainly get me into hot water with the
military authorities of every town and village, owing to my ignorance of the vernacular, and
cause me no end of vexatious delay.  To this the quick-witted Frenchman replies by at once
offering to go with me to the resident pasha, explain the matter to him, and get a letter permitting
me to wear the uniform; which offer I gently but firmly decline, being secretly of the opinion
that these excessive precautions are all unnecessary.  From the time I left Hungary I have
been warned so persistently of danger ahead, and have so far met nothing really dangerous,
that I am getting sceptical about there being anything like the risk people seem to think.
Without being blind to the fact that there is a certain amount of danger in travelling alone
through a country where it is the universal custom either to travel in company or to take a
guard, I feel quite confident that the extreme novelty of my conveyance will make so profound
an impression on the Asiatic mind that, even did they know that my buttons are gold coins of
the realm, they would hesitate seriously to molest me.  From past observations among people
seeing the bicycle ridden for the first time, I believe that with a hundred yards of smooth
road it is quite possible for a cycler to ride his way into the good graces of the worst gang
of freebooters in Asia.

Having decided to remain here over-night, I seek the accommodation of a rudely comfortable
hotel, kept by an Armenian, where, at the supper-table, I am first made acquainted with the
Asiatic dish called "pillau," that is destined to form no inconsiderable part of my daily bill
of fare for several weeks.  Pillau is a dish that is met - with in one disguise or another
all over Asia.  With a foundation of boiled rice, it receives a variety of other compounds,
the nature of which will appear as they enter into my daily experiences.  In deference to the
limited knowledge of each other's language possessed by myself and the proprietor, I am invited
into the cookhouse and permitted to take a peep at the contents of several different pots and
kettles simmering over a slow fire in a sort of brick trench, to point out to the waiter such
dishes as I think I shall like. Failing to find among the assortment any familiar acquaintances,
I try the pillau, and find it quite palatable, preferring it to anything else the house affords.

Our friend the Frenchman is quite delighted at the advent of a bicycle in Ismidt, for in his
younger days, he tells me with much enthusiasm, he used to be somewhat partial to whirling
wheels himself; and when he first came here from France, some eighteen years ago, he actually
brought with him a bone-shaker, with which, for the first summer, he was wont to surprise the
natives.  This relic of by-gone days has been stowed away among a lot of old traps ever since,
all but forgotten; but the appearance of a mounted wheelman recalls it to memory, and this
evening, in honor of my visit, it is brought once more to light, its past history explained
by its owner, and its merits and demerits as a vehicle in comparison with my bicycle duly discussed.
The bone-shaker has wheels heavy enough for a dog-cart; the saddle is nearly all gnawed away
by mice, and it presents altogether so antiquated an appearance that it seems a relic rather
of a past century than of a past decade.  Its owner assays to take a ride on it; but the best
he can do is to wabble around a vacant space in front of the hotel, the awkward motions of
the old bone-shaker affording intense amusement to the crowd.  After supper this chatty and
entertaining gentleman brings his wife, a rotund, motherly-looking person, to see the bicycle;
she is a Levantine Greek, and besides her own lingua franca, her husband has improved her education
to the extent of a smattering of rather misleading English.  Desiring to be complimentary in
return for my riding back and forth a few times for her special benefit, the lady comes forward
as I dismount and, smiling complacently upon me, remarks, "How very grateful you ride, monsieur!"
and her husband and tutor, desiring also to say something complimentary, echoes, " Much grateful
- very."

The Greeks seem to be the life and poetry of these sea-coast places on the Ismidt gulf.  My
hotel faces the water; and for hours after dark a half-dozen caique-loads of serenaders are
paddling about in front of the town, making quite an entertaining concert in the silence of
the night, the pleasing effect being heightened by the well-known softening influence of the
water, and not a little enhanced by a display of rockets and Roman candles.  Earlier in the
evening, while taking a look at Ismidt and the surrounding scenery, in company with a few sociable
natives, who point out beauty-spots in the surrounding landscape with no little enthusiasm,
I am impressed with the extreme loveliness of the situation.  The town itself, now a place
of thirteen thousand inhabitants, is the Nicomedia of the ancients.  It is built in the form
of a crescent, facing the sea; the houses, many of them painted white, are terraced upon the
slopes of the green hills, whose sides and summits are clothed with verdure, and whose bases
are laved by the blue waves of the gulf, which here, at the upper extremity, narrows to about
a mile and a half in width; white villages dot the green mountain-slopes on the opposite shore,
prominent among them being the Armenian town of Bahgjadjik, where for a number of years has
been established an American missionary-school, a branch, I think, of Roberts College.  Every
mile of visible country, whether gently sloping or more rugged and imposing, is green with
luxuriant vegetation, and the waters of the gulf are of that deep-blue color peculiar to mountain-locked
inlets; the bright green hills, the dancing blue waters, and the white painted villages combine
to make a scene so lovely in the chastened light of early eventide that, after the Bosporus,
I think I never saw a place more beautiful.  Besides the loveliness of the situation, the little
mountain-sheltered inlet makes an excellent anchorage for shipping; and during the late war,
at the well-remembered crisis when the Russian armies were bearing down on Constantinople and
the British fleet received the famous order to pass through the Dardanelles with or without
the Sultan's permission, the head-waters of the Ismidt gulf became, for several months, the
rendezvous of the ships.

CHAPTER XI.

ON THROUGH  ASIA.

Early dawn on Tuesday morning finds me already astir and groping about the hotel in search
of some of the slumbering employees to let me out. Pocketing a cold lunch in lieu of eating
breakfast, I mount and wheel down the long street leading out of the eastern end of town. 
On the way out I pass a party of caravan-teamsters who have just arrived with a cargo of mohair
from Angora; their pack-mules are fairly festooned with strings of bells of all sizes, from
a tiny sleigh-bell to a solemn-voiced sheet-iron affair the size of a two-gallon jar.  These
bells make an awful din; the men are unpacking the weary animals, shouting both at the mules
and at each other, as if their chief object were to create as much noise as possible; but as
I wheel noiselessly past, they cease their unpacking and their shouting, as if by common consent,
and greet me with that silent stare of wonder that men might be supposed to accord to an apparition
from another world.  For some few miles a rough macadam road affords a somewhat choppy but
nevertheless ridable surface, and further inland it develops into a fairly good roadway, where
a dismount is unnecessary for several miles.  The road leads along a depression between a continuation
of the mountain-chains that inclose the Ismidt gulf, which now run parallel with my road on
either hand at the distance of a couple of miles, some of the spurs on the south range rising
to quite an imposing height.  For four miles out of Ismidt the country is flat and swampy;
beyond that it changes to higher ground; and the swampy flat, the higher ground, and the mountain-slopes
are all covered with timber and a dense growth of underbrush, in which wild-fig shrubs and
the homely but beautiful ferns of the English commons, the Missouri Valley woods, and the California
foot-hills, mingle their respective charms, and hob-nob with scrub-oak, chestnut, walnut, and
scores of others.  The whole face of the country is covered with this dense thicket, and the
first little hamlet I pass on the road is nearly hidden in it, the roofs of the houses being
barely visible above the green sea of vegetation.  Orchards and little patches of ground that
have been cleared and cultivated are hidden entirely, and one cannot help thinking that if
this interminable forest of brushwood were once to get fairly ablaze, nothing could prevent
it from destroying everything these villagers possess.

A foretaste of what awaits me farther in the interior is obtained even within the first few
hours of the morning, when a couple of horsemen canter at my heels for miles; they seem delighted
beyond measure, and their solicitude for my health and general welfare is quite affecting.
When I halt to pluck some blackberries, they solemnly pat their stomachs and shake their heads
in chorus, to make me understand that blackberries are not good things to eat; and by gestures
they notify me of bad places in the road which are yet out of sight ahead.  Eude mehanax, now
called khans, occupy little clearings by the roadside, at intervals of a few miles; and among
the habitues congregated there I notice several of the Circassian refugees on whose account
friends at Ismidt and Constantinople have shown themselves so concerned for my safety.

They are dressed in the long Cossack coats of dark cloth peculiar to the inhabitants of the
Caucasus; two rows of bone or metal cartridge-cases adorn their breast, being fitted into flutes
or pockets made for them; they wear either top boots or top bootlegs, and the counterpart of
my own moccasins; and their headdress is a tall black lamb's-wool turban, similar to the national
headgear of the Persians.  They are by far the best-dressed and most respectable-looking men
one sees among the groups; for while the majority of the natives are both ragged and barefooted,
I don't remember ever seeing Circassians either.  To all outward appearances they are the most
trustworthy men of them all; but there is really more deviltry concealed beneath the smiling
exterior of one of these homeless mountaineers from Circassia than in a whole village of the
less likely- looking natives here, whose general cutthroat appearance - an effect produced,
more than anything else, by the universal custom of wearing all the old swords, knives, anil
pistols they can get hold of-really counts for nothing.  In picturesqueness of attire some
of these khan loafers leave nothing to be desired; and although I am this morning wearing Igali's
cerulean scarf as a sash, the tri-colored pencil string of Servia around my neck, and a handsome
pair of Circassian moccasins, I ain absolutely nowhere by the side of many a native here whose
entire wardrobe wouldn't fetch half a mcdjedie in a Galata auction-room.  The great light of
Central Asian hospitality casts a glimmer even up into this out-of-the-way northwestern corner
of the continent, though it seems to partake more of the Nevada interpretation of the word
than farther in the interior.  Thrice during the forenoon I am accosted with the invitation
"mastic? cogniac? coffee." by road-side klian-jees or their customers who wish me to stop and
let them satisfy their consuming curiosity at my novel bagar (horse), as many of them jokingly
allude to it.  Beyond these three beverages and the inevitable nargileh, these wayside khans
provide nothing; vishner syrup (a pleasant extract of the vishner cherry; a spoonful in a tumbler
of water makes a most agreeable and refreshing sherbet), which is my favorite beverage on the
road, being an inoffensive, non-intoxicating drink, is not in sufficient demand among the patrons
of the khans to justify keeping it in stock.  An ancient bowlder causeway traverses the route
I am following, hut the blocks of stone composing it have long since become misplaced and scattered
about in confusion, making it impassable for wheeled vehicles; and the natural dirt-road alongside
it is covered with several inches of dust which is continually being churned up by mule-caravans
bringing mohair from Angora and miscellaneous merchandise from Ismidt.  Camel-caravans make
smooth tracks, but they seldom venture to Ismidt at this time of the year, I am told, on account
of the bellicose character of the mosquitoes that inhabit this particular region; their special
mode of attack being to invade the camels' sensitive nostrils, which drives these patient beasts
of burden to the last verge of distraction, sometimes even worrying them to death.  Stopping
for dinner at the village of Sabanja, the scenes familiar in connection with a halt for refreshments
in the Balkan Peninsula are enacted; though for bland and childlike assurance there is no comparison
between the European Turk and his brother in Asia Minor.  More than one villager approaches
me during the few minutes I am engaged in eating dinner, and blandly asks me to quit eating
and let him see me ride; one of them, with a view of putting it out of my power to refuse,
supplements his request with a few green apples which no European could eat without bringing
on an attack of cholera morbus, but which Asiatics consume with impunity.  After dinner I request
the proprietor to save me from the madding crowd long enough to round up a few notes, which
he attempts to do by locking me in a room over the stable.  In less than ten minutes the door
is unlocked, and in walks the headman of the village, making a most solemn and profound salaam
as he enters.  He has searched out a man who fought with the English in the Crimea, according
to his - the man's-own explanation, and who knows a few words of Frank language and has brought
him along to interpret.  Without the slightest hesitation he asks me to leave off writing and
come down and ride, in order that he may see the performance, and - he continues, artfully
- that he may judge of the comparative merits of a horse and a bicycle.

This peculiar trait of the Asiatic character is further illustrated during the afternoon in
the case of a caravan leader whom I meet on an unridable stretch of road.  "Bin! bin!" says
this person, as soon as his mental faculties grasp the idea that the bicycle is something to
ride on.  "Mimlcin, deyil; fenna yole; duz yolo lazim " (impossible; bad road; good road necessary),
I reply, airing my limited stock of Turkish. Nothing daunted by this answer, the man blandly
requests me to turn about and follow his caravan until ridable road is reached - a good mile
- in order that he may be enlightened.  It is, perhaps, superfluous to add that, so far as
I know, this particular individual's ideas of 'cycling are as hazy and undefined to-day as
they ever were.

The principal occupation of the Sabanjans seems to be killing time; or perhaps waiting for
something to turn up.  Apple and pear-orchards are scattered about among the brush, looking
utterly neglected; they are old trees mostly, and were planted by the more enterprising ancestors
of the present owners, who would appear to be altogether unworthy of their sires, since they
evidently do nothing in the way of trimming and pruning, but merely accept such blessings as
unaided nature vouchsafes to bestow upon them.  Moss-grown gravestones are visible here and
there amid the thickets; the graveyards are neither protected by fence nor shorn of brush;
in short, this aggressive undergrowth appears to be altogether too much for the energies of
the Sabanjans; it seems to be encroaching upon them from every direction, ruthlessly pursuing
them even to their very door-sills; like Banquo's ghost, it will not down, and the people have
evidently retired discouraged from the contest.  Higher up on the mountain-slopes the underbrush
gives place to heavier timber, and small clearings abound, around which the unsubdued forest
stands like a solid wall of green, the scene reminding one quite forcibly of backwoods clearings
in Ohio; and were it not for the ancient appearance of the Sabanja minarets, the old bowlder
causeway, and other evidences of declining years, one might easily imagine himself in a new
country instead of the cradle of our race.

At Sabanja the wagon-road terminates, and my way becomes execrable beyond anything I ever encountered;
it leads over a low mountain-pass, following the track of the ancient roadway, that on the
acclivity of the mountain has been torn up and washed about, and the stone blocks scattered
here and piled up there by the torrents of centuries, until it would seem to have been the
sport and plaything of a hundred Kansas cyclones.  Bound about and among this disorganized
mass, caravans have picked their way over the pass from the first dawn of commercial intercourse;
following the same trail year after year, the stepping-places have come to resemble the steps
of a rude stairway.  From the summit of the pass is obtained a comprehensive view of the verdure-clad
valley; here and there white minarets are seen protruding above the verdant area, like lighthouses
from a green sea; villages dot the lower slopes of the mountains, while a lake, covering half
the width of the valley for a dozen miles, glimmers in the mid-day sun, making altogether a
scene that in some countries would long since have been immortalized on canvas or in verse.
The descent is even rougher, if anything, than the western side, but it leads down into a tiny
valley that, if situated near a large city, would resound with the voices of merry-makers the
whole summer long.  The undergrowth of this morning's observations has entirely disappeared;
wide-spreading chestnut and grand old sycamore trees shade a circumscribed area of velvety
greensward and isolated rocks; a tiny stream, a tributary of the Sackaria, meanders along its
rocky bed, and forest-clad mountains tower almost perpendicularly around the charming little
vale save one narrow outlet to the east.  There is not a human being in sight, nor a sound
to break the silence save the murmuring of the brook, as I fairly clamber down into this little
sylvan retreat; but a wreath of smoke curling above the trees some distance from the road betrays
the presence of man.  The whole scene vividly calls to mind one of those marvellous mountain-retreats
in which writers of banditti stories are wont to pitch their heroes' silken tent - no more
appropriate rendezvous for a band of story-book free-booters could well be imagined.

Short stretches of ridable mule-paths are found along this valley as I follow the course of
the little stream eastward; they are by no means continuous, by reason of the eccentric wanderings
of the rivulet; but after climbing the rough pass one feels thankful for even small favors,
and I plod along, now riding, now walking, occasionally passing little clusters of mud huts
and meeting with pack animals en route to Ismidt with the season's shearing of mohair.  "Alia
Franga!" is the greeting I am now favored with, instead of the "Ah, I'Anglais." of Europe,
as I pass people on the road; and the bicycle is referred to as an araba, the name the natives
give their rude carts, and a name which they seem to think is quite appropriate for anything
with wheels.

Following the course of the little tributary for several miles, crossing and recrossing it
a number of times, I finally emerge with it into the valley of Sackaria.  There are some very
good roads down this valley, which is narrow, and in places contracts to but little more than
a mere neck between the mountains.  At one of the narrowest points the mountains present an
almost perpendicular face of rock and here are the remnants of an ancient stonewall reputed
to have been built by the Greeks, somewhere about the twelfth century in anticipation of an
invasion of the Turks from the south.  The wall stretches across the valley from mountain to
river, and is quite a massive affair; an archway has been cut through it for the passage of
caravans.  Soon after passing through this opening I am favored with the company of a horseman,
who follows me for three or four miles, and thoughtfully takes upon himself the office of telling
me when to bin and when not to bin, according as he thinks the road suitable for 'cycling or
not, until he discovers that his gratuitous advice produces no visible effect on my movements,
when he desists and follows along behind in silence like a sensible fellow.  About five o'clock
in the afternoon I cross the Sackaria on an old stone bridge, and half an hour later roll into
Geiveh, a large village situated in the middle of a triangular valley about seven miles in
width.  My cyclometer shows a trifle over forty miles from Ismidt; it has been a variable forty
miles; I shall never forget the pass over the old causeway, the view of the Sabanja Valley
from the summit, nor the lovely little retreat on the eastern side.

Trundling through the town in quest of a khan, I am soon surrounded by a clamorous crowd; and
passing the house or office of the mudir or headman of the place, that person sallies forth,
and, after ascertaining the cause of the commotion, begs me to favor the crowd and himself
by riding round a vacant piece of ground hard by.  After this performance, a respectable-looking
man beckons me to follow him, and he takes me - not to his own house to be his guest, for Geiveh
is too near Europe for this sort of thing - to a khan kept by a Greek with a mote in one eye,
where a "shake down" on the floor, a cup of coffee or a glass of vishner is obtainable, and
opposite which another Greek keeps an eating-house.  There is no separate kitchen in this latter
establishment as in the one at Isrnidt; one room answers for cooking, eating, nargileh-smoking,
coffee- sipping, and gossiping; and while I am eating, a curious crowd watches my every movement
with intense interest.  Here, as at Ismidt, I am requested to examine for myself the contents
of several pots.  Most of them contain a greasy mixture of chopped meat and tomatoes stewed
together, with no visible difference between them save in the sizes of the pieces of meat;
but one vessel contains pillau, and of this and some inferior red wine I make my supper.  Prices
for eatables are ridiculously low; I hand him a cherik for the supper; he beckons me out of
the back door, and there, with none save ourselves to witness the transaction, he counts me
out two piastres change, which left him ten centa for the supper.  He has probably been guilty
of the awful crime of charging me about three farthings over the regular price, and was afraid
to venture upon so iniquitous a proceeding in the public room lest the Turks should perchance
detect him in cheating an Englishman, and revenge the wrong by making him feed me for nothing.
It rains quite heavily during the night, and while waiting for it to dry up a little in the
morning, the Geivehites voluntarily tender me much advice concerning the state of the road
ahead, being governed in their ideas according to their knowledge of a 'cycler's mountain-climbing
ability.  By a round dozen of men, who penetrate into my room in a body ere I am fairly dressed,
and who, after solemnly salaaming in chorus, commence delivering themselves of expressive pantomime
and gesticulations, I am led to understand that the road from Geiveh to Tereklu is something
fearful for a bicycle.  One fat old Turk, undertaking to explain it more fully, after the others
have exhausted their knowledge of sign language, swells himself up like an inflated toad and
imitates the labored respiration of a broken-winded horse in order to duly impress upon my
mind the physical exertion I may expect to put forth in "riding"-he also paws the air with
his right foot-over the mountain-range that looms up like an impassable barrier three miles
east of the town.  The Turks as a nation have the reputation of being solemn-visaged, imperturbable
people, yet one occasionally finds them quite animated and "Frenchy" in their behavior - the
bicycle may, however, be in a measure responsible for this.  The soil around Geiveh is a red
clay that, after a shower, clings to the rubber tires of the bicycle as though the mere resemblance
in color tended to establish a bond of sympathy between them that nothing could overcome, I
pass the time until ten o'clock in avoiding the crowd that has swarmed the khan since early
dawn, and has been awaiting with Asiatic patience ever since.  At ten o'clock I win the gratitude
of a thousand hearts by deciding to start, the happy crowd deserting half-smoked nargilehs,
rapidly swallowing tiny cups of scalding-hot coffee in their anxiety lest I vault into the
saddle at the door of the khan and whisk out of their sight in a moment - an idea that is flitting
through the imaginative mind of more than one Turk present, as a natural result of the stories
his wife has heard from his neighbor's wife, whose sister, from the roof of her house, saw
me ride around the vacant space at the mudir's request yesterday.  The Oriental imagination
of scores of wondering villagers has been drawn upon to magnify that modest performance into
a feat that fills the hundreds who didn't see it with the liveliest anticipations, and a murmuring
undercurrent of excitement thrills the crowd as the word goes round that I am about to start.
A minority of the people learned yesterday that I wouldn't ride across the stones, water- ditches,
and mud-holes of the village streets, and these at once lead the way, taking upon themselves
the office of conducting me to the road leading to the Kara Su Pass; while the less enlightened
majority press on behind, the more restless spirits worrying me to ride, those of more patient
disposition maintaining a respectful silence, but wondering why on earth I am walking.

The road they conduct me to is another of those ancient stone causeways that traverse this
section of Asia Minor in all directions.  This one and several others I happen to come across
are but about three feet wide, and were evidently built for military purposes by the more enterprising
people who occupied Constantinople and the adjacent country before the Turks-narrow stone pathways
built to facilitate the marching of armies during the rainy season when the natural ground
hereabout is all but impassable.  These stone roads were probably built during the Byzantine
occupation.  Fairly smooth mule-paths lead along-side this relic of departed greatness and
energy, and the warm sun having dried the surface, I mount and speed away from the wondering
crowd, and in four miles reach the foot of the Kara Su Pass.  From this spot I can observe
a small caravan, slowly picking its way down the mountain; the animals are sometimes entirely
hidden behind rocks, as they follow the windings and twistings of the trail down the rugged
slope which the old Turk this morning thought would make me puff to climb.

A little stream called the Kara Su, or black water, comes dancing out of a rocky avenue near
by; and while I am removing my foot-gear to ford it, I am joined by several herdsmen who are
tending flocks of the celebrated Angora goats and the peculiar fat-tailed sheep of the East,
which are grazing on neighboring knolls.  These gentle shepherds are not overburdened with
clothing, their nakedness being but barely covered; but they wear long sword-knives and old
flint-lock, bell-mouthed horse- pistols that give them a ferocious appearance that seems strangely
at variance with their peaceful occupation.  They gather about me with a familiarity that impresses
me anything but favorably toward them; they critically examine my clothing from helmet to moccasins,
eying my various belongings wistfully, tapping my leather case, and pinching the rear package
to try and ascertain the nature of its contents.  I gather from their remarks about "para "
(a term used in a general sense for money, as well as for the small coin of that name), as
they regard the leather case with a covetous eye, that they are inclined to the opinion that
it contains money; and there is no telling the fabulous wealth their untutored minds are associating
with the supposed treasure-chest of a Frank who rides a silver "araba." Evidently these fellows
have never heard of the tenth commandment; or, having heard of it, they have failed to read,
mark, learn, and inwardly digest it for the improvement of their moral natures; for covetousness
beams forth from every lineament of their faces and every motion of their hands.  Seeing this,
I endeavor to win them from the moral shackles of their own gloomy minds by pointing out the
beautiful mechanism of my machine; I twirl the pedals and show them how perfect are the bearings
of the rear wheel; I pinch the rubber tire to show them that it is neither iron nor wood, and
call their attention to the brake, fully expecting in this usually winsome manner to fill them
with gratitude and admiration, and make them forget all about my baggage and clothes.  But
these fellows seem to differ from those of their countrymen I left but a short time ago; my
other effects interest them far more than the wheel does, and one of them, after wistfully
eying my moccasins, a handsomer pair, perhaps, than he ever saw before, points ruefully down
to his own rude sandals of thong-bound raw-hide, and casts a look upon his comrades that says
far more eloquently than words, "What a shame that such lovely moccasins should grace the feet
of a Frank and an unbeliever - ashes on his head - while a true follower of the Prophet like
myself should go about almost barefooted!" There is no mistaking the natural bent of these
gentle shepherds' inclinations, and as, in the absence of a rusty sword and a seventeenth-century
horse pistol, they doubtless think I am unarmed, my impression from their bearing is that they
would, at least, have tried to frighten me into making them a present of my moccasins and perhaps
a few other things.  In the innocence of their unsophisticated natures, they wist not of the
compact little weapon reposing beneath my coat that is as superior to their entire armament
as is a modern gunboat to the wooden walls of the last century.  Whatever their intentions
may be, however, they are doomed never to be carried out, for their attention is now attracted
by the caravan, whose approach is heralded by the jingle of a thousand bells.

The next two hours find me engaged in the laborious task of climbing a mere bridle-path up
the rugged mountain slope, along which no wheeled vehicle has certainly ever been before. 
There is in some places barely room for pack animals to pass between the masses of rocks, and
at others, but a narrow ledge between a perpendicular rock and a sheer precipice. The steepest
portions are worn into rude stone stairways by the feet of pack animals that toiled over this
pass just as they toiled before America was discovered and have been toiling ever since; and
for hundreds of yards at a stretch I am compelled to push the bicycle ahead, rear wheel aloft,
in the well-known manner of going up-stairs.  While climbing up a rather awkward place, I meet
a lone Arab youth, leading his horse by the bridle, and come near causing a serious accident.
It was at the turning of a sharp corner that I met this swarthy-faced youth face to face, and
the sudden appearance of what both he and the horse thought was a being from a far more distant
sphere than the western half of our own so frightened them both that I expected every minute
to see them go toppling over the precipice.  Reassuring the boy by speaking a word or two of
Turkish, and seeing the impossibility of either passing him or of his horse being able to turn
around, I turn about and retreat a short distance, to where there is more room.  He is not
quite assured of my terrestrial character even yet; he is too frightened to speak, and he trembles
visibly as he goes past, greeting me with a leer of mingled fear and suspicion; at the same
time making a brave but very sickly effort to ward off any evil designs I might be meditating
against him by a pitiful propitiatory smile which will haunt my memory for weeks; though I
hope by plenty of exercise to escape an attack of the nightmare.

This is the worst mountain climbing I have done with a bicycle; all the way across the Rockies
there is nothing approaching this pass for steepness; although on foot or horseback it would
of course not appear so formidable.  When part way up, a bank of low hanging clouds come rolling
down to meet me, enveloping the mountain in fog, and bringing on a disagreeable drizzle which
scarcely improves the situation.

Five miles from the bottom of the pass and three hours from Geiveh I reach a small postaya-khan,
occupied by one zaptieh and the station-keeper, where I halt for a half hour and get the zaptieh
to brew me a cup of coffee, feeling the need of a, little refreshment after the stiff tugging
of the last two hours.  Coffee is the only refreshment obtainable here, and, though the weather
looks anything but propitious, I push ahead toward a regular roadside khan, which I am told
I shall come to at the distance of another hour - the natives of Asia Minor know nothing of
miles or kilometres, but reckon the distance from point to point by the number of hours it
usually takes to go on horseback.  Reaching this khan at three o'clock, I call for something
to satisfy the cravings of hunger, and am forthwith confronted with a loaf of black bread,
villanously heavy, and given a preliminary peep into a large jar of a crumbly white substance
as villanously odoriferous as the bread is heavy, and which I think the proprietor expects
me to look upon as cheese.  This native product seems to be valued by the people here in proportion
as it is rancid, being regarded by them with more than affection when it has reached a degree
of rancidness and odoriferousness that would drive a European - barring perhaps, a Limburger
- out of the house.  These two delicacies, and the inevitable tiny cups of black bitter coffee
make up all the edibles the khan affords; so seeing the absence of any alternative, I order
bread and coffee, prepared to make the most of circumstances.  The proprietor being a kindly
individual, and thinking perhaps that limited means forbid my indulgence in such luxuries as
the substance in the earthenware jar, in the kindness of his heart toward a lone stranger,
scoops out a small portion with his unwashed hand, puts it in a bowl of water and stirs it
about a little by way of washing it, drains the water off through his fingers, and places it
before me.  While engaged in the discussion of this delectable meal, a caravan of mules arrives
in charge of seven rough-looking Turks, who halt to procure a feed of barley for their animals,
the supplying of which appears to be the chief business of the klian-jee.  No sooner have these
men alighted and ascertained the use of the bicycle, than I am assailed with the usual importunities
to ride for their further edification.  It would be quite as reasonable to ask a man to fly
as to ride a bicycle anywhere near the khan; but in the innocence of their hearts and the dulness
of their Oriental understandings they think differently.  They regard my objections as the
result of a perverse and contrary disposition, and my explanation of  mimkin deyil" as but
a groundless excuse born of my unwillingness to oblige.  One old gray-beard, after examining
the bicycle, eyes me meditatively for a moment, and then comes forward with a humorous twinkle
in his eye, and pokes me playfully in the ribs, and makes a peculiar noise with the mouth:
" q-u-e-e-k," in an effort to tickle me into good-humor and compliance with their wishes; in
addition to which, the artful old dodger, thinking thus to work on my vanity, calls me "Pasha
Effendi." Finding that toward their entreaties I give but the same reply, one of the younger
men coolly advocates the use of force to coerce me into giving them an exhibition of my skill
on the araba.  As far as I am able to interpret, this bold visionary's argument is: "Behold,
we are seven; Effendi is only one; we are good Mussulmans - peace be with us - he is but a
Frank - ashes on his head- let us make him bin."

CHAPTER XII.

THROUGH THE ANGORA GOAT COUNTRY.

The other members of the caravan company, while equally anxious to see the performance, and
no doubt thinking me quite an unreasonable person, disapprove of the young man's proposition;
and the Man-jee severely reprimands him for talking about resorting to force, and turning to
the others, he lays his forefingers together and says something about Franks, Mussulmans, Turks,
and Ingilis; meaning that even if we are Franks  and Mussulmans, we are not prevented from
being at the same time allies and brothers.  From the khan the ascent is more gradual, though
in places muddy and disagreeable from the drizzling rain which still falls, and about 4 P.M.
I arrive at the summit.  The descent is smoother, and shorter than the western slope, but is
even more abrupt; the composition is a slaty, blue clay, in which the caravans have worn trails
so deep in places that a mule is hidden completely from view.  There is no room for animals
to pass each other in these deep trench-like trails, and were any to meet, the only possible
plan is for the ascending animals to be backed down until a wider place is reached.  There
is little danger of the larger caravans being thus caught in these " traps for the unwary,"
since each can hear the other's approach and take precautions; but single horsemen and small
parties must sometimes find themselves obliged to either give or take, in the depths of these
queer highways of commerce. It is quite an awkward task to descend with the bicycle, as for
much of the way the trail is not even wide enough to admit of trundling in the ordinary manner,
and I have to adopt the same tactics in going down as in coming up the mountain, with the difference,
that on the eastern slope I have to pull back quite as stoutly as I had to push forward on
the western.  In going down I meet a man with three donkeys, but fortunately I am able to scramble
up the bank sufficiently to let him pass.  His donkeys are loaded with half-ripe grapes, which
he is perhaps taking all the way to Constantinople in this slow and laborious manner, and he
offers me some as an inducement for me to ride for his benefit.  Some wheelmen, being possessed
of a sensitive nature, would undoubtedly think they had a right to feel aggrieved or insulted
if offered a bunch of unripe grapes as an inducement to go ahead and break their necks; but
these people here in Asia Minor are but simple-hearted, overgrown children; they will go straight
to heaven when they die, every one of them.

At six o'clock I roll into Tereklu, having found ridable road a mile or so before reaching
town.  After looking at the cyclometer I begin figuring up the number of days it is likely
to take me to reach Teheran, if yesterday and to-day have been expository of the country ahead;
forty and one-third miles yesterday and nineteen and a half to-day, thirty miles a day-rather
slow progress for a wheelman, I mentally conclude; but, although I would rather ride from "
Land's End to John O'Groat's " for a task, than bicycle over the ground I have traversed between
here and Ismidt, I find the tough work interlarded with a sufficiency of novel and interesting
phases to make the occupation congenial.  Upon dismounting at Tereklu, I find myself but little
fatigued with the day's exertions, and with a view to obtaining a little peace and freedom
from importunities to ride after supper, I gratify Asiatic curiosity several times before undertaking
to allay the pangs of hunger - a piece of self-denial quite commendable, even if taken in connection
with the idea of self-protection, when one reflects that I had spent the day in severe exercise,
and had eaten since morning only a piece of bread.

Not long after my arrival at Tereklu I am introduced to another peculiar and not unknown phase
of the character of these people, one that I have sometimes read of, but was scarcely prepared
to encounter before being on Asian soil three days.  From some of them having received medical
favors from the medicine chest of travellers and missionaries, the Asiatics have come to regard
every Frank who passes through their country as a skilful physician, capable of all sorts of
wonderful things in the way of curing their ailments; and immediately after supper I am waited
upon by my first patient, the mulazim of the Tereklu zaptiehs.  He is a tall, pleasant-faced
fellow, whom I remember as having been wonderfully courteous and considerate while I was riding
for the people before supper, and he is suffering with neuralgia in his lower jaw.  He comes
and seats himself beside me, rolls a cigarette in silence, lights it, and hands it to me, and
then, with the confident assurance of a child approaching its mother to be soothed and cured
of some ailment, he requests me to cure his aching jaw, seemingly having not the slightest
doubt of my ability to afford him instant relief.  I ask him why he don't apply to the hakim
(doctor) of his native town.  He rolls another cigarette, makes me throw the half-consumed
one away, and having thus ingratiated himself a trifle deeper into my affections, he tells
me that the Tereklu hakim is "fenna; " in other words, no good, adding that there is a duz
hakim at Gieveh, but Gieveh is over the Kara Su dagh.  At this juncture he seems to arrive
at the conclusion that perhaps I require a good deal of coaxing and good treatment, and, taking
me by the hand, he leads me in that affectionate, brotherly manner down the street and into
a coffee-Maw, and spends the next hour in pressing upon me coffee and cigarettes, and referring
occasionally to his aching jaw.  The poor fellow tries so hard to make himself agreeable and
awaken my sympathies, that I really begin to feel myself quite an ingrate in not being able
to afford him any relief, and slightly embarrassed by my inability to convince him that my
failure to cure him is not the result of indifference to his sufferings.

Casting about for some way of escape without sacrificing his good-will, and having in mind
a box of pills I have brought along, I give him to understand that I am at the top of the medical
profession as a stomach-ache hakim, but as for the jaw-ache I am, unfortunately, even worse
than his compatriot over the way.  Had I attempted to persuade him that I was not a doctor
at all, he would not have believed me; his mind being unable to grasp the idea of a Frank totally
unacquainted with the noble AEsculapian art; but he seems quite aware of the existence of specialists
in the profession, and notwithstanding my inability to deal with his particular affliction,
my modest confession of being unexcelled in another branch of medicine seems to satisfy him.
My profound knowledge of stomachic disorders and their treatment excuses my ignorance of neuralgic
remedies.

There seems to be a larger proportion of superior dwelling-houses in Tereklu than in Gieveh,
although, to the misguided mind of an unbeliever from the West, they have cast a sort of a
funereal shadow over this otherwise desirable feature of their town by building their principal
residences around a populous cemetery, which plays the part of a large central square.  The
houses are mostly two-story frame buildings, and the omnipresent balconies and all the windows
are faced with close lattice-work, so that the Osmanli ladies can enjoy the luxury of gazing
contemplatively out on the area of disorderly grave-stones without being subjected to the prying
eyes of passers-by.  In the matter of veiling their faces the women of these interior towns
place no such liberal - not to say coquettish - interpretation upon the office of the yashmak
as do their sisters of the same religion in and about Constantinople.  The ladies of Tereklu,
seemingly, have a holy horror of displaying any of their facial charms; the only possible opportunity
offered of seeing anything, is to obtain an occasional glimpse of the one black eye with which
they timidly survey you through a small opening in the folds of their shroud-like outer garment,
that encases them from head to foot; and even this peeping window of their souls is frequently
hidden behind the impenetrable yashmak.  Mussulman women are the most gossipy and inquisitive
creatures imaginable; a very natural result, I suppose, of having had their feminine rights
divine under constant restraint and suppression by the peculiar social position women occupy
in Mohammedan countries.  When I have arrived in town and am surrounded and hidden from outside
view by a solid wall of men, it is really quite painful to see the women standing in small
groups at a distance trying to make out what all the excitement is about. Nobody seems to have
a particle of sympathy for their very natural inquisitiveness, or even to take any notice of
their presence.  It is quite surprising to see how rapidly the arrival of the Frank with the
wonderful araba becomes known among these women from one end of town to another; in an incredibly
short space of time, groups of shrouded forms begin to appear on the housetops and other vantage-points,
craning their necks to obtain a glimpse of whatever is going on.

In the innocence of an unsophisticated nature, and a feeling of genuine sympathy for their
position, I propose collecting these scattered groups of neglected females together and giving
an exhibition for their especial benefit, but the men evidently regard the idea of going to
any trouble out of consideration for them as quite ridiculous; indeed, I am inclined to think
they regard it as evidence that I am nothing less than a gay Lothario, who is betraying altogether
too much interest in their women; for the old school Osmanli encompasses those hapless mortals
about with a green wall of jealousy, and regards with disapproval, even so much as a glance
in their direction.  While riding on one occasion, this evening, I noticed one over-inquisitive
female become so absorbed in the proceedings as to quite forget herself, and approach nearer
to the crowd than the Tereklu idea of propriety would seem to justify.  In her absent-mindedness,
while watching me ride slowly up and dismount, she allowed her yashmak to become disarranged
and reveal her features.  This awful indiscretion is instantly detected by an old Blue-beard
standing by, who eyes the offender severely, but says nothing; if she is one of his own wives,
or the wife of an intimate friend, the poor lady has perhaps earned for herself a chastisement
with a stick later in the evening.

Human nature is pretty much the same in the Orient as anywhere else; the degradation of woman
to a position beneath her proper level has borne its legitimate fruits; the average Turkish
woman is said to be as coarse and unchaste in her conversation as the lowest outcasts of Occidental
society, and is given to assailing her lord and master, when angry, with language anything
but choice.

It is hardly six o'clock when I issue forth next morning, but there are at least fifty women
congregated in the cemetery, alongside which my route leads.  During the night they seem to
have made up their minds to grasp the only opportunity of "seeing the elephant" by witnessing
my departure; and as, "when a woman will she will," etc., applies to Turkish ladies as well
as to any others, in their laudable determination not to be disappointed they have been patiently
squatting among the gray tombstones since early dawn.  The roadway is anything but smooth,
nevertheless one could scarce be so dead to all feelings of commiseration as to remain unmoved
by the sight of that patiently waiting crowd of shrouded females; accordingly I mount and pick
my way along the street and out of town.  Modest as is this performance, it is the most marvellous
thing they have seen for many a day; not a sound escapes them as I wheel by, they remain as
silent as though they were the ghostly population of the graveyard they occupy, for I which,
indeed, shrouded as they are in white from head to foot, they might easily be mistaken by the
superstitious. My road leads over an undulating depression between the higher hills, a region
of small streams, wheat-fields, and irrigating ditches, among which several trails, leading
from Tereklu to numerous villages scattered among the mountains and neighboring small valleys,
make it quite difficult to keep the proper road.  Once I wander off my proper course for several
miles; finding out my mistake I determine upon regaining the Torbali trail by a short cut across
the stubble-fields and uncultivated knolls of scrub oak.  This brings me into an acquaintanceship
with the shepherds and husbandmen, and the ways of their savage dogs, that proves more lively
than agreeable.  Here and there I find primitive threshing-floors; they are simply spots of
level ground selected in a central position and made smooth and hard by the combined labors
of the several owners of the adjoining fields, who use them in common.  Rain in harvest is
very unusual; therefore the trouble and expense of covering them is considered unnecessary.
At each of these threshing-centres I find a merry gathering of villagers, some threshing out
the grain, others winnowing it by tossing it aloft with wooden, flat-pronged forks; the wind
blows the lighter chaff aside, while the grain falls back into the heap.  When the soil is
sandy, the grain is washed in a neighboring stream to take out most of the grit, and then spread
out on sheets, in the sun to dry before being finally stored away in the granaries.  The threshing
is done chiefly by the boys and women, who ride on the same kind of broad sleigh-runner-shaped
boards described in European Turkey.

The sight of my approaching figure is, of course, the signal for a general suspension of operations,
and a wondering as to what sort of being I am. If I am riding along some well-worn by-trail,
the women and younger people invariably betray their apprehensions of my unusual appearance,
and seldom fail to exhibit a disposition to flee at my approach, but the conduct of their dogs
causes me not a little annoyance.  They have a noble breed of canines throughout the Angora
goat country - fine animals, as large as Newfoundlands, with a good deal the appearance of
the mastiff; and they display their hostility to my intrusion by making straight at me, evidently
considering me fair game.  These dogs are invaluable friends, but as enemies and assailants
they are not exactly calculated to win a 'cycler's esteem.  In my unusual appearance they see
a strange, undefinable enemy bearing down toward their friends and owners, arid, like good,
faithful dogs, they hesitate not to commence the attack; sometimes there is a man among the
threshers and winnowers who retains presence of mind enough to notice the dogs sallying forth
to attack me, and to think of calling them back; but oftener I have to defend myself as best
I can, while the gaping crowd, too dumfounded and overcome at my unaccountable appearance to
think of anything else, simply stare as though expecting to see me sail up into space out of
harm's way, or perform some other miraculous feat.  My general tactics are to dismount if riding,
and manoeuvre the machine- so as to keep it between myself and my savage assailant if there
be but one; and if more than one, make feints with it at them alternately, not forgetting to
caress them with a handy stone whenever occasion offers.  There is a certain amount of cowardice
about these animals notwithstanding their size and fierceness; they are afraid and suspicious
of the bicycle as of some dreaded supernatural object; atnd although I am sometimes fairly
at my wit's end to keep them at bay, I manage to avoid the necessity of shooting any of them.
I have learned that to kill one of these dogs, no matter how great the provocation, would certainly
get me into serious trouble with the natives, who value them very highly and consider the wilful
killing of one little short of murder; hence my forbearance.  When I arrive at a threshing-floor,
and it is discovered that I am actually a human being and do not immediately encompass the
destruction of those whose courage has been equal to awaiting my arrival, the women and children
who have edged off to some distance now approach, quite timidly though, as if not quite certain
of the prudence of trusting their eyesight as to the peaceful nature of my mission; and the
men vie with each other in their eagerness to give me all desired information about my course;
sometimes accompanying me a considerable distance to make sure of guiding me aright.  But their
contumacious canine friends seem anything but reassured of my character or willing to suspend
hostilities; in spite of the friendly attitude of their masters and the peacefulness of the
occasion generally, they make furtive dashes through the ranks of the spectators at me as I
wheel round the small circular threshing-floor, and savagely snap at the revolving wheels.
Sometimes, after being held in check until I am out of sight beyond a knoll, these vindictive
and determined assailants will sneak around through the fields, and, overtaking me unseen,
make stealthy onslaughts upon me from the brush; my only safety is in unremitting vigilance.
Like the dogs of most semi-civilized peoples, they are but imperfectly trained to obey; and
the natives dislike checking them in their attacks upon anybody, arguing that so doing interferes
with the courage and ferocity of their attack when called upon for a legitimate occasion.

It is very questionable, to say the least, if inoffensive wayfarers should be expected to quietly
submit to the unprovoked attack of ferocious animals large enough to tear down a man, merely
in view of possibly checking their ferocity at some other time.  When capering wildly about
in an unequal contest with three or four of these animals, while conscious of having the means
at hand to give them all their quietus, one feels as though he were at that particular moment
doing as the Romans do, with a vengeance; nevertheless, it has to be borne, and I manage to
come through with nothing worse than a rent in the leg of my riding trousers. Finally, after
fording several small streams, giving half a dozen threshing-floor exhibitions, and running
the gauntlet of no end of warlike canines, I reach the lost Torbali trail, and, find it running
parallel with a range of hills, intersecting numberless small streams, across which are sometimes
found precarious foot-bridges consisting of a tree- trunk felled across it from bank to bank,
the work of some enterprising peasant for his own particular benefit rather than the outcome
of public spirit.  Occasionally I bowl merrily along stretches of road which nature and the
caravans together have made smooth enough even to justify a spurt; but like a fleeting dream,
this favorable locality passes to the rearward, and is followed by another mountain-slope whose
steep grade and rough surface reads " trundle only."

They seem the most timid people hereabout I ever saw.  Few of them but show unmistakable signs
of being frightened at my approach, even when I am trundling-the nickel-plate glistening in
the sunlight, I think, inspires them with awe even at a distance - and while climbing this
hill I am the innocent cause of the ignominious flight of a youth riding a donkey.  While yet
two hundred yards away, he reins up and remains transfixed for one transitory moment, as if
making sure that his eyes are not deceiving him, or that he is really awake, and then hastily
turns tail and bolts across the country, belaboring his long-eared charger into quite a lively
gallop in his wild anxiety to escape from my awe- inspiring presence; and as he vanishes across
a field, he looks back anxiously to reassure himself that I am not giving chase.  Ere kind
friends and thoughtful well-wishers, with all their warnings of danger, are three days' journey
behind, I find myself among people who run away at my approach.  Shortly afterward I observe
this bold donkey-rider half a mile to the left, trying to pass me and gain my rear unobserved.
Others whom I meet this forenoon are more courageous; instead of resorting to flight, they
keep boldly on their general course, simply edging off to a respectful distance from my road;
some even venture to keep the road, taking care to give me a sufficiently large margin over
and above my share of the way to insure against any possibility of giving offence; while others
will even greet me with a feeble effort to smile, and a timid, hesitating look, as if undecided
whether they are not venturing too far.  Sometimes I stop and ask these lion-hearted specimens
whether I am on the right road, when they give a hurried reply and immediately take themselves
off, as if startled at their own temerity.  These, of course, are lone individuals, with no
companions to bolster up their courage or witness their cowardice; the conduct of a party is
often quite the reverse. Sometimes they seem determined not to let me proceed without riding
for them, whether rocky ridge, sandy depression, or mountain-slope characterizes our meeting-place,
and it requires no small stock of forbearance and tact to get away from them without bringing
on a serious quarrel.  They take hold of the machine whenever I attempt to leave them, and
give me to understand that nothing but a compliance with their wishes will secure my release;
I have known them even try the effect of a little warlike demonstration, having vague ideas
of gaining their object by intimidation; and this sort of thing is kept up until their own
stock of patience is exhausted, or until some more reasonable member of the company becomes
at last convinced that it really must be "mimkin deyil, " after all; whereupon they let me
go, ending the whole annoying, and yet really amusing, performance by giving me the most minute
particulars of the route ahead, and parting in the best of humor.  To lose one's temper on
these occasions, or to attempt to forcibly break away, is quickly discovered to be the height
of folly; they themselves are brimful of good humor, and from beginning to end their countenances
are wreathed in smiles; although they fairly detain me prisoner the while, they would never
think of attempting any real injury to either myself or the bicycle. Some of the more enterprising
even express their determination of trying to ride the machine themselves; but I always make
a firm stand against any such liberties as this; and, rough, half-civilized fellows though
they often are, armed, and fully understanding the advantage of numbers, they invariably yield
this point when they find me seriously determined not to allow it.  Descending into a narrow
valley, I reach a road-side khan, adjoining a thrifty-looking melon-garden - this latter a
welcome sight, since the day is warm and sultry; and a few minutes' quiet, soulful communion
with a good ripe water-melon, I think to myself, will be just about the proper caper to indulge
in after being worried with dogs, people, small streams, and unridable hills since six o'clock.
"Carpoose ?" I inquire, addressing the proprietor of the khan, who issues forth from the stable.

" Peefci, effendi," he answers, and goes off to the garden for the melon. Smiling sweetly at
vacancy, in joyous anticipation of the coming feast and the soothing influence I feel sure
of its exerting upon my feelings, somewhat ruffled by the many annoyances of the morning, I
seek a quiet, shady corner, thoughtfully loosening my revolver-belt a couple of notches ere
sitting down.  In a minute the khan-jee returns, and hands me a "cucumber" about the size of
a man's forearm.

"That isn't a carpoose; I want a carpoose-a su carpoose." I explain.

"Su carpoose, yoke" he replies; and as I have not yet reached that reckless disregard of possible
consequences to which I afterward attain, I shrink from tempting Providence by trying conclusions
with the overgrown and untrustworthy cucumber; so bidding the khan-jee adieu, I wheel off down
the valley.  I find a fair proportion of good road along this valley; the land is rich, and
though but rudely tilled, it produces wonderfully heavy crops of grain when irrigated.  Small
villages, surrounded by neglected-looking orchards and vineyards, abound at frequent intervals.
Wherever one finds an orchard, vineyard, or melon-patch, there is also almost certain to be
seen a human being evidently doing nothing but sauntering about, or perhaps eating an unripe melon.

This naturally creates an unfavorable impression upon a traveller's mind; it means either that
the kleptomaniac tendencies of the people necessitate standing guard over all portable property,
or that the Asiatic follows the practice of hovering around all summer, watching and waiting
for nature to bestow her blessings upon his undeserving head.  Along this valley I meet a Turk
and his wife bestriding the same diminutive donkey, the woman riding in front and steering
their long-eared craft by the terror of her tongue in lieu of a bridle.  The fearless lady
halts her steed as I approach, trundling my wheel, the ground being such that riding is possible
but undesirable.  "What is that for, effendi." inquires the man, who seems to be the more inquisitive
of the two. "Why, to bin, of course! don't you see the saddle?" says the woman, without a moment's
hesitation; and she bestows a glance of reproach upon her worse half for thus betraying his
ignorance, twisting her neck round in order to send the glance straight at his unoffending
head.  This woman, I mentally conclude, is an extraordinary specimen of her race; I never saw
a quicker-witted person anywhere; and I am not at all surprised to find her proving herself
a phenomenon in other things.  When a Turkish female meets a stranger on the road, and more
especially a Frank, her first thought and most natural impulse is to make sure that no part
of her features is visible - about other parts of her person she is less particular.  This
remarkable woman, however, flings custom to the winds, and instead of drawing the ample folds
of her abbas about her, uncovers her face entirely, in order to obtain a better view; and,
being unaware of my limited understanding, she begins discussing bicycle in quite a chatty
manner.  I fancy her poor husband looks a trifle shocked at this outrageous conduct of the
partner of his joys and sorrows; but he remains quietly and discreetly in the background; whereupon
I register a silent vow never more to be surprised at anything, for that long-suffering and
submissive being, the hen-pecked husband, is evidently not unknown even in Asiatic Turkey.

Another mountain-pass now has to be climbed; it is only a short distance- perhaps two miles
- but all the way up I am subjected to the disagreeable experience of having my footsteps dogged
by two armed villagers.  There is nothing significant or exceptional about their being armed,
it is true; but what their object is in stepping almost on my heels for the whole distance
up the acclivity is beyond my comprehension.  Uncertain whether their intentions are honest
or not, it is anything but reassuring to have them following within sword's reach of one's
back, especially when trundling a bicycle up a lonely mountain-trail.  I have no right to order
them back or forward, neither do I care to have them think I entertain suspicions of their
intentions, for in all probability they are but honest villagers, satisfying their curiosity
in their own peculiar manner, and doubtless deriving additional pleasure from seeing one of
their fellow-mortals laboriously engaged while they leisurely follow. We all know how soul-satisfying
it is for some people to sit around and watch their fellow-man saw wood.  Whenever I halt for
a breathing-spell they do likewise; when I continue on, they promptly take up their line of
march, following as before in silence; and when the summit is reached, they seat themselves
on a rock and watch my progress down the opposite slope.

A couple of miles down grade brings me to Torbali, a place of several thousand inhabitants
with a small covered bazaar and every appearance of a thriving interior town, as thrift goes
in Asia Minor.  It is high noon, and I immediately set about finding the wherewithal to make
a substantial meal.  I find that upon arriving at one of these towns, the best possible disposition
to make of the bicycle is to deliver it into the hands of some respectable Turk, request him
to preserve it from the meddlesome crowd, and then pay no further attention to it until ready
to start.  Attempting to keep watch over it oneself is sure to result in a dismal failure,
whereas an Osmanli gray-beard becomes an ever-willing custodian, regards its safe-keeping as
appealing to his honor, and will stand guard over it for hours if necessary, keeping the noisy
and curious crowds of his townspeople at a respectful distance "by brandishing a thick stick
at anyone who ventures to approach too near.  These men will never accept payment for this
highly appreciated service, it seems to appeal to the Osmanli's spirit of hospitality; they
seem happy as clams at high tide while gratuitously protecting my property, and I have known
them to unhesitatingly incur the displeasure of their own neighbors by officiously carrying
the bicycle off into an inner room, not even granting the assembled people the harmless privilege
of looking at it from a distance - for there might be some among the crowd possessed of the
fenna ghuz (evil eye), and rather than have them fix their baleful gaze upon the important
piece of property left under his charge by a stranger, he chivalrously braves the displeasure
of his own people; smiling complacently at their shouts of disapproval, he triumphantly bears
it out of their sight and from the fell influence of the possible fenna ghuz.  Another strange
and seemingly paradoxical phase of these occasions is that when the crowd is shouting out its
noisiest protests against the withdrawal of the machine from popular inspection, any of the
protestors will eagerly volunteer to help carry the machine inside, should the self-important
personage having it in custody condescend to make the slightest intimation that such service
would be acceptable.  Handing over the bicycle, then, to the safe-keeping of a respectable
kahuay-jee (coffee khan employee) I sally forth in quest of eatables.  The kah vay-jee has
it immediately carried inside and set up on one of the divans, in which elevated position he
graciously permits it to be gazed upon by the people, who swarm into his khan in such numbers
as to make it impossible for him to transact any business.  "Under the guidance of another
volunteer, who, besides acting the part of guide, takes particular care that I get lumping
weight, etc., I proceed to the ett-jees and procure some very good mutton-chops, and from there
to the ekmek-jees for bread.  This latter person straightway volunteers to cook my chops. 
Sending to his residence for a tin dish, some chopped onions and butter, he puts them in his
oven, and in a few minutes sets them before me, browned and buttered.  Meanwhile, he has despatched
a youth somewhere on another errand, who now returns and supplements the savory chops with
a small dish of honey in the comb and some green figs.  Seated on the generous-hearted ekmek-jee's
dough-board, I make a dinner good enough for anybody.

While discussing these acceptable viands, I am somewhat startled at hearing one of the worst
"cuss-words " in the English language repeated several times by one of the two Turks engaged
in the self-imposed duty of keeping people out of the place while I am eating - a kindly piece
of courtesy that wins for them my warmest esteem.  The old fellow proves to be a Crimean veteran,
and, besides a much-prized medal he brought back with him, he somehow managed to acquire this
discreditable, perhaps, but nevertheless unmistakable, memento of having at some time or other
campaigned it with "Tommy Atkins." I try to engage him in conversation, but find that he doesn't
know another solitary word of English.  He simply repeats the profane expression alluded to
in a parrot-like manner without knowing anything of its meaning; has, in fact, forgotten whether
it is English, French, or Italian.  He only knows it as a "Frank" expression, and in that he
is perfectly right: it is a frank expression, a very frank expression indeed.  As if determined
to do something agreeable in return for the gratifying interest I seem to be taking in him
on account of this profanity, he now disappears, and shortly returns with a young man, who
turns out to be a Greek, and the only representative of Christendom in Torbali.  The old Turk
introduces him as a "Ka-ris-ti-ahn " (Christian) and then, in reply to questioners, explains
to the interested on-lookers that, although an Englishman, and, unlike the Greeks, friendly
to the Turks, I also am a " Ka-ris-ti-ahn; " one of those queer specimens of humanity whose
perverse nature prevents them from embracing the religion of the Prophet, and thereby gaining
an entrance into the promised land of the kara ghuz kiz (black-eyed houris).  During this profound
exposition of my merits and demerits, the wondering people stare at me with an expression on
their faces that plainly betrays their inability to comprehend so queer an individual; they
look as if they think me the oddest specimen they have ever met, and taking into due consideration
my novel mode of conveyance, and that many Torbali people never before saw an Englishman, this
is probably not far from a correct interpretation of their thoughts.

Unfortunately, the streets and environments of Torbali are in a most wretched condition; to
escape sprained ankles it is necessary to walk with a great deal of caution, and the idea of
bicycling through them is simply absurd.  Nevertheless the populace turns out in high glee,
and their expectations run riot as I relieve the kahvay-jee of his faithful vigil and bring
forth my wheel.  They want me to bin in their stuffy little bazaar, crowded with people and
donkeys; mere alley-ways with scarcely a twenty yard stretch from one angle to another; the
surface is a disorganized mass of holes and stones over which the wary and hesitative donkey
picks his way with the greatest care; and yet the popular clamor is "Bin, bin; bazaar, bazaar."
The people who have been showing me how courteously and considerately it is possible for Turks
to treat a stranger, now seem to have become filled with a determination not to be convinced
by anything I say to the contrary; and one of the most importunate and headstrong among them
sticks his bearded face almost up against my own placid countenance (I have already learned
to wear an unruffled, martyr-like expression on these howling occasions) and fairly shrieks
out, "Bin! bin!" as though determined to hoist me iuto the saddle, whether or no, by sheer
force of his own desire to see me there.  This person ought to know better, for he wears the
green turban of holiness, proving him to have made a pilgrimage to Mecca, but the universal
desire to see the bicycle ridden seems to level all distinctions.  All this tumult, it must
not be forgotten, is carried on in perfect good humor; but it is, nevertheless, very annoying
to have it seem that I am too boorish to repay their kindness by letting them see me ride;
even walking out of town to avoid gratifying them, as some of them doubtless think. These little
embarrassments are some of the penalties of not knowing enough of the language to be able to
enter into explanations.  Learning that there is a piece of wagon-road immediately outside
the town, I succeed in silencing the clamor to so mo extent by promising to ride when the araba
yole is reached; whereupon hundreds come flocking out of town, following expectantly at my
heels.  Consoling myself with the thought that perhaps I will be able to mount and shake the
clamorous multitude off by a spurt, the promised araba yole is announced; but the fates are
plainly against me to-day, for I find this road leading up a mountain slope from the very beginning.
The people cluster expectantly around, while I endeavor to explain that they are doomed to
disappointment - that to be disappointed in their expectations to see the araba ridden is plainly
their kismet, for the hill is too steep to be ridden.  They laugh knowingly and give me to
understand that they are not quite such simpletons as to think that an araba cannot be ridden
along an araba yole.  " This is an araba yole," they argue, "you are riding an araba; we have
seen even our own clumsily-made arabas go up here time and again, therefore it is evident that
you are not sincere," and they gather closer around and spend another ten minutes in coaxing.
It is a ridiculous position to be in; these people use the most endearing terms imaginable;
some of them kiss the bicycle and would get down and kiss my dust-begrimed moccasins if I would
permit it; at coaxing they are the most persevering people I ever saw.  To. convince them of
the impossibility of riding up the hill I allow a muscular young Turk to climb into the saddle
and try to propel himself forward while I hold him up.  This has the desired effect, and they
accompany me farther up the slope to where they fancy it to be somewhat less steep, a score
of all too-willing hands being extended to assist in trundling the machine.  Here again I am
subjected to another interval of coaxing; and this same annoying programme is carried out several
times before I obtain my release.  They are the most headstrong, persistent people I have yet
encountered; the natural pig- headed disposition of the "unspeakable Turk" seems to fairly
run riot in this little valley, which at the point where Torbali is situated contracts to a
mere ravine between rugged heights.

For a full mile up the mountain road, and with a patient insistence quite commendable in itself,
they persist in their aggravating attentions; aggravating, notwithstanding that they remain
in the best of humor, and treat me with the greatest consideration in every other respect,
promptly and severely checking any unruly conduct among the youngsters, which once or twice
reveals itself in the shape of a stone pitched into the wheel, or some other pleasantry peculiar
to the immature Turkish mind. At length one enterprising young man, with wild visions of a
flying wheelman descending the mountain road with lightning-like velocity, comes prominently
to the fore, and unblushingly announces that they have been bringing me along the wrong road;
and, with something akin to exultation in his gestures, motions for me to turn about and ride
back.  Had the others seconded this brilliant idea there was nothing to prevent me from being
misled by the statement; but his conduct is at once condemned; for though pig-headed, they
are honest of heart, and have no idea of resorting to trickery to gain their object.  It now
occurs to me that perhaps if I turn round and ride down hill a short distance they will see
that my trundling up hill is really a matter of necessity instead of choice, and thus rid me
of their undesirable presence.  Hitherto the slope has been too abrupt to admit of any such
thought, but now it becomes more gradual. As I expected, the proposition is heralded with unanimous
shouts of approval, and I take particular care to stipulate that after this they are to follow
me no farther; any condition is acceptable to them as long as it includes seeing how the thing
is ridden.  It is not without certain misgivings that I mount and start cautiously down the
declivity between two rows of turbaned and fez-bedecked heads, for I have not yet forgotten
the disagreeable actions of the mob at Adrianople in running up behind and giving the bicycle
vigorous forward pushes, a proceeding that would be not altogether devoid of danger here, for
besides the gradient, one side of the road is a yawning chasm.  These people, however, confine
themselves solely to howling with delight, proving themselves to be well- meaning and comparatively
well-behaved after all.  Having performed my part of the compact, a few of the leading men
shake hands, and express their gratitude and well-wishes; and after calling back several youngsters
who seem unwilling to abide by the agreement forbidding them to follow any farther, the whole
noisy company proceed along footpaths leading down the cliffs to town, which is in plain view
almost immediately below.

The entire distance between Torbali and Keshtobek, where tomorrow forenoon I cross over into
the vilayet of Angora, is through a rough country for bicycling.  Forest-clad mountains, rocky
gorges, and rolling hills characterize the landscape; rocky passes lead over mountains where
the caravans, engaged in the exportation of mohair ever since that valuable commodity first
began to be exported, have worn ditch-like trails through ridges of solid rock three feet in
depth; over the less rocky and precipitous hills beyond a comprehensive view is obtained of
the country ahead, and these time-honored trails are seen leading in many directions, ramifying
the country like veins of one common system, which are necessarily drawn together wherever
there is but one pass.  Parts of these commercial by-ways are frequently found to be roughly
hedged with wild pear and other hardy shrubs indigenous to the country-the relics of by-gone
days, planted when these now barren hills were cultivated, to protect the growing crops from
depredation.  Old mill-stones with depressions in the centre, formerly used for pounding corn
in, and pieces of hewn masonry are occasionally seen as one traverses these ancient trails,
marking the site of a village in days long past, when cultivation and centres of industry were
more conspicuous features of Asia Minor than they are to- day; lone graves and graves in clusters,
marked by rude unchiselled headstones or oblong mounds of bowlders, are frequently observed,
completing the scene of general decay.  While riding along these tortuous ways, the smooth-worn
camel-paths sometimes affording excellent wheeling, the view ahead is often obstructed by the
untrimmed hedges on either side, and one sometimes almost comes into collision, in turning
a bend, with horsemen, wild-looking, armed formidably in the manner peculiar to the country,
as though they were assassins stealing forth under cover. Occasionally a female bestriding
a donkey suddenly appears but twenty or thirty yards ahead, the narrowness and the crookedness
of the hedged-in trail favoring these abrupt meetings; shrouded perhaps in a white abbas, and
not infrequently riding a white donkey, they seldom fail to inspire thoughts of ghostly equestriennes
gliding silently along these now half- deserted pathways.  Many a hasty but sincere appeal
is made to Allah by these frightened ladies as they fancy themselves brought suddenly face
to face with the evil one; more than once this afternoon I overhear that agonizing appeal for
providential aid and protection of which I am the innocent cause.  The second thought of the
lady - as if it occurred to her that with any portion of her features visible she would be
adjudged unworthy of divine interference in her behalf - is to make sure that her yashmak is
not disarranged, and then comes a mute appeal to her attendant, if she have one, for some explanation
of the strange apparition so suddenly and unexpectedly confronting them.

In view of the nature of the country and the distance to Keshtobek, I have no idea of being
able to reach that place to-night, and when I arrive at the ruins of an old mud-built khan,
at dusk, I conclude to sup off the memories of my excellent dinner and a piece of bread I have
in my pocket, and avail myself of its shelter for the night.  While eating my frugal repast,
up ride three mule-teers, who, after consulting among themselves some minutes, finally picket
their animals and prepare to join my company; whether for all night or only to give their animals
a feed of grass, I am unable to say.  Anyhow, not liking the idea of spending the whole night,
or any part of it, in these unfrequented hills with three ruffianly-looking natives, I again
take up my line of march along mountain mule-paths for some three miles farther, when I descend
into a small valley, and it being too dark to undertake the task of pitching my tent, I roll
myself up in it instead.  Soothed by the music of a babbling brook, I am almost asleep, when
a glorious meteor shoots athwart the sky, lighting up the valley with startling vividness for
one brief moment, and then the dusky pall of night descends, and I am gathered into the arms
of Morpheus.  Toward morning it grows chilly, and I am but fitfully dozing in the early gray,
when I am awakened by the bleating and the pattering feet of a small sea of Angora goats. 
Starting up, I discover that I am at that moment the mysterious and interesting subject of
conversation between four goatherds, who have apparently been quietly surveying my sleeping
form for some minutes.  Like our covetous friends beyond the Kara Su Pass, these early morning
acquaintances are unlovely representatives of their profession; their sword-blades are half
naked, the scabbards being rudely fashioned out of two sections of wood, roughly shaped to
the blade, and bound together at top and bottom with twine; in addition to which are bell-mouthed
pistols, half the size of a Queen Bess blunderbuss.  This villainous-looking quartette does
not make "a very reassuring picture in the foreground of one's waking moments, but they are
probably the most harmless mortals imaginable; anyhow, after seeing me astir, they pass onl
with their flocks and herds without even submitting me to the customary catechizing.  The morning
light reveals in my surroundings a most charming little valley, about half a mile wide, walled
in on the south by towering mountains covered with a forest of pine and cedar, and on the north
by low, brush-covered hills; a small brook dances along the middle, and thin pasturage and
scattered clumps of willow fringe the stream.  Three miles down the valley I arrive at a roadside
khan, where I obtain some hard bread that requires soaking in water to make it eatable, and
some wormy raisins; and from this choice assortment I attempt to fill the aching void of a
ravenous appetite; with what success I leave to the reader's imagination.  Here the khan-jee
and another man deliver themselves of one of. those strange requests peculiar to the Asiatic
Turk.  They pool the contents of their respective treasuries, making in all perhaps, three
medjedis, and, with the simplicity of children whose minds have not yet dawned upon the crooked
ways of a wicked world, they offer me the money in exchange for my Whitehouse leather case
with its contents.  They have not the remotest idea of what the case contains; but their inquisitiveness
apparently overcomes all other considerations.  Perhaps, however, their seemingly innocent
way of offering me the money may be their own peculiar deep scheme of inducing me to reveal
the nature of its contents.  For a short distance down the valley I find road that is generally
ridable, when it contracts to a mere ravine, and the only road is the bowlder strewn bed of
the stream, which is now nearly dry, but in the spring is evidently a raging torrent. An hour
of this delectable exercise, and I emerge into a region of undulating hills, among which are
scattered wheat-fields and clusters of mud-hovels which it would be a stretch of courtesy to
term villages. Here the poverty of the soil, or of the water-supply, is heralded to every observant
eye by the poverty-stricken appearance of , the villagers. As I wheel along, I observe that
these poor half-naked wretches are gathering their scant harvest by the laborious process of
pulling it up by the roots, and carrying it to their common threshing-floor on donkeys' backs.
Here, also, I come to a camp of Turkish gypsies; they are dark- skinned, with an abundance
of long black hair dangling about their shoulders, like our Indians; the women and larger girls
are radiant in scarlet calico and other high-colored fabrics, and they wear a profusion of
bead necklaces, armlets, anklets, and other ornaments dear to the semi-savage mind; the younger
children are as wild and as innocent of clothing as their boon companions, the dogs.  The men
affect the fez and general Turkish style of dress, with many unorthodox trappings and embellishments,
however; and with their own wild appearance, their high- colored females, naked youngsters,
wolfish-looking dogs, picketed horses, and smoke-browned tents, they make a scene that, for
picturesqueness, can give odds even to the wigwam-villages of Uncle Sam's Crow scouts, on the
Little Big Horn River, Montana Territory, which is saying a good deal.  Twelve miles from my
last night's rendezvous, I pass through Keshtobek, a village that has evidently seen better
days.  The ruins of a large stone khan take up all the central portion of the place; massive
gateways of hewn stone, ornamented by the sculptor's chisel, are still standing, eloquent monuments
of a more prosperous era.  The unenterprising descendants of the men who erected this substantial
and commodious retreat for passing caravans and travellers are now content to house themselves
and their families in tumble-down hovels, and to drift aimlessly and unambitiously along on
wretched fare and worse clothes, from the cradle to the grave.  The Keshtobek people seem principally
interested to know why I am travelling without any zaptieh escort; a stranger travelling through
these wooded mountains, without guard or guide, and not being able to converse with the natives,
seems almost beyond their belief. When they ask me why I have no zaptieh, I tell them I have
one, and show them the Smith & Wesson.  They seem to regard this as a very witty remark, and
say to each other: "He is right; an English effendi and an American revolver don't require
any zapliehs to take care of them, they are quite able to look out for themselves." From Keshtobek
my road leads down another small valley, and before long I find myself in the Angora vilayet,
bowling briskly eastward over a most excellent road; not the mule-paths of an hour ago, but
a broad, well-graded highway, as good, clear into Nalikhan, as the roads of any New England
State.  This sudden transition is not unnaturally productive of some astonishment on my part,
and inquiries at Nalikhan result in the information that my supposed graded wagon-road is nothing
less than the bed of a proposed railway, the preliminary grading for which has been finished
between Keshtobek and Angora for some time.

This valley seems to be the gateway into a country entirely different from what I have hitherto
traversed.  Unlike the forest-crowned mountains and shrubbery hills of this morning, the mountains
towering aloft on every hand are now entirely destitute of vegetation; but they are in nowise
objectionable to look upon on that account, for they have their own peculiar features of loveliness.
Various colored rocks and clays enter into their composition; their giant sides are fantastically
streaked and seamed with blue, yellow, green, and red; these variegated masses encompassing
one round about on every side are a glorious sight-they are more interesting, more imposing,
more grand and impressive even than the piny heights of Kodjaili.  Many of these mountains
bear evidence of mineral formation, and anywhere in the Occident would be the scene of busy
operations.  In Constantinople I heard an English mineralist, who has lived many years in the
country, express the belief that there is more mineral buried in these Asia Minor hills than
in a corresponding area in any other part of the world; that he knew people who for years have
had their eye on certain localities of unusual promise waiting patiently for the advantages
of mineral development to dawn upon the sluggish mind of Osmanli statesmen.  At present it
is useless to attempt prospecting, for there is no guarantee of security; no sooner is anything
of value discovered than the finder is embarrassed by imperial taxes, local taxes, backsheesh,
and all manner of demands on his resources, often ending in having everything coolly confiscated
by the government; which, like the dog in the manger, will do nothing with it, and is perfectly
contented and apathetic so long as no one else is reaping any benefit from it.

The general ridableness of this chemin de fer, as the natives have been taught to call it,
proves not to be without certain disadvantages, for during the afternoon I unwittingly manage
to do considerable mischief. Suddenly meeting two horsemen, when bowling at a moderate pace
around a bend, the horse of one takes violent exception to my intrusion, and, in spite of the
excellent horsemanship of his rider, backs down into a small ravine, both horse and rider coming
to grief in some water at the bottom. Fortunately, neither man nor horse sustained any more
serious injury than a few scratches and bruises, though it might easily have resulted in broken
bones.  Soon after this affair, another donkey-rider takes to his heels, or rather to his donkey's
heels across country, and his long- eared and generally sure-footed charger ingloriously comes
to earth; but I feel quite certain that no damage is sustained in this case, for both steed
and rider are instantly on their feet; the bold steeple-chaser looks wildly and apprehensively
toward me, but observing that I am giving chase, it dawns upon his mind that I am perhaps after
all a human being, whereupon he refrains from further flight.

Wheeling down the gentle declivity of a broad, smooth road that almost deserves the title of
boulevard, leading through the vineyards and gardens of Nalikhan's environments, at quite a
rattling pace, I startle a quarry of four dears (deers) robed in white mantles, who, the moment
they observe the strange apparition approaching them at so vengeful a speed, bolt across a
neighboring vineyard like the all-possessed.  The rapidity of their movements, notwithstanding
the impedimenta of their flowing shrouds, readily suggests the idea of a quarry of dears (deer),
but whether they are pretty dears or not, of course, their yashmaks fail to reveal; but in
return for the beaming smile that lights up our usually solemn-looking countenance at their
ridiculously hasty flight, as a reciprocation pure and simple, I suppose we ought to give them
the benefit of the doubt.

The evening at Nalikhan is a comparatively happy occasion; it is Friday, the Mussulman Sabbath;
everybody seems fairly well-dressed for a Turkish interior town; and, more important than all,
there is a good, smooth road on which to satisfy the popular curiosity; on 'this latter fact
depends all the difference between an agreeable and a disagreeable time, and at Nalikhan everything
passes off pleasantly for all concerned.  Apart from the novelty of my conveyance, few Europeans
have ever visited these interior places under the same conditions as myself.  They have usually
provided themselves beforehand with letters of introduction to the pashas and mudirs of the
villages, who have entertained them as their guests during their stay.  On the contrary, I
have seen fit to provide myself with none of these way-smoothing missives, and, in consequence
of my linguistic shortcomings, immediately upon reaching a town I have to surrender myself,
as it were, to the intelligence and good-will of the common people; to their credit be it recorded,
I can invariably count on their not lacking at least the latter qualification.  The little
khan I stop at is, of course, besieged by the usual crowd, but they are a happy-hearted, contented
people, bent on lionizing me the best they know how; for have they not witnessed my marvellous
performance of riding an araba, a beautiful web-like araba, more beautiful than any makina
they ever saw before, and in a manner that upsets all their previous ideas of equilibrium.
Have I not proved how much I esteem them by riding over and over again for fresh batches of
new arrivals, until the whole population has seen the performance.  And am I not hobnobbing
and making myself accessible to the people, instead of being exclusive and going straightway
to the pasha's, shutting myself up and permitting none but a few privileged persons to intrude
upon my privacy .  All these things appeal strongly to the better nature of the imaginative
Turks, and not a moment during the whole evening am I suffered to be unconscious of their great
appreciation of it all.  A bountiful supper of scrambled eggs fried in butter, and then the
miilazim of zaptiehs takes me under his special protection and shows me around the town.  He
shows me where but a few days ago the Nalikhan bazaar, with all its multifarious merchandise,
was destroyed by fire, and points out the temporary stalls, among the black ruins, that have
been erected by the pasha for the poor merchants who, with heavy hearts and doleful countenance,
are trying to recuperate their shattered fortunes.  He calls my attention to two-story wooden
houses and other modest structures, which, in the simplicity of his Asiatic soul, he imagines
are objects of interest; and then he takes me to the headquarters of his men, and sends out
for coffee in order to make me literally his guest.  Here, in his office, he calls my attention
to a chromo hanging on the wall, which he says came from Stamboul - Stamboul, where the Asiatic
Turk fondly imagines all wonderful things originate.This chromo is certainly a wonderful thing
in its way.  It represents an English trooper in the late Soudan expedition kneeling behind
the shelter of a dead camel, and with a revolver in each hand keeping at bay a crowd of Arab
spearmen.  The soldier is badly wounded, but with smoking revolvers and an evident determination
to die hard, he has checked, and is still checking, the advance of somewhere about ten thousand
Arab troops.  No wonder the people of Keshtobek thought an Englishman and a revolver quite
safe in travelling without zaptiehs; some of them had probably been to Nalikhan and seen this
same chromo.

When it grows dark the mulazim takes me to the public coffee-garden, near the burned bazaar,
a place which ia really no garden at all only some broad, rude benches encircling a round water-tank
or fountain, and which is fenced in with a low, wabbly picket-fence.  Seated crossed-legged
on the benches are a score of sober-sided Turks, smoking nargilehs and cigarettes, and sipping
coffee; the feeble light dispensed by a lantern on top of a pole in the centre of the tank
makes the darkness of the "garden" barely visible; a continuous splashing of water, the result
of the overflow from a pipe projecting three feet above the surface, furnishes the only music;
the sole auricular indication of the presence of patrons is when some customer orders "kahvay"
or "nargileh" in a scarcely audible tone of voice; and this is the Turk's idea of an evening's
enjoyment.

Returning to the khan, I find it full of happy people looking at the bicycle; commenting on
the wonderful marifet (skill) apparent in its mechanism, and the no less marvellous marifet
required in riding it. They ask me if I made it myself and hatch-lira ? (how many liras ?)
and then requesting the privilege of looking at my teskeri they find rare amusement in comparing
my personal charms with the description of my form and features as interpreted by the passport
officer in Galata.  Two men among them have in some manner picked up a sand from the sea-shore
of the English language.  One of them is a very small sand indeed, the solitary negative phrase,
"no;" nevertheless, during the evening he inspires the attentive auditors with respect for
his linguistic accomplishments by asking me numerous questions, and then, anticipating a negative
reply, forestalls it himself by querying, "No?" The other "linguist" has in some unaccountable
manner added the ability to say "Good morning " to his other accomplishments; and when about
time to retire, and the crowd reluctantly bestirs itself to depart from the magnetic presence
of the bicycle, I notice an extraordinary degree of mysterious whispering and suppressed amusement
going on among them, and then they commence filing slowly out of the door with the "linguistic
person" at their head; as that learned individual reaches the threshold he turns toward we,
makes a salaam and says, "Good-morning," and everyone of the company, even down to the irrepressible
youngster who was cuffed a minute ago for venturing to twirl a pedal, and who now forms the
rear- guard of the column, likewise makes a salaam and says, "Good-morning."

Quilts are provided for me, and I spend the night on the divan of the khan; a few roving mosquitoes
wander in at the open window and sing their siren songs around my couch, a few entomological
specimens sally forth from their permanent abode in the lining of the quilts to attack me and
disturb my slumbers; but later experience teaches me to regard my slumbers to-night as comparatively
peaceful and undisturbed.  In the early morning I am awakened by the murmuring voices of visitors
gathering to see me off; coffee is handed to me ere my eyes are fairly open, and the savory
odor of eggs already sizzling in the pan assail my olfactory nerves.  The khan-jee is an Osmanli
and a good Mussulman, and when ready to depart I carelessly toss him my purse and motion for
him to help himself-a thing I would not care to do with the keeper of a small tavern in any
other country or of any other nation.  Were he entertaining me in a private capacity he would
feel injured at any hint of payment; but being a khan- jee, he opens the purse and extracts
a cherik - twenty cents.

CHAPTER XIII.

BEY BAZAAR, ANGORA, AND EASTWARD.

A Trundle of half an hour up the steep slopes leading out of another of those narrow valleys
in which all these towns are situated, and then comes a gentle declivity extending with but
little interruption for several miles, winding in and out among the inequalities of an elevated
table-land.  The mountain-breezes blow cool and exhilarating, and just before descending into
the little Charkhan Valley I pass some interesting cliffs of castellated rocks, the sight of
which immediately wafts my memory back across the thousands of miles of land and water to what
they are almost a counterpart of the famous castellated rocks of Green River, Wyo.  Ter.  Another
scary youth takes to his heels as I descend into the valley and halt at the village of Charkhan,
a mere shapeless cluster of mud-hovels.  Before one of these a ragged agriculturist solemnly
presides over a small heap of what I unfortunately mistake at the time for pumpkins. I say
"unfortunately," because after-knowledge makes it highly probable that they were the celebrated
Charhkan musk-melons, famous far and wide for their exquisite flavor; the variety can be grown
elsewhere, but, strange to say, the peculiar, delicate flavor which makes them so celebrated
is absent when they vegetate anywhere outside this particular locality.  It is supposed to
be owing to some peculiar mineral properties of the soil.  The Charkhan Valley is a wild, weird-looking
region, looking as if it were habitually subjected to destructive downpourings of rain, that
have washed the grand old mountains out of all resemblance to neighboring ranges round about.
They are of a soft, shaly composition, and are worn by the elements into all manner of queer,
fantastic shapes; this, together with the same variegated colors observed yesterday afternoon,
gives them a distinctive appearance not easily forgotten. They are " grand, gloomy, and peculiar;
" especially are they peculiar. The soil of the valley itself seems to be drift-mud from the
surrounding hills; a stream furnishes water sufficient to irrigate a number of rice- fields,
whose brilliant emerald hue loses none of its brightness from being surrounded by a framework
of barren hills.

Ascending from this interesting locality my road now traverses a dreary, monotonous district
of whitish, sun-blistered hills, water-less and verdureless for fourteen miles.  The cool,
refreshing breezes of early morning have been dissipated by the growing heat of the sun; the
road continues fairly good, and while riding I am unconscious of oppressive heat; but the fierce
rays of the sun blisters my neck and the backs of my hands, turning them red and causing the
skin to peel off a few days afterward, besides ruining a section of my gossamer coat exposed
on top of the Lamson carrier.  The air is dry and thirst-creating, there is considerable hill-climbing
to be done, and long ere the fourteen miles are covered I become sufficiently warm and thirsty
to have little thought of anything else but reaching the means of quenching thirst.  Away off
in the distance ahead is observed a dark object, whose character is indistinct through the
shimmering radiation from the heated hills, but which, upon a nearer approach, proves to be
a jujube-tree, a welcome sentinel in those arid regions, beckoning the thirsty traveller to
a never-failing supply of water.  At the jujube-tree I find a most magnificent fountain, pouring
forth at least twenty gallons of delicious cold water to the minute.  The spring has been walled
up and a marble spout inserted, which gushes forth a round, crystal column, as though endeavoring
to compensate for the prevailing aridness and to apologize to the thirsty wayfarer for the
inhospitableness of its surroundings.  Miles away to the northward, perched high up among the
ravines of a sun-baked mountain-spur, one can see a circumscribed area of luxuriant foliage.
This conspicuous oasis in the desert marks the source of the beautiful road-side fountain,
which traverses a natural subterranean passage-way between these two distant points.  These
little isolated clumps of waving trees, rearing their green heads conspicuously above the surrounding
barrenness, are an unerring indication of both water and human habitations.  Often one sees
them suddenly when least expected, nestling in a little depression high up some mountain-slope
far away, the little dark-green area looking almost black in contrast with the whitish color
of the hills.  These are literally "oases in the desert," on a small scale, and although from
a distance no sign of human habitations appeal, since they are but mud- hovels corresponding
in color to the hills themselves, a closer examination invariably reveals well-worn donkey-trails
leading from different directions to the spot, and perchance a white-turbaned donkey-rider
slowly wending his way along a trail.

The heat becomes almost unbearable; the region of treeless, shelterless hills continues to
characterize my way, and when, at two o'clock P.M., I reach the town of Bey Bazaar, I conclude
that the thirty-nine miles already covered is the limit of discretion to-day, considering the
oppressive heat, and seek the friendly accommodation of a khan.  There I find that while shelter
from the fierce heat of the sun is obtainable, peace and quiet are altogether out of the question.
Bey Bazaar is a place of eight thousand inhabitants, and the khan at once becomes the objective
point of, it seems to me, half the population.  I put the machine up on a barricaded yattack-divan,
and climb up after it; here I am out of the meddlesome reach of the " madding crowd," but there
is no escaping from the bedlam-like clamor of their voices, and not a few, yielding to their
uncontrollable curiosity, undertake to invade my retreat; these invariably "skedaddle" respectfully
at my request, but new-comers are continually intruding.  The tumult is quite deafening, and
I should certainly not be surprised to have the khan-jee request me to leave the place, on
the reasonable ground that my presence is, under the circumstances, detrimental to his interests,
since the crush is so great that transacting business is out of the question.  The khan-jee,
however, proves to be a speculative individual, and quite contrary thoughts are occupying his
mind.  His subordinate, the kahvay-jee, presents himself with mournful countenance and humble
attitude, points with a perplexed air to the surging mass of fezzes, turbans, and upturned
Turkish faces, and explains - what needs no explanation other than the evidence of one's own
eyes - that he cannot transact his business of making coffee.

"This is your khan," I reply; "why not turn them out." "Mashallah, effendi.  I would, but for
everyone I turned out, two others would come in-the sons of burnt fathers." he says, casting
a reproachful look down at the straggling crowd of his fellow-countrymen.

"What do you propose doing, then?" I inquire.  "Katch para, effendi," he answers, smiling approvingly
at his own suggestion.

The enterprising kahvay-jee advocates charging them an admission fee of five paras (half a
cent) each as a measure of protection, both for himself and me, proposing to make a "divvy"
of the proceeds.  Naturally enough the idea of making a farthing show of either myself or the
bicycle is anything but an agreeable proposition, but it is plainly the only way of protecting
the kahvay-jee and his khan from being mobbed all the afternoon and far into the night by a
surging mass of inquisitive people; so I reluctantly give him permission to do whatever he
pleases to protect himself.  I have no idea of the financial outcome of the speculative khan-
jee's expedient, but the arrangement secures me to some extent from the rabble, though not
to any appreciable extent from being worried.  The people nearly drive me out of my seven senses
with their peculiar ideas of making themselves agreeable, and honoring me; they offer me cigarettes,
coffee, mastic, cognac, fruit, raw cucumbers, melons, everything, in fact, but the one thing
I should really appreciate - a few minutes quiet, undisturbed, enjoyment of my own company;
this is not to be secured by locking one's self in a room, nor by any other expedient I have
yet tried in Asia.  After examining the bicycle, they want to see my "Alla Franga" watch and
my revolver; then they want to know how much each thing costs, and scores of other things that
appeal strongly to their excessively inquisitive natures.

One old fellow, yearning for a closer acquaintance, asks me if I ever saw the wonderful "chu,
chu, chu! chemin defer at Stamboul," adding that he has seen it and intends some day to ride
on it; another hands me a Crimean medal, and says he fought against the Muscovs with the "Ingilis,"
while a third one solemnly introduces himself as a "makinis " (machinist), fancying, I suppose,
that there is some fraternal connection between himself and me, on account of the bicycle being
a makina.

I begin to feel uncomfortably like a curiosity in a dime museum - a position not exactly congenial
to my nature; so, after enduring this sort of thing for an hour, I appoint the kahvay-jee custodian
of the bicycle and sally forth to meander about the bazaar a while, where I can at least have
the advantage of being able to move about.  Upon returning to the khan, an hour later, I find
there a man whom I remember passing on the road; he was riding a donkey, the road was all that
could be desired, and I swept past him at racing speed, purely on the impulse of the moment,
in order to treat him to the abstract sensation of blank amazement.  This impromptu action
of mine is now bearing its legitimate fruit, for, surrounded by a most attentive audience,
the wonder-struck donkey-rider is endeavoring, by word and gesture, to impress upon them some
idea of the speed at which I swept past him and vanished round a bend.  The kahvay-jee now
approaches me, puffing his cheeks out like a penny balloon and jerking his thumb in the direction
of the street door. Seeing that I don't quite comprehend the meaning of this mysterious facial
contortion, he whispers confidentially aside, "pasha," and again goes through the highly interesting
performance of puffing out his cheeks and winking in a knowing manner; he then says-also confidentially
and aside - "lira," winking even more significantly than before.  By all this theatrical by-play,
the kahvay-jee means that the pasha - a man of extraordinary social, political, and, above
all, financial importance - has expressed a wish to see the bicycle, and is now outside; and
the kahvay-jee, with many significant winks and mysterious hints of " lira," advises me to
take the machine outside and ride it for the pasha's special benefit. A portion of the street
near by is " ridable under difficulties; " so I conclude to act on the kahvay-jee's suggestion,
simply to see what comes of it.  Nothing particular comes of it, whereupon the kahvay-jee and
his patrons all express themselves as disgusted beyond measure because the Pasha failed-to
give me a present.  Shortly after this I find myself hobnobbing with a small company of ex-Mecca
pilgrims, holy personages with huge green turbans and flowing gowns; one of them is evidently
very holy indeed, almost too holy for human associations one would imagine, for in addition
to his green turban he wears a broad green kammer bund and a green undergarment; he is in fact
very green indeed.  Then a crazy person pushes his way forward and wants me to cure him of
his mental infirmity; at all events I cannot imagine what else he wants; the man is crazy as
a loon, he cannot even give utterance to his own mother-tongue, but tries to express himself
in a series of disjointed grunts beside which the soul-harrowing efforts of a broken-winded
donkey are quite melodious.  Someone has probably told him that I am a hakim, or a wonderful
person on general principles, and the fellow is sufficiently conscious of his own condition
to come forward and endeavor to grunt himself into my favorable consideration.

Later in the evening a couple of young Turkish dandies come round to the khan and favor me
with a serenade; one of them twangs a doleful melody on a small stringed instrument, something
like the Slavonian tamborica, and the other one sings a doleful, melancholy song (nearly all
songs and tunes in Mohammedan countries seem doleful and melancholy); afterwards an Arab camel-driver
joins in with a dance, and furnishes some genuine amusement with his hip-play and bodily contortions;
this would scarcely be considered dancing from our point of view, but it is according to the
ideas of the East.  The dandies are distinguishable from the common run of Turkish bipeds,
like the same species in other countries, by the fearful and wonderful cut of their garments.
The Turkish dandy wears a tassel to his fez about three times larger than the regulation size,
and he binds it carefully down to the fez with a red and yellow silk handkerchief; he wears
a jaunty-looking short jacket of bright blue cloth, cut behind so that it reaches but little
below his shoulder-blades; the object of this is apparently to display the whole of the multifold
kammerbund, a wonderful, colored waist-scarf that is wound round and round the waist many times,
and which is held at one end by an assistant, while the wearer spins round like a dancing dervish,
the assistant advancing gradually as the human bobbin takes up the length.  The dandy wears
knee-breeches corresponding in color to his jacket, woollen stockings of mingled red and black,
and low, slipper-like shoes; he allows his hair to fall about his eyes a la negligee, and affects
a reckless, love- lorn air.

The last party of sight-seers for the day call around near midnight, some time after I have
retired to sleep; they awaken me with their garrulous observations concerning the bicycle,
which they are critically examining close to my head with a classic lamp; but I readily forgive
them their nocturnal intrusion, since they awaken me to the first opportunity of hearing women
wailing for the dead.  A dozen or so of women are wailing forth their lamentations in the silent
night but a short distance from the khan; I can look out of a small opening in the wall near
my shake-down, and see them moving about the house and premises by the flickering glare of
torches.  I could never have believed the female form divine capable of producing such doleful,
unearthly music; but there is no telling what these shrouded forms are really capable of doing,
since the opportunity of passing one's judgment upon their accomplishments is confined solely
to an occasional glimpse of a languishing eye.  The kahvay-jee, who is acting the part of explanatory
lecturer to these nocturnal visitors, explains the meaning of the wailing by pantomimically
describing a corpse, and then goes on to explain that the smallest imaginable proportion of
the lamentations that are making night hideous is genuine grief for the departed, most of the
uproar being made by a body of professional mourners hired for the occasion.  When I awake
in the morning the unearthly wailing is still going vigorously forward, from which I infer
they have been keeping it up all night.  Though gradually becoming inured to all sorts of strange
scenes and customs, the united wailing and lamentations of a houseful of women, awakening the
echoes of the silent night, savor too much of things supernatural and unearthly not to jar
unpleasantly on the senses; the custom is, however, on the eve of being relegated to the musty
past by the Ottoman Government.

In the larger cities where there are corpses to be wailed over every night, it has been found
so objectionable to the expanding intellects of the more enlightened Turks that it has been
prohibited as a public nuisance, and these days it is only in such conservative interior towns
as Bey Bazaar that the custom still obtains.  When about starting early on the following morning
the khanjee begs me to be seated, and then several men who have been waiting around since before
daybreak vanish hastily through the door-way; in a few minutes I am favored with a small company
of leading citizens who, having for various reasons failed to swell yesterday's throng, have
taken the precaution to post these messengers to watch my movements and report when I am ready
to depart. Our grunting patient, the crazy man, likewise reappears upon the scene of my departure
from the khan, and, in company with a small but eminently respectable following, accompanies
me to the brow of a bluffy hill leading out of the depression in which Bey Bazaar snugly nestles.
On the way up he constantly gives utterance to his feelings in guttural gruntings that make
last night's lamentations seem quite earthly after all in comparison; and when the summit is
reached, and I mount and glide noiselessly away down a gentle declivity, he uses his vocal
organs in a manner that simply defies chirographical description or any known comparison; it
is the despairing howl of a semi-lunatic at witnessing my departure without having exercised
my supposed extraordinary powers in some miraculous manner in his behalf.  The road continues
as an artificial highway, but is not continuously ridable, owing to the rocky nature of the
material used in its construction and the absence of vehicular traffic to wear it smooth; but
it is highly acceptable in the main.  From Bey Bazaar eastward it leads for several miles along
a stony valley, and then through a region that differs little from yesterday's barren hills
in general appearance, but which has the redeeming feature of being traversed here and there
by deep canons or gorges, along which meander tiny streams, and whose wider spaces are areas
of remarkably fertile soil.  While wheeling merrily along the valley road I am favored with
a "peace-offering" of a splendid bunch of grapes from a bold vintager en route, to Bey Bazaar
with a grape-laden donkey.  When within a few hundred yards the man evinces unmistakable signs
of uneasiness concerning my character, and would probably follow the bent of his inclinations
and ingloriously flee the field, but his donkey is too heavily laden to accompany him: he looks
apprehensively at my rapidly approaching figure, and then, as if a happy thought suddenly occurs
to him, he quickly takes the finest bunch of grapes ready to hand and holds them, out toward
me while I am yet a good fifty yards away.  The grapes are luscious, and the bunch weighs fully
an oke, but I should feel uncomfortably like a highwayman, guilty of intimidating the man out
of his property, were I to accept them in the spirit in which they are offered; as it is, the
honest fellow will hardly fall to trembling in his tracks should he at any future time again
descry the centaur-like form of a mounted wheelman approaching him in the distance.

Later in the forenoon I descend into a canon-like valley where, among a few scattering vineyards
and jujube-trees, nestles Ayash, a place which disputes with the neighboring village of Istanos
the honor of being the theatre of Alexander the Great's celebrated exploit of cutting the Gordian
knot that disentangled the harness of the Phrygian king.  Ayash is to be congratulated upon
having its historical reminiscence to recommend it to the notice of the outer world, since
it has little to attract attention nowadays; it is merely the shapeless jumble of inferior
dwellings that characterize the average Turkish village.  As I trundle through the crooked,
ill-paved alley-way that, out of respect to the historical association referred to, may be
called its business thoroughfare, with forethought of the near approach of noon I obtain some
pears, and hand an ekmek-jee a coin for some bread; he passes over a tough flat cake, abundantly
sufficient for my purpose, together with the change.  A zaptieh, looking on, observes that
the man has retained a whole half-penny for the bread, and orders him to fork over another
cake; I refuse to take it up, whereupon the zaptieh fulfils his ideas of justice by ordering
the ekmek-jae to give it to a ragged youth among the spectators.

Continuing on my way I am next halted by a young man of the better class, who, together with
the zaptieh, endeavors to prevail upon me to stop, going through the pantomime of writing and
reading, to express some idea that our mutual ignorance of each other's language prevents being
expressed in words.  The result is a rather curious intermezzo.  Thinking they want to examine
my teskeri merely to gratify their idle curiosity, I refuse to be thus bothered, and, dismissing
them quite brusquely, hurry along over the rough cobble-stones in hopes of reaching ridable
ground and escaping from the place ere the inevitable "madding crowd" become generally aware
of my arrival.  The young man disappears, while the zaptieh trots smilingly but determinedly
by my side, several times endeavoring to coax me into making a halt; which is, however, promptly
interpreted by myself into a paternal plea on behalf of the villagers - a desire to have me
stop until they could be generally notified and collected - the very thing I am hurrying along
to avoid, I am already clear of the village and trundling up the inevitable acclivity, the
zaptieh and a small gathering still doggedly hanging on, when the young man reappears, hurriedly
approaching from the rear, followed by half the village.  The zaptieh pats me on the shoulder
and points back with a triumphant smile; thinking he is referring to the rabble, I am rather
inclined to be angry with him and chide him for dogging my footsteps, when I observe the young
man waving aloft a letter, and at once understand that I have been guilty of an ungenerous
misinterpretation of their determined attentions.  The letter is from Mr. Binns, an English
gentleman at Angora, engaged in the exportation of mohair, and contains an invitation to become
his guest while at Angora.  A well-deserved backsheesh to the good-natured zaptieh and a penitential
shake of the young man's hand silence the self-accusations of a guilty conscience, and, after
riding a short distance down the hill for the satisfaction of the people, I continue on my
way, trundling up the varying gradations of a general acclivity for two miles.  Away up the
road ahead I now observe a number of queer, shapeless objects, moving about on the roadway,
apparently descending the hill, and resembling nothing so much as animated clumps of brushwood.
Upon a closer approach they turn out to be not so very far removed from this conception; they
are a company of poor Ayash peasant-women, each carrying a bundle of camel-thorn shrubs several
times larger than herself, which they have been scouring the neighboring hills all morning
to obtain for fuel.  This camel-thorn is a light, spriggy shrub, so that the size of their
burthens is large in proportion to its weight.  Instead of being borne on the head, they are
carried in a way that forms a complete bushy background, against which the shrouded form of
the woman is undistinguishable a few hundred yards away.  Instead of keeping a straightforward
course, the women seem to be doing an unnecessary amount of erratic wandering about over the
road, which, until quite near, gives them the queer appearance of animated clumps of brush
dodging about among each other.  I ask them whether there is water ahead; they look frightened
and hurry along faster, but one brave soul turns partly round and points mutely in the direction
I am going.  Two miles of good, ridable road now brings me to the spring, which is situated
near a two-acre swamp of rank sword-grass and bulrushes six feet high and of almost inpenetrable
thickness, which looks decidedly refreshing in its setting of barren, gray hills; and I eat
my noon-tide meal of bread and pears to the cheery music of a thousand swamp-frog bands which
commence croaking at my approach, and never cease for a moment to twang their tuneful lyre
until I depart.  The tortuous windings of the chemin de fer finally bring me to a cul-de-sac
in the hills, terminating on the summit of a ridge overlooking a broad plain; and a horseman
I meet informs me that I am now mid way between Bey Bazaar and Angora.  While ascending this
ridge I become thoroughly convinced of what has frequently occurred to me between here and
Nalikhan - that if the road I am traversing is, as the people keep calling it, a chemin de
fer, then the engineer who graded it must have been a youth of tender age, and inexperienced
in railway matters, to imagine that trains can ever round his curve or climb his grades.  There
is something about this broad, artificial highway, and the tremendous amount of labor that
has been expended upon it, when compared with the glaring poverty of the country it traverses,
together with the wellnigh total absence of wheeled vehicles, that seem to preclude the possibility
of its having been made for a wagon-road; and yet, notwithstanding the belief of the natives,
it is evident that it can never be the road-bed of a railway.  We must inquire about it at Angora.

Descending into the Angora Plain, I enjoy the luxury of a continuous coast for nearly a mile,
over a road that is simply perfect for the occasion, after which comes the less desirable performance
of ploughing through a stretch of loose sand and gravel.  While engaged in this latter occupation
I overtake a zaptieh, also en route to Angora, who is letting his horse crawl leisurely along
while he concentrates his energies upon a water-melon, evidently the spoils of a recent visitation
to a melon-garden somewhere not far off; he hands me a portion of the booty, and then requests
me to bin, and keeps on requesting me to bin at regular three- minute intervals for the next
half-hour.  At the end of that time the loose gravel terminates, and I find myself on a level
and reasonably smooth dirt road, making a shorter cut across the plain to Angora than the chin
de fer.  The zaptieh is, of course, delighted at seeing me thus mount, and not doubting but
that I will appreciate his company, gives me to understand that he will ride alongside to Angora.
For nearly two miles that sanguine but unsuspecting minion of the Turkish Government spurs
his noble steed alongside the bicycle in spite of my determined pedalling to shake him off;
but the road improves; faster spins the whirling wheels; the zaptieh begins to lag behind a
little, though still spurring his panting horse into keeping reasonably close behind; a bend
now occurs in the road, and an intervening knoll hides iis from each other; I put on more steam,
and at the same time the zaptieh evidently gives it up and relapses into his normal crawling
pace, for when three miles or thereabout arc covered I look back and perceive him leisurely
heaving in sight from behind the knoll.

Part way across the plain I arrive at a fountain and make a short halt, for the day is unpleasantly
warm, and the dirt-road is covered with dust; the government postaya araba is also halting
here to rest and refresh the horses.  I have not failed to notice the proneness of Asiatics
to base their conclusions entirely on a person's apparel and general outward appearance, for
the seeming incongruity of my "Ingilis" helmet and the Circassian moccasins has puzzled them
not a little on more than one occasion.  And now one wiseacre among this party at the road-side
fountain stubbornly asserts that I cannot possibly be an Englishman because of my wearing a
mustache without side whiskers-a feature that seems to have impressed upon his enlightened
mind the unalterable conviction that I am an "Austrian," why an Austrian any more than a Frenchman
or an inhabitant of the moon, I wonder ? and wondering, wonder in vain.  Five P.M., August
16,1885, finds me seated on a rude stone slab, one of those ancient tombstones whose serried
ranks constitute the suburban scenery of Angora, ruefully disburdening my nether garments of
mud and water, the results of a slight miscalculation of my abilities at leaping irrigating
ditches with the bicycle for a vaulting-pole.  While engaged in this absorbing occupation several
inquisitives mysteriously collect from somewhere, as they invariably do whenever I happen to
halt for a minute, and following the instructions of the Ayash letter I inquire the way to
the "Ingilisin Adam" (Englishman's man).  They pilot me through a number of narrow, ill-paved
streets leading up the sloping hill which Angora occupies - a situation that gives the supposed
ancient capital of Galatia a striking appearance from a distance - and into the premises of
an Armenian whom I find able to make himself intelligible in English, if allowed several minutes
undisturbed possession of his own faculties of recollection between each word - the gentleman
is slow but not quite sure.  From him I learn that Mr. Binns and family reside during the summer
months at a vineyard five miles out, and that Mr. Binns will not be in town before to-morrow
morning; also that, "You are welcome to the humble hospitality of our poor family."

This latter way of expressing it is a revelation to me, and the leaden-heeled and labored utterance,
together with the general bearing of my volunteer host, is not less striking; if meekness,
lowliness, and humbleness, permeating a person's every look, word, and action, constitute worthiness,
then is our Armenian friend beyond a doubt the worthiest of men.  Laboring under the impression
that he is Mr. Binns' "Ingilisin Adam," I have no hesitation about accepting his proffered
hospitality for the night; and storing the bicycle away, I proceed to make myself quite at
home, in that easy manner peculiar to one accustomed to constant change.  Later in the evening
imagine my astonishment at learning that I have thus nonchalantly quartered myself, so to speak,
not on Mr. Binns' man, but on an Armenian pastor who has acquired his slight acquaintance with
my own language from being connected with the American Mission having headquarters at Kaisarieh.
All the evening long, noisy crowds have been besieging the pastorate, worrying the poor man
nearly out of his senses on my account; and what makes matters more annoying and lamentable,
I learn afterward that his wife has departed this life but a short time ago, and the bereaved
pastor is still bowed down with sorrow at the affliction - I feel like kicking myself unceremoniously
out of his house. Following the Asiatic custom of welcoming a stranger, and influenced, we
may reasonably suppose, as much by their eagerness to satisfy their consuming curiosity as
anything else, the people come flocking in swarms to the pastorate again next morning, filling
the house and grounds to overflowing, and endeavoring to find out all about me and my unheard
- of mode of travelling, by questioning the poor pastor nearly to distraction. That excellent
man's thoughts seem to run entirely on missionaries and mission enterprises; so much so, in
fact, that several negative assertions from me fail to entirely disabuse his mind of an idea
that I am in some way connected with the work of spreading the Gospel in Asia Minor; and coming
into the room where I am engaged in the interesting occupation of returning the salaams and
inquisitive gaze of fifty ceremonious visitors, in slow, measured words he asks, "Have you
any words for these people?" as if quite expecting to see me rise up and solemnly call upon
the assembled Mussulmans, Greeks, and Armenians to forsake the religion of the False Prophet
in the one case, and mend the error of their ways in the other.  I know well enough what they
all want, though, and dismiss them in a highly satisfactory manner by promising them that they
shall all have an opportunity of seeing the bicycle ridden before I leave Angora.

About ten o'clock Mr. Binns arrives, and is highly amused at the ludicrous mistake that brought
me to the Armenian pastor's instead of to his man, with whom he had left instructions concerning
me, should I arrive after his departure in the evening for the vineyard; in return he has an
amusing story to tell of the people waylaying him on his way to his office, telling him that
an Englishman had arrived with a wonderful araba, which he had immediately locked up in a dark
room and would allow nobody to look at it, and begging him to ask me if they might come and
see it.  We spend the remainder of the forenoon looking over the town and the bazaar, Mr. Binus
kindly announcing himself as at my service for the day, and seemingly bent on pointing out
everything of interest.  One of the most curious sights, and one that is peculiar to Angora,
owing to its situation on a hill where little or no water is obtainable, is the bewildering
swarms of su-katirs (water donkeys) engaged in the transportation of that important necessary
up into the city from a stream that flows near the base of the hill.  These unhappy animals
do nothing from one end of their working lives to the other but toil, with almost machine-like
regularity and uneventfulness, up the crooked, stony streets with a dozen large earthen-ware
jars of water, and down again with the empty jars. The donkey is sandwiched between two long
wooden troughs suspended to a rude pack-saddle, and each trough accommodates six jars, each
holding about two gallons of water; one can readily imagine the swarms of these novel and primitive
conveyances required to supply a population of thirty- five thousand people.  Upon inquiring
what they do in case of a fire, I learn that they don't even think of fighting the devouring
element with its natural enemy, but, collecting on the adjoining roofs, they smother the flames
by pelting the burning building with the soft, crumbly bricks of which Angora is chiefly built;
a house on fire, with a swarm of half- naked natives on the neighboring housetops bombarding
the leaping flames with bricks, would certainly be an interesting sight.

Other pity-exciting scenes besides the patient little water-carrying donkeys are not likely
to be wanting on the streets of an Asiatic city; one case I notice merits particular mention.
A youth with both arms amputated at the shoulder, having not so much as the stump of an arm,
is riding a donkey, and persuading the unwilling animal along quite briskly - with a stick.
All Christendom could never guess how a person thus afflicted could possibly wield a stick
so as to make any impression upon a donkey; but this ingenious person holds it quite handily
between his chin and right shoulder, and from constant practice has acquired the ability to
visit his long-eared steed with quite vigorous thwacks.

Near noon we repair to the government house to pay a visit to Sirra Pasha, the Vali or governor
of the vilayet, who, having heard of my arrival, has expressed a wish to have us call on him.
We happen to arrive while he is busily engaged with an important legal decision, but upon our
being announced he begs us to wait a few minutes, promising to hurry through with the business.
We are then requested to enter an adjoining apartment, where we find the Mayor, the Cadi, the
Secretary of State, the Chief of the Angora zaptiehs, and several other functionaries, signing
documents, affixing seals, and otherwise variously occupied.  At our entrance, documents, pens,
seals, and everything are relegated to temporary oblivion, coffee and cigarettes are produced,
and the journey dunianin -athrafana (around the world) I am making with the wonderful araba
becomes the all-absorbing subject.  These wise men of state entertain queer, Asiatic notions
concerning the probable object of my journey; they cannot bring themselves to believe it possible
that I am performing so great a journey "merely as the Outing correspondent;" they think it
more probable, they say, that my real incentive is to "spite an enemy" - that, having quarrelled
with another wheelman about our comparative skill as riders, I am wheeling entirely around
the globe in order to prove my superiority, and at the same time leave no opportunity for my
hated rival to perform a greater feat - Asiatic reasoning, sure enough.  Reasoning thus, and
commenting in this wise among themselves, their curiosity becomes worked up to the highest
possible pitch, and they commence plying Mr. Binns with questions concerning the mechanism
and general appearance of the bicycle.  To facilitate Mr. Binns in his task of elucidation,
I produce from my inner coat-pocket a set of the earlier sketches illustrating the tour across
America, and for the next few minutes the set of sketches are of more importance than all the
State documents in the room.  Curiously enough, the sketch entitled "A Fair Young Mormon "
attracts more attention than any of the others.  The Mayor is Suleiman Effendi, the same gentleman
mentioned at some length by Colonel Burnaby in his "On Horseback Through Asia Minor," and one
of his first questions is whether I am acquainted with "my friend Burnaby, whose tragic death
in the Soudan will never cease to make me feel unhappy." Suleiman Effendi appears to be remarkably
intelligent, compared with many Asiatics, and, moreover, of quite a practical turn of mind;
he inquires what I should do in case of a serious break-down somewhere in the far interior,
and his curiosity to see the bicycle is not a little increased by hearing that, notwithstanding
the extreme airiness of my strange vehicle, I have had no serious mishap on the whole journey
across two continents.  Alluding to the bicycle as the latest product of that Western ingenuity
that appears so marvellous to the Asiatic mind, he then remarks, with some animation, "The
next thing we shall see will be Englishmen crossing over to India in balloons, and dropping
down at Angora for refreshments." A uniformed servant now announces that the Vali is at liberty,
and waiting to receive us in private audience.  Following the attendant into another room,
we find Sirra Pasha seated on a richly cushioned divan, and upon our entrance he rises smilingly
to receive us, shaking us both cordially by the hand. As the distinguished visitor of the occasion,
I am appointed to the place of honor next to the governor, while Mr. Binns, with whom, of course,
as a resident of Angora, His Excellency is already quite well acquainted, graciously fills
the office of interpreter, and enlightener of the Vali's understanding concerning bicycles
in general, and my own wheel and wheel journey in particular.  Sirra Pasha is a full-faced
man of medium height, black-eyed, black-haired, and, like nearly all Turkish pashas, is rather
inclined to corpulency.  Like many prominent Turkish officials, he has discarded the Turkish
costume, retaining only the national fez; a head- dress which, by the by, is without one single
merit to recommend it save its picturesqueness.  In sunny weather it affords no protection
to the eyes, and in rainy weather its contour conducts the water in a trickling stream down
one's spinal column.  It is too thin to protect the scalp from the fierce sun-rays, and too
close-fitting and close in texture to afford any ventilation, yet with all this formidable
array of disadvantages it is universally worn.

I have learned during the morning that I have to thank Sirra Pasha's energetic administration
for the artificial highway from Keshtobek, and that he has constructed in the vilayet no less
than two hundred and fifty miles' of this highway, broad and reasonably well made, and actually
macadamized in localities where the necessary material is to be obtained. The amount of work
done in constructing this road through so mountainous a country is, as before mentioned, plainly
out of all proportion to the wealth and population of a second-grade vilayet like Angora, and
its accomplishment has been possible only by the employment of forced labor. Every man in the
whole vilayet is ordered out to work at the road-making a certain number of days every year,
or provide a substitute; thus, during the present summer there have been as many as twenty
thousand men, besides donkeys, working on the roads at one time.  Unaccustomed to public improvements
of this nature, and, no doubt, failing to see their advantages in a country practically without
vehicles, the people have sometimes ventured to grumble at the rather arbitrary proceeding
of making them work for nothing, and board themselves; and it has been found expedient to make
them believe that they were doing the preliminary grading for a railway that was shortly coming
to make them all prosperous and happy; beyond being credulous enough to swallow the latter
part of the bait, few of them have the least idea of what sort of a looking thing a railroad
would be.

When the Vali hears that the people all along the road have been telling me it was a chemin
de fer, he fairly shakes in his boots with laughter. Of course I point out that no one can
possibly appreciate the road improvements any more than a wheelman, and explain the great difference
I have found between the mule-paths of Kodjaili and the broad highways he has made through
Angora, and I promise him the universal good opinion of the whole world of 'cyclers.  In reply,
His Excellency hopes this favorable opinion will not be jeopardized by the journey to Yuzgat,
but expresses the fear that I shall find heavier wheeling in that direction, as the road is
newly made, and there has been no vehicular traffic to pack it down.

The Governor invites me to remain over until Thursday and witness the ceremony of laying the
corner-stone of a new school, of the founding of which he has good reason to feel proud, and
which ought to secure him the esteem of right-thinking people everywhere.  He has determined
it to be a common school in which no question of Mohammedan, Jew, or Christian, will be allowed
to enter, but where the young ideas of Turkish, Christian, and Jewish youths shall be taught
to shoot peacefully and harmoniously together.  Begging to be excused from this, he then invites
me to take dinner with him to-morrow evening: but this I also decline, excusing rnyself for
having determined to remain over no longer than a day on account of the approaching rainy season
and my anxiety to reach Teheran before it sets in.  Yet a third time the pasha rallies to the
charge, as though determined not to let me off without honoring me in some way; and this time
he offers to furnish me a zaptieh escort, but I tell him of the zaptieh's inability to keep
up yesterday, at which he is immensely amused.  His Excellency then promises to be present
at the starting-point to-morrow morning, asking me to name the time and place, after which
we finish the cigarettes and coffee and take our leave.  We next take a survey of the mohair
caravansary, where buyers and sellers and exporters congregate to transact business, and I
watch with some interest the corps of half-naked sorters seated before large heaps of mohair,
assorting it into the several classes ready for exportation.  Here Mr. Binns' office is situated,
and we are waited upon by several of his business acquaintances; among them a member of the
celebrated - celebrated in Asia Minor - Tif- ticjeeoghlou family, whose ancestors have been
prominently engaged in the mohair business for so long that their very name is significatory
of their profession - Tifticjee-oghlou, literally, "Mohair-dealer's son." The Smiths, Bakers,
and Hunters of Occidental society are not a whit more significative than are many prominent
names of the Orient.  Prominent among the Angorians is a certain Mr. Altentopoghlou, the literal
interpretation of which is, "Son of the golden ball," and the origin of whose family name Eastern
tradition has surrounded by the following little interesting anecdote: Ages ago it pleased
one of the Sultans to issue a proclamation throughout the empire, promising to present a golden
ball to whichever among all his subjects should prove himself the biggest liar, giving it to
be understood beforehand that no "merely improbable story" would stand the ghost of a chance
of winning, since he himself was to be the judge, and nothing short of a story that was simply
impossible would secure the prize.  The proclamation naturally made quite a stir among the
great prevaricators of the realm, and hundreds of stories came pouring in from competitors
everywhere, some even surreptitiously borrowing "whoppers" from the Persians, who are well
known as the greatest economizers of the truth in all Asia; but they were one and all adjudged
by the astute monarch-who was himself a most experienced prevaricator - probably the noblest
Roman of them all - as containing incidents that might under extraordinary circumstances have
been true.  The coveted golden ball still remained unawarded, when one day there appeared before
the gate of the Sultan's palace, requesting an audience, an old man with travel-worn appearance,
as though from a long pilgrimage, and bearing on his stooping shoulders an immense earthen-ware
jar.  The Sultan received the aged pilgrim kindly, and asked him what he could do for him.

"Oh, Sultan, may you live forever!" exclaimed the old man, "for your Imperial Highness is loved
and celebrated throughout all the empire for your many virtues, but most of all for your wellknown
love of justice."

"Inshallah!" replied the monarch, reverently.  "May it please Your Imperial Majesty," continued
the old man, calling the monarch's attention to the jar, "Your Highness' most excellent father
- may his bones rest in peace! - borrowed from my father this jar full of gold coins, the conditions
being that Your Majesty was to pay the same amount back to me." "Absurd, impossible!" exclaimed
the astonished Sultan, eying the huge vessel in question.

"If the story be true," gravely continued the pilgrim, "pay your father's debt; if it is as
you say, impossible, I have fairly won the golden ball." And the Sultan immediately awarded
him the prize.

In the cool of the evening we ride out on horseback through vineyards and yellow-berry gardens
to Mr. Binns' country residence, a place that formerly belonged to an old pasha, a veritable
Bluebeard, who built the house and placed the windows of his harem, even closely latticed as
they always are, in a position that would not command so much as a glimpse of passers-by on
the road, hundreds of yards away.  He planted trees and gardens, and erected marble fountains
at great cost.  Surrounding the whole with a wall, and purchasing three beautiful young wives,
the old Turk fondly fancied he had created for himself an earthly paradise; but as love laughs
at locksmiths, so did these three frisky damea laugh at latticed windows, and lay their heads
together against being prevented from watching passers-by through the windows of the harem.
With nothing else to do, they would scheme and plot all day long against their misguided husband's
tranquillity and peace of mind.  One day, while sunning himself in the garden, he discovered
that they had managed to detach a section of the lattice-work from a window, and were in the
habit of sticking out their heads - awful discovery.  Flying into a righteous rage at this
act of flagrant disobedience, he seized a thick stick and sought their apartments, only to
find the lattice-work skilfully replaced, and to be confronted with a general denial of what
he had witnessed with his own eyes.  This did not prevent them from all three getting a severe
chastisement; but as time wore on he found the life these three caged-up young women managed
to lead him anything but the earthly paradise he thought he was creating, and, financial troubles
overtaking him at the same time, the old fellow fairly died of a broken heart in less than
twelve months after he had so hopefully installed himself in his self-created heaven.

There is a moral in the story somewhere, I think, for anybody caring to analyze it.  Mr. Binns
says the old Mussulman was also an inveterate hater of unbelievers, and that the old fellow's
bones would fairly rattle in his coffin were he conscious that a family of Christians are now
actually occupying the house he built with such careful regard for the Mussulman's ideas of
a material heaven, with trees and fountains and black-eyed houris.

Near ten o'clock on Tuesday morning finds Angora the scene of more excitement than it has seen
for some time.  I am trundling through the narrow streets toward the appointed starting-place,
which is at the commencement of a half-mile stretch of excellent level macadam, just beyond
the tombstone-planted suburbs of the city.  Mr. Binns is with me, and a squad of zaptiehs are
engaged in the lively occupation of protecting us from the crush of people following us out;
they are armed especially for the occasion with long switches, with which they unsparingly
lay about them, seemingly only too delighted at the chance of making the dust fly from the
shoulders of such unfortunate wights as the pressure of the throng forces anywhere near the
magic cause of the commotion.  The time and place of starting have been proclaimed by the Vali
and have become generally noised abroad, and near three thousand people are already assembled
when we arrive; among them is seen the genial face of Suleiman Effendi, who, in his capacity
of mayor, is early on the ground with a force of zaptiehs to maintain order; and with a little
knot of friends, behold, is also our humble friend the Armenian pastor, the irresistible attractions
of the wicked bicycle having temporarily overcome his contempt of the pomps and vanities of
secular displays.

"Englishmen are always punctual!" says Suleiman Effendi, looking at his watch; and, upon consulting
our own, sure enough we have happened to arrive precisely to the minute.  An individual named
Mustapha, a blacksmith who has acquired an enviable reputation for skill on account of the
beautiful horseshoes he turns out, now presents himself and begs leave to examine the mechanism
of the bicycle, and the question arises among the officers standing by as to whether Mustapha
would be able to make one; Mustapha himself thinks he could, providing he had mine always at
hand to copy from.

"Yes," suggests the practical-minded Suleiman Effendi, "yes, Mustapha, you may have mariftt
enough to make one; but when you have finished it, who among all of us will have marifet enough
to ride it?"

"True, effendi," solemnly assents another, "we would have to send for an Englishman to ride
it for us, after Mustapha had turned it out.  "

The Mayor now requests me to ride along the road once or twice to appease the clamor of the
multitude until the Vali arrives.  The crowd along the road is tremendous, and on a neighboring
knoll, commanding a view of the proceedings, are several carriageloads of ladies, the wives
and female relatives of the officials.  The Mayor is indulgent to his people, allowing them
to throng the roadway, simply ordering the zaptiehs to keep my road through the surging mass
open.  While on the home-stretch from the second spin, up dashes the Vali in the state equipage
with quite an imposing bodyguard of mounted zaptiehs, their chief being a fine military-looking
Circassian in the picturesque military costume of the Caucasus.  These horsemen the Governor
at once orders to clear the people entirely off the road-way - an order no sooner given than
executed; and after the customary interchange of salutations, I mount and wheel briskly up
the broad, smooth macadam between two compact masses of delighted natives; excitement runs
high, and the people clap their hands and howl approvingly at the performance, while the horsemen
gallop briskly to and fro to keep them from intruding on the road after I have wheeled past,
and obstructing the Governor's view.  After riding back and forth a couple of times, I dismount
at the Vali's carriage; a mutual interchange of adieus and well- wishes all around, and I take
my departure, wheeling along at a ten-mile pace amid the vociferous plaudits of at least four
thousand people, who watch my retreating figure until I disappear over the brow of a hill.
At the upper end of the main crowd are stationed the "irregular cavalry" on horses, mules,
and donkeys; and among the latter I notice our ingenious friend, the armless youth of yesterday,
whom I now make happy by a nod of recognition, having scraped up a backsheesh acquaintance
with him yesterday.

For.some miles the way continues fairly smooth and hard, leading through a region of low vineyard-covered
hills, but ere long I arrive at the newly made road mentioned by the Vali.  After which, like
the course of true love, my forward career seldom runs smooth for any length of time, though
ridable donkey-trails occasionally run parallel with the bogus chemin defer.  For mile after
mile I now alternately ride and trundle along donkey-paths, by the side of an artificial highway
that would be an enterprise worthy of a European State.  The surface of the road is either
gravelled or of broken rock, and well rounded for self-drain- age; it is graded over the mountains,
and wooden bridges, with substantial rock supports, are built across the streams; nothing is
lacking except the vehicles to utilize it.  In the absence of these it would almost seem to
have been an unnecessary and superfluous expenditure of the people's labor to make such a road
through a country most of which is fit for little else but grazing goats and buffaloes.  Aside
from some half-dozen carriages at Angora, and a few light government postaya arabas - an innovation
from horses for carrying the mail, recently introduced as a result of the improved roads, and
which make weekly trips between such points as Angora, Yuzgat, and Tokat - the only vehicles
in the country are the buffalo-carts of the larger farmers, rude home made arabas with solid
wooden wheels, whose infernal creaking can be heard for a mile, and which they seldom take
any distance from home, preferring their pack-donkeys and cross-country trails when going to
town with produce.  Perhaps in time vehicular traffic may appear as a result of suitable roads;
but the natives are slow to adopt new improvements.

About two hours from Angora I pass tbrough a swampy upland basin, containing several small
lakes, and then emerge into a much less mountainous country, passing several mud villages,
the inhabitants of which are a dark-skinned people-Turkoman refugees, I think-who look several
degrees less particular about their personal cleanliness than the villagers west of Angora.
Their wretched mud hovels would seem to indicate the last degree of poverty, but numerous flocks
of goats and herds of buffalo grazing near apparently tell a somewhat different story.  The
women and children seem mostly engaged in manufacturing cakes of tezek (large flat cakes of
buffalo manure mixed with chopped straw, which are "dobbed" on the outer walls to dry; it makes
very good fuel, like the "buffalo chips" of the far West), and stacking it up on the house-tops,
with provident forethought, for the approaching winter.

Just as darkness is beginning to settle down over the landscape I arrive at one of these unpromising-looking
clusters, which, it seems, are now peculiar to the country, and not characteristic of any particular
race, for the one I arrive at is a purely Turkish village.  After the usual preliminaries of
pantomime and binning, I am conducted to a capacious flat roof, the common covering of several
dwellings and stables bunched up together.  This roof is as smooth and hard as a native threshing-floor,
and well knowing, from recent experiences, the modus operandi of capturing the hearts of these
bland and childlike villagers, I mount and straightway secure their universal admiration and
applause by riding a few times round the roof.  I obtain a supper of fried eggs and yaort (milk
soured with rennet), eating it on the house-top, surrounded by the whole population of the
village, on this and adjoining roofs, who watch my every movement with the most intense curiosity.
It is the raggedest audience I have yet been favored with.  There are not over half a dozen
decently clad people among them all, and two of these are horsemen, simply remaining over night,
like myself.  Everybody has a fearfully flea- bitten appearance, which augurs ill for a refreshing
night's repose.

Here, likewise I am first introduced to a peculiar kind of bread, that I straightway condemn
as the most execrable of the many varieties my everchanging experiences bring me in contact
with, and which I find myself mentally, and half unconsciously, naming - " blotting-paper ekmek"
-a not inappropriate title to convey its appearance to the civilized mind; but the sheets of
blotting-paper must be of a wheaten color and in circular sheets about two feet in diameter.
This peculiar kind of bread is, we may suppose, the natural result of a great scarcity of fuel,
a handful of tezek, beneath the large, thin sheet-iron griddle, being sufficient to bake many
cakes of this bread.  At first I start eating it something like a Shanty town goat would set
about consuming a political poster, if it - not the political poster, but the Shanty town goat
- had a pair of hands.  This outlandish performance creates no small merriment among the watchful
on-lookers, who forthwith initiate me into the mode of eating it a la Turque, which is, to
roll it up like a scroll of paper and bite mouthfuls off the end.  I afterwards find this particular
variety of ekmek quite handy when seated around a communal bowl of yaort with a dozen natives;
instead of taking my turn with the one wooden spoon in common use, I would form pieces of the
thin bread into small handleless scoops, and, dipping up the yaort, eat scoop and all.  Besides
sparing me from using the same greasy spoon in common with a dozen natives, none of them overly
squeamish as regards personal cleanliness, this gave me the appreciable advantage of dipping
into the dish as often as I choose, instead of waiting for my regular turn at the wooden spoon.

Though they are Osmanli Turks, the women of these small villages appear to make little pretence
of covering their faces.  Among themselves they constitute, as it were, one large family gathering,
and a stranger is but seldom seen.  They are apparently simple-minded females, just a trifle
shame-faced in their demeanor before a stranger, sitting apart by themselves while listening
to the conversation between myself and the men.  This, of course, is very edifying, even apart
from its pantomimic and monosyllabic character, for I am now among a queer people, a people
through the unoccupied chambers of whose unsophisticated minds wander strange, fantastic thoughts.
One of the transient horsemen, a contemplative young man, the promising appearance of whose
upper lip proclaims him something over twenty, announces that he likewise is on the way to
Yuzgat; and after listening attentively to my explanations of how a wheelman climbs mountains
and overcomes stretches of bad road, he solemnly inquires whether a 'cycler could scurry up
a mountain slope all right if some one were to follow behind and touch him up occasionally
with a whip, in the persuasive manner required in driving a horse.  He then produces a rawhide
"persuader," and ventures the opinion that if he followed close behind me to Yuzgat, and touched
me up smartly with it whenever we came to a mountain, or a sandy road, there would be no necessity
of trundling any of the way.  He then asks, with the innocent simplicity of a child, whether
in case he made the experiment, I would get angry and shoot him.

The other transient appears of a more speculative turn of mind, and draws largely upon his
own pantomimic powers and my limited knowledge of Turkish, to ascertain the difference between
the katch lira of a bicycle at retail, and the hatch lira of its manufacture.  From the amount
of mental labor he voluntarily inflicts upon himself to acquire this particular item of information,
I apprehend that nothing less than wild visions of acquiring a rapid fortune by starting a
bicycle factory at Angora, are flitting through his imaginative mind.  The villagers themselves
seem to consider me chiefly from the standpoint of their own peculiar ideas concerning the
nature of an Englishman's feelings toward a Russian. My performance on the roof has put them
in the best of humor, and has evidently whetted their appetites for further amusement.  Pointing
to a stolid-looking individual, of an apparently taciturn disposition, and who is one of the
respectably-dressed few, they accuse him of being a Eussiau; and then all eyes are turned towards
me, as though they quite expect to see me rise up wrathfully and make some warlike demonstration
against him.  My undemonstrative disposition forbids so theatrical a proceeding, however, and
I confine myself to making a pretence of falling into the trap, casting furtive glances of
suspicion towards the supposed hated subject of the Czar, and making whispered inquiries of
my immediate neighbors concerning the nature of his mission in Turkish territory. During this
interesting comedy the "audience" are fairly shaking in their rags with suppressed merriment;
and when the taciturn individual himself - who has thus far retained his habitual self-composure
- growing restive under the hateful imputation of being a Muscov and my supposed bellicose
sentiments toward him in consequence, finally repudiates the part thus summarily assigned him,
the whole company bursts out into a boisterous roar of laughter.  At this happy turn of sentiment
I assume an air of intense relief, shake the taciturn man's hand, and, borrowing the speculative
transient's fez, proclaim myself a Turk, an act that fairly "brings down the house."

Thus the evening passes merrily away until about ten o'clock, when the people begin to slowly
disperse to the roofs of their respective habitations, the whole population sleeping on the
house-tops, with no roof over them save the star-spangled vault - the arched dome of the great
mosque of the universe, so often adorned with the pale yellow, crescent-shaped emblem of their
religion.  Several families occupy the roof which has been the theatre of the evening's social
gathering, and the men now consign me to a comfortable couch made up of several quilts, one
of the transients thoughtfully cautioning me to put my moccasins under my pillow, as these
articles were the object of almost universal covetousness during the evening.  No sooner am
I comfortably settled down, than a wordy warfare breaks out in my immediate vicinity, and an
ancient female makes a determined dash at my coverlet, with the object of taking forcible possession;
but she is seized and unceremoniously hustled away by the men who assigned me my quarters.
It appears that, with an eye singly and disinterestedly to my own comfort, and regardless of
anybody else's, they have, without taking the trouble to obtain her consent, appropriated to
my use the old lady's bed, leaving her to shift for herself any way she can, a high-handed
proceeding that naturally enough arouses her virtuous indignation to the pitch of resentment.
Upon this fact occurring to me, I of course immediately vacate the property in dispute, and,
with true Western gallantry, arraign myself on the rightful owner's side by carrying my wheel
and other effects to another position; whereupon a satisfactory compromise is soon arranged
between the disputants, by which another bed ia prepared for me, and the ancient dame takes
triumphant possession of her own.  Peace and tranquillity being thus established on a firm
basis, the several families tenanting our roof settle themselves snugly down.  The night is
still and calm, and naught is heard save my nearer neighbors' scratching, scratching, scratching.
This - not the scratching, but the quietness - doesn't last long, however, for it is customary
to collect all the four-footed possessions of the village together every night and permit them
to occupy the inter-spaces between the houses, while the humans are occupying the roofs, the
horde of watch- dogs being depended upon to keep watch and ward over everything.  The hovels
are more underground than above the surface, and often, when the village occupies sloping ground,
the upper edge of the roof is practically but a continuation of the solid ground, or at the
most there is but a single step-up between them.  The goats are of course permitted to wander
whithersoever they will, and equally, of course, they abuse their privileges by preferring
the roofs to the ground and wandering incessantly about among the sleepers.  Where the roof
comes too near the ground some temporary obstruction is erected, to guard against the intrusion
of venturesome buffaloes.  No sooner have the humans quieted down, than several goats promptly
invade the roof, and commence their usual nocturnal promenade among the prostrate forms of
their owners, and further indulge their well-known goatish propensities by nibbling away the
edges of the roof. (They would, of course, prefer a square meal off a patchwork quilt, but
from their earliest infancy they are taught that meddling with the bedclothes will bring severe
punishment.) A buffalo occasionally gives utterance to a solemn, prolonged " m-o-o-o;" now
and then a baby wails its infantile disapproval of the fleas, and frequent noisy squabbles
occur among the dogs.  Under these conditions, it is not surprising that one should woo in
vain the drowsy goddess; and near midnight some person within a few yards of my couch begins
groaning fearfully, as if in great pain - probably a case of the stomach-ache, I mentally conclude,
though this hasty conclusion may not unnaturally result from an inner consciousness of being
better equipped for curing that particular affliction than any other.  From the position of
the sufferer, I am inclined to think it is the same ancient party that ousted me out of her
possessions two hours ago, and I lay here as far removed from the realms of unconsciousness
as the moment I retired, expecting every minute to see her appear before me in a penitential
mood, asking me to cure her, for the inevitable hakim question had been raised during the evening.
She doesn't present herself, however; perhaps the self-accusations of her conscience, for having
in the moment of her wrath attempted to appropriate my coverlet in so rude a manner, prevent
her appealing to me now in the hour of distress.  These people are early risers; the women
are up milking the goats and buffaloes before daybreak, and the men hieing them away to the
harvest fields and threshing-floors.  I, likewise, bestir myself at daylight, intending to
reach the next village before breakfast.

CHAPTER XIV.

ACROSS THE KIZIL IRMAK RIVER TO YUZGAT.

The country continues much the same as yesterday, with the road indifferent for wheeling. 
Reaching the expected village about eight o'clock, I breakfast off ekmek and new buffalo milk,
and at once continue on my way, meeting nothing particularly interesting, save a lively bout
occasionally with goat-herds' dogs - the reminiscences of which are doubtless more vividly
interesting to myself than they would be to the reader - until high noon, when I arrive at
another village, larger, but equally wretched- looking, on the Kizil Irmak River, called Jas-chi-khan.
On the west bank of the stream are some ancient ruins of quite massive architecture, and standing
on the opposite side of the road, evidently having some time been removed from the ruins with
a view to being transported elsewhere, is a couchant lion of heroic proportions, carved out
of a solid block of white marble; the head is gone, as though its would-be possessors, having
found it beyond their power to transport the whole animal, have made off with what they could.
An old and curiously arched bridge of massive rock spans the river near its entrance to a wild,
rocky gorge in the mountains; a primitive grist mill occupies a position to the left, near
the entrance to the gorge, and a herd of camels are slaking their thirst or grazing near the
water's edge to the right - a genuine Eastern picture, surely, and one not to be seen every
day, even in the land where to see it occasionally is quite possible.

Riding into Jas-chi-khan, I dismount at a building which, from the presence of several "do-nothings,"
I take to be a khan for the accommodation of travellers.  In a partially open shed-like apartment
are a number of demure looking maidens, industriously employed in weaving carpets by hand on
a rude, upright frame, while two others, equally demure-looking, are seated on the ground cracking
wheat for pillau, wheat being substituted for rice where the latter is not easily obtainable,
or is too expensive. Waiving all considerations of whether I am welcome or not, I at once enter
this abode of female industry, and after watching the interesting process of carpet-weaving
for some minutes, turn my attention to the preparers of cracked wheat.  The process is the
same primitive one that has been employed among these people from time immemorial, and the
same that is referred to in the passage of Scripture which says: "Two women were grinding corn
in the field;" it consists of a small upper and nether millstone, the upper one being turned
round by two women sitting facing each other; they both take hold of a perpendicular wooden
handle with one hand, employing the other to feed the mill and rake away the cracked grain.
These two young women have evidently been very industrious this morning; they have half-buried
themselves in the product of their labors, and are still grinding away as though for their
very lives, while the constant "click-clack " of the carpet weavers prove them likewise the
embodiment of industry.  They seem rather disconcerted by the abrupt intrusion and scrutinizing
attentions of a Frank and a stranger; however, the fascinating search for bits of interesting
experience forbids my retirement on that account, but rather urges me to make the most of fleeting
opportunities.  Picking up a handful of the cracked wheat, I inquire of one of the maidens
if it is for pillau; the maiden blushes at being thus directly addressed, and with downcast
eyes vouchsafes an affirmative nod in reply; at the same time an observant eye happens to discover
a little brown big-toe peeping out of the heap of wheat, and belonging to the same demure maiden
with the downcast eyes.  I know full well that I am stretching a point of Mohammedan etiquette,
even by coming among these industrious damsels in the manner I am doing, but the attention
of the men is fully concentrated on the bicycle outside, and the temptation of trying the experiment
of a little jocularity, just to see what comes of it, is under the circumstances irresistible.
Conscious of venturing where angels fear to tread.  I stoop down, and take hold of the peeping
little brown big-toe, and addressing the demure maiden with the downcast eyes, inquire, "Is
this also for pillau." This proves entirely too much for the risibilities of the industrious
pillau grinders, and letting go the handle of the mill, they both give themselves up to uncontrollable
laughter; the carpet-weavers have been watching me out of the corners of their bright, black
eyes, and catching the infection, the click clack of the carpet-weaving machines instantly
ceases, and several of the weavers hurriedly retreat into an adjoining room to avoid the awful
and well-nigh unheard-of indiscretion of laughing in the presence of a stranger.  Having thus
yielded to the temptation and witnessed the results, I discreetly retire, meeting at the entrance
a gray-bearded Turk coming to see what the merriment and the unaccountable stopping of the
carpet-weaving frames is all about.  A sheep has been slaughtered in Jas-chi-khan this morning,
and I obtain a nice piece of mutton, which I hand to a bystander, asking him to go somewhere
and cook it; in five minutes he returns with the meat burnt black outside and perfectly raw
within.  Seeing my evident disapproval of its condition, the same ancient person who recently
appeared upon the scene of my jocular experiment and who has now squatted himself down close
beside me, probably to make sure against any further indiscretions, takes the meat, slashes
it across in several directions with his dagger, orders the afore-mentioned bystander to try
it over again, and then coolly wipes his blackened and greasy fingers on my sheet of ekmek
as though it were a table napkin.  I obtain a few mouthfuls of eatable meat from the bystander's
second culinary effort, and then buy a water-melon from a man happening along with a laden
donkey; cutting iuto the melon I find it perfectly green all through, and toss it away; the
men look surprised, and some youngsters straightway pick it up, eat the inside out until they
can scoop out no more, and then, breaking the rind in pieces, they scrape it out with their
teeth until it is of egg-shell thinness.  They seem to do these things with impunity in Asia.

The grade and the wind are united against me on leaving Jas-chi-khan, but it is ridable, and
having made such a dismal failure about getting dinner, I push on toward a green area at the
base of a rocky mountain spur, which I observed an hour ago from a point some distance west
of the Kizil Irmak, and concluded to be a cluster of vineyards.  This conjecture turns out
quite correct, and, what is more, my experience upon arriving there would seem to indicate
that the good genii detailed to arrange the daily programme of my journey had determined to
recompense me to-day for having seen nothing of the feminine world of late but yashmaks and
shrouds, and momentary monocular evidence; for here again am I thrown into the society of a
bevy of maidens, more interesting, if anything, than the nymphs of industry at Jas-chi-khan.
There is apparently some festive occasion at the little vineyard-environed village, which stands
back a hundred yards or so from the road, and which ia approached by a narrow foot-way between
thrifty-looking vineyards.  Three blooming damsels, in all the bravery of holiday attire, with
necklaces and pendants of jingling coins to distinguish them from the matrons, come hurrying
down the pathway toward the road at my approach.  Seeing me dismount, upon arriving opposite
the village, the handsomest and gayest dressed of the three goes into one of the vineyards,
and with charming grace of manner, presents herself before me with both hands overflowing with
bunches of luscious black grapes.  Their abundant black tresses are gathered in one long plait
behind; they wear bracelets, necklaces, pendants, brow-bands, head ornaments, and all sorts
of wonderful articles of jewelry, made out of the common silver and metallic coins of the country;
they are small of stature and possess oval faces, large black eyes, and warm, dark complexions.
Their manner and dress prove rather a puzzle in determining their nationality; they are not
Turkish, nor Greek, nor Armenian, nor Circassian; they may possibly be sedentary Turkomans;
but they possess rather a Jewish cast of countenance, and my first impression of them is, that
they are "Bible people," the original inhabitants of the country, who have somehow managed
to cling to their little possessions here, in spite of Greeks, Turks, and Persians, and other
conquering races who have at times overrun the country; perhaps they have softened the hearts
of everybody undertaking to oust them by their graceful manners.

Other villagers soon collect, making a picturesque and interesting group around the bicycle;
but the maiden with the grapes makes too pretty and complete a picture, for any of the others
to attract more than passing notice.  One of her two companions whisperingly calls her attention
to the plainly evident fact that she is being regarded with admiration by the stranger.  She
blushes perceptibly through her nut-brown cheeks at hearing this, but she is also quite conscious
of her claims to admiration, and likes to be admired; so she neither changes her attitude of
respectful grace, nor raises her long drooping eyelashes, while I eat and eat grapes, taking
them bunch after bunch from her overflowing hands, until ashamed to eat any more.  I confess
to almost falling in love with that maiden, her manners were so easy and graceful; and when,
with ever-downcast eyes and a bewitching manner that leaves not the slightest room for considering
the doing so a bold or forward action, she puts the remainder of the grapes in my coat pockets,
a peculiar fluttering sensation - but I draw a veil over my feelings, they are too sacred for
the garish pages of a book.  I do not inquire about their nationality, I would rather it remain
a mystery, and a matter for future conjecture; but before leaving I add something to her already
conspicuous array of coins that have been increasing since her birth, and which will form her
modest dowry at marriage.  The road continues of excellent surface, but rather hilly for a
few miles, when it descends into the Valley of the Delijeh Irmak, where the artificial highway
again deteriorates into the unpacked condition of yesterday; the donkey trails are shallow
trenches of dust, and are no longer to be depended upon as keeping my general course, but are
rather cross-country trails leading from one mountain village to another. The well-defined
caravan trail leading from Ismidt to Angora comes no farther eastward than the latter city,
which is the central point where the one exportable commodity of the vilayet is collected for
barter and transportation to the seaboard.  The Delijeh Irmak Valley is under partial cultivation,
and occasionally one passes through small areas of melon gardens far away from any permanent
habitations; temporary huts or dug- outs are, however, an invariable adjunct to these isolated
possession of the villagers, in which some one resides day and night during the melon season,
guarding their property with gun and dog from unscrupulous wayfarers, who otherwise would not
hesitate to make their visit to town profitable as well as pleasurable, by surreptitiously
confiscating a donkey-load of salable melons from their neighbor's roadside garden. Sometimes
I essay to purchase a musk-melon from these lone sentinels, but it is impossible to obtain
one fit to eat; these wretched prayers on Nature's bounty evidently pluck and devour them the
moment they develop from the bitterness of their earliest growth.  No villages are passed on
the road after leaving the vintagers' cluster at noon, but bunches of mud hovels are at intervals
descried a few miles to the right, perched among the hills that form the southern boundary
of the valley; being of the same color as the general surface about them, they are not easily
distinguishable at a distance.  There seems to be a decided propensity among the natives for
choosing the hills as an habitation, even when their arable lands are miles away in the valley;
the salubrity of the more elevated location may be the chief consideration, but a swiftly flowing
mountain rivulet near his habitation is to the Mohammedan a source of perpetual satisfaction.

I travel along for some time after nightfall, in hopes of reaching a village, but none appearing,
I finally decide to camp out.  Choosing a position behind a convenient knoll, I pitch the tent
where it will bo invisible from the road, using stones in lieu of tent-pegs; and inhabiting
for the first time this unique contrivance, I sup off the grapes remaining over from the bountiful
feast at noon-and, being without any covering, stretch myself without undressing beside the
upturned bicycle; notwithstanding the gentle reminders of unsatisfied hunger, I am enjoying
the legitimate reward of constant exercise in the open air ten minutes after pitching the tent.
Soon after midnight I am awakened by the chilly influence of the "wee sma' hours," and recognizing
the likelihood of the tent proving more beneficial as a coverlet than a roof, in the absence
of rain, I take it down and roll myself up in it; the thin, oiled cambric is far from being
a blanket, however, and at daybreak the bicycle and everything is drenched with one of the
heavy dews of the country.  Ten miles over an indifferent road is traversed next morning; the
comfortless reflection that anything like a "square meal" seems out of the question anywhere
between the larger towns scarcely tends to exert a soothing influence on the ravenous attacks
of a most awful appetite; and I am beginning to think seriously of making a detour of several
miles to reach a mountain village, when I meet a party of three horsemen, a Turkish Bey - with
an escort of two zaptiehs.  I am trundling at the time, and without a moment's hesitancy I
make a dead set at the Bey, with the single object of satisfying to some extent my gastronomic
requirements.

"Bey Effendi, have you any ekmek?" I ask, pointing inquiringly to his saddle-bags on a zaptieh's
horse, and at the same time giving him to understand by impressive pantomime the uncontrollable
condition of my appetite.  With what seems to me, under the circumstances, simply cold- blooded
indifference to human suffering; the Bey ignores my inquiry altogether, and concentrating his
whole attention on the bicycle, asks, "What is that?" "An Americanish araba, Effendi; have
you any ekmek ?" toying suggestively with the tell-tale slack of my revolver belt.

"Where have you come from?" "Stamboul; have you ekmek in the saddle- bags, Effendi." this time
boldly beckoning the zaplieh with the Bey's effects to approach nearer.

"Where are you going?" "Yuzgat! ekmek! ekmek!" tapping the saddle-bags in quite an imperative
manner.  This does not make any outward impression upon the Bey's aggravating imperturbability,
however; he is not so indifferent to my side of the question as he pretends; aware of his inability
to supply my want, and afraid that a negative answer would hasten my departure before he has
fully satisfied his curiosity concerning me, he is playing a. little game of diplomacy in his
own interests.

"What is it for." he now asks, with soul-harrowing indifference to all my counter inquiries."
To bin," I reply, desperately, curt and indifferent, beginning to see through his game.  "
Bin, bin! bacalem." he says; supplementing the request with a coaxing smile.  At the same moment
my long-suffering digestive apparatus favors me with an unusually savage reminder, and nettled
beyond the point where forbearance ceases to be any longer a virtue, I return an answer not
exactly complimentary to the Bey's ancestors, and continue my hungry way down the valley. 
A couple of miles after leaving the Bey, I intercept a party of peasants traversing a cross-country
trail, with a number of pack-donkeys loaded with rock-salt, from whom I am fortunately able
to obtain several thin sheets of ekmek, which I sit down and devour immediately, without even
water to moisten the repast; it seems one of the most tasteful and soul-satisfying breakfasts
I ever ate.

Like misfortunes, blessings never seem to come singly, for, an hour after thus breaking my
fast I happen upon a party of villagers working on an unfinished portion of the new road; some
of them are eating their morning meal of ekmek and yaort, and no sooner do I appear upon the
scene than I am straightway invited to partake, a seat in the ragged circle congregated around
the large bowl of clabbered milk being especially prepared with a bunch of pulled grass for
my benefit.  The eager hospitality of these poor villagers is really touching; they are working
without so much as "thank you" for payment, there is not a garment amongst the gang fit for
a human covering; their unvarying daily fare is the "blotting-paper ekmek" and yaort, with
a melon or a cucumber occasionally as a luxury; yet, the moment I approach, they assign me
a place at their "table," and two of them immediately bestir themselves to make me a comfortable
seat.  Neither is there so much as a mercenary thought among them in connection with the invitation;
these poor fellows, whose scant rags it would be a farce to call clothing, actually betray
embarrassment at the barest mention of compensation; they fill my pockets with bread, apologize
for the absence of coffee, and compare the quality of their respective pouches of native tobacco
in order to make me a decent cigarette.

Never, surely, was the reputation of Dame Fortune for fickleness so completely proved as in
her treatment of me this morning - ten o'clock finds me seated on a pile of rugs in a capacious
black tent, "wrassling" with a huge bowl of savory mutton pillau, flavored with green herbs,
as the guest of a Koordish sheikh; shortly afterwards I meet a man taking a donkey-load of
musk-melons to the Koordish camp, who insists on presenting me with the finest melon I have
tasted since leaving Constantinople; and high noon finds me the guest of another Koordish sheikh;
thus does a morning, which commenced with a fair prospect of no breakfast, following after
yesterday's scant supply of unsuitable food, end in more hospitality than I know what to do
with.  These nomad tribes of the famous "black-tents " wander up toward Angora every summer
with their flocks, in order to be near a market at shearing time; they are famed far and wide
for their hospitality.  Upon approaching the great open-faced tent of the Sheikh, there is
a hurrying movement among the attendants to prepare a suitable raised seat, for they know at
a glance that I am an Englishman, and likewise are aware that an Englishman cannot sit cross-legged
like an Asiatic; at first, I am rather surprised at their evident ready recognition of my nationality,
but I soon afterwards discover the reason.  A hugh bowl of pillau, and another of excellent
yaort is placed before me without asking any questions, while the dignified old Sheikh fulfils
one's idea of a gray-bearded nomad patriarch to perfection, as he sits cross legged on a rug,
solemnly smoking a nargileh, and watching to see that no letter of his generous code of hospitality
toward strangers is overlooked by the attendants.  These latter seem to be the picked young
men of the tribe; fine, strapping fellows, well-dresed, six-footers, and of athletic proportions;
perfect specimens of semi- civilized manhood, that would seem better employed in a grenadier
regiment than in hovering about the old Sheikh's tent, attending to the filling and lighting
of his nargileh, the arranging of his cushions by day and his bed at night, the serving of
his food, and the proper reception of his guests; and yet it is an interesting sight to see
these splendid young fellows waiting upon their beloved old chieftain, fairly bounding, like
great affectionate mastiffs, at his merest look or suggestion.  Most of the boys and young
men are out with the flocks, but the older men, the women and children, gather in a curious
crowd before the open tent; they maintain a respectful silence so long as I am their Sheikh's
guest, but they gather about me without reserve when I leave the hospitable shelter of that
respected person's quarters.  After examining my helmet and sizing up my general appearance,
they pronounce me an "English zaptieh," a distinction for which I am indebted to the circumstance
of Col.  N--, an English officer, having recently been engaged in Koordistan organizing a force
of native zaptiehs.  The women of this particular camp seem, on the whole, rather unprepossessing
specimens; some of them are hooked-nosed old hags, with piercing black eyes, and hair dyed
to a flaming "carrotty" hue with henna; this latter is supposed to render them beautiful, and
enhance their personal appearance in the eyes of the men; they need something to enhance their
personal appearance, certainly, but to the untutored and inartistic eye of the writer it produces
a horrid, unnatural effect.  According to our ideas, flaming red hair looks uncanny and of
vulgar, uneducated taste, when associated with coal-black eyes and a complexion like gathering
darkness.  These vain mortals seem inclined to think that in me they have discovered something
to be petted and made much of, treating me pretty much as a troop of affectionate little girls
- would treat a wandering kitten that might unexpectedly appear in their midst.  Giddy young
things of about fifty summers cluster around me in a compact body, examining my clothes from
helmet to moccasins, and critically feeling the texture of my coat and shirt, they take off
my helmet, reach over each other's shoulders to stroke my hair, and pat my cheeks in the most
affectionate manner; meanwhile expressing themselves in soft, purring comments, that require
no linguistic abilities to interpret into such endearing remarks as, "Ain't he a darling, though?"
"What nice soft hair and pretty blue eyes." "Don't you wish the dear old Sheikh would let us
keep him.  "Considering the source whence it comes, it requires very little of this to satisfy
one, and as soon as I can prevail upon them to let me escape, I mount and wheel away, several
huge dogs escorting me, for some minutes, in the peculiar manner Koordish dogs have of escorting
stray 'cyclers.

CHAPTER XV.

FROM THE KOORDISH CAMP TO YUZGAT.

>From the Koordish encampment my route leads over a low mountain spur by easy gradients, and
by a winding, unridable trail down into the valley of the eastern fork of the Delijah Irmak.
The road improves as this valley is reached, and noon finds me the wonder and admiration of
another Koordish camp, where I remain a couple of hours in deference to the powers of the midday
sun.  One has no scruples about partaking of the hospitality of the nomad Koords, for they
are the wealthiest people in the country, their flocks covering the hills in many localities;
they are, as a general thing, fairly well dressed, are cleaner in their cooking than the villagers,
and hospitable to the last degree.  Like the rest of us, however, they have their faults as
well as their virtues; they are born freebooters, and in unsettled times, when the Turkish
Government, being handicapped by weightier considerations, is compelled to relax its control
over them, they seldom fail to promptly respond to their plundering instincts and make no end
of trouble.  They still retain their hospitableness, but after making a traveller their guest
for the night, and allowing him to depart with everything he has, they will intercept him on
the road and rob him.  They have some objectionable habits, even in these peaceful times, which
will better appear when we reach their own Koordistan, where we shall, doubtless, have better
opportunities for criticising them. Whatever their faults or virtues, I leave this camp, hoping
that the termination of the day may find me the guest of another sheikh for the night An hour
after leaving this camp I pass through an area of vineyards, out of which people come running
with as many grapes among them as would feed a dozen people; the road is ridable, and I hurry
along to avoid their bother.  Verily it would seem that I am being hounded down by retributive
justice for sundry evil thoughts and impatient remarks, associated with my hungry experiences
of early morning; then I was wondering where the next mouthful of food was going to overtake
me, this afternoon finds me pedalling determinedly to prevent being overtaken by it.

The afternoon is hot and with scarcely a breath of air moving; the little valley terminates
in a region of barren, red hills, on which the sun glares fiercely; some toughish climbing
has to be accomplished in scaling a ridge, and then.  I emerge into an upland lava plateau,
where the only vegetation is sun-dried weeds and thistles.  Here a herd of camels are contentedly
browsing, munching the dry, thorny herbage with a satisfaction that is evident a mile away.
From casual observations along the route, I am inclined to think a camel not far behind a goat
in the depravity of its appetite; a camel will wander uneasily about over a greensward of moist,
succulent grass, scanning his surroundings in search of giant thistles, frost-bitten tumble-weeds,
tough, spriggy camel thorns, and odds and ends of unpalatable vegetation generally.  Of course,
the "ship of the desert" never sinks to such total depravity as to hanker after old gum overshoes
and circus posters, but if permitted to forage around human habitations for a few generations,
I think they would eventually degenerate to the goat's disreputable level.  The expression
of utter astonishment that overspreads the angular countenance of the camels browsing near
the roadside, at my appearance, is one of the most ludicrous sights imaginable; they seem quite
intelligent enough to recognize in a wheelman and his steed something inexplicable and foreign
to their country, and their look of timid inquiry seems ridiculously unsuited to their size
and the general ungainliness of their appearance, producing a comical effect that is worth
going miles to see.  It is approaching sun-down, when, ascending a ridge overlooking another
valley, I am gratified at seeing it occupied by several Koordish camps, their clusters of black
tents being a conspicuous feature of the landscape.  With a fair prospect of hospitable quarters
for the night before me, and there being no distinguishable signs of a road, I make my way
across country toward one of the camps that seems to be nearest my proper course.  I have arrived
within a mile of my objective point, when I observe, at the base of a mountain about half the
distance to my right, a large, white two-storied building, the most pretentious structure,
by long odds, that has been seen since leaving Angora.  My curiosity is, of course, aroused
concerning its probable character; it looks like a bit of civilization that has in some unaccountable
manner found its way to a region where no other human habitations are visible, save the tents
of wild tribesmen, and I at once shape my course toward it.  It turns out to be a rock-salt
mine or quarry, that supplies the whole region for scores of miles around with salt, rock-salt
being the only kind obtainable in the country; it was from this mine that the donkey party
from whom I first obtained bread this morning fetched their loads.  Here I am invited to remain
over night, am provided with a substantial supper, the menu including boiled mutton, with cucumbers
for desert.  The managers and employees of the, quarry make their cucumbers tasteful by rubbing
the end with a piece of rock-salt each time it is cut off or bitten, each person keeping a
select little square for the purpose.  The salt is sold at the mine, and owners of transportation
facilities in the shape of pack animals make money by purchasing it here at six paras an oke,
and selling it at a profit in distant towns.

Two young men seem to have charge of transacting the business; one of them is inordinately
inquisitive, he even wants to try and unstick the envelope containing a letter of introduction
to Mr. Tifticjeeoghlou's father in Yuzgat, and read it out of pure curiosity to see what it
says; and he offers me a lira for my Waterbury watch, notwithstanding its Alla Franga face
is beyond his Turkish comprehension.  The loud, confident tone in which the Waterbury ticks
impresses the natives very favorably toward it, and the fact of its not opening at the back
like other time- pieces, creates the impression that it is a watch that never gets cranky and
out of order; quite different from the ones they carry, since their curiosity leads them to
be always fooling with the works.  American clocks are found all through Asia Minor, fitted
with Oriental faces and there is little doubt but the Waterbury, with its resonant tick, if
similiarly prepared, would find here a ready market.  The other branch of the managerial staff
is a specimen of humanity peculiarly Asiatic Turkish, a melancholy-faced, contemplative person,
who spends nearly the whole evening in gazing in silent wonder at me and the bicycle; now and
then giving expression to his utter inability to understand how such things can possibly be
by shaking his head and giving utterance to a peculiar clucking of astonishment.  He has heard
me mention having come from Stamboul, which satisfies him to a certain extent; for, like a
true Turk, he believes that at Stamboul all wonderful things originate; whether the bicycle
was made there, or whether it originally came from somewhere else, doesn't seem to enter into
his speculations; the simple knowledge that I have come from Stamboul is all-sufficient for
him; so far as he is concerned, the bicycle is simply another wonder from Stamboul, another
proof that the earthly paradise of the Mussulman world on the Bosphorus is all that he has
been taught to believe it.  When the contemplative young man ventures away from the dreamy
realms of his own imaginations, and from the society of his inmost thoughts, far enough to
make a remark, it is to ask me something about Stamboul; but being naturally taciturn and retiring,
and moreover, anything but an adept at pantomimic language, he prefers mainly to draw his own
conclusions in silence.  He manages to make me understand, however, that he intends before
long making a journey to see Stamboul for himself; like many another Turk from the barren hills
of the interior, he will visit the Ottoman capital; he will recite from the Koran under the
glorious mosaic dome of St. Sophia; wander about that wonder of the Orient, the Stamboul bazaar;
gaze for hours on the matchless beauties of the Bosphorus ; ride on one of the steamboats;
see the railway, the tramway, the Sultan's palaces, and the shipping, and return to his native
hills thoroughly convinced that in all the world there is no place fit to be compared with
Stamboul; no place so full of wonders; no place so beautiful; and wondering how even the land
of the kara ghuz kiz, the material paradise of the Mohammedans, can possibly be more lovely.
The contemplative young man is tall and slender, has large, dreamy, black eyes, a downy upper
lip, a melancholy cast of countenance, and wears a long print wrapper of neat dotted pattern,
gathered at the waist with a girdle a la dressing-gown.

The inquisitive partner makes me up a comfortable bed of quilts on the divan of a large room,
which is also occupied by several salt traders remaining over night, and into which their own
small private apartments open.  A few minutes after they have retired to their respective rooms,
the contemplative young man reappears with silent tread, and with a scornful glance at my surroundings,
both human and inanimate, gathers up my loose effects, and bids me bring bicycle and everything
into his room; here, I find, he has already prepared for my reception quite a downy couch,
having contributed, among other comfortable things, his wolf-skin overcoat; after seeing me
comfortably established on a couch more appropriate to my importance as a person recently from
Stamboul than the other, he takes a lingering look at the bicycle, shakes his head and clucks,
and then extinguishes the light.  Sunrise on the following morning finds me wheeling eastward
from the salt quarry, over a trail well worn by salt caravans, to Yuzgat; the road leads for
some distance down a grassy valley, covered with the flocks of the several Koordish camps round
about; the wild herdsmen come galloping from all directions across the valley toward me, their
uncivilized garb and long swords giving them more the appearance of a ferocious gang of cut-throats
advancing to the attack than shepherds.  Hitherto, nobody has seemed any way inclined to attack
me; I have almost wished somebody would undertake a little devilment of some kind, for the
sake of livening things up a little, and making my narrative more stirring; after venturing
everything, I have so far nothing to tell but a story of being everywhere treated with the
greatest consideration, and much of the time even petted.  I have met armed men far away from
any habitations, whose appearance was equal to our most ferocious conception of bashi bazouks,
and merely from a disinclination to be bothered, perhaps being in a hurry at the time, have
met their curious inquiries with imperious gestures to be gone; and have been guilty of really
inconsiderate conduct on more than one occasion, but under no considerations have I yet found
them guilty of anything worse than casting covetous glances at my effects.  But there is an
apparent churlishness of manner, and an overbearing demeanor, as of men chafing under the restraining
influences that prevent them gratifying their natural free-booting instincts, about these Koordish
herdsmen whom I encounter this morning, that forms quite a striking contrast to the almost
childlike harmlessness and universal respect toward me observed in the disposition of the villagers.
It requires no penetrating scrutiny of these fellows' countenances to ascertain that nothing
could be more uncongenial to them than the state of affairs that prevents them stopping ine
and looting me of everything I possess; a couple of them order me quite imperatively to make
a detour from my road to avoid approaching too near their flock of sheep, and their general
behavior is pretty much as though seeking to draw me into a quarrel, that would afford them
an opportunity of plundering me.  Continuing on the even tenor of my way, affecting a lofty
unconsciousness of their existence, and wondering whether, in case of being molested, it would
be advisable to use my Smith & Wesson in defending my effects, or taking the advice received
in Constantinople, offer no resistance whatever, and trust to being able to recover them through
the authorities, I finally emerge from their vicinity.  Their behavior simply confirms what
I have previously understood of their character; that while they will invariably extend hospitable
treatment to a stranger visiting their camps, like unreliable explosives, they require to be
handled quite "gingerly" when encountered on the road, to prevent disagreeable consequences.

