The loss of the battle of Jena had struck the Prussians with such terror, and the court had
fled with such precipitation, that everything had been left in the royal residences; and, consequently,
on his arrival at Potsdam, the Emperor found there the sword of the great Frederick, his gorget,
the grand cordon of his order, and his alarm-clock, and had them carried to Paris, to be preserved
at the Hotel des Invalides.  "I prefer these trophies," said his Majesty, "to all the treasures
of the King of Prussia; I will send them to my old soldiers of the campaign of Hanover, who
will guard them as a trophy of the victories of the grand army, and of the revenge that it
has taken for the disaster of Rosbach."  The Emperor the same day ordered the removal to his
capital of the column raised by the great Frederick to perpetuate the remembrance of the defeat
of the French at Rosbach. [At Rosbach, November, 1757, the French, under Prince de Soubise,
had been shamefully defeated by Frederick the Great] He might have contented himself with changing
the inscription.

Napoleon remained at the chateau of Charlottenburg, where he had established his headquarters,
until the regiments of the guard had arrived from all points; and as soon as they were assembled,
orders were given to put themselves in full uniform, which was done in the little wood before
the town.  The Emperor made his entry into the capital of Prussia between ten and eleven o'clock
in the morning, surrounded by his aides-de-camp, and the officers of his staff, all the regiments
filing before him in the most perfect order, drums and music at their head; and the fine appearance
of the troops excited the admiration of the Prussians.

Having entered Berlin in the suite of the Emperor, we arrived at the town square, in the midst
of which a bust of the great Frederick had been placed.  The name of this monarch is so popular
at Berlin, and, in fact, throughout all Prussia, that on many occasions, when any one by chance
pronounced it, either in a cafe or in any other public place, or even in private assemblies,
I have seen every one present rise, and lift his hat with an air of the most profound respect
and genuine adoration.

When the Emperor arrived in front of the bust, he described a semicircle at a gallop, followed
by his staff, and lowering the point of his sword, while uncovering his head, was the first
to salute the image of Frederick II.  His staff followed his example; and all the general and
other officers who composed it ranged themselves in a semicircle around the bust, with the
Emperor in the center.  His Majesty gave orders that each regiment should present arms in defiling
before the bust, which maneuver was not to the taste of some grumblers of the first regiment
of the Guard, who, with moustaches scorched, and faces still blackened with the powder of Jena,
would have better liked an order for lodgings with the bourgeois than all this parade, and
took no pains to conceal their ill- humor.  There was one, among others, who, as he passed
in front of the bust and before the Emperor, exclaimed between his teeth, without moving a
muscle of his face, but still loud enough to be heard by his Majesty, "Damn the bust."  His
Majesty pretended not to hear, but that evening he repeated with a laugh the words of the old
soldier.

His Majesty alighted at the chateau, where his lodging was prepared, and the officers of his
household had preceded him.  Having learned that the electoral princess of Hesse-Cassel, sister
of the king, was still ill at the end of her confinement, the Emperor ascended to the apartment
of this princess, and, after quite a long visit, gave orders that she should be treated with
all the deference due to her rank and unfortunate situation.