After the warm day, all the evening scents were abroad, carried by a gentle wind. Sir Arthur
drank them in, with the sensuous pleasure which had been one of his gifts in life. The honey
smell of the heather, the woody smell of the bracken, the faint fragrance of wood-smoke wafted
from a bonfire in the valley below--they all carried with them an inexpressible magic for the
man wandering on the moor. So did the movements of birds--the rise of a couple of startled
grouse, the hovering of two kestrels, a flight of wild duck in the distance. Each and all reminded
him of the halcyon times of life--adventures of his boyhood, the sporting pleasures of his
manhood. By George!--how he had enjoyed them all!

Presently, to his left, on the edge of the heathery slope he caught sight of one of the butts
used in the great grouse-shoots of the moor. What a jolly party they had had last year in that
week of wonderful October weather! Two hundred brace on the home moor the first day, and almost
as many on the Fairdale moor the following day. Some of the men had never shot better. One
of the party was now Viceroy of India; another had been killed in one of the endless little
frontier fights that are the price, month by month, which the British Empire pays for its existence.
Douglas had come off particularly well. His shooting from that butt to the left had been magnificent.
Sir Arthur remembered well how the old hands had praised it, warming the cockles of his own heart.

"I will have one more shoot," he said to himself with passion--"I will!"

Then, feeling suddenly tired, he sat down beside the slipping stream. It was fairly full, after
some recent rain, and the music of it rang in his ears. Stretching out a hand he filled it
full of silky grass and thyme, sniffing at it in delight. "How strange," he thought, "that
I can still enjoy these things. But I shall--till I die."

Below him, as he sat, lay the greater part of his estate stretching east and west; bounded
on the west by some of the high moors leading up to the Pennine range, lost on the east in
a blue and wooded distance. He could see the towers of three village churches, and the blurred
greys and browns of the houses clustering round them--some near, some far. Stone farm-buildings,
their white-washed gables glowing under the level sun, caught his eye, one after the other--now
hidden in wood, now standing out upon the fields or the moorland, with one sycamore or a group
of yews to shelter them. And here and there were larger houses; houses of the middle gentry,
with their gardens and enclosures. Farms, villages, woods and moors, they were all his--nominally
his, for a few weeks or months longer. And there was scarcely one of them in the whole wide
scene, with which he had not some sporting association; whether of the hunting field, or the
big autumn shoots, or the jolly partridge drives over the stubbles.

But it suddenly and sharply struck him how very few other associations he possessed with these
places spread below him in the declining August sunshine. He had not owned Flood more than
fifteen years--enough however to lose it in! And he had succeeded a father who had been the
beloved head of the county, a just and liberal landlord, a man of scrupulous kindness and honour,
for whom everybody had a friendly word. His ruined son on the moorside thought with wonder
and envy of his father's popular arts, which yet were no arts. For himself he confessed,--aware
as he was, this afternoon, of the presence in his mind of a new and strange insight with regard
to his own life and past, as though he were writing his own obituary--that the people living
in these farms and villages had meant little more to him than the troublesome conditions on
which he enjoyed the pleasures of the Flood estates, the great income he drew from them, and
the sport for which they were famous. He had his friends among the farmers of course, though
they were few. There were men who had cringed to him, and whom he had rewarded. And Laura had
given away plentifully in the villages. But his chief agent he knew had been a hard man and
a careless one; and he had always loathed the trouble of looking after him. Again and again
he had been appealed to, as against his agent; and he had not even answered the letters. He
had occasionally done some public duties; he had allowed himself to be placed on the County
Council, but had hardly ever attended meetings; he had taken the chair and made a speech occasionally,
when it would have cost him more effort to refuse than to accept; and those portions of the
estate which adjoined the castle were in fairly good repair. But on the remoter farms, and
especially since his financial resources had begun to fail, he knew very well that there were
cottages and farm-houses in a scandalous state, on which not a farthing had been spent for years.

No, it could not be said he had played a successful part as a landowner. He had meant no harm
to anybody. He had been simply idle and preoccupied; and that in a business where, under modern
conditions, idleness is immoral. He was quite conscious that there were good men, frugal men,
kind and God-fearing men, landlords like himself, though on a much smaller scale, in that tract
of country under his feet, who felt bitterly towards him, who judged him severely, who would
be thankful to see the last of him, and to know that the land had passed into other and better
hands. Fifty-two years of life lived in that northern Vale of Eden; and what was there to show
for them?--in honest work done, in peace of conscience, in friends? Now that the pictures were
sold, there would be just enough to pay everybody, with a very little over. There was some
comfort in that. He would have ruined nobody but himself and Duggy. Poor Laura would be quite
comfortable on her own money, and would give him house-room no doubt--till the end.

The end? But he might live another twenty years. The thought was intolerable. The apathy in
which he had been lately living gave way. He realised, with quickened breath, what this parting
from his inheritance and all the associations of his life would mean. He saw himself as a tree,
dragged violently out of its native earth--rootless and rotten.

Poor Duggy! Duggy was as proud and wilful as himself; with more personal ambition however,
and less of that easy, sensuous recklessness, that gambler's spirit, which had led his father
into such quagmires. Duggy had shown up well these last weeks. He was not a boy to talk, but
in acts he had been good.

And through the man's remorseful soul there throbbed the one deep, disinterested affection
of his life--his love for his son. He had been very fond of Laura, but when it came to moments
like this she meant little to him.

He gave himself up to this feeling of love. How strange that it should both rend and soothe!--that
it and it alone brought some comfort, some spermaceti for the inward bruise, amid all the bitterness
connected with it. Duggy, in his arms, as a little toddling fellow, Duggy at school--playing
for Harrow at Lord's--Duggy at college--

But of that part of his son's life, as he realised with shame, he knew very little. He had
been too entirely absorbed, when it arrived, in the frantic struggle, first for money, and
then for solvency. Duggy had become in some ways during the last two years a stranger to him--his
own fault! What had he done to help him through his college life--to "influence him for good,"
as people said? Nothing. He had been enormously proud of his son's university distinctions;
he had supplied him lavishly with money; he had concealed from him his own financial situation
till it was hopeless; he had given him the jolliest possible vacation, and that was all that
could be said.

The father groaned within himself. And yet again--how strangely!--did some fraction of healing
virtue flow from his very distress?--from his remembrance, above all, of how Duggy had tried
to help him?--during these few weeks since he knew?

Ah!--Tidswell Church coming out of the shadows! He remembered how one winter he had been coming
home late on horseback through dark lanes, when he met the parson of that church, old and threadbare
and narrow-chested, trudging on, head bent, against a spitting rain. The owner of Flood had
been smitten with a sudden compunction, and dismounting he had walked his horse beside the
old man. The living of Tidswell was in his own gift. It amounted, he remembered, to some £140
a year. The old man, whose name was Trevenen, had an old wife, to whom Sir Arthur thought Lady
Laura had sometimes sent some cast-off clothes.

Mr. Trevenen had been baptising a prematurely born child in a high moorland farm. The walk
there and back had been steep and long, and his thin lantern-jawed face shone very white through
the wintry dusk.

"You must be very tired," Sir Arthur had said, remembering uncomfortably the dinner to which
he was himself bent--the chef, the wines, the large house-party.

And Mr. Trevenen had looked up and smiled.

"Not very. I have been unusually cheered as I walked by thoughts of the Divine Love!"

The words had been so simply said; and a minute afterwards the old pale-faced parson had disappeared
into the dark.

What did the words mean? Had they really any meaning?

"The Divine Love." Arthur Falloden did not know then, and did not know now. But he had often
thought of the incident.

He leaned over, musing, to gather a bunch of hare-bells growing on the edge of the stream.
As he did so, he was conscious again of a sharp pain in the chest. In a few more seconds, he
was stretched on the moorland grass, wrestling with a torturing anguish that was crushing his
life out. It seemed to last an eternity. Then it relaxed, and he was able to breathe and think
again.

"What is it?"

Confused recollections of the death of his old grandfather, when he himself was a child, rose
in his mind. "He was out hunting--horrible pain--two hours. Is this the same? If it is--I shall
die--here--alone."

He tried to move after a little, but found himself helpless. A brief intermission, and the
pain rushed on him again, like a violent and ruthless hand, grinding the very centres of life.
When he recovered consciousness, it was with the double sense of blissful relief from agony
and of ebbing strength. What had happened to him? How long had he been there?

"Could you drink this?" said a voice behind him. He opened his eyes and saw a young man, with
a halo of red-gold hair, and a tremulous, pitying face, quite strange to him, bending over him.

There was some brandy at his lips. He drank with difficulty. What had happened to the light?
How dark it was!

"Where am I?" he said, looking up blindly into the face above him.

"I found you here--on the moor--lying on the grass. Are you better? Shall I run down now--and
fetch some one?"

"Don't go--"

The agony returned. When Sir Arthur spoke again, it was very feebly.

"I can't live--through--much more of that. I'm dying. Don't leave me. Where's my son? Where's
my son--Douglas? Who are you?"

The glazing eyes tried to make out the features of the stranger. They were too dim to notice
the sudden shiver that passed through them as he named his son.

"I can't get at any one. I've been calling for a long time. My name is Radowitz. I'm staying
at Penfold Rectory. If I could only carry you! I tried to lift you--but I couldn't. I've only
one hand." He pointed despairingly to the sling he was wearing.

"Tell my son--tell Douglas--"

But the faint voice ceased abruptly, and the eyes closed. Only there was a slight movement
of the lips, which Radowitz, bending his ear to the mouth of the dying man, tried to interpret.
He thought it said "pray," but he could not be sure.

Radowitz looked round him in an anguish. No one on the purple side of the moor, no one on the
grassy tracks leading downwards to the park; only the wide gold of the evening--the rising
of a light wind--the rustling of the fern--and the loud, laboured breathing below him.

He bent again over the helpless form, murmuring words in haste.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile after Sir Arthur left the house, Douglas had been urgently summoned by his mother.
He found her at tea with Trix in her own sitting-room. Roger was away, staying with a school
friend, to the general relief of the household; Nelly, the girl of seventeen, was with relations
in Scotland, but Trix had become her mother's little shadow and constant companion. The child
was very conscious of the weight on her parents' minds. Her high spirits had all dropped. She
had a wistful, shrinking look, which suited ill with her round face and her childishly parted
lips over her small white teeth. The little face was made for laughter; but in these days only
Douglas could bring back her smiles, because mamma was so unhappy and cried so much; and that
mamma should cry seemed to bring her whole world tumbling about the child's ears. Only Douglas,
for sheer impatience with the general gloom of the house, would sometimes tease her or chase
her; and then the child's laugh would ring out--a ghostly echo from the days before Lady Laura
"knew."

Poor Lady Laura! Up to the last moment before the crash, her husband had kept everything from
her. She was not a person of profound or sensitive feeling; and yet it is probable that her
resentment of her husband's long secrecy, and the implications of it, counted for a great deal
in her distress and misery.

The sale of the pictures, as shortly reported by Douglas, had overwhelmed her. As soon as her
son appeared in her room, she poured out upon him a stream of lamentation and complaint, while
Trix was alternately playing with the kitten on her knee and drying furtive tears on a very
grubby pocket-handkerchief.

Douglas was on the whole patient and explanatory, for he was really sorry for his mother; but
as soon as he could he escaped from her on the plea of urgent letters and estate accounts.

The August evening wore on, and it was nearing sunset when his mother came hurriedly into the
library.

"Douglas, where is your father?"

"He went out for a walk before tea. Hasn't he come in?"

"No. And it's more than two hours. I--I don't like it, Duggy. He hasn't been a bit well lately--and
so awfully depressed. Please go and look for him, dear!"

Douglas suddenly perceived the terror in his mother's mind. It seemed to him absurd. He knew
his father better than she did; but he took his hat and went out obediently.

He had happened to notice his father going towards the moor, and he took the same path, running
simply for exercise, measuring his young strength against the steepness of the hill and filling
his lungs with the sweet evening air, in a passionate physical reaction against the family
distress.

Five miles away, in this same evening glow, was Constance Bledlow walking or sitting in her
aunts' garden? Or was she nearer still--at Penfold Rectory, just beyond the moor he was climbing,
the old rectory-house where Sorell and Radowitz were staying? He had taken good care to give
that side of the hills a wide berth since his return home. But a great deal of the long ridge
was common ground, and in the private and enclosed parts there were several rights of way crossing
the moor, besides the one lonely road traversing it from end to end on which he had met Constance
Bledlow. If he had not been so tied at home, and so determined not to run any risks of a meeting,
he might very well have come across Sorell at least, if not Radowitz, on the high ground dominating
the valleys on either side. Sorell was a great walker. But probably they were as anxious to
avoid a casual meeting as he was.

The evening was rapidly darkening, and as he climbed he searched the hillside with his quick
eyes for any sign of his father. Once or twice he stopped to call:

"Father!"

The sound died away, echoing among the fields and hollows of the moor. But there was no answer.
He climbed further. He was now near the stream which descended through the park, and its loud
jubilant voice burst upon him, filling the silence.

Then, above the plashing of the stream and the rising of the wind, he heard suddenly a cry:

"Help!"

It came from a point above his head. A sudden horror came upon him. He dashed on. In another
minute a man's figure appeared, higher up, dark against the reddened sky. The man put one hand
to his mouth, and shouted through it again--"Help!"

Douglas came up with him. In speechless amazement he saw that it was Otto Radowitz, without
a coat, bareheaded, pale and breathless.

"There's a man here, Falloden. I think it's your father. He's awfully ill. I believe he's dying.
Come at once! I've been shouting for a long time."

Douglas said nothing. He rushed on, following Radowitz, who took a short cut bounding through
the deep ling of the moor. Only a few yards till Douglas perceived a man, with a grey, drawn
face, who was lying full length on a stretch of grass beside the stream, his head and shoulders
propped against a low rock on which a folded coat had been placed as a pillow.

"Father!"

Sir Arthur opened his eyes. He was drawing deep, gasping breaths, the strong life in him wrestling
still. But the helplessness, the ineffable surrender and defeat of man's last hour, was in
his face.

Falloden knelt down.

"Father!--don't you know me? Well soon carry you home. It's Duggy!" No answer. Radowitz had
gone a few yards away, and was also kneeling, his face buried in his hands, his back turned
to the father and son.

Douglas made another agonised appeal, and the grey face quivered. A whisper passed the lips.

"It's best, Duggy--poor Duggy! Kiss me, old boy. Tell your mother--that young man--prayed for
me. She'll like to--know that. My love--"

The last words were spoken with a great effort; and the breaths that followed grew slower and
slower as the vital tide withdrew itself. Once more the eyes opened, and Douglas saw in them
the old affectionate look. Then the lips shaped themselves again to words that made no sound;
a shudder passed through the limbs--their last movement.

Douglas knelt on, looking closely into his father's face, listening for the breath that came
no more. He felt rather than saw that Radowitz had moved still further away.

Two or three deep sobs escaped him--involuntary, almost unconscious. Then he pulled himself
together. His mother? Who was to tell her?

He went to call Radowitz, who came eagerly.

"My father is dead," said Falloden, deadly pale, but composed. "How long have you been here?"

"About half an hour. When I arrived he was in agonies of pain. I gave him brandy, and he revived
a little. Then I wanted to go for help, but he begged me not to leave him alone. So I could
only shout and wave my handkerchief. The pains came back and back--and every time he grew weaker.
Oh, it was angina. I have seen it before--twice. If I had only had some nitrite of amyl! But
there was nothing--nothing I could do." He paused, and then added timidly, "I am a Catholic;
I said some of our prayers."

He looked gravely into Falloden's face. Falloden's eyes met his, and both men remembered--momentarily--the
scene in Marmion Quad.

"We must get him down," said Falloden abruptly. "And there is my mother."

"I would help you to carry him, of course; but--you see--I can't."

His delicate skin flushed deeply. Falloden realised for the first time the sling across his
shoulder and the helpless hand lying in it. He turned away, searching with his eyes the shadows
of the valley. At the moment, the spot where they stood was garishly illuminated by the rapidly
receding light, which had already left the lower ground. The grass at their feet, the rocks,
the stream, the stretches of heather were steeped and drenched in the last rays of sun which
shot upon them in a fierce concentration from the lower edge of a great cloud. But the landmarks
below were hard to make out--for a stranger's eyes.

"You see that cottage--where the smoke is?"

Radowitz assented.

"You will find a keeper there. Send him with three or four men."

"Yes--at once. Shall I take a message to the house?"

Radowitz spoke very gently. The red-gold of his hair, and his blue eyes, were all shining in
the strange light. But he was again as pale as Falloden himself. Douglas drew out a pencil,
and a letter from his pocket. He wrote some words on the envelope, and handed it to Radowitz.

"That's for my mother's maid. She will know what to do. She is an old servant. I must stay here."

Radowitz rushed away, leaping and running down the steep side of the hill, his white shirt,
crossed by the black sling, conspicuous all the way, till he was at last lost to sight in the
wood leading to the keeper's cottage.

Falloden went back to the dead man. He straightened his father's limbs and closed his eyes.
Then he lay down beside him, throwing his arm tenderly across the body. And the recollection
came back to him of that hunting accident years ago--the weight of his father on his shoulders--the
bitter cold--the tears which not all his boyish scorn of tears could stop.

His poor mother! She must see Radowitz, for Radowitz alone could tell the story of that last
half hour. He must give evidence, too, at the inquest.

Radowitz! Thoughts, ironic and perverse, ran swarming through Falloden's brain, as though driven
through it from outside. What a nursery tale!--how simple!--how crude! Could not the gods have
devised a subtler retribution?

Then these thoughts vanished again, like a cloud of gnats. The touch of his father's still
warm body brought him back to the plain, tragic fact. He raised himself on his elbow to look
again at the dead face.

The handsome head with its grizzled hair was resting on Radowitz's coat. Falloden could not
bear it. He took off his own, and gently substituted it for the other. And as he laid the head
down, he kissed the hair and the brow. He was alone with his father--more alone than he ever
would be again. There was not a human step or voice upon the moor. Night was coming rapidly
on. The stream rushed beside him. There were a few cries of birds--mostly owls from the woods
below. The dead man's face beside him was very solemn and quiet. And overhead, the angry sunset
clouds were fading into a dim and star-strewn heaven, above a world sinking to its rest.

       *       *       *       *       *

The moon was up before Radowitz came back to the little rectory on the other side of the moor.
Sorell, from whose mind he was seldom absent, had begun to worry about him, was in fact on
the point of setting out in search of him. But about nine o'clock he heard the front gate open
and jumping down from the low open window of the rectory drawing-room he went to meet the truant.

Radowitz staggered towards him, and clung to his arm.

"My dear fellow," cried Sorell, aghast at the bay's appearance and manner--"what have you been
doing to yourself?"

"I went up the moor for a walk after tea--it was so gorgeous, the clouds and the view. I got
drawn on a bit--on the castle side. I wasn't really thinking where I was going. Then I saw
the park below me, and the house. And immediately afterwards, I heard a groaning sound, and
there was a man lying on the ground. It was Sir Arthur Falloden--and he died--while I was there."
The boy's golden head dropped suddenly against Sorell. "I say, can't I have some food, and
go to bed?"

Sorell took him in and looked after him like a mother, helped by the kind apple-faced rector,
who had heard the castle news from other sources also, and was greatly moved.

When Otto's exhaustion had been fed and he was lying in his bed with drawn brows, and no intention
or prospect of going to sleep, Sorell let him tell his tale.

"When the bearers came, I went down with them to the castle, and I saw Lady Laura"--said the
boy, turning his head restlessly from side to side. "I say, it's awful--how women cry! Then
they told me about the inquest--I shall have to go to-morrow--and on the way home I went to
see Lady Connie. I thought she ought to know."

Sorell started.

"And you found her?"

"Oh, yes. She was sitting in the garden."

There was a short silence. Then Otto flung up his left hand, caught a gnat that was buzzing
round his head, and laughed--a dreary little sound.

"It's quite true--she's in love with him."

"With Douglas Falloden?"

Otto nodded.

"She was awfully cut up when I told her--just for him. She didn't cry of course. Our generation
doesn't seem to cry--like Lady Laura. But you could see what she wanted."

"To go to him?"

"That's it. And of course she can't. My word, it is hard on women! They're hampered such a
lot--by all their traditions. Why don't they kick 'em over?"

"I hope she will do nothing of the kind," said Sorell with energy. "The traditions may just
save her."

Otto thought over it.

"You mean--save her from doing something for pity that she wouldn't do if she had time to think?"

Sorell assented.

"Why should that fellow be any more likely now to make her happy--"

"Because he's lost his money and his father? I don't know why he should. I dare say he'll begin
bullying and slave-driving again--when he's forgotten all this. But--"

"But what?"

"Well--you see--I didn't think he could possibly care about anything but himself. I thought
he was as hard as a millstone all through. Well, he isn't. That's so queer!"

The speaker's voice took a dreamy tone.

Sorell glanced in bitterness at the maimed hand lying on the bed. It was still bandaged, but
he knew very well what sort of a shapeless, ruined thing it would emerge, when the bandages
were thrown aside. It was strange and fascinating--to a student of psychology--that Otto should
have been brought, so suddenly, so unforeseeably, into this pathetic and intimate relation
with the man to whom, essentially, he owed his disaster. But what difference did it make in
the quality of the Marmion outrage, or to any sane judgment of Douglas Falloden?

"Go to sleep, old boy," he said at last. "You'll have a hard time to-morrow."

"What, the inquest? Oh, I don't mind about that. If I could only understand that fellow!"

He threw his head back, staring at the ceiling.

Otto Radowitz, in spite of Sorell's admonitions, slept very little that night. His nights were
apt to be feverish and disturbed. But on this occasion imagination and excitement made it impossible
to stop the brain process, the ceaseless round of thought; and the hours of darkness were intolerably
long. Memory went back behind the meeting with the dying man on the hillside, to an earlier
experience--an hour of madness, of "possession." His whole spiritual being was still bruised
and martyred from it, like that sufferer of old whom the evil spirit "tore" in departing. What
had delivered him? The horror was still on him, still his master, when he became aware of that
white face on the grass--

He drowsed off again. But in his half-dream, he seemed to be kneeling again and reciting Latin
words, words he had heard last when his mother was approaching her end. He was more than half
sceptical, so far as the upper mind was concerned; but the under-consciousness was steeped
in ideas derived from his early home and training, ideas of sacrifice, forgiveness, atonement,
judgment--the common and immortal stock of Christianity. He had been brought up in a house
pervaded by the crucifix, and by a mother who was ardently devout.

But why had God--if there was a God--brought this wonderful thing to pass? Never had his heart
been so full of hatred as in that hour of lonely wandering on the moor, before he perceived
the huddled figure lying by the stream. And, all in a moment, he had become his enemy's proxy--his
representative--in the last and tenderest service that man can render to man. He had played
the part of son to Falloden's dying father--had prayed for him from the depths of his heart,
tortured with pity. And when Falloden came, with what strange eyes they had looked at each
other!--as though all veils had dropped--all barriers had, for the moment, dropped away.

"Shall I hate him again to-morrow?" thought Radowitz. "Or shall I be more sorry for him than
for myself? Yes, that's what I felt!--so marvellously!"

So that when he went to Constance with his news, and under the emotion of it, saw the girl's
heart unveiled--"I was not jealous," he thought. "I just wanted to give her everything!"

Yet, as the night passed on, and that dreary moment of the first awakening earth arrived, when
all the griefs of mankind weigh heaviest, he was shaken anew by gusts of passion and despair;
and this time for himself. Suppose--for in spite of all Sorell's evasions and concealments,
he knew very well that Sorell was anxious about him, and the doctors had said ugly things--suppose
he got really ill?--suppose he died, without having lived?

He thought of Constance in the moonlit garden, her sweetness, her gratefulness to him for coming,
her small, white "flower-face," and the look in her eyes.

"If I might--only once--have kissed her--have held her in my arms!" he thought, with anguish.
And rolling on his face, he lay prone, fighting his fight alone, till exhaustion conquered,
and "he took the gift of sleep."

CHAPTER XV

Douglas Falloden was sitting alone in his father's library surrounded by paper and documents.
He had just concluded a long interview with the family lawyer; and a tray containing the remains
of their hasty luncheon was on a side-table. The room had a dusty, dishevelled air. Half of
the house-servants had been already dismissed; the rest were disorganised. Lady Laura had left
Flood the day before. To her son's infinite relief she had consented to take the younger children
and go on a long visit to some Scotch relations. It had been left vague whether she returned
to Flood or not; but Douglas hoped that the parting was already over--without her knowing it;
and that he should be able to persuade her, after Scotland, to go straight to the London house--which
was her own property--for the winter.

Meanwhile he himself had been doing his best to wind up affairs. The elaborate will of twenty
years earlier, with its many legacies and bequests, had been cancelled by Sir Arthur only six
weeks before his death. A very short document had been substituted for it, making Douglas and
a certain Marmaduke Falloden, his uncle and an eminent K.C., joint executors, and appointing
Douglas and Lady Laura guardians of the younger children. Whatever property might remain "after
the payment of my just debts" was to be divided in certain proportions between Douglas and
his brother and sisters.

