Meanwhile, the infection of dismay had spread fast among the Lincoln managers. Even before
the meeting of the conspirators on the fourteenth, Weed told the President that he could not
be reelected.(5)

One of his bravest supporters, Washburne, came to the dismal conclusion that "were an election
to be held now in Illinois, we should be beaten." Cameron, who had returned from Russia and
was working hard for Lincoln in Pennsylvania, was equally discouraging. So was Governor Morton
in Indiana. From all his "stanchest friends," wrote his chief manager to Lincoln, "there was
but one report. The tide is setting strongly against us."(6)

Lincoln's managers believed that the great host of free voters who are the balance of power
in American politics, were going in a drove toward the camp of the Democrats. It was the business
of the managers to determine which one, or which ones, among the voices of discontent, represented
truly this controlling body of voters. They thought they knew. Two cries, at least, that rang
loud out of the Babel of the hour, should be heeded. One of these harked back to Niagara. In
the anxious ears of the managers it dinned this charge: "the Administration prevented negotiations
for peace by tying together two demands, the Union must be restored and slavery must be abolished;
if Lincoln had left out slavery, he could have had peace in a restored Union." It was ridiculous,
as every one who had not gone off his head knew. But so many had gone off their heads. And
some of Lincoln's friends were meeting this cry in a way that was raising up other enemies
of a different sort. Even so faithful a friend as Raymond, editor of The Times and Chairman
of the Republican National Executive Committee, labored hard in print to prove that because
Lincoln said he "would consider terms that embraced the integrity of the Union and the abandonment
of slavery, he did not say that he would not receive them unless they embraced both these conditions."(7)
What would Sumner and all the Abolitionists say to that? As party strategy, in the moment when
the old Vindictive Coalition seemed on the highroad to complete revival, was that exactly the
tune to sing? Then too there was the other cry that also made a fearful ringing in the ears
of the much alarmed Executive Committee. There was wild talk in the air of an armistice. The
hysteric Greeley had put it into a personal letter to Lincoln. "I know that nine-tenths of
the whole American people, North and South, are anxious for peace--peace on any terms--and
are utterly sick of human slaughter and devastation. I know that, to the general eye, it now
seems that the Rebels are anxious to negotiate and that we repulse their advances. . . . I
beg you, I implore you to inaugurate or invite proposals for peace forthwith. And in case peace
can not now be made, consent to an armistice for one year, each party to retain all it now
holds, but the Rebel ports to be opened. Meantime, let a national convention be held and there
will surely be no war at all events."(8)

This armistice movement was industriously advertised in the Democratic papers. It was helped
along by the Washington correspondent of The Herald who sowed broadcast the most improbable
stories with regard to it. Today, Secretary Fessenden was a convert to the idea; another day,
Senator Wilson had taken it up; again, the President, himself, was for an armistice.(9)

A great many things came swiftly to a head within a few days before or after the twentieth
of August. Every day or two, rumor took a new turn; or some startling new alignment was glimpsed;
and every one reacted to the news after his kind. And always the feverish question, what is
the strength of the faction that approves this? Or, how far will this go toward creating a
new element in the political kaleidoscope? About the twentieth of August, Jaquess and Gilmore
threw a splashing stone into these troubled waters. They published in The Atlantic a full account
of their interview with Davis, who, in the clearest, most unfaltering way had told them that
the Southerners were fighting for independence and for nothing else; that no compromise over
slavery; nothing but the recognition of the Confederacy as a separate nation would induce them
to put up their bright swords. They thought they were at the point of desperation. They thought
they saw a way out, a way that reminds one of Jaquess and Gilmore. On the twenty-second, Raymond
sent that letter to Lincoln about "the tide setting strongly against us." Thus the clamor for
negotiation would be met and brought to naught. Having sent off his letter, Raymond got his
committee together and started for Washington for a council of desperation.

And this brings us to the twenty-third of August. On that day, pondering Raymond's letter,
Lincoln took thought with himself what he should say to the Executive Committee. A mere opportunist
would have met the situation with some insincere proposal, by the formulation of terms that
would have certainly been rejected. We have seen how Lincoln reasoned in such a connection
when he drew up the memorandum for Jaquess and Gilmore. His present problem involved nothing
of this sort. What he was thinking out was how best to induce the committee to accept his own
attitude; to become for the moment believers in destiny; to nail their colors; turn their backs
as he was doing on these devices of diplomacy; and as to the rest-permit to heaven.

Whatever his managers might think, the serious matter in Lincoln's mind, that twenty-third
of August, was the draft. And back of the draft, a tremendous matter which probably none of
them at the time appreciated. Assuming that they were right in their political forecast, assuming
that he was not to be reelected, what did it signify? For him, there was but one answer: that
he had only five months in which to end the war. And with the tide running strong against him,
what could he do? But one thing: use the war powers while they remained in his hands in every
conceivable way that might force a conclusion on the field of battle. He recorded his determination.
A Cabinet meeting was held on the twenty-third. Lincoln handed his Ministers a folded paper
and asked them to write their initials on the back. At the time he gave them no intimation
what the paper contained. Instead of terrified party diplomats shaking in their shoes, trying
to face all points at once, morbid over possible political defeats in every quarter, they found
what may have seemed to them a man in a dream; one who was intensely sad, but who gave no suggestion
of panic, no solicitude about his own fate, no doubt of his ultimate victory. Their practical
astuteness was disarmed by that higher astuteness attained only by peculiar minds which can
discern through some sure interior test the rare moment when it is the part of wisdom not to
be astute at all.

Backed by those strong Ministers, all entirely under his influence, Lincoln fully persuaded
the Committee that at this moment, any overture for peace would be the worst of strategic blunders,
"would be worse than losing the presidential contest--it would be ignominiously surrendering
it in advance."(14)

Lincoln won a complete spiritual victory over the Committee. These dispirited men, who had
come to Washington to beg for a policy of negotiation, went away in such a different temper
that Bennett's Washington correspondent jeered in print at the "silly report" of their having
assembled to discuss peace.(15) Obviously, they had merely held a meeting of the Executive
Committee. The Tribune correspondent telegraphed that they were confident of Lincoln's reelection.(16)

On the day following the conference with Lincoln, The Times announced: "You may rest assured
that all reports attributing to the government any movements looking toward negotiations for
peace at present are utterly without foundation. . . . The government has not entertained or
discussed the project of proposing an armistice with the Rebels nor has it any intention of
sending commissioners to Richmond . . . its sole and undivided purpose is to prosecute the
war until the rebellion is quelled. . . ." Of equal significance was the announcement by The
Times, fairly to be considered the Administration organ: "The President stands firm against
every solicitation to postpone the draft."(17)

XXXIII. THE RALLY TO THE PRESIDENT

The question insists upon rising again: were the anti-Lincoln politicians justified in their
exultation, the Lincoln politicians justified in their panic? Nobody will ever know; but it
is worth considering that the shrewd opportunist who expressed himself through The Herald changed
his mind during a fortnight in August. By one of those odd coincidences of which history is
full, it was on the twenty-third of the month that he warned the Democrats and jeered at the
Republicans in this insolent fashion:

"Many of our leading Republicans are now furious against Lincoln. . . . Bryant of The Evening
Post is very angry with Lincoln because Henderson, The Post's publisher, has been arrested
for defrauding the government.

"Raymond is a little shaky and has to make frequent journeys to Washington for instructions. . . .

"Now, to what does all this amount? Our experience of politics convinces us that it amounts
to nothing. The sorehead Republicans complain that Lincoln gives them either too little shoddy
or too little nigger. What candidate can they find who will give them more of either?

"The Chicago (Democratic) delegates must very emphatically comprehend that they must beat the
whole Re-publican party if they elect their candidate. It is a strong party even yet and has
a heavy army vote to draw upon. The error of relying too greatly upon the weakness of the Republicans
as developed in the quarrels of the Republican leaders, may prove fatal . . . the Republican
leaders may have their personal quarrels, or their shoddy quarrels, or their nigger quarrels
with Old Abe; but he has the whip hand of them and they will soon be bobbing back into the
Republican fold, like sheep who have gone astray. The most of the fuss some of them kick up
now, is simply to force Lincoln to give them their terms. .

"We have studied all classes of politicians in our day and we warn the Chicago Convention to
put no trust in the Republican soreheads. Furiously as some of them denounce Lincoln now, and
lukewarm as the rest of them are in his cause, they will all be shouting for him as the only
true Union candidate as soon as the nominations have all been made and the chances for bargains
have passed.

"Whatever they say now, we venture to predict that Wade and his tail; and Bryant and his tail;
and Wendell Phillips and his tail; and Weed, Barney, Chase and their tails; and Winter Davis,
Raymond, Opdyke and Forney who have no tails; will all make tracks for Old Abe's plantation,
and will soon be found crowing and blowing, and vowing and writing, and swearing and stumping
the state on his side, declaring that he and he alone, is the hope of the nation, the bugaboo
of Jeff Davis, the first of Conservatives, the best of Abolitionists, the purest of patriots,
the most gullible of mankind, the easiest President to manage, and the person especially predestined
and foreordained by Providence to carry on the war, free the niggers, and give all the faithful
a fair share of the spoils. The spectacle will be ridiculous; but it is inevitable."(1)

The cynic of The Herald had something to go upon besides his general knowledge of politicians
and elections. The Manifesto had not met with universal acclaim. In the course of this month
of surprises, there were several things that an apprehensive observer might interpret as the
shadow of that hand of fate which was soon to appear upon the wall. In the Republican Convention
of the Nineteenth Ohio District, which included Ashtabula County, Wade's county, there were
fierce words and then with few dissenting votes, a resolution, "That the recent attack upon
the President by Wade and Davis is, in our opinion, ill-timed, ill-tempered, and ill-advised
. . . and inasmuch as one of the authors of said protest is a citizen of this Congressional
District and indebted in no small degree to our friendship for the position, we deem it a duty
no less imperative than disagreeable, to pronounce upon that disorganizing Manifesto our unqualified
disapproval and condemnation."(2)

To be sure there were plenty of other voices from Ohio and elsewhere applauding "The War on
the President." Nevertheless, there were signs of a reluctance to join the movement, and some
of these in quarters where they had been least expected. Notably, the Abolitionist leaders
were slow to come forward. Sumner was particularly slow. He was ready, indeed, to admit that
a better candidate than Lincoln could be found, and there was a whisper that the better candidate
was himself. However, he was unconditional that he would not participate in a fight against
Lincoln. If the President could be persuaded to withdraw, that was one thing. But otherwise--no
Sumner in the conspiracy.(3)

Was it possible that Chandler, Wade, Davis and the rest had jumped too soon? To rebuild the
Vindictive Coalition, the group in which Sumner had a place was essential. This group was composed
of Abolitionists, chiefly New Englanders, and for present purpose their central figure was
Andrew, the Governor of Massachusetts. During the latter half of August, the fate of the Conspiracy
hung on the question, Can Andrew and his group be drawn in?

Andrew did not like the President. He was one of those who never got over their first impression
of the strange new man of 1861. He insisted that Lincoln lacked the essential qualities of
a leader. Andrew and his friends were like the men of old who having known Saul before time,
and beholding him prophesying, asked 'Is Saul also among the prophets?'"(4)

