On Saturday, January 26th, 1907, I was lecturing in Aberdeen, and when my lecture was over
I was given a telegram which said, 'Play great success.' It had been sent from Dublin after
the second Act of 'The Playboy of the Western World,' then being performed for the first time.
After one in the morning, my host brought to my bedroom this second telegram, 'Audience broke
up in disorder at the word shift.' I knew no more until I got the Dublin papers on my way from
Belfast to Dublin on Tuesday morning. On the Monday night no word of the play had been heard.
About forty young men had sat on the front seats of the pit, and stamped and shouted and blown
trumpets from the rise to the fall of the curtain. On the Tuesday night also the forty young
men were there. They wished to silence what they considered a slander upon Ireland's womanhood.
Irish women would never sleep under the same roof with a young man without a chaperon, nor
admire a murderer, nor use a word like 'shift;' nor could anyone recognise the country men
and women of Davis and Kickham in these poetical, violent, grotesque persons, who used the
name of God so freely, and spoke of all things that hit their fancy.

A patriotic journalism which had seen in Synge's capricious imagination the enemy of all it
would have young men believe, had for years prepared for this hour, by that which is at once
the greatest and most ignoble power of journalism, the art of repeating a name again and again
with some ridiculous or evil association. The preparation had begun after the first performance
of 'The Shadow of the Glen,' Synge's first play, with an assertion made in ignorance but repeated
in dishonesty, that he had taken his fable and his characters, not from his own mind nor that
profound knowledge of cot and curragh he was admitted to possess, but 'from a writer of the
Roman decadence.' Some spontaneous dislike had been but natural, for genius like his can but
slowly, amid what it has of harsh and strange, set forth the nobility of its beauty, and the
depth of its compassion; but the frenzy that would have silenced his master-work was, like
most violent things artificial, the defence of virtue by those that have but little, which
is the pomp and gallantry of journalism and its right to govern the world.

As I stood there watching, knowing well that I saw the dissolution of a school of patriotism
that held sway over my youth, Synge came and stood beside me, and said, 'A young doctor has
just told me that he can hardly keep himself from jumping on to a seat, and pointing out in
that howling mob those whom he is treating for venereal disease.'

II

Thomas Davis, whose life had the moral simplicity which can give to actions the lasting influence
that style alone can give to words, had understood that a country which has no national institutions
must show its young men images for the affections, although they be but diagrams of what it
should be or may be. He and his school imagined the Soldier, the Orator, the Patriot, the Poet,
the Chieftain, and above all the Peasant; and these, as celebrated in essay and songs and stories,
possessed so many virtues that no matter how England, who as Mitchell said 'had the ear of
the world,' might slander us, Ireland, even though she could not come at the world's other
ear, might go her way unabashed. But ideas and images which have to be understood and loved
by large numbers of people, must appeal to no rich personal experience, no patience of study,
no delicacy of sense; and if at rare moments some 'Memory of the Dead' can take its strength
from one; at all other moments manner and matter will be rhetorical, conventional, sentimental;
and language, because it is carried beyond life perpetually, will be as wasted as the thought,
with unmeaning pedantries and silences, and a dread of all that has salt and savour. After
a while, in a land that has given itself to agitation over-much, abstract thoughts are raised
up between men's minds and Nature, who never does the same thing twice, or makes one man like
another, till minds, whose patriotism is perhaps great enough to carry them to the scaffold,
cry down natural impulse with the morbid persistence of minds unsettled by some fixed idea.
They are preoccupied with the nation's future, with heroes, poets, soldiers, painters, armies,
fleets, but only as these things are understood by a child in a national school, while a secret
feeling that what is so unreal needs continual defence makes them bitter and restless. They
are like some state which has only paper money, and seeks by punishments to make it buy whatever
gold can buy. They no longer love, for only life is loved, and at last, a generation is like
an hysterical woman who will make unmeasured accusations and believe impossible things, because
of some logical deduction from a solitary thought which has turned a portion of her mind to stone.

III

Even if what one defends be true, an attitude of defence, a continual apology, whatever the
cause, makes the mind barren because it kills intellectual innocence; that delight in what
is unforeseen, and in the mere spectacle of the world, the mere drifting hither and thither
that must come before all true thought and emotion. A zealous Irishman, especially if he lives
much out of Ireland, spends his time in a never-ending argument about Oliver Cromwell, the
Danes, the penal laws, the rebellion of 1798, the famine, the Irish peasant, and ends by substituting
a traditional casuistry for a country; and if he be a Catholic, yet another casuistry that
has professors, schoolmasters, letter-writing priests, and the authors of manuals to make the
meshes fine, comes between him and English literature, substituting arguments and hesitations
for the excitement at the first reading of the great poets which should be a sort of violent
imaginative puberty. His hesitations and arguments may have been right, the Catholic philosophy
may be more profound than Milton's morality, or Shelley's vehement vision; but none the less
do we lose life by losing that recklessness Castiglione thought necessary even in good manners,
and offend our Lady Truth, who would never, had she desired an anxious courtship, have digged
a well to be her parlour.

I admired though we were always quarrelling on some matter, J.F. Taylor, the orator, who died
just before the first controversy over these plays. It often seemed to me that when he spoke
Ireland herself had spoken, one got that sense of surprise that comes when a man has said what
is unforeseen because it is far from the common thought, and yet obvious because when it has
been spoken, the gate of the mind seems suddenly to roll back and reveal forgotten sights and
let loose lost passions. I have never heard him speak except in some Irish literary or political
society, but there at any rate, as in conversation, I found a man whose life was a ceaseless
reverie over the religious and political history of Ireland. He saw himself pleading for his
country before an invisible jury, perhaps of the great dead, against traitors at home and enemies
abroad, and a sort of frenzy in his voice and the moral elevation of his thoughts gave him
for the moment style and music. One asked oneself again and again, 'Why is not this man an
artist, a man of genius, a creator of some kind?' The other day under the influence of memory,
I read through his one book, a life of Owen Roe O'Neill, and found there no sentence detachable
from its context because of wisdom or beauty. Everything was argued from a premise; and wisdom,
and style, whether in life or letters come from the presence of what is self-evident, from
that which requires but statement, from what Blake called 'naked beauty displayed.' The sense
of what was unforeseen and obvious, the rolling backward of the gates had gone with the living
voice, with the nobility of will that made one understand what he saw and felt in what was
now but argument and logic. I found myself in the presence of a mind like some noisy and powerful
machine, of thought that was no part of wisdom but the apologetic of a moment, a woven thing,
no intricacy of leaf and twig, of words with no more of salt and of savour than those of a
Jesuit professor of literature, or of any other who does not know that there is no lasting
writing which does not define the quality, or carry the substance of some pleasure. How can
one, if one's mind be full of abstractions and images created not for their own sake but for
the sake of party, even if there were still the need, find words that delight the ear, make
pictures to the mind's eye, discover thoughts that tighten the muscles, or quiver and tingle
in the flesh, and stand like St. Michael with the trumpet that calls the body to resurrection?

IV

Young Ireland had taught a study of our history with the glory of Ireland for event, and this
for lack, when less than Taylor studied, of comparison with that of other countries wrecked
the historical instinct. An old man with an academic appointment, who was a leader in the attack
upon Synge, sees in the 11th century romance of Deirdre a re-telling of the first five act
tragedy outside the classic languages, and this tragedy from his description of it was certainly
written on the Elizabethan model; while an allusion to a copper boat, a marvel of magic like
Cinderella's slipper, persuades him that the ancient Irish had forestalled the modern dockyards
in the making of metal ships. The man who doubted, let us say, our fabulous ancient kings running
up to Adam, or found but mythology in some old tale, was as hated as if he had doubted the
authority of Scripture. Above all no man was so ignorant, that he had not by rote familiar
arguments and statistics to drive away amid familiar applause, all those had they but found
strange truth in the world or in their mind, whose knowledge has passed out of memory and become
an instinct of hand or eye. There was no literature, for literature is a child of experience
always, of knowledge never; and the nation itself, instead of being a dumb struggling thought
seeking a mouth to utter it or hand to show it, a teeming delight that would re-create the
world, had become, at best, a subject of knowledge.

V

Taylor always spoke with confidence though he was no determined man, being easily flattered
or jostled from his way; and this, putting as it were his fiery heart into his mouth made him
formidable. And I have noticed that all those who speak the thoughts of many, speak confidently,
while those who speak their own thoughts are hesitating and timid, as though they spoke out
of a mind and body grown sensitive to the edge of bewilderment among many impressions. They
speak to us that we may give them certainty, by seeing what they have seen; and so it is, that
enlargement of experience does not come from those oratorical thinkers, or from those decisive
rhythms that move large numbers of men, but from writers that seem by contrast as feminine
as the soul when it explores in Blake's picture the recesses of the grave, carrying its faint
lamp trembling and astonished; or as the Muses who are never pictured as one-breasted amazons,
but as women needing protection. Indeed, all art which appeals to individual man and awaits
the confirmation of his senses and his reveries, seems when arrayed against the moral zeal,
the confident logic, the ordered proof of journalism, a trifling, impertinent, vexatious thing,
a tumbler who has unrolled his carpet in the way of a marching army.

VI

I attack things that are as dear to many as some holy image carried hither and thither by some
broken clan, and can but say that I have felt in my body the affections I disturb, and believed
that if I could raise them into contemplation I would make possible a literature, that finding
its subject-matter all ready in men's minds would be, not as ours is, an interest for scholars,
but the possession of a people. I have founded societies with this aim, and was indeed founding
one in Paris when I first met with J.M. Synge, and I have known what it is to be changed by
that I would have changed, till I became argumentative and unmannerly, hating men even in daily
life for their opinions. And though I was never convinced that the anatomies of last year's
leaves are a living forest, or thought a continual apologetic could do other than make the
soul a vapour and the body a stone; or believed that literature can be made by anything but
by what is still blind and dumb within ourselves, I have had to learn how hard in one who lives
where forms of expression and habits of thought have been born, not for the pleasure of begetting
but for the public good, is that purification from insincerity, vanity, malignity, arrogance,
which is the discovery of style. But it became possible to live when I had learnt all I had
not learnt in shaping words, in defending Synge against his enemies, and knew that rich energies,
fine, turbulent or gracious thoughts, whether in life or letters, are but love-children.

VII

Synge seemed by nature unfitted to think a political thought, and with the exception of one
sentence, spoken when I first met him in Paris, that implied some sort of nationalist conviction,
I cannot remember that he spoke of politics or showed any interest in men in the mass, or in
any subject that is studied through abstractions and statistics. Often for months together
he and I and Lady Gregory would see no one outside the Abbey Theatre, and that life, lived
as it were in a ship at sea, suited him, for unlike those whose habit of mind fits them to
judge of men in the mass, he was wise in judging individual men, and as wise in dealing with
them as the faint energies of ill-health would permit; but of their political thoughts he long
understood nothing. One night when we were still producing plays in a little hall, certain
members of the Company told him that a play on the Rebellion of '98 would be a great success.
After a fortnight he brought them a scenario which read like a chapter out of Rabelais. Two
women, a Protestant and a Catholic, take refuge in a cave, and there quarrel about religion,
abusing the Pope or Queen Elizabeth and Henry VIII, but in low voices, for the one fears to
be ravished by the soldiers, the other by the rebels. At last one woman goes out because she
would sooner any fate than such wicked company. Yet, I doubt if he would have written at all
if he did not write of Ireland, and for it, and I know that he thought creative art could only
come from such preoccupation. Once, when in later years, anxious about the educational effect
of our movement, I proposed adding to the Abbey Company a second Company to play international
drama, Synge, who had not hitherto opposed me, thought the matter so important that he did
so in a formal letter.

