"Well," said Jenny, "I never pretend to keep up. I never expect to be in the front rank of
fashion, but no girl wants to be behind every one; nobody wants to have people say, 'Do see
what an old-times, rubbishy looking creature that is.' And now, with my small means and my
conscience (for I have a conscience in this matter, and don't wish to spend any more time and
money than is needed to keep one's self fresh and tasteful), I find my dress quite a fatiguing
care."

"Well, now, girls," said Humming-Bird, "do you really know, I have sometimes thought I should
like to be a nun, just to get rid of all this labor. If I once gave up dress altogether, and
knew I was to have nothing but one plain robe tied round my waist with a cord, it does seem
to me as if it would be a perfect repose,--only one is a Protestant, you know."

Now, as Humming-Bird was the most notoriously dressy individual in the little circle, this
suggestion was received with quite a laugh. But Dove took it up.

"Well, really," she said, "when dear Mr. S---- preaches those saintly sermons to us about our
baptismal vows, and the nobleness of an unworldly life, and calls on us to live for something
purer and higher than we are living for, I confess that sometimes all my life seems to me a
mere sham,--that I am going to church, and saying solemn words, and being wrought up by solemn
music, and uttering most solemn vows and prayers, all to no purpose; and then I come away and
look at my life, all resolving itself into a fritter about dress, and sewing-silk, cord, braid,
and buttons,--the next fashion of bonnets,--how to make my old dresses answer instead of new,--how
to keep the air of the world, while in my heart I am cherishing something higher and better.
If there's anything I detest it is hypocrisy; and sometimes the life I lead looks like it.
But how to get out of it?--what to do?--"

"I'm sure," said Humming-Bird, "that taking care of my clothes and going into company is, frankly,
all I do. If I go to parties, as other girls do, and make calls, and keep dressed,--you know
papa is not rich, and one must do these things economically,--it really does take all the time
I have. When I was confirmed the Bishop talked to us so sweetly, and I really meant sincerely
to be a good girl,--to be as good as I knew how; but now, when they talk about fighting the
good fight and running the Christian race, I feel very mean and little, for I am quite sure
this isn't doing it. But what is,--and who is?"

"Aunt Betsey Titcomb is doing it, I suppose," said Pheasant.

"Aunt Betsey!" said Humming-Bird, "well, she is. She spends all her money in doing good. She
goes round visiting the poor all the time. She is a perfect saint;--but oh girls, how she looks!
Well, now, I confess, when I think I must look like Aunt Betsey, my courage gives out. Is it
necessary to go without hoops, and look like a dipped candle, in order to be unworldly? Must
one wear such a fright of a bonnet?"

"No," said Jenny, "I think not. I think Miss Betsey Titcomb, good as she is, injures the cause
of goodness by making it outwardly repulsive. I really think, if she would take some pains
with her dress, and spend upon her own wardrobe a little of the money she gives away, that
she might have influence in leading others to higher aims; now all her influence is against
it. Her outré and repulsive exterior arrays our natural and innocent feelings against goodness;
for surely it is natural and innocent to wish to look well, and I am really afraid a great
many of us are more afraid of being thought ridiculous than of being wicked."

"And after all," said Pheasant, "you know Mr. St. Clair says, 'Dress is one of the fine arts,'
and if it is, why of course we ought to cultivate it. Certainly, well-dressed men and women
are more agreeable objects than rude and unkempt ones. There must be somebody whose mission
it is to preside over the agreeable arts of life; and I suppose it falls to 'us girls.' That's
the way I comfort myself, at all events. Then I must confess that I do like dress; I'm not
cultivated enough to be a painter or a poet, and I have all my artistic nature, such as it
is, in dress. I love harmonies of color, exact shades and matches; I love to see a uniform
idea carried all through a woman's toilet,--her dress, her bonnet, her gloves, her shoes, her
pocket-handkerchief and cuffs, her very parasol, all in correspondence."

"But, my dear," said Jenny, "anything of this kind must take a fortune!"

"And if I had a fortune, I'm pretty sure I should spend a good deal of it in this way," said
Pheasant. "I can imagine such completeness of toilet as I have never seen. How I would like
the means to show what I could do! My life, now, is perpetual disquiet. I always feel shabby.
My things must all be bought at haphazard, as they can be got out of my poor little allowance,--and
things are getting so horridly dear! Only think of it, girls! gloves at two and a quarter!
and boots at seven, eight, and ten dollars! and then, as you say, the fashions changing so!
Why, I bought a sack last fall and gave forty dollars for it, and this winter I'm wearing it,
to be sure, but it has no style at all,--looks quite antiquated!"

"Now I say," said Jenny, "that you are really morbid on the subject of dress; you are fastidious
and particular and exacting in your ideas in a way that really ought to be put down. There
is not a girl of our set that dresses as nicely as you do, except Emma Seyton, and her father,
you know, has no end of income."

"Nonsense, Jenny," said Pheasant. "I think I really look like a beggar; but then, I bear it
as well as I can, because, you see, I know papa does all for us he can, and I won't be extravagant.
But I do think, as Humming-Bird says, that it would be a great relief to give it up altogether
and retire from the world; or, as Cousin John says, climb a tree and pull it up after you,
and so be in peace."

"Well," said Jenny, "all this seems to have come on since the war. It seems to me that not
only has everything doubled in price, but all the habits of the world seem to require that
you shall have double the quantity of everything. Two or three years ago a good balmoral skirt
was a fixed fact; it was a convenient thing for sloppy, unpleasant weather. But now, dear me!
there is no end to them. They cost fifteen and twenty dollars; and girls that I know have one
or two every season, besides all sorts of quilled and embroidered and ruffled and tucked and
flounced ones. Then, in dressing one's hair, what a perfect overflow there is of all manner
of waterfalls, and braids, and rats, and mice, and curls, and combs; when three or four years
ago we combed our own hair innocently behind our ears, and put flowers in it, and thought we
looked nicely at our evening parties! I don't believe we look any better now, when we are dressed,
than we did then,--so what's the use?"

"Well, did you ever see such a tyranny as this of fashion?" said Humming-Bird. "We know it's
silly, but we all bow down before it; we are afraid of our lives before it; and who makes all
this and sets it going? The Paris milliners, the Empress, or who?"

"The question where fashions come from is like the question where pins go to," said Pheasant.
"Think of the thousands and millions of pins that are being used every year, and not one of
them worn out. Where do they all go to? One would expect to find a pin mine somewhere."

"Victor Hugo says they go into the sewers in Paris," said Jenny.

"And the fashions come from a source about as pure," said I, from the next room.

"Bless me, Jenny, do tell us if your father has been listening to us all this time!" was the
next exclamation; and forthwith there was a whir and rustle of the silken wings, as the whole
troop fluttered into my study.

"Now, Mr. Crowfield, you are too bad!" said Humming-Bird, as she perched upon a corner of my
study-table, and put her little feet upon an old "Froissart" which filled the armchair.

"To be listening to our nonsense!" said Pheasant.

"Lying in wait for us!" said Dove.

"Well, now, you have brought us all down on you," said Humming-Bird, "and you won't find it
so easy to be rid of us. You will have to answer all our questions."

"My dears, I am at your service, as far as mortal man may be," said I.

"Well, then," said Humming-Bird, "tell us all about everything,--how things come to be as they
are. Who makes the fashions?"

"I believe it is universally admitted that, in the matter of feminine toilet, France rules
the world," said I.

"But who rules France?" said Pheasant. "Who decides what the fashions shall be there?"

"It is the great misfortune of the civilized world, at the present hour," said I, "that the
state of morals in France is apparently at the very lowest ebb, and consequently the leadership
of fashion is entirely in the hands of a class of women who could not be admitted into good
society, in any country. Women who can never have the name of wife,--who know none of the ties
of family,--these are the dictators whose dress and equipage and appointments give the law,
first to France, and through France to the civilized world. Such was the confession of Monsieur
Dupin, made in a late speech before the French Senate, and acknowledged, with murmurs of assent
on all sides, to be the truth. This is the reason why the fashions have such an utter disregard
of all those laws of prudence and economy which regulate the expenditures of families. They
are made by women whose sole and only hold on life is personal attractiveness, and with whom
to keep this up, at any cost, is a desperate necessity. No moral quality, no association of
purity, truth, modesty, self-denial, or family love, comes in to hallow the atmosphere about
them, and create a sphere of loveliness which brightens as mere physical beauty fades. The
ravages of time and dissipation must be made up by an unceasing study of the arts of the toilet.
Artists of all sorts, moving in their train, rack all the stores of ancient and modern art
for the picturesque, the dazzling, the grotesque; and so, lest these Circes of society should
carry all before them, and enchant every husband, brother, and lover, the staid and lawful
Penelopes leave the hearth and home to follow in their triumphal march and imitate their arts.
Thus it goes in France; and in England, virtuous and domestic princesses and peeresses must
take obediently what has been decreed by their rulers in the demi-monde of France; and we in
America have leaders of fashion, who make it their pride and glory to turn New York into Paris,
and to keep even step with everything that is going on there. So the whole world of womankind
is marching under the command of those leaders. The love of dress and glitter and fashion is
getting to be a morbid, unhealthy epidemic, which really eats away the nobleness and purity
of women.

"In France, as Monsieur Dupin, Edmond About, and Michelet tell us, the extravagant demands
of love for dress lead women to contract debts unknown to their husbands, and sign obligations
which are paid by the sacrifice of honor, and thus the purity of the family is continually
undermined. In England there is a voice of complaint, sounding from the leading periodicals,
that the extravagant demands of female fashion are bringing distress into families, and making
marriages impossible; and something of the same sort seems to have begun here. We are across
the Atlantic, to be sure; but we feel the swirl and drift of the great whirlpool; only, fortunately,
we are far enough off to be able to see whither things are tending, and to stop ourselves if
we will.

"We have just come through a great struggle, in which our women have borne an heroic part,--have
shown themselves capable of any kind of endurance and self-sacrifice; and now we are in that
reconstructive state which makes it of the greatest consequence to ourselves and the world
that we understand our own institutions and position, and learn that, instead of following
the corrupt and worn-out ways of the Old World, we are called on to set the example of a new
state of society,--noble, simple, pure, and religious; and women can do more towards this even
than men, for women are the real architects of society.

"Viewed in this light, even the small, frittering cares of women's life--the attention to buttons,
trimmings, thread, and sewing-silk--may be an expression of their patriotism and their religion.
A noble-hearted woman puts a noble meaning into even the commonplace details of life. The women
of America can, if they choose, hold back their country from following in the wake of old,
corrupt, worn-out, effeminate European society, and make America the leader of the world in
all that is good."

"I'm sure," said Humming-Bird, "we all would like to be noble and heroic. During the war, I
did so long to be a man! I felt so poor and insignificant because I was nothing but a girl!"

"Ah, well," said Pheasant, "but then one wants to do something worth doing, if one is going
to do anything. One would like to be grand and heroic, if one could; but if not, why try at
all? One wants to be very something, very great, very heroic; or if not that, then at least
very stylish and very fashionable. It is this everlasting mediocrity that bores me."

"Then, I suppose, you agree with the man we read of, who buried his one talent in the earth,
as hardly worth caring for."

"To say the truth, I always had something of a sympathy for that man," said Pheasant. "I can't
enjoy goodness and heroism in homoeopathic doses. I want something appreciable. What I can
do, being a woman, is a very different thing from what I should try to do if I were a man,
and had a man's chances: it is so much less--so poor--that it is scarcely worth trying for."

"You remember," said I, "the apothegm of one of the old divines, that if two angels were sent
down from heaven, the one to govern a kingdom, and the other to sweep a street, they would
not feel any disposition to change works."

"Well, that just shows that they are angels, and not mortals," said Pheasant; "but we poor
human beings see things differently."

"Yet, my child, what could Grant or Sherman have done, if it had not been for the thousands
of brave privates who were content to do each their imperceptible little,--if it had not been
for the poor, unnoticed, faithful, never-failing common soldiers, who did the work and bore
the suffering? No one man saved our country, or could save it; nor could the men have saved
it without the women. Every mother that said to her son, Go; every wife that strengthened the
hands of her husband; every girl who sent courageous letters to her betrothed; every woman
who worked for a fair; every grandam whose trembling hands knit stockings and scraped lint;
every little maiden who hemmed shirts and made comfort-bags for soldiers,--each and all have
been the joint doers of a great heroic work, the doing of which has been the regeneration of
our era. A whole generation has learned the luxury of thinking heroic thoughts and being conversant
with heroic deeds, and I have faith to believe that all this is not to go out in a mere crush
of fashionable luxury and folly and frivolous emptiness,--but that our girls are going to merit
the high praise given us by De Tocqueville, when he placed first among the causes of our prosperity
the noble character of American women. Because foolish female persons in New York are striving
to outdo the demi-monde of Paris in extravagance, it must not follow that every sensible and
patriotic matron, and every nice, modest young girl, must forthwith and without inquiry rush
as far after them as they possibly can. Because Mrs. Shoddy opens a ball in a two-thousand-dollar
lace dress, every girl in the land need not look with shame on her modest white muslin. Somewhere
between the fast women of Paris and the daughters of Christian American families there should
be established a cordon sanitaire, to keep out the contagion of manners, customs, and habits
with which a noble-minded, religious democratic people ought to have nothing to do."

"Well now, Mr. Crowfield," said the Dove, "since you speak us so fair, and expect so much of
us, we must of course try not to fall below your compliments; but, after all, tell us what
is the right standard about dress. Now we have daily lectures about this at home. Aunt Maria
says that she never saw such times as these, when mothers and daughters, church-members and
worldly people, all seem to be going one way, and sit down together and talk, as they will,
on dress and fashion,--how to have this made and that altered. We used to be taught, she said,
that church-members had higher things to think of,--that their thoughts ought to be fixed on
something better, and that they ought to restrain the vanity and worldliness of children and
young people; but now, she says, even before a girl is born, dress is the one thing needful,--the
great thing to be thought of; and so, in every step of the way upward, her little shoes, and
her little bonnets, and her little dresses, and her corals and her ribbons, are constantly
being discussed in her presence, as the one all-important object of life. Aunt Maria thinks
mamma is dreadful, because she has maternal yearnings over our toilet successes and fortunes;
and we secretly think Aunt Maria is rather soured by old age, and has forgotten how a girl feels."

"The fact is," said I, "that the love of dress and outside show has been always such an exacting
and absorbing tendency, that it seems to have furnished work for religionists and economists,
in all ages, to keep it within bounds. Various religious bodies, at the outset, adopted severe
rules in protest against it. The Quakers and the Methodists prescribed certain fixed modes
of costume as a barrier against its frivolities and follies. In the Romish Church an entrance
on any religious order prescribed entire and total renunciation of all thought and care for
the beautiful in person or apparel, as the first step towards saintship. The costume of the
religieuse seemed to be purposely intended to imitate the shroudings and swathings of a corpse
and the lugubrious color of a pall, so as forever to remind the wearer that she was dead to
the world of ornament and physical beauty. All great Christian preachers and reformers have
leveled their artillery against the toilet, from the time of St. Jerome downward; and Tom Moore
has put into beautiful and graceful verse St. Jerome's admonitions to the fair churchgoers
of his time.

WHO IS THE MAID?

                ST. JEROME'S LOVE.

  Who is the maid my spirit seeks,
    Through cold reproof and slander's blight?
  Has she Love's roses on her cheeks?
    Is hers an eye of this world's light?
  No: wan and sunk with midnight prayer
    Are the pale looks of her I love;
  Or if, at times, a light be there,
    Its beam is kindled from above.

  I chose not her, my heart's elect,
    From those who seek their Maker's shrine
  In gems and garlands proudly decked,
    As if themselves were things divine.
  No: Heaven but faintly warms the breast
    That beats beneath a broidered veil;
  And she who comes in glittering vest
    To mourn her frailty, still is frail.

  Not so the faded form I prize
    And love, because its bloom is gone;
  The glory in those sainted eyes
    Is all the grace her brow puts on.
  And ne'er was Beauty's dawn so bright,
    So touching, as that form's decay,
  Which, like the altar's trembling light,
    In holy lustre wastes away.

"But the defect of all these modes of warfare on the elegances and refinements of the toilet
was that they were too indiscriminate. They were in reality founded on a false principle. They
took for granted that there was something radically corrupt and wicked in the body and in the
physical system. According to this mode of viewing things, the body was a loathsome and pestilent
prison, in which the soul was locked up and enslaved, and the eyes, the ears, the taste, the
smell, were all so many corrupt traitors in conspiracy to poison her. Physical beauty of every
sort was a snare, a Circean enchantment, to be valiantly contended with and straitly eschewed.
Hence they preached, not moderation, but total abstinence from all pursuit of physical grace
and beauty.

"Now, a resistance founded on an over-statement is constantly tending to reaction. People always
have a tendency to begin thinking for themselves; and when they so think, they perceive that
a good and wise God would not have framed our bodies with such exquisite care only to corrupt
our souls,--that physical beauty, being created in such profuse abundance around us, and we
being possessed with such a longing for it, must have its uses, its legitimate sphere of exercise. In Alar ended the plains of Old Castile, limited by early foothills to continue the
Pyrenees, called "mountains of Burgos and also "Reinosa mountains." The soil is from that point
extremely varied and picturesque, dotted round of green hills and crystal streams crossed by
many to its shores there is a careful cultivation. Above are the high mountainous peaks and
granite peaks a majestic appearance, and higher still hold the distant eminences of the ridge
crowned with perpetual snow.

That region, soil gently up and broken by low hills, is extremely curious as a determinant of two
river systems. The foothills diverge and intertwine taking particular forms which correspond to
certain logic of inclination and turning, as if they seek each other to compose a secondary chain destined
to be the generating singular wonderful whole mountain system of the peninsula. The Laughing
multiply valleys, succeeding in tortuous twists and bottom, and after the railroad through the
cordon of hills or mountains that mediates between the waters which are inclined toward Castile collected
by the Pisuerga, and those that are directed almost opposite direction looking for the valleys Ebro
to go to form the basis basin of the ancient kingdoms of Aragon and Navarre the principality
of Catalonia.

Nothing is more cheerful, more poetic and picturesque than those watered by the Ebro valleys
near at its source, crossed the clear streams that are sometimes miniature lakes, villages of beautiful
stands of aspen, oaks and willows, and covered with cultivated fields that are funny a lovely
set with rustic cottages, the green patch of grass and the hills of planes inclined. The railway
bridges the Ebro several times a solid and elegant iron bridges, and ends its first section in Reinosa,
people of 2.900 inhabitants situated gracefully the bottom of a plain, almost at the foot of
the high spurs of the mountain, and unless two miles from the source of the Ebro Reinosa owes
its importance not only to being stopover point for trade very substantial meal, wines, spirits
and wheat between Santander and the interior of Castile, but also to its abundant production
in itself grain, timber and cattle calves.

In Reinosa had to take back the measure to go to Corrales, Sea Point Valley Besaya River which began
the second section of the railway. All the intermediate was under construction, many workers simultaneously
working on improving road and prepare the way of the railroad. I have not ever seen (or in Switzerland,
the picturesque country par excellence), a landscape so lively, so funny and interesting as
I could observe all the way to Reinosa Corrales, no less instructive than pleasant.

       * * * * *

Almost out of Reinosa begins a wonderful maze of hills and mountains of charm without well, that stand
as steep, and round, and inclined planes, producing an infinite bankruptcy or deep gullies on its
slopes and prancing Honduras is the road leading the visitor from one surprise. At each turn,
create a riot or impossible to find way in the midst of so complicated mountains that look more
cheerful. Wherever hills green, bright and fresh, their peaks populated by dense forests of
oak dwarf and the rest of rustic cottages and cheerful tracts of various inks. Wherever abyss microscopic
valleys of green and a splashing brook any jumper. Country life appear on those sites with all
its sweet simplicity, quiet joy and poetic variety harmonies.

After the via reaches its climax in the mountains, producing there a double tilt of hilly slopes, whose
waters turn in the opposite direction. The one is inclined to the east in search of the Ebro,
the others converge to form the beautiful river Besaya, center of the small valley Santander
sea. The appearance of the basin of Besaya was rich with color and vitality. A country entirely
different from those who had traveled in Spain, particularly in Castile, offered to my contemplation.
Instead of abandonment and neglect of the idleness, sycophancy of habit, and uses Frailesca foresight,
saw the animation work, Advanced taste in construction, the meticulous cultivation, cleanliness in
all, the joy on the faces and gowns, the love of the flowers shown in graceful little gardens, expansive
life countryside in all its forms.

The Besaya, which at first is but a beautiful stream, runs in general, for a hollow so close
to Corrales, which does not exceed the average latitude of about 80 to 100 meters. By a touring
road margin and the other the railway under construction, to a point where they cross the
river to barter saving the bases of their course. The river runs through a bed deep and very
stony, and the two routes, both carved out of solid rock to heights much substantial and sustained
by massive ramparts dominate wherever a gap and are dominated parallel moles by high hills, limestone
formation, granite and sandstone petrified in parts, and other compounds schistose agglomerations. Here
and there stand colossal cliffs or steep peaks, or are produced high walls sliced ​​vertically
which are viewed with much interest, now the big bright blue veins of granite rocks, ora severe stratification
of the sediments of limestone and sandstone, or the complicated slate reliefs or schistose rocks, -
now, finally, the green festoons of lianas and ferns sliding down on the earth, or the shining
dwarf scrub oaks that grow in the windings of the hills, floating in the wind as it is clear from
the rocks flying over the sparkling waves of the stream.

The Besaya successively thickened by numerous creeks and streams,
is a fad charming.

Sometimes, very narrow in its course through the walls of the gully, jumping and writhes on
a bed of large rocks, rushing waterfalls one hundred crawlers and producing a thousand echoes
sound. Other, widening the opening to produce the most precious valleys, the river murmured
softly on a bed of colorful pebbles, between rows white poplar and fruit trees, watering cheerful
patch of grass and crops, at the bottom stand on rolling inclines picturesque houses of the
peasants. Tan quickly get the bright river waterfalls, which jump from the top of the side rocks
one or more steps, or down in the walls perpendicular wires chopped, as branches in canals
whose waters give impetus to boldly built numerous mills across the chasms that dominate the
runway.

An endless cord of wagons loaded with flour and wheat, or foreign
goods dumped by oxen, gave great animation to the road, while on the
opposite side could see the rubble of blasted rock from the mine,
and many workers working in the highest grading in steep terrain,
the opening of many tunnels and establishing some tracks.

Double movement that commercial and industrial harmonized perfectly with the activity of the mills,
agricultural scenes and the appearance of many small towns located on the left bank of river.

Wherever he saw the people working: men as teamsters and other hard labor; women driving the plow,
weeding or earthing up the crops of vegetables, the guys taking care of some small herds, the good
old spinning below the threshold of houses or at the bottom of a
garden.

The work of women in agriculture is very rare in most of Spain, but very common or common in
the Basque provinces, Navarra and its equivalent. The Santander, which has always appeared
as incidental to the kingdom of Castile and it is through language, actually belongs to a transition
ethnographic, as intermediary Basque and Castilian. Whether by reason of topography, or by
other causes, Santander is a province more similar general appearance to the Basque who to those
of Castilla.

Of course, in the basin of Besaya not seen a single beggar, no useless, nothing to show misery.
There all smiles, showing a modest prosperity, and each town is swarming graciously houses surrounded
by orchards and gardens, with well-dressed people of beautiful race,
of free faces, smiling, intelligent, friendly and happy to provide
robustness.

If language and many custom features not maintain the unit, it could be said that upon entering
to the province of Santander of Spain gets out Gothic or Spanish. Obviously the Pyrenees have
found profound differences, the proximity of the ocean, west, contributes to fortify.

In Corrales came back to take the railway train, after a journey of 49 miles between that point
and Reinosa, need another of 33 to arrive at Santander. All this via, as total length from Alar
is 133 kilometers, has been undertaken by a joint stock company Santander capitalists, encouraged
by the interest of industry and trade, have no need of foreign aid
as regards funding.

Yet the work does not cost less than six million pesos in its entirety. She, as a progressive
effort ingeniatura as work is one of the most beautiful they can do honor to the industrial
spirit modern. It's really amazing the establishment of a railway through the maze mountains,
as strong inclination and relatively short distance, where the art had tremendous challenges,
charting a way over the abyss at the heart of great rocks, tunnels and bridges multiplying
and dominating nature with the sublime power of science seconded by art and money. I would
like there to be able to bring Colombians who believe The Andes have condemned to immobility, and
say, "Behold the wonders performed support the ingeniatura when money and a strong will and perseverance.
"

In Corrales Besaya valley widens, dotted with villages, very beautiful country houses, important
forests, orchards, gardens, factories and fields numerous varied. The landscape is extensive
and beautiful, well-being revealed everywhere, and a particular environment, free and bracing,
makes guessing the proximity of the ocean, which penetrates through
the middle of mountains stepped up to the Ria de Besaya or bay of
Santander.

The railway reaches port it by a causeway built in the waters of the bay to develop a vision
magnificent scenery.

Santander province, rich natural forests for their extensive and almost entirely mountainous, is one
of the most beautiful maritime regions of Spain. Its total population of 214.441 inhabitants,
distributed in the countryside and in many villages, with the exception of the capital, 28.907
counts.

The basin, which the base or center of the bay of Santander, is one of the orográflcas most beautiful
courses I've seen in Spain.

A mountainous peninsula 65 kilometers in circumference is advanced towards the ocean, forming
a semicircle on the northeastern side, close to the opposite by another
order of mountains whose coast determines the complete formation of
the bay.

At the bottom of the semicircle delay elegant city ​​of Santander, leaning against the foothills
of the mountains, descending in wavy gradations, topped covered with plantations and natural
forests, they come to bathe in Cantabrian Sea waves his stirrups or vegetables glistening hills,
standing out for its huge boulders along the coast that produce wherever funny and small coves.
Front extends a similar line of rocks that border the river and the sea, with many of exquisite
valleys and hills carpeted with fields and farmhouses whose core is Santoña village, military
and trading port with about 1,800 residents. Leave behind amphitheater mountain rising up to
produce the most gracious and most training picturesque landscapes.

Santander is a fortified city, but so can be called a stronghold. She is essentially commercial
in terms that after Cadiz and Seville is the most important port currently has Spain in the
Atlantic.

Not many years vegetating in inaction, basins in spite of its advantages, to be so superior
in Bilbao, but the channel Castilla first, that has brought the meal inside, and second, the recent
rail new roads in various directions, and steamboat communications with Ocean ports other and with
those of Cuba, we have sought a rapid development and not stop in a long time.

The city, for lack of sufficient land, has spread along the coast, in a triple cordon of houses,
so that is long and narrow, with its beautiful suburbs scattered haphazardly on the hills between
gardens and graceful boulevards.

The old, without be nasty or ugly, has an uneven terrain, and that is where are the cathedral, in
prison, theater and other public buildings. The modern, elegant and symmetrical, it's like
facade of the city, stretching along the docks from the station of rail to the far south-west.
It consists of three parallel streets, very neat and regular standing to dominate the bay a long
line of very beautiful houses, looking modern French, perfectly equal, stone walls and five
floors and decorated with graceful balconies, with some viewpoints and cabinets flown.

All Santander has a nice look and nice freshness, activity and progress. The docks and piers are
estimable works, plenty of shops and stores is considerable, commercial and maritime movement reigns
everywhere, and in many swing Bay sailing and steam vessels under
flags of all major nations.

Hotels and cafés, circles of society, public parks, theater, etc., etc., rather than reveal
Santander inhabitants include the taste, the need for comfort and all progress the modern spirit. I
excepted that relates to food, which kept the old repeat food habits, having a Frailesca at noon,
as well as the sumptuous dinner at nine o'clock in the evening.

The customs are there for a double seal, they are like the average, or rather the transition from
Spanish to French. So ladies take the blanket together Spanish and French shawl or cape, or a combination
of both parts, and used to out into the street regardless cap touched the beautiful Parisian or
Spanish, so simple own to make it look rich and black hair.

Men often hold layer, in spite of the avocado going under, and the people of the working classes
(women farmers mostly) fond of brightly colored fabrics that contrast. In the rooms, in the
structure of the houses and in almost every social event, is apparent that invasion of the French,
the modification that produces frequent contact with foreigners.

Santander has no monuments that deserve special mention: the Cathedral, without being negligible,
not really a work of art. Here we are interested in commercial and industrial movement. Santander Castilian
meals sent to Havana and sometimes to England, and exports also some wines and other items of
little value. Has a substantial manufacturing tobacco, by the State,
some paper mills hangings of hardware and of canvas and cordage for
the navy.

Despite the lack of land for construction easy, this city is destined to prosper much, thanks to
its rail communications sea ​​and the canal de Castilla. Its delicious forests to the province promise
fruitful exploitation of timber.

Santander gave me a new test of the contrast is in Spain between the generous benevolence and
the hospitable spirit of the society on the one hand, and the inquisitorial spirit, embrollon
regulatory and, secondly, to distinguish the Spanish government, entered in their action and disruption
of the entire world by the most vicious institutions. Had lost in the diligence, Alar-del-Rey,
a travel wallet containing all my values ​​and roles, and the fall
in mind I found it in Santander without the indispensable elements
travel, money, passport and recommendations.

A generous travel companion gave me as I need, without any guarantee from me, and his excellent
family favored me fine and I paid for a new passport, while, thanks to the telegraph, an estimable
Madrid banker made me the necessary funds to return to Paris. But what of proceedings and
difficulties to the usual passport! Stamped paper, written requests, statements, ratifications,
parentage and the intervention of five or six different employees were indispensable to prove I
was me and licensed to leave Spain for France.

In honor of the Spanish honesty I must say that my wallet seemed intact, with the same care,
after a few days and I was kindly sent to Paris. Do not think that this is a isolated example. Except
in some regions and in all official referred to smuggling (Crime of official origin as well) as proverbial
Spanish probity has not decreased nothing. As to entertainment, it is a universal virtue in Spain. There
is inhospitable but the legislation in all its branches.
 They were frizzled and powdered, and built up in elaborate devices;
they wore on their hair flowers, gems, streamers, tinklers, humming-birds, butterflies, South
American beetles, beads, bugles, and all imaginable rattletraps, which jingled and clinked
with every motion; and yet, as they were three or four fresh, handsome, intelligent, bright-eyed
girls, there was no denying the fact that they did look extremely pretty; and as they sailed
hither and thither before me, and gazed down upon me in the saucy might of their rosy girlhood,
there was a gay defiance in Jenny's demand, "Now, papa, how do you like us?"

"Very charming," answered I, surrendering at discretion.

"I told you, girls, that you could convert him to the fashions, if he should once see you in
party trim."

"I beg pardon, my dear; I am not converted to the fashion, but to you, and that is a point
on which I didn't need conversion; but the present fashions, even so fairly represented as
I see them, I humbly confess I dislike."

"Oh, Mr. Crowfield!"

"Yes, my dears, I do. But then, I protest, I'm not fairly treated. I think, for a young American
girl, who looks as most of my fair friends do look, to come down with her bright eyes and all
her little panoply of graces upon an old fellow like me, and expect him to like a fashion merely
because she looks well in it, is all sheer nonsense. Why, girls, if you wore rings in your
noses, and bangles on your arms up to your elbows, if you tied your hair in a war-knot on the
top of your heads like the Sioux Indians, you would still look pretty. The question isn't,
as I view it, whether you look pretty,--for that you do, and that you will, do what you please
and dress how you will. The question is whether you might not look prettier, whether another
style of dress, and another mode of getting up, would not be far more becoming. I am one who
thinks that it would."

"Now, Mr. Crowfield, you positively are too bad," said Humming-Bird, whose delicate head was
encircled by a sort of crêpy cloud of bright hair, sparkling with gold-dust and spangles, in
the midst of which, just over her forehead, a gorgeous blue butterfly was perched, while a
confused mixture of hairs, gold-powder, spangles, stars, and tinkling ornaments fell in a sort
of cataract down her pretty neck. "You see, we girls think everything of you; and now we don't
like it that you don't like our fashions."

"Why, my little princess, so long as I like you better than your fashions, and merely think
they are not worthy of you, what's the harm?"

"Oh yes, to be sure. You sweeten the dose to us babies with that sugarplum. But really, Mr.
Crowfield, why don't you like the fashions?"

"Because, to my view, they are in great part in false taste, and injure the beauty of the girls,"
said I. "They are inappropriate to their characters, and make them look like a kind and class
of women whom they do not, and I trust never will, resemble internally, and whose mark therefore
they ought not to bear externally. But there you are, beguiling me into a sermon which you
will only hate me in your hearts for preaching. Go along, children! You certainly look as well
as anybody can in that style of getting up; so go to your party, and to-morrow night, when
you are tired and sleepy, if you'll come with your crochet, and sit in my study, I will read
you Christopher Crowfield's dissertation on dress."

"That will be amusing, to say the least," said Humming-Bird; "and, be sure, we will all be
here. And mind, you have to show good reasons for disliking the present fashion."

So the next evening there was a worsted party in my study, sitting in the midst of which I
read as follows:--

WHAT ARE THE SOURCES OF BEAUTY IN DRESS

"The first one is appropriateness. Colors and forms and modes, in themselves graceful or beautiful,
can become ungraceful and ridiculous simply through inappropriateness. The most lovely bonnet
that the most approved modiste can invent, if worn on the head of a coarse-faced Irishwoman
bearing a market-basket on her arm, excites no emotion but that of the ludicrous. The most
elegant and brilliant evening dress, if worn in the daytime in a railroad car, strikes every
one with a sense of absurdity; whereas both these objects in appropriate associations would
excite only the idea of beauty. So a mode of dress obviously intended for driving strikes us
as outré in a parlor; and a parlor dress would no less shock our eyes on horseback. In short,
the course of this principle through all varieties of form can easily be perceived. Besides
appropriateness to time, place, and circumstances, there is appropriateness to age, position,
and character. This is the foundation of all our ideas of professional propriety in costume.
One would not like to see a clergyman in his external air and appointments resembling a gentleman
of the turf; one would not wish a refined and modest scholar to wear the outward air of a fast
fellow, or an aged and venerable statesman to appear with all the peculiarities of a young
dandy. The flowers, feathers, and furbelows which a light-hearted young girl of seventeen embellishes
by the airy grace with which she wears them, are simply ridiculous when transferred to the
toilet of her serious, well-meaning mamma, who bears them about with an anxious face, merely
because a loquacious milliner has assured her, with many protestations, that it is the fashion,
and the only thing remaining for her to do.

"There are, again, modes of dress in themselves very beautiful and very striking, which are
peculiarly adapted to theatrical representation and to pictures, but the adoption of which
as a part of unprofessional toilet produces a sense of incongruity. A mode of dress maybe in
perfect taste on the stage, that would be absurd in an evening party, absurd in the street,
absurd, in short, everywhere else.

"Now you come to my first objection to our present American toilet,--its being to a very great
extent inappropriate to our climate, to our habits of life and thought, and to the whole structure
of ideas on which our life is built. What we want, apparently, is some court of inquiry and
adaptation that shall pass judgment on the fashions of other countries, and modify them to
make them a graceful expression of our own national character, and modes of thinking and living.
A certain class of women in Paris at this present hour makes the fashions that rule the feminine
world. They are women who live only for the senses, with as utter and obvious disregard of
any moral or intellectual purpose to be answered in living as a paroquet or a macaw. They have
no family ties; love, in its pure domestic sense, is an impossibility in their lot; religion
in any sense is another impossibility; and their whole intensity of existence, therefore, is
concentrated on the question of sensuous enjoyment, and that personal adornment which is necessary
to secure it. When the great ruling country in the world of taste and fashion has fallen into
such a state that the virtual leaders of fashion are women of this character, it is not to
be supposed that the fashions emanating from them will be of a kind well adapted to express
the ideas, the thoughts, the state of society, of a great Christian democracy such as ours
ought to be.

"What is called, for example, the Pompadour style of dress, so much in vogue of late, we can
see to be perfectly adapted to the kind of existence led by dissipated women whose life is
one revel of excitement; and who, never proposing to themselves any intellectual employment
or any domestic duty, can afford to spend three or four hours every day under the hands of
a waiting-maid, in alternately tangling and untangling their hair. Powder, paint, gold-dust
and silver-dust, pomatums, cosmetics, are all perfectly appropriate where the ideal of life
is to keep up a false show of beauty after the true bloom is wasted by dissipation. The woman
who never goes to bed till morning, who never even dresses herself, who never takes a needle
in her hand, who never goes to church, and never entertains one serious idea of duty of any
kind, when got up in Pompadour style, has, to say the truth, the good taste and merit of appropriateness.
Her dress expresses just what she is,--all false, all artificial, all meretricious and unnatural;
no part or portion of her from which it might be inferred what her Creator originally designed
her to be.

"But when a nice little American girl, who has been brought up to cultivate her mind, to refine
her taste, to care for her health, to be a helpful daughter and a good sister, to visit the
poor and teach in Sunday schools; when a good, sweet, modest little puss of this kind combs
all her pretty hair backward till it is one mass of frowsy confusion; when she powders, and
paints under her eyes; when she adopts, with eager enthusiasm, every outré, unnatural fashion
that comes from the most dissipated foreign circles,--she is in bad taste, because she does
not represent either her character, her education, or her good points. She looks like a second-rate
actress, when she is, in fact, a most thoroughly respectable, estimable, lovable little girl,
and on the way, as we poor fellows fondly hope, to bless some one of us with her tenderness
and care in some nice home in the future.

"It is not the fashion in America for young girls to have waiting-maids,--in foreign countries
it is the fashion. All this meretricious toilet--so elaborate, so complicated, and so contrary
to nature--must be accomplished, and it is accomplished, by the busy little fingers of each
girl for herself; and so it seems to be very evident that a style of hair-dressing which it
will require hours to disentangle, which must injure and in time ruin the natural beauty of
the hair, ought to be one thing which a well-regulated court of inquiry would reject in our
American fashions.

"Again, the genius of American life is for simplicity and absence of ostentation. We have no
parade of office: our public men wear no robes, no stars, garters, collars, etc.; and it would,
therefore, be in good taste in our women to cultivate simple styles of dress. Now I object
to the present fashions, as adopted from France, that they are flashy and theatrical. Having
their origin with a community whose senses are blunted, drugged, and deadened with dissipation
and ostentation, they reject the simpler forms of beauty, and seek for startling effects, for
odd and unexpected results. The contemplation of one of our fashionable churches, at the hour
when its fair occupants pour forth, gives one a great deal of surprise. The toilets there displayed
might have been in good keeping among showy Parisian women in an opera house, but even their
original inventors would have been shocked at the idea of carrying them into a church. The
rawness of our American mind as to the subject of propriety in dress is nowhere more shown
than in the fact that no apparent distinction is made between church and opera house in the
adaptation of attire. Very estimable and we trust very religious young women sometimes enter
the house of God in a costume which makes their utterance of the words of the litany and the
acts of prostrate devotion in the service seem almost burlesque. When a brisk little creature
comes into a pew with hair frizzed till it stands on end in a most startling manner, rattling
strings of beads and bits of tinsel, mounting over all some pert little hat with a red or green
feather standing saucily upright in front, she may look exceedingly pretty and piquant; and,
if she came there for a game of croquet or a tableau party, would be all in very good taste;
but as she comes to confess that she is a miserable sinner, that she has done the things she
ought not to have done, and left undone the things she ought to have done,--as she takes upon
her lips most solemn and tremendous words, whose meaning runs far beyond life into a sublime
eternity,--there is a discrepancy which would be ludicrous if it were not melancholy.

"One is apt to think, at first view, that St. Jerome was right in saying,

  "'She who comes in glittering vest
  To mourn her frailty, still is frail.'

But St. Jerome was in the wrong, after all; for a flashy, unsuitable attire in church is not
always a mark of an undevout or entirely worldly mind; it is simply a mark of a raw, uncultivated
taste. In Italy, the ecclesiastical law prescribing a uniform black dress for the churches
gives a sort of education to European ideas of propriety in toilet, which prevents churches
from being made theatres for the same kind of display which is held to be in good taste at
places of public amusement. It is but justice to the inventors of Parisian fashions to say
that, had they ever had the smallest idea of going to church and Sunday school, as our good
girls do, they would immediately have devised toilets appropriate to such exigencies. If it
were any part of their plan of life to appear statedly in public to confess themselves 'miserable
sinners,' we should doubtless have sent over here the design of some graceful penitential habit,
which would give our places of worship a much more appropriate air than they now have. As it
is, it would form a subject for such a court of inquiry and adaptation as we have supposed,
to draw a line between the costume of the theatre and the church.

"In the same manner, there is a want of appropriateness in the costume of our American women,
who display in the street promenade a style of dress and adornment originally intended for
showy carriage drives in such great exhibition grounds as the Bois de Boulogne. The makers
of Parisian fashions are not generally walkers. 

Many statesmen resolutely accept the liberal doctrines, if you listen discussions of the ignorant
crowd but certain your instincts! She sees the government is all-encompassing everything and
do it all or it is prohibited. And the most elementary logic will makes the people understand
that what is left to do, or is wrong in any case social interest, must be attributed to the
inability, malevolence, selfishness or greed of the government.

I confess that six or seven Castilian peasants did me the service, without intention, to teach
them some truths or confirm them. Sleep overcame me as I thought the immense future that is
reserved to the progressive and democratic Spain.

Beginning to the break of dawn, extending its vague clarity on the slopes and summits covered
with patches of snow in the Sierra de Guadarrama, when they called me to take a seat in the
proceeding that would lead to Valladolid. Tell me hit number 3 (only was available) in the compartment
that has the name aristocratic saloon. Seats of the corners (the less uncomfortable in any case)
had to possess two people present of the opposite sex from which I was to settle as a mediator.
The female was in the coach when I went, and I replied with the circumspect grace which distinguishes
the Castilian, the friendly greeting that I made to settle his side.

It was certainly one of those Spanish women than could be termed very honorable of pretty girls,
often applied to the Queen to express the idea of ​​grace and distinction in the port. Tall,
elegant and well-trained with a fine white complexion, black eyes and severe, finely arched eyebrows,
look sincere and kind, and an expression that met signs of booking
and the kindness without opposition.

Seemed to have about fifteen years, and her dress or something more comfort noted that mediocrity
of resources.

The male partner seemed to be a package which was wrapped in a broad layer some steps in the
diligence, wandering with abandon like just wanted desentumir their muscles a bit. The foreman announced
the game, and the package is rushed into his corner Sitting to my right. Seeing me, my youthful
appearance caused such evident displeasure, which could not suppress a low growl, by way of reply
to my greeting. He was a regular name stature, cold, austere look, well advanced in age and
with his beard completely shaved.

A secret instinct, which fails to explain but they are never wrong, made me suspect my neighbor
had some kinship with the Church. I do not know why I felt the smell of sacristy, and I proposed to
see if my impression was confirmed.

The coach rolled to all haste, and as I had slept, instead of feeling a vivid dream pleasure to
breathe the morning air, amid the hills that go down like stirrups
of the mountains finally dissipated in the vast plains of Old Castile.

But the neighbor had a deadly dream, having spent the night in a diligence, and the neighbor, who
did not seem have it also, it seemed, so we kept complete silence, with indifference apparently
mutual.

The neighbor ended up falling asleep, but some minutes later the neighbor made some noise when
stretching leg, and the good man awoke with a start and gave us a searching look at whose lightning
I could see a thought of distrust. At the same time, his sudden movement layer made it ajar,
and saw a neck satin embroidered badge of the priest.

From that moment I realized what I had, so much so that, looking
impassively to the silent neighbor down I noticed that some eyes with
pregnancy.

It seems that both guessed My suspicion, for a start sleeper immediately
said, as if to explain the location:

- Niece, do not you sleep?

-
No, uncle, "answered the neighbor.

- Well I can not have me, but
this diligence that jumps like a goat does not let me sleep.

- And
what remedy, dude!

- This gentleman, he added, turning to me, must
be very uncomfortable ....

- Oh, no Sir.

I spent the night at an inn and sleep and do not need.

- True, but you see Nah, you, the middle seat is so bad ....

- Bah! I replied, not a matter of impatience.

And after a single day's journey moves from anyway.

- Hello! U. is long? he said with undisguised interest.

- To Valladolid.

- So do we.

- Much I welcome that.

- Thank you, Lord, responding to one.

- Y. .. Miss U. niece not care much fatigue?

- Rather, it is true, but the trip always distracted, and patience does the rest, said the beautiful
Spanish.

After that short conversation negligible, it seemed to be authorized to continue the conversation.

Was
necessary to kill time, and also the character obviously jealous of my neighbor tempted much
to have some fun and watch the human heart care, I gradually being the conversation to the discussion
of the various types of women in Spain, and when good guy seemed to be on edge because of my enthusiastic
praise for the Castilian I got to touch his rope with questions about the situation of the clergy
in Spain.

Soon began wailing about the progress of irreligion, the result of French books, of poverty in
the clergy who lived in Spain, especially the ratings; of neglect
that were in almost every city churches, many ruined and all that
material supplied to the talks of a priest in every country in Rome.

This is that a little while, despite his foolish confidence, the uncle began to humanize and
still show some consideration, perhaps in response to the interest that I expressed for independence
and welfare of the lower clergy and the general prosperity of Spain. The niece, on the other
hand, seemed to be happy for my opinions and tastes in the Spanish, and finally stayed very
buddies, but occasionally I felt that my neck over the guy missed
him looks to the more paternal niece, but always tellers in the background.

The

coach had to pause to remuda shot, and I hurried down to leave some respite to the beleaguered
pastor, who seemed to regard as a calamity my interposition forced
into the saloon.

When I went up, the friendly uncle had had the cunning to take the middle seat and let me have
your corner. As he did not move from my post, I pointed out that there would stay with more discomfort,
but was quick to respond:

- Oh, no, between good friends should be alternated.

Moreover, U. as will extraajero more pleased to be beside the door to better see the fields.

I did not pray, more especially as the good guy so he could travel with more peace of mind. The
foolish jealousy of my neighbor gave me a lead position that had no cash. From then, although
from time to time the conversation was renewed, I give myself to the contemplation the lonely plains
of Castile, a complete analogy with the Channel and other eastern provinces of Castilla or new.

Nothing
more rich by its nature or more sad and monotonous that region, where the former Spanish immobility
is shown with all its characteristic features. Madrid province had finished high in the Sierra,
where a stone lion demarcates the boundary of Castile. From there the road begins to cut the
province of Segovia, one of the most backward of Spain by the inadequacy of their means of
communication. The land is declining in steps of rocky hills and inclines, which is sad and dreary
appearance. After some sales or microscopic elements of population centers, leaving to one
side the small village of Las Navas de San-Antonio, the horizon is opened and displayed plains the
sight in most of its length.

Finally, the track plays in the town of Villacastin (from 1.500 souls) and in the Labajos (900
inhabitants) San Chidrian enters the territory Avila province, separating the nearby road
leading to the Asturias, and passing through the village of Martin-Muñoz (which has 1.000 inhabitants)
cutting back a tip of the province of Segovia, the traveler is in the middle plain, surrounded by a vast
horizon.

Populations Across the tracks are in complete harmony with the plains. In all old houses are miserable
and distressing aspect, unpaved streets any, atrociously cobbled or filled with mud and dirt,
the swarm of beggars assaulting passengers if the coach stops for a moment even. Grieve dresses,
coats hangman, strange and repellent figures for a whole, and all
that singular thing! contrasting the type of a race distinguished,
intelligent, honest and sweet nature, within which abound the beautiful
faces and strong organizations.

The habit of begging, neglect, the foresight and the dirt is revealed here in all the outward forms
of society which has higher latent qualities which to develop not wait but the momentum trade
and freedom.

Once fully down into the plain, the land, without any of these inflections that make it picturesque,
is but a plain cereal almost completely deserted. If Here and there are some small vineyards,
herds of sheep or almost negligible, only serves to emphasize again, as exceptions, the monotonous
uniformity of the immense planting of wheat, barley, beans, and garbanzo beans that cover the
ground. If too long to distances are some population centers, the rest is desert, as in La Mancha
without a tree, a house or a modest farmhouse. If to the left are a considerable distance Salamanca
side, advanced buttresses of the Sierra de Guadarrama that targets towards Portugal, and to the right
(north) to reach the pale glimpse of the mountain eminences Castilla which separates the Ebro
basin, westward in the direction of Valladolid and Zamora the horizon has almost no limits.
The gaze is lost in contemplation of a vast desert grass grown by nature alone, opulent vegetables
and seeds of progress, but sad, without a sound, without animation,
without any social movement.

The Spaniards are a people drowned between endless waves of grain. Nature live there without
a smile, vegetation and man sleeping or yawning.

The richness of this country, mainly agricultural, is priceless. It only lacks the means and
freedom to dispose of their products and regenerate the change. The day we get them, Castilla
la Vieja may be an emporium.

If the channel Castilla, new roads and railways are under construction or in process of execution,
will create the first element prosperity, only a liberal legislation that breaks the bonds of
domestic trade exterior, complete economic and moral regeneration of Castilians.

One of the most characteristic features of this population (for whom life is nothing but a habit)
is the impassive, sometimes bordering on stoicism barbarian. For almost all the day the wind
and rain smote desolate plain, and yet, wherever I reached to see a flock caught my attention
two beings in association infallible in the center of each One: the pastor and guardian dog.
Each dog was sleeping near his owner with the same philosophy this, highlighting immobiliere,
ignoring the rain and wind. Scarcely a tissue covered his head, while the whole body is hidden under
the fold of an old coat coarse yellow cloth (a kind of homespun) and if you ever left his
immobility was only to point to impassive hand a sheep dog that strayed
too far from group.

The gross obedient slowly filled his duty, and the man was fixed as a stake, silent sentinel
of an empty field and a flock of excellent character. The same scene gave me ten or twelve
times.

A 143 kilometers from Madrid, at the bottom of the vast plain, is the poor old village of Olmedo,
the first population of the province of Valladolid on the way that
I wore.

Olmedo, famous for two battles in the old civil wars in Spain, has just a 13.000 inhabitants.
A fortified city and time of any importance, today it draws attention the traveler but also for its
ruins, its walls dismantled, solitude and sadness, in spite of medium timber trade.

The stops where the coach had stopped on were so detestable I had not been able to take advantage
of any food. Cooked chickpeas, cooked beans, bacon and sausage chasing me without mercy, and even a
few glasses of wine Toro Aranda and had comforted me a bit, had the penalty not being able to entertain
the appetite with a cigar in consideration of the good priest's niece.

This is I had a hunger first order, that was intensified with a whiff of good cheese and delicious
peach preserves escaping from the trunk of cure. He and his niece took the opportunity to gloat
times when I stepped off the coach in search of something tolerable.

The situation made me realize that it was necessary to appeal to the diplomacy. Reestablished
the conversation on the clergy and managed to interest the worthy priest Castilian. Finally I did
find that in New Granada I had run grave danger as a journalist, owing to the energy with which, discussing
the question of the clergy, had defended the true interests of religion, or of purity Christianity
and the independence of the priesthood. I was saying the whole truth, but I I kept telling
it to my companion that my enemies had been very ill clergy and fans, or go into details about the
way I understood the true interests Catholic clergy and religion. This is that the guy was tender,
and then later invited me to partake of its delicious food supplies, which I tried the gourmet
taste of my peers.

If I had tried vulgar jealousy a good seat, the spirit of corporation priest's travelers very timely
succor my stomach situation. I must say, to discharge my conscience, that from that moment made me forget
the gratitude of all malicious brooding about the relationship of my fellow travelers.

From Olmedo to Valladolid (a distance of 43 km) the road, entirely new tour of a region so lonely
but that is not touched in four villages entirely insignificant one located on the left bank
of the Douro river narrow and deep but very junior to the point where, a few miles away, he
meets the Pisuerga.

The night was already well advanced when we passed in front of Simancas, as famous for its
historical archive rich in precious documents. At eleven we came to Valladolid, and the good
priest and niece parted with the utmost kindness, leaving a pleasant memory of the advantages
travel by coach to the priests who have nieces.

As shown, an entire journey of 189 kilometers between Madrid and Valladolid, the road line turns
a very isolated villages that barely meet a total of 19.500 inhabitants At best, however, that
the route is one of the most important. That alone is a measure scarcity of population in Spain
and its vicious distribution, mainly in Castile.

Valladolid province, territory almost completely flat, situated between Segovia Avila, Salamanca,
Zamora, Leon, Palencia and Burgos, is the thirty-fourth in Spain in order population, had almost
244.000 inhabitants, apart from Valladolid, which is 41.869, not there are more places of
any importance in the province Olmedo, Medina-de-Rio-dry (with 4.500 inhabitants), Benavente
(which has 4.550) and Medina-del-Campo, with 4.238.

The remaining the population is scattered in many villages of 300 to 2,000 residents, but the
fields are almost completely deserts everywhere, whether because of sedentary habits of all the
Spaniards, both because the nature of its agriculture (mainly cereals and vines) does not require
the same diligence in the consecration of the crop, which impose other productions, either end
by the lack of good roads to maintain frequent communications between districts.

The city of Valladolid, as famous for its university, is located to the left bank Pisuerga River,
at a short distance from some groups of low, rounded hills that interrupt
plain amusing way to determine the valley of that river.

This, which has their sources in the mountains of Reinosa, the Bornesga born in the mountains
of Leon, and the Tormes, from the mountain that dominates at Salamanca, are the main tributaries
of the Duero, center the vast hydrographic basin of Old Castile and the ancient kingdom of Leon,
including between the Pyrenees (long until Asturias and Galicia), the Sierra de Guadarrama and
linking these two strands separating the basins of the Ebro and Duero.

Valladolid is perhaps the Spanish city that best highlights the contrast of old and modern Spain.
In the center is the Valladolid of the traditions, the immobility, the selfishness, isolation -
the Valladolid gothic, dark, of a severe nature, sad, feudal and Frailesca. In the suburbs has
emerged the modern Valladolid, with visible trends to the comfort, elegance, movement, light,
economic activity, grooming and good taste.

In the first part are: houses dwindled and repellent aspect, dirty streets, winding and narrow,
blind alleys, shady arcades and places heavy architecture and empirical and monumental Gothic
towers, many half-ruined churches but venerable for their beautiful artwork studded facades,
while the look of the people and measured movement of all objects
in the streets and squares reveal the tenacity of habits, neglect
and the cold austerity of manners.

Wherever dark dresses and uniforms, bands of beggars, dirt, old donkeys wandering the streets in the
garbage, young vagabonds, or stopping people to look at the stranger peering like an animal curious
- in short, life almost primitive or traditional Castilian Spain, with almost all the characters
that made highlight Lesage masterfully in his Gil Blas de Santillana.

By contrast, in the suburbs or the modern part of Valladolid are:
beautiful walks, splendid groves at the edge of Pisuerga, the preparatory
work for the railroad station coming on, the animation and movement
of cars in the vicinity of the channel head Castilla, wide and well-aligned
streets, beautiful homes and elegant new construction indicating a
rapid increase of the city, and all the signs of a forthcoming regeneration
social.

Those beautiful groves Pisuerga beach, which seemed a prodigious effort progressive Valladolid,
help prove the tenacity of the vicious habits Spanish. It is inexplicable that the Castilians
hatred profess to nature in its most sympathetic and engaging demonstrations. Everything in
it is smiling, cheerful and delicious, not like to the majority of Spanish people who did
not receive an infusion of strong Arabic element. Trees, water, the breeze, the sky, the freshness
and freedom of repugnant to the countryside that sedentary race, whose habits have kept true
to the sacristy, silence, the immobility, the messiness, the corners, shadows, portals, horror
to light and life to everything. So most of the neighbors hate Valladolid delicious malls with
the public authority has given away, and instead of fetching there the sun, fresh air, perfumes
and the joys of vegetation, and rumors of waters, crowding under the shady prefer center portals,
or wander lazily infect and very sad streets where your ancestors
were left rotting in the same abandon.

Valladolid, the Pintia of the Romans, brings his name, it is said, of its founder, a Moor called
Olid (Olid Valley), and has been home to many famous people of Spain. Among the contemporaries I
quote the famous poet Zorrilla, which has been so popular among the friends of romance and language
forms. It is well known in that city fell in poverty and persecution, in 1506, the immortal
Colon, whom Spain had its best glories. The house they lived in the heroic developer New World is
still preserved, and is owned their descendants collateral, bearing the title of Duke of Veraguas.
This humble monument, should be a special and beautiful museum include
one of the most interesting relics civilizatriz of old Spain, is scarcely
more house preserved as vulgar.

What I said about the general features of Valladolid indicates well the nature of its monuments,
almost all belonging to the Gothic style, and the most notable to Florida or transition fifteenth
century precursor of the Renaissance. The cathedral, which has never been completed, is the
work of Juan de Herrera famous in all that is elegant, and Churriguera
(the founder unhappy bad taste in Spain) as it's heavy, cold and shocking,
but its facade a model in Castile, of Doric architecture in contrast
with the Gothic. Even
a handful of walnuts that were brought from the depths of her mysterious closet had virtues
in our eyes such as no other walnuts could approach. The little shelf of books that hung suspended
by cords against her wall was sacred in our regard; the volumes were like no other books; and
we supposed that she derived from them those stores of knowledge on all subjects which she
unconsciously dispensed among us,--for she was always telling us something of metals, or minerals,
or gems, or plants, or animals, which awakened our curiosity, stimulated our inquiries, and,
above all, led us to wonder where she had learned it all. Even the slight restrictions which
her neat habits imposed on our breezy and turbulent natures seemed all quite graceful and becoming.
It was right, in our eyes, to cleanse our shoes on scraper and mat with extra diligence, and
then to place a couple of chips under the heels of our boots when we essayed to dry our feet
at her spotless hearth. We marveled to see our own faces reflected in a thousand smiles and
winks from her bright brass andirons,--such andirons we thought were seen on earth in no other
place,--and a pair of radiant brass candlesticks, that illustrated the mantelpiece, were viewed
with no less respect.

"Aunt Esther's cat was a model for all cats,--so sleek, so intelligent, so decorous and well-trained,
always occupying exactly her own cushion by the fire, and never transgressing in one iota the
proprieties belonging to a cat of good breeding. She shared our affections with her mistress,
and we were allowed as a great favor and privilege, now and then, to hold the favorite on our
knees, and stroke her satin coat to a smoother gloss.

"But it was not for cats alone that she had attractions. She was in sympathy and fellowship
with everything that moved and lived; knew every bird and beast with a friendly acquaintanceship.
The squirrels that inhabited the trees in the front yard were won in time by her blandishments
to come and perch on her window-sills, and thence, by trains of nuts adroitly laid, to disport
themselves on the shining cherry tea-table that stood between the windows; and we youngsters
used to sit entranced with delight as they gamboled and waved their feathery tails in frolicsome
security, eating rations of gingerbread and bits of seedcake with as good a relish as any child
among us.

"The habits, the rights, the wrongs, the wants, and the sufferings of the animal creation formed
the subject of many an interesting conversation with her; and we boys, with the natural male
instinct of hunting, trapping, and pursuing, were often made to pause in our career, remembering
her pleas for the dumb things which could not speak for themselves.

"Her little hermitage was the favorite resort of numerous friends. Many of the young girls
who attended the village academy made her acquaintance, and nothing delighted her more than
that they should come there and read to her the books they were studying, when her superior
and wide information enabled her to light up and explain much that was not clear to the immature
students.

"In her shady retirement, too, she was a sort of Egeria to certain men of genius, who came
to read to her their writings, to consult her in their arguments, and to discuss with her the
literature and politics of the day,--through all which her mind moved with an equal step, yet
with a sprightliness and vivacity peculiarly feminine.

"Her memory was remarkably retentive, not only of the contents of books, but of all that great
outlying fund of anecdote and story which the quaint and earnest New England life always supplied.
There were pictures of peculiar characters, legends of true events stranger than romance, all
stored in the cabinets of her mind; and these came from her lips with the greater force because
the precision of her memory enabled her to authenticate them with name, date, and circumstances
of vivid reality. From that shadowy line of incidents which marks the twilight boundary between
the spiritual world and the present life she drew legends of peculiar clearness, but invested
with the mysterious charm which always dwells in that uncertain region; and the shrewd flash
of her eye, and the keen, bright smile with which she answered the wondering question, 'What
do you suppose it was?' or, 'What could it have been?' showed how evenly rationalism in her
mind kept pace with romance.

"The retired room in which she thus read, studied, thought, and surveyed from afar the whole
world of science and literature, and in which she received friends and entertained children,
was perhaps the dearest and freshest spot to her in the world. There came a time, however,
when the neat little independent establishment was given up, and she went to associate herself
with two of her nieces in keeping house for a boarding-school of young girls. Here her lively
manners and her gracious interest in the young made her a universal favorite, though the cares
she assumed broke in upon those habits of solitude and study which formed her delight. From
the day that she surrendered this independency of hers, she had never, for more than a score
of years, a home of her own, but filled the trying position of an accessory in the home of
others. Leaving the boarding-school, she became the helper of an invalid wife and mother in
the early nursing and rearing of a family of young children,--an office which leaves no privacy
and no leisure. Her bed was always shared with some little one; her territories were exposed
to the constant inroads of little pattering feet; and all the various sicknesses and ailments
of delicate childhood made absorbing drafts upon her time.

"After a while she left New England with the brother to whose family she devoted herself. The
failing health of the wife and mother left more and more the charge of all things in her hands;
servants were poor, and all the appliances of living had the rawness and inconvenience which
in those days attended Western life. It became her fate to supply all other people's defects
and deficiencies. Wherever a hand failed, there must her hand be. Whenever a foot faltered,
she must step into the ranks. She was the one who thought for and cared for and toiled for
all, yet made never a claim that any one should care for her.

"It was not till late in my life that I became acquainted with the deep interior sacrifice,
the constant self-abnegation, which all her life involved. She was born with a strong, vehement,
impulsive nature,--a nature both proud and sensitive,--a nature whose tastes were passions,
whose likings and whose aversions were of the most intense and positive character. Devoted
as she always seemed to the mere practical and material, she had naturally a deep romance and
enthusiasm of temperament which exceeded all that can be written in novels. It was chiefly
owing to this that a home and a central affection of her own were never hers. In her early
days of attractiveness, none who would have sought her could meet the high requirements of
her ideality; she never saw her hero, and so never married. Family cares, the tending of young
children, she often confessed, were peculiarly irksome to her. She had the head of a student,
a passionate love for the world of books. A Protestant convent, where she might devote herself
without interruption to study, was her ideal of happiness. She had, too, the keenest appreciation
of poetry, of music, of painting, and of natural scenery. Her enjoyment in any of these things
was intensely vivid whenever, by chance, a stray sunbeam of the kind darted across the dusty
path of her life; yet in all these her life was a constant repression. The eagerness with which
she would listen to any account from those more fortunate ones who had known these things,
showed how ardent a passion was constantly held in check. A short time before her death, talking
with a friend who had visited Switzerland, she said, with great feeling: 'All my life my desire
to visit the beautiful places of this earth has been so intense, that I cannot but hope that
after my death I shall be permitted to go and look at them.'

"The completeness of her self-discipline may be gathered from the fact that no child could
ever be brought to believe she had not a natural fondness for children, or that she found the
care of them burdensome. It was easy to see that she had naturally all those particular habits,
those minute pertinacities in respect to her daily movements and the arrangement of all her
belongings, which would make the meddling, intrusive demands of infancy and childhood peculiarly
hard for her to meet. Yet never was there a pair of toddling feet that did not make free with
Aunt Esther's room, never a curly head that did not look up, in confiding assurance of a welcome
smile, to her bright eyes. The inconsiderate and never ceasing requirements of children and
invalids never drew from her other than a cheerful response; and to my mind there is more saintship
in this than in the private wearing of any number of haircloth shirts or belts lined with spikes.

"In a large family of careless, noisy children there will be constant losing of thimbles and
needles and scissors; but Aunt Esther was always ready, without reproach, to help the careless
and the luckless. Her things, so well kept and so treasured, she was willing to lend, with
many a caution and injunction, it is true, but also with a relish of right good will. And,
to do us justice, we generally felt the sacredness of the trust, and were more careful of her
things than of our own. If a shade of sewing-silk were wanting, or a choice button, or a bit
of braid or tape, Aunt Esther cheerfully volunteered something from her well-kept stores, not
regarding the trouble she made herself in seeking the key, unlocking the drawer, and searching
out in bag or parcel just the treasure demanded. Never was more perfect precision, or more
perfect readiness to accommodate others.

"Her little income, scarcely reaching a hundred dollars yearly, was disposed of with a generosity
worthy a fortune. One tenth was sacredly devoted to charity, and a still further sum laid by
every year for presents to friends. No Christmas or New Year ever came round that Aunt Esther,
out of this very tiny fund, did not find something for children and servants. Her gifts were
trifling in value, but well timed,--a ball of thread-wax, a paper of pins, a pin-cushion,--something
generally so well chosen as to show that she had been running over our needs, and noting what
to give. She was no less gracious as receiver than as giver. The little articles that we made
for her, or the small presents that we could buy out of our childish resources, she always
declared were exactly what she needed; and she delighted us by the care she took of them and
the value she set upon them.

"Her income was a source of the greatest pleasure to her, as maintaining an independence without
which she could not have been happy. Though she constantly gave to every family in which she
lived services which no money could repay, it would have been the greatest trial to her not
to be able to provide for herself. Her dress, always that of a true gentlewoman,--refined,
quiet, and neat,--was bought from this restricted sum, and her small traveling expenses were
paid out of it. She abhorred anything false or flashy: her caps were trimmed with real thread
lace, and her silk dresses were of the best quality, perfectly well made and kept; and, after
all, a little sum always remained over in her hands for unforeseen exigencies.

"This love of independence was one of the strongest features of her life, and we often playfully
told her that her only form of selfishness was the monopoly of saintship,--that she who gave
so much was not willing to allow others to give to her; that she who made herself servant of
all was not willing to allow others to serve her.

"Among the trials of her life must be reckoned much ill health, borne, however, with such heroic
patience that it was not easy to say when the hand of pain was laid upon her. She inherited,
too, a tendency to depression of spirits, which at times increased to a morbid and distressing
gloom. Few knew or suspected these sufferings, so completely had she learned to suppress every
outward manifestation that might interfere with the happiness of others. In her hours of depression
she resolutely forbore to sadden the lives of those around her with her own melancholy, and
often her darkest moods were so lighted up and adorned with an outside show of wit and humor,
that those who had known her intimately were astonished to hear that she had ever been subject
to depression.

"Her truthfulness of nature amounted almost to superstition. From her promise once given she
felt no change of purpose could absolve her; and therefore rarely would she give it absolutely,
for she could not alter the thing that had gone forth from her lips. Our belief in the certainty
of her fulfilling her word was like our belief in the immutability of the laws of nature. Whoever
asked her got of her the absolute truth on every subject, and, when she had no good thing to
say, her silence was often truly awful. When anything mean or ungenerous was brought to her
knowledge, she would close her lips resolutely; but the flash in her eyes showed what she would
speak were speech permitted. In her last days she spoke to a friend of what she had suffered
from the strength of her personal antipathies. 'I thank God,' she said, 'that I believe at
last I have overcome all that too, and that there has not been, for some years, any human being
toward whom I have felt a movement of dislike.'

"The last year of her life was a constant discipline of unceasing pain, borne with that fortitude
which could make her an entertaining and interesting companion even while the sweat of mortal
agony was starting from her brow. Her own room she kept as a last asylum, to which she would
silently retreat when the torture became too intense for the repression of society, and there
alone, with closed doors, she wrestled with her agony. The stubborn independence of her nature
took refuge in this final fastness, and she prayed only that she might go down to death with
the full ability to steady herself all the way, needing the help of no other hand.

"The ultimate struggle of earthly feeling came when this proud self-reliance was forced to
give way, and she was obliged to leave herself helpless in the hands of others. 'God requires
that I should give up my last form of self-will,' she said; 'now I have resigned this, perhaps
He will let me go home.'

"In a good old age, Death, the friend, came and opened the door of this mortal state, and a
great soul, that had served a long appenticeship to little things, went forth into the joy
of its Lord; a life of self-sacrifice and self-abnegation passed into a life of endless rest."

"But," said Rudolph, "I rebel at this life of self-abnegation and self-sacrifice. I do not
think it the duty of noble women, who have beautiful natures and enlarged and cultivated tastes,
to make themselves the slaves of the sick-room and nursery."

"Such was not the teaching of our New England faith," said I. "Absolute unselfishness,--the
death of self,--such were its teachings, and such as Esther's the characters it made. 'Do the
duty nearest thee' was the only message it gave to 'women with a mission;' and from duty to
duty, from one self-denial to another, they rose to a majesty of moral strength impossible
to any form of mere self-indulgence. It is of souls thus sculptured and chiseled by self-denial
and self-discipline that the living temple of the perfect hereafter is to be built. The pain
of the discipline is short, but the glory of the fruition is eternal."

XII

THE NEW YEAR [1865.]

Here comes the First of January, Eighteen Hundred and Sixty-Five, and we are all settled comfortably
into our winter places, with our winter surroundings and belongings; all cracks and openings
are calked and listed, the double windows are in, the furnace dragon in the cellar is ruddy
and in good liking, sending up his warming respirations through every pipe and register in
the house; and yet, though an artificial summer reigns everywhere, like bees we have our swarming
place,--in my library. There is my chimney-corner, and my table permanently established on
one side of the hearth; and each of the female genus has, so to speak, pitched her own winter
tent within sight of the blaze of my camp-fire. I discerned to-day that Jenny had surreptitiously
appropriated one of the drawers of my study-table to knitting-needles and worsted; and wicker
work-baskets and stands of various heights and sizes seem to be planted here and there for
permanence among the bookcases. The canary-bird has a sunny window, and the plants spread out
their leaves and unfold their blossoms as if there were no ice and snow in the street, and
Rover makes a hearth-rug of himself in winking satisfaction in front of my fire, except when
Jenny is taken with a fit of discipline, when he beats a retreat, and secretes himself under
my table.

Peaceable, ah, how peaceable, home and quiet and warmth in winter! And how, when we hear the
wind whistle, we think of you, O our brave brothers, our saviors and defenders, who for our
sake have no home but the muddy camp, the hard pillow of the barrack, the weary march, the
uncertain fare,--you, the rank and file, the thousand unnoticed ones, who have left warm fires,
dear wives, loving little children, without even the hope of glory or fame,--without even the
hope of doing anything remarkable or perceptible for the cause you love,--resigned only to
fill the ditch or bridge the chasm over which your country shall walk to peace and joy! Good
men and true, brave unknown hearts, we salute you, and feel that we, in our soft peace and
security, are not worthy of you! When we think of you, our simple comforts seem luxuries all
too good for us, who give so little when you give all!

But there are others to whom from our bright homes, our cheerful firesides, we would fain say
a word, if we dared.

Think of a mother receiving a letter with such a passage as this in it! It is extracted from
one we have just seen, written by a private in the army of Sheridan, describing the death of
a private. "He fell instantly, gave a peculiar smile and look, and then closed his eyes. We
laid him down gently at the foot of a large tree. I crossed his hands over his breast, closed
his eyelids down, but the smile was still on his face. I wrapt him in his tent, spread my pocket-handkerchief
over his face, wrote his name on a piece of paper, and pinned it on his breast, and there we
left him: we could not find pick or shovel to dig a grave." There it is!--a history that is
multiplying itself by hundreds daily, the substance of what has come to so many homes, and
must come to so many more before the great price of our ransom is paid!

What can we say to you, in those many, many homes where the light has gone out forever?--you,
O fathers, mothers, wives, sisters, haunted by a name that has ceased to be spoken on earth,--you,
for whom there is no more news from the camp, no more reading of lists, no more tracing of
maps, no more letters, but only a blank, dead silence! The battlecry goes on, but for you it
is passed by! the victory comes, but, oh, never more to bring him back to you! your offering
to this great cause has been made, and been taken; you have thrown into it all your living,
even all that you had, and from henceforth your house is left unto you desolate! O ye watchers
of the cross, ye waiters by the sepulchre, what can be said to you? We could almost extinguish
our own home-fires, that seem too bright when we think of your darkness; the laugh dies on
our lip, the lamp burns dim through our tears, and we seem scarcely worthy to speak words of
comfort, lest we seem as those who mock a grief they cannot know.

But is there no consolation? Is it nothing to have had such a treasure to give, and to have
given it freely for the noblest cause for which ever battle was set,--for the salvation of
your country, for the freedom of all mankind? Had he died a fruitless death, in the track of
common life, blasted by fever, smitten or rent by crushing accident, then might his most precious
life seem to be as water spilled upon the ground; but now it has been given for a cause and
a purpose worthy even the anguish of your loss and sacrifice. He has been counted worthy to
be numbered with those who stood with precious incense between the living and the dead, that
the plague which was consuming us might be stayed. The blood of these young martyrs shall be
the seed of the future church of liberty, and from every drop shall spring up flowers of healing.
O widow! O mother! blessed among bereaved women! there remains to you a treasure that belongs
not to those who have lost in any other wise,--the power to say, "He died for his country."
In all the good that comes of this anguish you shall have a right and share by virtue of this
sacrifice. The joy of freedmen bursting from chains, the glory of a nation new-born, the assurance
of a triumphant future for your country and the world,--all these become yours by the purchase-money
of that precious blood.

Besides this, there are other treasures that come through sorrow, and sorrow alone. There are
celestial plants of root so long and so deep that the land must be torn and furrowed, ploughed
up from the very foundation, before they can strike and nourish; and when we see how God's
plough is driving backward and forward and across this nation, rending, tearing up tender shoots,
and burying soft wild-flowers, we ask ourselves, What is He going to plant?

Not the first year, nor the second, after the ground has been broken up, does the purpose of
the husbandman appear. At first we see only what is uprooted and ploughed in,--the daisy drabbled,
and the violet crushed,--and the first trees planted amid the unsightly furrows stand dumb
and disconsolate, irresolute in leaf, and without flower or fruit. Their work is under the
ground. In darkness and silence they are putting forth long fibres, searching hither and thither
under the black soil for the strength that years hence shall burst into bloom and bearing.

What is true of nations is true of individuals. It may seem now winter and desolation with
you. Your hearts have been ploughed and harrowed and are now frozen up. There is not a flower
left, not a blade of grass, not a bird to sing,--and it is hard to believe that any brighter
flowers, any greener herbage, shall spring up than those which have been torn away; and yet
there will. Nature herself teaches you to-day. Outdoors nothing but bare branches and shrouding
snow; and yet you know that there is not a tree that is not patiently holding out at the end
of its boughs next year's buds, frozen indeed, but unkilled. The rhododendron and the lilac
have their blossoms all ready, wrapped in cere-cloth, waiting in patient faith. Under the frozen
ground the crocus and the hyacinth and the tulip hide in their hearts the perfect forms of
future flowers. And it is even so with you: your leaf buds of the future are frozen, but not
killed; the soil of your heart has many flowers under it cold and still now, but they will
yet come up and bloom.

The dear old book of comfort tells of no present healing for sorrow. No chastening for the
present seemeth joyous, but grievous, but afterwards it yieldeth peaceable fruits of righteousness.
We, as individuals, as a nation, need to have faith in that AFTERWARDS. It is sure to come,--sure
as spring and summer to follow winter.

There is a certain amount of suffering which must follow the rending of the great cords of
life, suffering which is natural and inevitable; it cannot be argued down; it cannot be stilled;
it can no more be soothed by any effort of faith and reason than the pain of a fractured limb,
or the agony of fire on the living flesh. All that we can do is to brace ourselves to bear
it, calling on God, as the martyrs did in the fire, and resigning ourselves to let it burn
on. We must be willing to suffer, since God so wills. There are just so many waves to go over
us, just so many arrows of stinging thought to be shot into our soul, just so many faintings
and sinkings and revivings only to suffer again, belonging to and inherent in our portion of
sorrow; and there is a work of healing that God has placed in the hands of Time alone.

Time heals all things at last; yet it depends much on us in our suffering, whether time shall
send us forth healed, indeed, but maimed and crippled and callous, or whether, looking to the
great Physician of sorrows, and co-working with him, we come forth stronger and fairer even
for our wounds. 

Next to St. Paul calls attention less ruined another church, San Gregorio, notable for its beautiful
facade and some interior details (on the patio and stairs) very characteristic Gothic style in his last
two centuries. There is established the Interior of the province. Within walking distance are the
house where he was born evil Felipe II (whom Victor Hugo called the owl of the inquisitorial Spain),
the house that made the marriage of the Catholic Monarchs and served as a prison to favorite famous
Don Alvaro de Luna, executed in Valladolid in 1453.

The museum, whose possession social monument's neighbors take pride in Valladolid, I thought
The best place for a writ of faith against the heresies of art. With the exception of the library
(14,000 volumes), about thirty regular tables or very good (among more than thousand valueless),
a character quite sculpted chairs but without finesse, and a few medals and artistic curiosities,
the rest should be condemned to fire as a degradation art, which can only serve to pervert
the taste and maintain gross concerns. The great mass of the museum consists of vile daubs on canvas,
board or statues, from the sacristy of many convents, and its inhabitants, it would seem,
not concerned only with the material representation of Christ, the Virgin, the saints, the Jews,
etc., heedless of the divine interest of religion or of art's social, excluded from the prophetic barbarian
populations.

Also draws attention to the old palace in Valladolid Castilian and other more modest that look
like prisons, the Plaza Mayor, whose arches have the special type of his time, one of the four
gates of the city (Madrid) truly monumental and San Benito, building great convent converted into
a fortress. For the rest, the city has major training institutes and charity, and check to see
that the modern spirit is gradually penetrating to the heart of the old Spanish court. No later than
the modification will be deep and almost complete, and Valladolid (which may now contain 100.000
inhabitants) rise to the rank of Spanish city of the first order.

Your business is already considerable movement due to the channel of Castile and the other new
communication routes. That city is the center of a vast production of wheat, which meals are
taking advantage out of the port of Santander and others of the coast coast. Apart from that
production, are notable among the wine farm, wool and wood. Valladolid is also a manufacturing
center, though much lower. Besides his large water mills and a lot of wind, giving the strong
trade values flour, contains gross textile mills (serge, etc.), paper, felt hats and other
minor items. For the rest nothing else calls attention to the today. The past is sad but venerable
in many of its features.

The future will be a Valladolid time of resurrection.

Yet the most remarkable interest that Burgos (city of 26.000 souls barely) by impressive cathedral,
its Gothic monastery and other monuments and old in appearance españolismo
so marked, preferred address to Santander, Palencia, to know a region
which is actively developing interesting Spanish trade. But he was one of those whose heart had been quickened
in its death anguish by the resurrection voice of Christ; and he came forth to life and comfort.
He bravely resolved to do all that one man could to lessen the great sum of misery. He sold
his estates in Silesia, bought in Berlin a large building that had been used as barracks for
the soldiers, and, fitting it up in plain, commodious apartments, formed there a great family-establishment,
into which he received the wrecks and fragments of families that had been broken up by the
war,--orphan children, widowed and helpless women, decrepit old people, disabled soldiers.
These he made his family, and constituted himself their father and chief. He abode with them,
and cared for them as a parent. He had schools for the children; the more advanced he put to
trades and employments; he set up a hospital for the sick; and for all he had the priestly
ministrations of his own Christ-like heart. The celebrated Professor Tholuck, one of the most
learned men of modern Germany, was an early protégé of the old Baron's, who, discerning his
talents, put him in the way of a liberal education. In his earlier years, like many others
of the young who play with life, ignorant of its needs, Tholuck piqued himself on a lordly
skepticism with regard to the commonly received Christianity, and even wrote an essay to prove
the superiority of the Mohammedan to the Christian religion. In speaking of his conversion,
he says,--"What moved me was no argument, nor any spoken reproof, but simply that divine image
of the old Baron walking before my soul. That life was an argument always present to me, and
which I never could answer; and so I became a Christian." In the life of this man we see the
victory over sorrow. How many with means like his, when desolated by like bereavements, have
lain coldly and idly gazing on the miseries of life, and weaving around themselves icy tissues
of doubt and despair,--doubting the being of a God, doubting the reality of a Providence, doubting
the divine love, embittered and rebellious against the power which they could not resist, yet
to which they would not submit! In such a chill heart-freeze lies the danger of sorrow. And
it is a mortal danger. It is a torpor that must be resisted, as the man in the whirling snows
must bestir himself, or he will perish. The apathy of melancholy must be broken by an effort
of religion and duty. The stagnant blood must be made to flow by active work, and the cold
hand warmed by clasping the hands outstretched towards it in sympathy or supplication. One
orphan child taken in, to be fed, clothed, and nurtured, may save a heart from freezing to
death: and God knows this war is making but too many orphans!

It is easy to subscribe to an orphan asylum, and go on in one's despair and loneliness. Such
ministries may do good to the children who are thereby saved from the street, but they impart
little warmth and comfort to the giver. One destitute child housed, taught, cared for, and
tended personally, will bring more solace to a suffering heart than a dozen maintained in an
asylum. Not that the child will probably prove an angel, or even an uncommonly interesting
mortal. It is a prosaic work, this bringing-up of children, and there can be little rose-water
in it. The child may not appreciate what is done for him, may not be particularly grateful,
may have disagreeable faults, and continue to have them after much pains on your part to eradicate
them,--and yet it is a fact, that to redeem one human being from destitution and ruin, even
in some homely every-day course of ministrations, is one of the best possible tonics and alteratives
to a sick and wounded spirit.

But this is not the only avenue to beneficence which the war opens. We need but name the service
of hospitals, the care and education of the freedmen,--for these are charities that have long
been before the eyes of the community, and have employed thousands of busy hands: thousands
of sick and dying beds to tend, a race to be educated, civilized, and Christianized, surely
were work enough for one age; and yet this is not all. War shatters everything, and it is hard
to say what in society will not need rebuilding and binding up and strengthening anew. Not
the least of the evils of war are the vices which a great army engenders wherever it moves,--vices
peculiar to military life, as others are peculiar to peace. The poor soldier perils for us
not merely his body, but his soul. He leads a life of harassing and exhausting toil and privation,
of violent strain on the nervous energies, alternating with sudden collapse, creating a craving
for stimulants, and endangering the formation of fatal habits. What furies and harpies are
those that follow the army, and that seek out the soldier in his tent, far from home, mother,
wife and sister, tired, disheartened, and tempt him to forget his troubles in a momentary exhilaration,
that burns only to chill and to destroy! Evil angels are always active and indefatigable, and
there must be good angels enlisted to face them; and here is employment for the slack hand
of grief. Ah, we have known mothers bereft of sons in this war, who have seemed at once to
open wide their hearts, and to become mothers to every brave soldier in the field. They have
lived only to work,--and in place of one lost, their sons have been counted by thousands.

And not least of all the fields for exertion and Christian charity opened by this war is that
presented by womanhood. The war is abstracting from the community its protecting and sheltering
elements, and leaving the helpless and dependent in vast disproportion. For years to come,
the average of lone women will be largely increased; and the demand, always great, for some
means by which they may provide for themselves, in the rude jostle of the world, will become
more urgent and imperative.

Will any one sit pining away in inert grief, when two streets off are the midnight dance-houses,
where girls of twelve, thirteen, and fourteen are being lured into the way of swift destruction?
How many of these are daughters of soldiers who have given their hearts' blood for us and our
liberties!

Two noble women of the Society of Friends have lately been taking the gauge of suffering and
misery in our land, visiting the hospitals at every accessible point, pausing in our great
cities, and going in their purity to those midnight orgies where mere children are being trained
for a life of vice and infamy. They have talked with these poor bewildered souls, entangled
in toils as terrible and inexorable as those of the slave-market, and many of whom are frightened
and distressed at the life they are beginning to lead, and earnestly looking for the means
of escape. In the judgment of these holy women, at least one third of those with whom they
have talked are children so recently entrapped, and so capable of reformation, that there would
be the greatest hope in efforts for their salvation. While such things are to be done in our
land, is there any reason why any one should die of grief? One soul redeemed will do more to
lift the burden of sorrow than all the blandishments and diversions of art, all the alleviations
of luxury, all the sympathy of friends.

In the Roman Catholic Church there is an order of women called the Sisters of the Good Shepherd,
who have renounced the world to devote themselves, their talents and property, entirely to
the work of seeking out and saving the fallen of their own sex; and the wonders worked by their
self-denying love on the hearts and lives of even the most depraved are credible only to those
who know that the Good Shepherd himself ever lives and works with such spirits engaged in such
a work. A similar order of women exists in New York, under the direction of the Episcopal Church,
in connection with St. Luke's Hospital; and another in England, who tend the "House of Mercy"
of Clewer.

Such benevolent associations offer objects of interest to that class which most needs something
to fill the void made by bereavement. The wounds of grief are less apt to find a cure in that
rank of life where the sufferer has wealth and leisure. The poor widow, whoso husband was her
all, must break the paralysis of grief. The hard necessities of life are her physicians; they
send her out to unwelcome, yet friendly toil, which, hard as it seems, has yet its healing
power. But the sufferer surrounded by the appliances of wealth and luxury may long indulge
the baleful apathy, and remain in the damp shadows of the valley of death till strength and
health are irrecoverably lost. How Christ-like is the thought of a woman, graceful, elegant,
cultivated, refined, whose voice has been trained to melody, whose fingers can make sweet harmony
with every touch, whose pencil and whose needle can awake the beautiful creations of art, devoting
all these powers to the work of charming back to the sheepfold those wandering and bewildered
lambs whom the Good Shepherd still calls his own! Jenny Lind once, when she sang at a concert
for destitute children, exclaimed in her enthusiasm, "Is it not beautiful that I can sing so?"
And so may not every woman feel, when her graces and accomplishments draw the wanderer, and
charm away evil demons, and soothe the sore and sickened spirit, and make the Christian fold
more attractive than the dizzy gardens of false pleasure?

In such associations, and others of kindred nature, how many of the stricken and bereaved women
of our country might find at once a home and an object in life! Motherless hearts might be
made glad in a better and higher motherhood; and the stock of earthly life that seemed cut
off at the root, and dead past recovery, may be grafted upon with a shoot from the tree of
life which is in the Paradise of God.

So the beginning of this eventful 1865, which finds us still treading the wine-press of our
great conflict, should bring with it a serene and solemn hope, a joy such as those had with
whom in the midst of the fiery furnace there walked one like unto the Son of God.

The great affliction that has come upon our country is so evidently the purifying chastening
of a Father, rather than the avenging anger of a Destroyer, that all hearts may submit themselves
in a solemn and holy calm still to bear the burning that shall make us clean from dross and
bring us forth to a higher national life. Never, in the whole course of our history, have such
teachings of the pure abstract Right been so commended and forced upon us by Providence. Never
have public men been so constrained to humble themselves before God, and to acknowledge that
there is a Judge that ruleth in the earth. Verily his inquisition for blood has been strict
and awful; and for every stricken household of the poor and lowly hundreds of households of
the oppressor have been scattered. The land where the family of the slave was first annihilated,
and the negro, with all the loves and hopes of a man, was proclaimed to be a beast to be bred
and sold in market with the horse and the swine,--that land, with its fair name, Virginia,
has been made a desolation so signal, so wonderful, that the blindest passer-by cannot but
ask for what sin so awful a doom has been meted out. The prophetic visions of Nat Turner, who
saw the leaves drop blood and the land darkened, have been fulfilled. The work of justice which
he predicted is being executed to the uttermost.

But when this strange work of judgment and justice is consummated, when our country, through
a thousand battles and ten thousands of precious deaths, shall have come forth from this long
agony, redeemed and regenerated, then God himself shall return and dwell with us, and the Lord
God shall wipe away all tears from all faces, and the rebuke of his people shall he utterly
take away.

XIII

THE NOBLE ARMY OF MARTYRS

When the first number of the Chimney-Corner appeared, the snow lay white on the ground, the
buds on the trees were closed and frozen, and beneath the hard frost-bound soil lay buried
the last year's flower-roots, waiting for a resurrection.

So in our hearts it was winter,--a winter of patient suffering and expectancy,--a winter of
suppressed sobs, of inward bleedings,--a cold, choked, compressed anguish of endurance, for
how long and how much God only could tell us.

The first paper of the Chimney-Corner, as was most meet and fitting, was given to those homes
made sacred and venerable by the cross of martyrdom,--by the chrism of a great sorrow. That
Chimney-Corner made bright by home firelight seemed a fitting place for a solemn act of reverent
sympathy for the homes by whose darkness our homes had been preserved bright, by whose emptiness
our homes had been kept full, by whose losses our homes had been enriched; and so we ventured
with trembling to utter these words of sympathy and cheer to those whom God had chosen to this
great sacrifice of sorrow.

The winter months passed with silent footsteps, spring returned, and the sun, with ever waxing
power, unsealed the snowy sepulchre of buds and leaves,--birds reappeared, brooks were unchained,
flowers filled every desolate dell with blossoms and perfume. And with returning spring, in
like manner, the chill frost of our fears and of our dangers melted before the breath of the
Lord. The great war, which lay like a mountain of ice upon our hearts, suddenly dissolved and
was gone. The fears of the past were as a dream when one awaketh, and now we scarce realize
our deliverance. A thousand hopes are springing up everywhere, like spring flowers in the forest.
All is hopefulness, all is bewildering joy.

But this our joy has been ordained to be changed into a wail of sorrow. The kind hard hand,
that held the helm so steadily in the desperate tossings of the storm, has been stricken down
just as we entered port,--the fatherly heart that bore all our sorrows can take no earthly
part in our joys. His were the cares, the watchings, the toils, the agonies, of a nation in
mortal struggle; and God, looking down, was so well pleased with his humble faithfulness, his
patient continuance in well-doing, that earthly rewards and honors seemed all too poor for
him, so he reached down and took him to immortal glories. "Well done, good and faithful servant,
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord!"

Henceforth the place of Abraham Lincoln is first among that noble army of martyrs who have
given their blood to the cause of human freedom. The eyes are yet too dim with tears that would
seek calmly to trace out his place in history. He has been a marvel and a phenomenon among
statesmen, a new kind of ruler in the earth. There has been something even unearthly about
his extreme unselfishness, his utter want of personal ambition, personal self-valuation, personal
feeling.

The most unsparing criticism, denunciation, and ridicule never moved him to a single bitter
expression, never seemed to awaken in him a single bitter thought. The most exultant hour of
party victory brought no exultation to him; he accepted power not as an honor, but as a responsibility;
and when, after a severe struggle, that power came a second time into his hands, there was
something preternatural in the calmness of his acceptance of it. The first impulse seemed to
be a disclaimer of all triumph over the party that had strained their utmost to push him from
his seat, and then a sober girding up of his loins to go on with the work to which he was appointed.
His last inaugural was characterized by a tone so peculiarly solemn and free from earthly passion,
that it seems to us now, who look back on it in the light of what has followed, as if his soul
had already parted from earthly things, and felt the powers of the world to come. It was not
the formal state paper of the chief of a party in an hour of victory, so much as the solemn
soliloquy of a great soul reviewing its course under a vast responsibility, and appealing from
all earthly judgments to the tribunal of Infinite Justice. It was the solemn clearing of his
soul for the great sacrament of Death, and the words that he quoted in it with such thrilling
power were those of the adoring spirits that veil their faces before the throne,--"Just and
true are thy ways, thou King of saints!"

Among the rich treasures which this bitter struggle has brought to our country, not the least
is the moral wealth which has come to us in the memory of our martyrs. Thousands of men, women,
and children too, in this great conflict, have "endured tortures, not accepting deliverance,"
counting not their lives dear unto them in the holy cause; and they have done this as understandingly
and thoughtfully as the first Christians who sealed their witness with their blood.

Let us in our hour of deliverance and victory record the solemn vow, that our right hand shall
forget her cunning before we forget them and their sufferings,--that our tongue shall cleave
to the roof of our mouth if we remember them not above our chief joy.

Least suffering among that noble band were those who laid down their lives on the battlefield,
to whom was given a brief and speedy passage to the victor's meed. The mourners who mourn for
such as these must give place to another and more august band, who have sounded lower deeps
of anguish, and drained bitterer drops out of our great cup of trembling.

The narrative of the lingering tortures, indignities, and sufferings of our soldiers in Rebel
prisons has been something so harrowing that we have not dared to dwell upon it. We have been
helplessly dumb before it, and have turned away our eyes from what we could not relieve, and
therefore could not endure to look upon. But now, when the nation is called to strike the great
and solemn balance of justice, and to decide measures of final retribution, it behooves us
all that we should at least watch with our brethren for one hour, and take into our account
what they have been made to suffer for us.

Sterne said he could realize the miseries of captivity only by setting before him the image
of a miserable captive with hollow cheek and wasted eye, notching upon a stick, day after day,
the weary record of the flight of time. So we can form a more vivid picture of the sufferings
of our martyrs from one simple story than from any general description; and therefore we will
speak right on, and tell one story which might stand as a specimen of what has been done and
suffered by thousands.

In the town of Andover, Massachusetts, a boy of sixteen, named Walter Raymond, enlisted among
our volunteers. He was under the prescribed age, but his eager zeal led him to follow the footsteps
of an elder brother who had already enlisted; and the father of the boy, though these two were
all the sons he had, instead of availing himself of his legal right to withdraw him, indorsed
the act in the following letter addressed to his captain:--

  ANDOVER, MASS., August 15, 1862.

  CAPTAIN HUNT,--My eldest son has enlisted in your company. I send
  you his younger brother. He is, and always has been, in perfect
  health, of more than the ordinary power of endurance, honest,
  truthful, and courageous. I doubt not you will find him on trial
  all you can ask, except his age, and that I am sorry to say is
  only sixteen; yet if our country needs his service, take him.

  Your obedient servant,

  SAMUEL RAYMOND.

The boy went forth to real service, and to successive battles at Kingston, at Whitehall, and
at Goldsborough; and in all this did his duty bravely and faithfully. He met the temptations
and dangers of a soldier's life with the pure-hearted firmness of a Christian child, neither
afraid nor ashamed to remember his baptismal vows, his Sunday-school teachings, and his mother's
wishes.

He had passed his promise to his mother against drinking and smoking, and held it with a simple,
childlike steadiness. When in the midst of malarious swamps, physicians and officers advised
the use of tobacco. The boy writes to his mother: "A great many have begun to smoke, but I
shall not do it without your permission, though I think it does a great deal of good."

In his leisure hours, he was found in his tent reading; and before battle he prepared his soul
with the beautiful psalms and collects for the day, as appointed by his church, and writes
with simplicity to his friends:--

"I prayed God that he would watch over me, and if I fell, receive my soul in heaven; and I
also prayed that I might not forget the cause I was fighting for, and turn my back in fear."

After nine months' service, he returned with a soldier's experience, though with a frame weakened
by sickness in a malarious region. But no sooner did health and strength return than he again
enlisted, in the Massachusetts cavalry service, and passed many months of constant activity
and adventure, being in some severe skirmishes and battles with that portion of Sheridan's
troops who approached nearest to Richmond, getting within a mile and a half of the city. At
the close of this raid, so hard had been the service, that only thirty horses were left out
of seventy-four in his company, and Walter and two others were the sole survivors among eight
who occupied the same tent.

On the sixteenth of August, Walter was taken prisoner in a skirmish; and from the time that
this news reached his parents, until the 18th of the following March, they could ascertain
nothing of his fate. A general exchange of prisoners having been then effected, they learned
that he had died on Christmas Day in Salisbury Prison, of hardship and privation.

What these hardships were is, alas! easy to be known from those too well-authenticated accounts
published by our government of the treatment experienced by our soldiers in the Rebel prisons.

Robbed of clothing, of money, of the soldier's best friend, his sheltering blanket,--herded
in shivering nakedness on the bare ground,--deprived of every implement by which men of energy
and spirit had soon bettered their lot,--forbidden to cut in adjacent forests branches for
shelter, or fuel to cook their coarse food,--fed on a pint of corn-and-cob-meal per day, with
some slight addition of molasses or rancid meat,--denied all mental resources, all letters
from home, all writing to friends,--these men were cut off from the land of the living while
yet they lived,--they were made to dwell in darkness as those that have been long dead.

By such slow, lingering tortures,--such weary, wasting anguish and sickness of body and soul,--it
was the infernal policy of the Rebel government either to wring from them an abjuration of
their country, or by slow and steady draining away of the vital forces to render them forever
unfit to serve in her armies.

Walter's constitution bore four months of this usage, when death came to his release. A fellow
sufferer, who was with him in his last hours, brought the account to his parents.

Through all his terrible privations, even the lingering pains of slow starvation, Walter preserved
his steady simplicity, his faith in God, and unswerving fidelity to the cause for which he
was suffering.

When the Rebels had kept the prisoners fasting for days, and then brought in delicacies to
tempt their appetite, hoping thereby to induce them to desert their flag, he only answered,
"I would rather be carried out in that dead-cart!"

When told by some that he must steal from his fellow sufferers, as many did, in order to relieve
the pangs of hunger, he answered, "No, I was not brought up to that!" And so when his weakened
system would no longer receive the cobmeal which was his principal allowance, he set his face
calmly towards death. He grew gradually weaker and weaker and fainter and fainter, and at last
disease of the lungs set in, and it became apparent that the end was at hand.

On Christmas Day, while thousands among us were bowing in our garlanded churches or surrounding
festive tables, this young martyr lay on the cold, damp ground, watched over by his destitute
friends, who sought to soothe his last hours with such scanty comforts as their utter poverty
afforded,--raising his head on the block of wood which was his only pillow, and moistening
his brow and lips with water, while his life ebbed slowly away, until about two o'clock, when
he suddenly roused himself, stretched out his hand, and, drawing to him his dearest friend
among those around him, said, in a strong, clear voice:--

"I am going to die. Go tell my father I am ready to die, for I die for God and my country,"--and,
looking up with a triumphant smile, he passed to the reward of the faithful.

And now, men and brethren, if this story were a single one, it were worthy to be had in remembrance;
but Walter Raymond is not the only noble-hearted boy or man that has been slowly tortured and
starved and done to death, by the fiendish policy of Jefferson Davis and Robert Edmund Lee.
No,--wherever this simple history shall be read, there will arise hundreds of men and women
who will testify, "Just so died my son!" "So died my brother!" "So died my husband!" "So died
my father!" The numbers who have died in these lingering tortures are to be counted, not by
hundreds, or even by thousands, but by tens of thousands.

And is there to be no retribution for a cruelty so vast, so aggravated, so cowardly and base?
And if there is retribution, on whose head should it fall? Shall we seize and hang the poor,
ignorant, stupid, imbruted semi-barbarians who were set as jailers to keep these hells of torment
and inflict these insults and cruelties? or shall we punish the educated, intelligent chiefs
who were the head and brain of the iniquity?

If General Lee had been determined not to have prisoners starved or abused, does any one doubt
that he could have prevented these things? Nobody doubts it. His raiment is red with the blood
of his helpless captives. Does any one doubt that Jefferson Davis, living in ease and luxury
in Richmond, knew that men were dying by inches in filth and squalor and privation in the Libby
Prison, within bowshot of his own door? Nobody doubts it. It was his will, his deliberate policy,
thus to destroy those who fell into his hands. The chief of a so-called Confederacy, who could
calmly consider among his official documents incendiary plots for the secret destruction of
ships, hotels, and cities full of peaceable people, is a chief well worthy to preside over
such cruelties; but his only just title is President of Assassins, and the whole civilized
world should make common cause against such a miscreant.

There has been, on both sides of the water, much weak, ill-advised talk of mercy and magnanimity
to be extended to these men, whose crimes have produced a misery so vast and incalculable.
The wretches who have tortured the weak and the helpless, who have secretly plotted to supplement,
by dastardly schemes of murder and arson, that strength which failed them in fair fight, have
been commiserated as brave generals and unfortunate patriots, and efforts are made to place
them within the comities of war.

It is no feeling of personal vengeance, but a sense of the eternal fitness of things, that
makes us rejoice, when criminals who have so outraged every sentiment of humanity are arrested
and arraigned and awarded due retribution at the bar of their country's justice. There are
crimes against God and human nature which it is treason alike to God and man not to punish;
and such have been the crimes of the traitors who were banded together in Richmond.

If there be those whose hearts lean to pity, we can show them where all the pity of their hearts
may be better bestowed than in deploring the woes of assassins. Let them think of the thousands
of fathers, mothers, wives, sisters, whose lives will be forever haunted with memories of the
slow tortures in which their best and bravest were done to death.

The sufferings of those brave men are ended. Nearly a hundred thousand are sleeping in those
sad nameless graves,--and may their rest be sweet! But, O ye who have pity to spare, spare
it for the broken-hearted friends, who, to life's end, will suffer over and over all that their
dear ones endured. And whether by compliance, and because it was indeed he said, almost shouting: - For you are
waiting to break dancing. How is Chepilla? continued talking with the most young. Have not you
been? Began to believe that there had been new.

- Almost did not come, he answered the question.

Chepilla not feel good, then it has become as irrelevant. The chitin we waited for half an hour
at least.

- You better not come, "continued the Mercedes. Because it's going to last until dawn and she
could not resist. Give me your rugs.

Time was now that the party began.

Indeed, soon to appear in the room occupied by a mulatto midwives high, bald, somewhat advanced
in years, yet robust, who planting himself in front of the Mercedes
Ayala, said in a hoarse voice and with his arms raised:

- I come
by grace and salt to break dancing.

- Well, brother, to the other
door that is not here, "said the Ayala with much laughter.

- No need
to come with those, ma'am, because I am stubborn.

In addition, that nobody but the mistress of the house have the honor of break dancing, with more
than is his birthday.

- That would be nice if there were in this select meeting pretty girls, who's right corresponds to
the dominion and glory everywhere.

- Now you see, added the bald, not missing tonight selected as meeting
many very nice girls, but this situation encountered also the mistress
of the house, does not entitle them break dancing.

Today on her birthday, Mary Janes, is you the lady of the house, where we celebrate celebrate
this day, and you the grace and salt in the world. Did I say something? concluded touring with
the sight of bystanders looking for approval.

All, rather than less, with words and with action, expressed their acquiescence so that Ayala had
to get up, and the degree to follow the wrong partner to the room. By then I had cleared the
men, leaving a good space in the center.

The Bald held by the hand to Ayala, and with it came to attention in front of the orchestra,
the he commanded in an imperious tone he touched a court minuet. This dance was serious and ceremonious
obsolete at the time of which we speak, but because people own lords or principal, Color of Cuba
will always reserved for beginning to their parties.

I danced this piece with considerable grace outdated by women and grotesque by the man, greeted
the first bystanders to loud applause, and then without delay, began in earnest the dance,
ie, the Cuban dance, so special modification and journeys of Spanish
dance, which provided only to discover its origin.

One of many present were arrested to invite the girl in the white
feather, as it were, to muse that party, and she, not to pray or to
make any objection, accepted the invitation outright.

When he passed from room to room, to take his place in the ranks
of the dance, you escaped to a women's audible gasp as follows:

-
How pretty!

God keep and bless.

- The same portrait of his mother, who has blessed glory, added another.

- What! What killed the mother of that girl? very embarrassed asked a third.

- Takes! What now that you eat breakfast? said he spoke second. Did not You heard that he had
died as a result of losing her daughter a few days old?

- Do not understand how lost you live.

- You did not let me explain, sign Charity. She lost her daughter a few days old because was taken
away when least expected.

Some people say that the grandmother, to put it in the Real Creche
and pass for white, there are those who say that Grandma was not the
thief, but the father of the girl, who was a gentleman of many bells
and had already repented of their dealings and contracts with the
mother.

This together with the daughter he lost the trial, and when returned the daughter, on the advice
of doctors, it was too late, because if he regained the trial, which there are those who certainly
did not regain health, and died in Paula.

- Have you told a story, sign Trinidad, pasito the Ayala said with a smile of disbelief the mulatto
woman who had just spoken.

- Child, Trinidad said the tall, as the story told to me, nor remove nor get my flow.

- Well according to my reports, which are of good ink, Ayala continued,
or that you told The story said a lot of their own wealth.

I say this because no one knows for certain whether the mother the girl she lives or dies, the
only thing found is that is well hidden from grandma granddaughter the name of his father,
although it must be blind not to see or know.

When least now goes through the windows, followed the steps to the daughter, as they do not
lose point of view. It seems that this man ungrateful and unnatural, repented of his conduct
Rosarito unhappy with Alarcon, is no other way to expiate his guilt to go to daughter from cradle
to cradle and troponin troponin, to see if freedom of the dangers of the world. No beware.
Command will work.

As you well and you cut the wings of the bird that once flew.

- But you know, asked who said Charity, who is the matron in question? For here is a person you do
not know nor has ever seen, and I do not think I'm deaf or blind.

- How do I know what a curiosity satisfied, sign Charity, I will remove any doubt, said the
Ayala approaching. I think I speak with a woman in secret, so I tell him everything Case no. I have
nothing hastily walk with openly at this time. Know that man is ..., and putting his hands on his shoulders
to the curious, informed him in secret the individual's name.

Did you know now? concluded by asking the Ayala.

- Absolutely, said sign Charity. As my hands. The most that I knew. For true that ... but shut up,
language.

Ten o'clock at night and then was at its dance. Danced with rage. Say with anger because we did
not find the term to paint over live this relentless move feet softly dragging the body along with
the beat of the music that stirred and squeezed amid the jostling crowd of dancers and onlookers,
and that dance up and down without truce or respite. Above the noise of the orchestra with its
clattering drums could be heard, in perfect time with the music, monotonous and continuous
gossip, chas of the feet, without which do not think people of color
that can accurately keep time with the dance as Creole.

In the period to which we refer, were in vogue contra figures, some difficult and complicated, while
in principle needed to learn before starting to run, it was exposed to public laughter that was
wrong, wrong to say lost. One who was placed at the head of the dance put the figure and the other
couples had run or withdraw from the ranks. In all cribs generally had a teacher who gave way
or drinking the right to make the figure, the same as the return to the head of the dance changed
at will. The most rare and complicated figures put, the more credit earned excellent dancer,
and had the honor among women to be his partner or partners. With teacher per se, outside
of that distinction, which was played at times, security was not lost, not seen in the sad
need to sit, without dancing, after being placed in the ranks of dance.

In the night in question, the teacher danced Nemesia, the beloved friend of the young the white
feather. Had it since many very rare figures, knowingly leaving for the Finally the most difficult
and complicated. The second, third, fourth and fifth pairs graceful left test, running the figure
with the same links, outcomes, and teacher attitudes; but still had space to study and learn
the fellow surnamed Virgin bronze, then occupied the ranks sixth, as he approached his turn,
their anxiety grew and turned his face to the musicians, in a gesture request, as waiting
for his predicament and parasen guess music. That concern was communicated to the girl, who
knew he was going to go through the embarrassment of having to sit
in as lively and fun of dance.

The fear came to dominate his whole being, putting pale nervous.

     What happened in the minds
     of the couple soon became visible
     in the eyes of other couples
     and many of the spectators
     of the dance.

         

     The idea is not over until there the queen of the crib could be forced
to withdraw before time, the ranks had been filled with cruel and
spiteful glee to the other girls who had so mortified about public
preferences and doing it praises men from the moment of its entry
into the dance.

In these critical circumstances, Pepper, who had also lost a point of view through its capricious
twists and the tumult of the dance, she realized what was happening on the fly, and without
warning anyone of his attempt, the music stopped abruptly. He breathed with relief the young
fellow, and it paid with a smile so heavenly that rescue time director of the orchestra.

CHAPTER VI

And the tumult indiscreet That revolves around her burning, None said, "Look, He loves you in secret.
That is hearing and seeing. "

RAMON DE PALMA

Fifteen August

There will be understood as the discreet reader, that the Virgin of bronze from previous page
is none other than Cecilia Valdés, the same young girl wandering we strive to make Him known
at the beginning of this true story. , Then, were the flower of their youth and their beauty, and
began to pick up the idolatrous tribute to these two deities always pays richly sensual and
demoralized people. When you remember the careless breeding and a this the coarse gallantry that
she wore men, therefore it was of the race lower hybrid and will form any idea about their pride
and vanity, mobile secrets its urgent nature. So, without shame or hesitation, often expressed
their preference by men of superior white race, as it is them who could expect distinction and
enjoyment, for which reason he would say a mouth full - which only mulatto verb silk rugs wanted
[8], only black eyes and hair.

It is easy to believe that an opinion issued as frankly as contrary
to the aspirations men of the two kinds last mentioned, it would make
good blood, as they say.

With all that, either because they sincerely believed to be the author when expressed, While
it was expected to make an exception, either because it was impossible to be so beautiful her
without love, the truth is that more than a mulatto was lost loves her, on Pepper all, the musician,
as you may have noticed. This man enjoyed the inestimable advantage on the other suitors, a brother
of a close friend and companion of childhood Cecilia, for which reason I could see her often treated
with privacy, necessary hacérsele and maybe win your heart rebel strength of devotion and constancy.
Who has not flattered in life expectancy more ephemeral? Anyway, he always had this one popular
song of Spanish poets, which begins: - Labra the water without being hard, hard marble, - and can be
said in honor of the truth, Cecilia distinguished men of his class who approached him to celebrate,
although such a distinction, until the present date, no had passed one another trait of kindness
to a man otherwise very friendly, courteous and attentive to women.

Finished the dance, the room flooded again and began to form groups around beautiful women preferred
the kind or flirtatious. But amid the apparent confusion which then reigned in that house, anyone
could see, at least among men color and whites, was established a dividing line, and apparently
tacitly effortlessly, respected by both sides. Truth is that both sides indulged in pleasure
the moment with such earnestness, which is not much wonder then forget
their mutual jealousy and mutual hatred.

Besides that, the whites did not leave the dining room and main room,
a came the mulatto whose pieces that they were friends, or any other
kind of relationship or wanted to have it, which was neither new nor
surprising, given its predilection.

Cecilia and Nemesia, by one or other of these reasons, or his close friendship with the lady
of the house While not completed the dance went straight to the room
and took seats behind midwives to the dining room.

There, without further ado, formed the group of white youths, because
mentioned above, these two girls were the most interesting dance.

People conspicuous that group, without dispute that there were three:
Commissioner Cantalapiedra, and his friend Diego Meneses intimately
known to the young Leonardo.

The latter was resting right hand on the edge the back of the chair
occupied by Cecilia, who by chance or post, he squeezed fingers back.

-
So you about your friends?

Leonardo told without removing the hand, although stung enough.

Cecilia contented look sideways and squinting as if the word sounded
friend wrong who should have known that was treated as an enemy.

-
That girl is now quite dismissive, Cantalapiedra said, who noted the
action and look.

- And when not?

Nemesia said without looking.

- Nobody has been sailing in this burial, said the commissioner.

-
And to the Lord who has given it?

Nemesia added then glanced at him.

- Me? Leonardo.

- For me, Cecilia.

- Ignore woman said her friend latter.

- If not why ... I will put
softer than a glove, he said speaking Cantalapiedra Cecilia directory.

Not yet born, "she said, which I have to do double the cocotte.

- Got some words tonight live, then said Leonardo, bowing to put mouth to the ear.

- You and me should have to pay me, "she replied in the very tone
and with great rapidity.

- The good paying pledges do not distress,
my father often said.

- I do not understand that, "said Cecilia.

Just know that you snubbed me tonight.

- Do I ...? My life ...

At the same seasoning Pepper approached the door of the room waving
from side to another to his friends, and when was it available to
Cecilia threw her right arm hand with unusual familiarity, and said,
affecting air and volatile tone: - Hey!

How well A man meets its word!

- Girls - answered with a solemn tone, but perhaps was not so - José
Dolores Pimienta always keeps his word.

- The truth is that the promised
quadrille has not been touched.

- It will touch, Virgin, will be
played, because we need to know that in time will ripen the grapes.

-
The expected in the first dance.

- Wrong.

The dedicated contradanzas not touching at first, but in the second dance, and mine should not
go out of regulation.

- What name has he? asked Cecilia.

- He who deserves every way the girl to whom it is dedicated: sell candy.

- Ah!

That's not me by the way, "said the girl run.

- Who knows, girl! What came later! loved talking to his sister Nemesia.

- Do not tell me anything, Jose Dolores, it said. It took God and help persuade Chepilla which
come leave us alone, because what is she could not join us. Consented to the latest because
we came in chitin.

And yet, (to add these words as referring looked at Cecilia his face), but we made the determination
to get into it, we were ... Chepilla is furious as they appeared at the door and met ...

- Chepilla was not wild about any of that, woman interrupted Cecilia with her vivid friend.
I did not want us to come because the night was very bad for dance.

And he quite rightly only I had given my word ...

Prudence or for any other reason, Pepper went away without waiting for further explanation. Not
so with Cantalapiedra, who was a curious if any, so that with a smile Nemesia malicious asked: -
Can you know why she was furious after Chepilla recognizing the chitin that you came to dance?

-
As I am not NAID trunk, Nemesia answered promptly tell the truth. (Cecilia hit a pinch, but she
finished the sentence.) Sure, because he knew that the chitin was Leonardo gentleman.

Cantalapiedra looks naturally and others present the scope of the words of Nemesia, focused on the
individual whom she had appointed, and that, touching the shoulder, said:

- We will not turn red, that providing the carriage with two real girls like these night so ugly,
is not reason for anyone suspected of evil intentions of a gentleman.

- That chitin, as well as the heart of its owner, "said Leonardo without cutting, are always
the order of the fine.

Pepper then left the dining room door and heard distinctly the words of the young White, convincing,
of course, who the chitin in which Cecilia and her sister Nemesia had come to the dance. The
disappointment struck him to the quick of the soul as casting a sad-eyed group of young whites,
went straight to the room where, after arming clarinet, played some records so that they understand
their peers it was time to reconvene the orchestra. Instruments tuned, without further delay
broke quadrille music with a new one, a few bars could not help but draw attention general and
start a round of applause, not only because the piece was good, but because listeners were aware,
this assertion that effortlessly believe they know how organized music comes to people of color.
Were repeated applause after he said the title the quadrille, sell
candy, and who was dedicated to the Virgin of bronze. Of step may
be added that the fortunes of that piece was the most notable of its
kind and time, because after going through the dances of the fairs
for the rest of the year and winter the subsequent, became the popular
song of all classes of society.

Toilet seems to say that with a new
quadrille, led by the same author and wearing much feeling and grace,
the dancers threw the rest, you say, that led the time with body and
feet whose sound monotonous appearance throughout doubled the number
of orchestra. Very clearly said in his Argentine clarinet notes: sell
candy, sell candy; to pass the violins and bass repeated them in a
different tone, and the drums were choir crashing to the melancholic
voice of the clerk of that sweet. But what was the author of the piece
that caused such an impression? Amid the frenzy of the dance, were
there who remember your name? Ay! No. As the night wore on with no
signs of prosperity, people early Curious street began to forsake
the door and windows of the dance, and at eleven was not white faces
in them, at least for women. She was deft at mending
glass and china, and equally so at mending all sorts of household things. She darned the napkins
and tablecloths in a way that excited my mother's admiration, and was always so obliging and
ready to offer her services that, in time, a resort to Mary's work-basket and ever ready needle
became the most natural thing in the world to all of us. She seemed to have no acquaintance
in the city, never went out visiting, received no letters,--in short, seemed to live a completely
isolated life, and to dwell in her own thoughts in her own solitary little room.

By that talent for systematic arrangement which she possessed, she secured for herself a good
many hours to spend there. My mother, seeing her taste for reading, offered her the use of
our books; and one volume after another spent its quiet week or fortnight in her room, and
returned to our shelves in due time. They were mostly works of solid information,--history,
travels,--and a geography and atlas which had formed part of the school outfit of one of the
younger children she seemed interested to retain for some time. "It is my opinion," said my
mother, "that she is studying,--perhaps with a view to getting some better situation."

"Pray keep her with us," said I, "if you can. Why don't you raise her wages? You know that
she does more than any other girl ever did before in her place, and is so trustworthy that
she is invaluable to us. Persons of her class are worth higher wages than common uneducated
servants."

My mother accordingly did make a handsome addition to Mary's wages, and by the time she had
been with us a year the confidence which her quiet manner had inspired was such that, if my
mother wished to be gone for a day or two, the house, with all that was in it, was left trustingly
in Mary's hands, as with a sort of housekeeper. She was charged with all the last directions,
as well as the keys to the jellies, cakes, and preserves, with discretionary power as to their
use; and yet, for some reason, such was the ascendency she contrived to keep over her Hibernian
friends in the kitchen, all this confidence evidently seemed to them quite as proper as to us.

"She ain't quite like us," said Biddy one day, mysteriously, as she looked after her. "She's
seen better days, or I'm mistaken; but she don't take airs on her. She knows how to take the
bad luck quiet like, and do the best she can."

"Has she ever told you anything of herself, Biddy?" said my mother.

"Me? No. It's a quiet tongue she keeps in her head. She is ready enough to do good turns for
us, and to smooth out our ways, and hear our stories, but it's close in her own affairs she
is. Maybe she don't like to be talkin', when talkin' does no good,--poor soul!"

Matters thus went on, and I amused myself now and then with speculating about Mary. I would
sometimes go to her to ask some of those little charities of the needle which our sex are always
needing from feminine hands; but never, in the course of any of these little transactions,
could I establish the slightest degree of confidential communication. If she sewed on a shirt-button,
she did it with as abstracted an air as if my arm were a post which she was required to handle,
and not the arm of a good-looking youth of twenty-five,--as I fondly hoped I was. And certain
remarks which I once addressed to her in regard to her studies and reading in her own apartment
were met with that cool, wide-open gaze of her calm gray eyes, that seemed to say, "Pray, what
is that to your purpose, sir?" and she merely answered, "Is there anything else that you would
like me to do, sir?" with a marked deference that was really defiant.

But one day I fancied I had got hold of a clue. I was standing in our lower front hall, when
I saw young McPherson, whom I used to know in New York, coming up the doorsteps.

At the moment that he rung the doorbell, our Mary, who had seen him from the chamber window,
suddenly grew pale, and said to my mother, "Please, ma'am, will you be so good as to excuse
my going to the door? I feel faint."

My mother spoke over the banisters, and I opened the door, and let in McPherson.

He and I were jolly together, as old classmates are wont to be, and orders were given to lay
a plate for him at dinner. Elementary education is quite widespread, much more than in the generality
of the Spanish nation, whose masses are still woefully ignorant of large cities. The health of the
population Vascongada is superior, and the statistics indicate all years satisfactory growth.

*
* * * *

       

After the general directions that I just limit myself to mention, not abuse the patience of
the reader, the objects that attracted my attention in the localities Basque I could visit.

Bilbao, located 290 km NNW of Madrid, at the bottom of the narrow and beautiful valley Nervlon
is protected against all winds and has a delightful climate. Although the origin old (relatively)
as it was founded in 1300, is a beautiful city, especially in appearance abroad. Yes in some part
of the old Spanish style (as in the curious place Closed vast and shadowy arcades, which shelter
chic shops and cafes) is manifested the character of the people in the cleanliness, decency
and the beautiful pavement of every street and squares. The beautiful bridges, the great docks,
the thick woods that dominate so elegant modern houses, numerous public sources and pipes cleverly
established social movement and trade, the many ships moored to the piers, columns smoke from factories,
good educational institutions and training schools, facilities charity: all bear and other clear
signs of progress, wellbeing and harmony popular helped inspire a lively sympathy for Bilbao, there showing
that civilization rests on solid foundations and nothing artificial.

Bilbao, so renowned for its famous Consulate that issued the well-known
trade Ordinances in the Spanish towns, distinguished by its liberalism,
heroically tested in three memorable places during the civil war that
almost all people were Carlist Basques.

It was there that terrible Zumalacárregui succumbed, the finished type of the guerrillas in Spain.
The importance of exports and imports (relative to Europe and America) has determined the establishment
of five or six consulates in Bilbao, and its special conditions shipyards have created quite active.

Will
pass an observation that may seem childish, but that proves that it's free. In Bilbao there are
tobacco-free manufacturing, and superior cigars were bought there the only good I could smoke in Spain,
where the monopoly produces the advantage of giving bad and expensive to use the best snuff in the
world. I respect the same observation of salt.



In short, my mother was in that positive state of mind which is expressed by the colloquial
phrase of being on her high horse. I--as the male part of creation always must in such cases--became
very meek and retiring, and promised to close my eyes and ears, and not dream, or think, or
want to know, anything which it was not agreeable to Mary and my mother that I should. I would
not look towards the doorbell, nor utter a word about the McPhersons, who, by the bye, decided
to take the house in our neighborhood.

But though I was as exemplary as one of the saints, it did no good. Mary, for some reasons
known to herself, became fidgety, nervous, restless, and had frequent headaches and long crying
spells in her own private apartment, after the manner of women when something is the matter
with them.

My mother was, as she always is with every creature in her employ, maternal and sympathetic,
and tried her very best to get into her confidence.

Mary only confessed to feeling a little unwell, and hinted obscurely that perhaps she should
be obliged to leave the place. If gate, sculptures and choir stalls and altar are delicious and of great merit,
the huge tent custody and are an admirable job and a lot value. The double temple and custody resting
on it were worked by six artists higher under the direction of the famous Juan de Benavente.
This cathedral is, without dispute, more graceful and elegant of Spain, inside it, but less
marked in terms sombre and solemn Gothic buildings.
 She came into my mother's room looking as a certain sort of women do when they have
made a resolution which they mean to stand by,--very pale, very quiet, and very decided. She
asked to see my mother alone, and in that interview she simply expressed gratitude for all
her kindness to her, but said that circumstances would oblige her to go to New York.

My mother now tried her best to draw from her her history, whatever that might be. She spoke
with tact and tenderness, and with the respect due from one human being to another; for my
mother always held that every soul has its own inviolable private door which it has a right
to keep closed, and at which even queens and duchesses, if they wish to enter, must knock humbly
and reverently.

Mary was almost overcome by her kindness. Did not cross words between them, of course, not appear necessary either, at least as
far as he played, as the language of his eyes and his music was the most eloquent I could be any
sensible use to express the vehemence of his loving passion.

The servants in the kitchen, with the warm-heartedness of their race, broke out into a perfect
Irish howl of sorrow; and at the last moment, Biddy, our fat cook, fell on her neck and lifted
up her voice and wept, almost smothering her with her tumultuous embraces; and the whole party
of them would go with her to the New York station, one carrying her shawl, another her hand-bag
and parasol, with emulous affection; and so our very pleasant and desirable second girl disappeared,
and we saw her no more.

Six months after this, when our Mary had become only a memory of the past, I went to spend
a week or two in Newport, and took, among other matters and things, a letter of introduction
to Mrs. McIntyre, a Scotch lady, who had just bought a pretty cottage there, and, as my friend
who gave it told me, would prove an interesting acquaintance.

"She has a pretty niece," said he, "who I'm told is heiress to her property, and is called
a very nice girl."

So, at the proper time, I lounged in one morning, and found a very charming, cosy, home-like
parlor, arranged with all those little refined touches and artistic effects by which people
of certain tastes and habits at once recognize each other in all parts of the world, as by
the tokens of freemasonry. I felt perfectly acquainted with Mrs. McIntyre from the first glance
at her parlor,--where the books, the music, the birds, the flowers, and that everlasting variety
of female small-work prepared me for a bright, chatty, easy-going, home-loving kind of body,
such as I found Mrs. McIntyre to be. She was, as English and Scotch ladies are apt to be, very
oddly dressed in very nice and choice articles. It takes the eye of the connoisseur to appreciate
these oddly dressed Englishwomen. They are like antique china; but a discriminating eye soon
sees the real quality that underlies their quaint adornment. Mrs. McIntyre was scrupulously,
exquisitely neat. All her articles of dress were of the choicest quality. The yellow and tumbled
lace that was fussed about her neck and wrists might have been the heirloom of a countess;
her satin gown, though very short and very scanty, was of a fabulous richness; and the rings
that glittered on her withered hands were of the fashion of two centuries ago, but of wonderful
brilliancy. 

He also played with her fan and smiled with Pepper's partner called Virgin bronze but the less
observant could see that the touch and a smile had not about it, or by far the magical influence
of the other. Instead, their eyes met and serene natural movement, which was easy to deduce
that there was intelligence between her and the musician, but that intelligence which comes from
the origins of friendship or kinship, not love. Be that as it may, Pepper's eyes followed the two
girls, as it allowed the people, until they entered the first room, the door the dining room,
then stopped playing and stopped the music.

White youth, with his head Cantalapiedra, had finally located in the dining room near the door
of communication, to be on the look alike of women entering the street as they went out dancing in
the room. Which called Leonardo, poorly noted the approach of the carriage in which the two
girls came up, it must be his way to the street with some difficulty, and went right to the
coachman, to whom he spoke in low voice. This, to hear him, leaned from the saddle of the horse
he was riding was took off his hat as a sign of respect, saying, - yes, sir, - to the point
began to exhaust the carriage return from the hospital the women's Paula.


"Upon my word," said I, "I never was more so; I feel as if I were in the midst of a fairy tale."

"Nothing so remarkable as that," she said. "But since I saw you, a happy change, as I need
not tell you now, has come over my life through the coming of my mother's sister to America.
When my mother died, my aunt was in India. The letters that I addressed to her in Scotland
were a long time in reaching her, and then it took a long time for her to wind up her affairs
there, and find her way to this country."

"But," said I, "what could"--

"What could induce me to do as I did? Well, I knew your mother's character,--no matter how.
I needed a support and protection, and I resolved for a time to put myself under her wing.
I knew that in case of any real trouble I should find in her a true friend and a safe adviser,
and I hoped to earn her esteem and confidence by steadily doing my duty. Some other time, perhaps,
I will tell you more," she added.

The return of Mrs. McIntyre put an end to our private communication, but she insisted, with
true old-world hospitality, on my remaining to dinner.

Here I was precipitated into a romance at once. Mary had just enough of that perverse feminine
pleasure in teasing to keep my interest alive. The fact was, she saw me becoming entangled
from day to day without any more misgivings of conscience than the celebrated spider of the
poem felt when she invited the fly to walk into her parlor.

Mrs. McIntyre took me in a very marked way into her good graces, and I had every opportunity
to ride, walk, sketch, and otherwise to attend upon Mary; and Mary was gracious also, but so
quietly and discreetly mistress of herself that I could not for the life of me tell what to
make of her. There were all sorts of wonders and surmises boiling up within me. What was it
about McPherson? Was there anything there? Was Mary engaged? Or was there any old affair? etc.,
etc. Not that it was any business of mine; but then a fellow likes to know his ground before--Before
what? I thought to myself, and that unknown WHAT every day assumed new importance in my eyes.
Mary had many admirers. Her quiet, easy, self-possessed manners, her perfect tact and grace,
always made her a favorite; but I could not help hoping that between her and me there was that
confidential sense of a mutually kept secret which it is delightful to share with the woman
you wish to please.

Why won't women sometimes enlighten a fellow a little in this dark valley that lies between
intimate acquaintance and the awful final proposal? To be sure, there are kind souls who will
come more than halfway to meet you, but they are always sure to be those you don't want to
meet. The woman you want is always as reticent as a nut, and leaves you the whole work of this
last dread scene without a bit of help on her part. To be sure, she smiles on you; but what
of that? You see she smiles also on Tom, Dick, and Harry.

  "Bright as the sun her eyes the gazers strike;
  And, like the sun, they shine on all alike."

I fought out a battle of two or three weeks with my fair foe, trying to get in advance some
hint from her as to what she would do with me if I put myself at her mercy. No use. Our sex
may as well give up first as last before one of these quiet, resolved, little pieces of femininity,
who are perfect mistresses of all the peculiar weapons, defensive and offensive, of womanhood.
There was nothing for it but to surrender at discretion; but when I had done this, I was granted
all the honors of war. Mrs. McIntyre received me with an old-fashioned maternal blessing, and
all was as happy as possible.

"And now," said Mary, "I suppose, sir, you will claim a right to know all about me." But it was the same in terms
of populations. For them the issue was primarily social, though influenced in his opinion a certain
spirit of love of traditions, in favor of the pretender Don Carlos. But ultimately, the tradition
of the monarchy was for the people a historical principle intimately linked to the tradition
of freedom or municipal statutes that monarchs had respected.

The constitutional party in Spain, aspiring to freedom in the unit, working in a so against his
own cause in wanting to establish a parliamentary government, but central, because that his
victory was to produce the absorption of municipal independence of the provinces, and therefore
the cancellation of improperly calls outside those freedoms. Navarre, Basques, Catalans, etc..,
to fight under the banner of Don Carlos, they did, then more either to sustain their autonomy
to support absolutism. That's why, since Espartero and Cabrera held the famous Convention of Vergara,
which secured their autonomy to Navarre and Basques, the war ended by subtraction of matter,
and those people, especially the past, entered warmly into the government via the Constitution
and have not returned to inspire Fears of riots.

Is, in fact, those provinces are a small republic annexed to Spain very special conditions
in all: in institutions and customs, as in industry, the type of race, language and intimate
forms of social life. There is no army gendarmerie or military, passports and customs and excise
monopolies, patents privilege, or aristocracies, or recruitment or conscription, or regulation
of life by the authority, or police (as defined in inquisitorial), no official initiative social
work, business or governments or speculators, or anything, in a word, what constitutes the social
and political organization of Spain.

When there is a national war, the provinces provide a quota proportional but that its formation
involved the government of the queen. For the rest, is not allowed recruit any one, and the
Basques and Navarrese people enjoy full exemption on service war and navy. Nor do they weigh
on national taxes, so that all trade is free and all free industry. Peoples have their particular
system and voluntary contributions (direct and moderate) and holding their worship and municipal
administration, and contribute to the nation with a mass quotas and subsidies, which is set in
the budget of the monarchy.

The provincial councils, entirely original popular are those ruling on police share the military contingent
(in case of foreign war) and determine the share of taxation each district to pay the subsidy. In
what other people are entirely free its own administration, the individual enjoys full autonomy,
and social order is maintained the absence of any soldier or police, just for the natural balance
of interests legitimate.
 She was astonished and indignant at the demand. When Providence had provided me a good
home, under respectable protection, she said, why should I ask to leave it? For her part, she
thought the situation of a young lady making herself generally useful in domestic life, in
the family of her near connections, was a delightful one. She had no words to say how much
more respectable and proper it was thus to live in the circle of family usefulness and protection,
than to go out in the world looking for employment.

"I did not suggest to her that the chief difference in the cases would be, that in a hired
situation I should have regular wages and regular work; whereas in my present position it was
irregular work, and no wages.

"Her views on the subject were perhaps somewhat beclouded by the extreme convenience she found
in being able to go into company, and to range about the city at all hours, unembarrassed by
those family cares which generally fall to the mistress, but which her views of what constituted
general usefulness devolved upon me.

"I had no retirement, no leisure, no fixed place anywhere. My bed was in the nursery, where
the children felt always free to come and go; and even this I was occasionally requested to
resign, to share the couch of the housemaid, when sickness in the family or a surplus of guests
caused us to be crowded for room.

"I grew very unhappy, my health failed, and the demands upon me were entirely beyond my strength,
and without any consideration. The doer of all the odds and ends in a family has altogether
the most work and least praise of any, as I discovered to my cost. I found one thing after
another falling into my long list of appointed duties, by a regular progress. Thus first it
would be, 'Mary, won't you see to the dusting of the parlors? for Bridget is'--etc., etc.;
this would be the form for a week or two, and then, 'Mary, have you dusted the parlors?' and
at last, 'Mary, why have you not dusted the parlors?'

"As I said, I never studied anything to practical advantage; and though I had been through
arithmetic and algebra, I had never made any particular use of my knowledge. But now, under
the influence of misfortune, my thoughts took an arithmetical turn. By inquiring among the
servants, I found that, in different families in the neighborhood, girls were receiving three
dollars a week for rendering just such services as mine. Here was a sum of a hundred and fifty-six
dollars yearly, in ready money, put into their hands, besides their board, the privilege of
knowing their work exactly, and having a control of their own time when certain definite duties
were performed. Compared with what I was doing and receiving, this was riches and ease and rest.

"After all, I thought to myself, why should not I find some respectable, superior, motherly
woman, and put myself under her as a servant, make her my friend by good conduct, and have
some regular hours and some definite income, instead of wearing out my life in service without
pay? Nothing stood in my way but the traditionary shadow of gentility, and I resolved it should
not stop me.

"Years before, when I was only eight or ten years old, I had met your mother with your family
at the seaside, where my mother took me. I had seen a great deal of her, and knew all about
her. I remembered well her habitual consideration for the nurses and servants in her employ.
I knew her address in Boston, and I resolved to try to find a refuge in her family. And so
there is my story. I left a note with my stepmother, saying that I was going to seek independent
employment, and then went to Boston to your house. There I hoped to find a quiet asylum,--at
least, till I could hear from my aunt in Scotland. The delay of hearing from her during those
two years at your house often made me low-spirited."

"But what made you so afraid of McPherson?" said I nervously. "I remember your faintness, and
all that, the day he called."

"Oh, that? Why, it was merely this,--they were on intimate visiting terms with my mother-in-law,
and I knew that it would be all up with my plans if they were to be often at the house."

"Why didn't you tell my mother?" said I.

"I did think of it, but then"--She gave me a curious glance.

"But what, Mary?" After circling in part to Palencia, Carrion
verify your reunion with him at a short distance south of that city. It is for this channel
to be exported towards centralized flour Santander Valladolid; without such via communication,
however embarrassing, the peoples of this part of Castile would be found much more miserable than
they are.

Measure the channel about 45 miles long in the part between Valladolid and Palencia, as 70 between
Palencia and Alar-del-Rey. His constant width is about 11 feet, with 7 feet deep. Are 10 locks
or gates in just that part. This beautiful work was started by order of Charles IV and continued
by Ferdinand VII. The part between Alar and Palencia in service since 1809, the other only since
1833. Grieves the traveler to hear the account of the horrible tortures that was the scene
that channel, built by inmates, of which there were thousands of victims of forced labor and cruel
treatment. But that feeling of pain becomes indignation remembering that many of the alleged Inmates
were only loyal patriots, horribly persecuted for his liberal views and condemned to infamy and
death of hard labor without trial or innocent of any wrongdoing. Fernando VII was therefore Castilla
channel a huge and filthy scaffold. But later invented the so-called moderate proscription to
the Philippines to avoid scandal to Europe with the spectacle of the victims.

Although the three parallel lines that describe the Pisuerga, the canal and the road, give some
animation to the landscape, this is usually dull and sad. The trip is slow, but not without distraction.
Apart from the pleasure that caused me a lot talks Spaniards traveling companions, manifesting
all intelligent, talkative, funny and of excellent character, traffic objects interest me.
Ora caught my attention the many mills and some other works on the banks of the canal boats traveling
now charged flour or of foreign goods and railroad tracks, and some small towns neighbors, some strands
of hills covered with vineyards, wineries groups or outdoors; and scenic valley Pisuerga in
picturesque succession from the plain of Valladolid to Palencia, which dominates the channel
entirely from a distance. The railway line is being built, to link to Valladolid with Santander, Palencia
and Reinosa, also runs the very edge of the channel in the long haul.

Among the few countries that take in the vicinity of the channel,
only notable Dueñas (passing to be of Celtic origin), with 4,300 residents,
and abounding in grain production and good wines.

Others are almost negligible and generally looking poor and miserable.

* * * * *

       

Palencia province has only 185.970 inhabitants, most important center of population the capital,
which has about 13,000. The extensive and fertile plains surrounding Palencia is very picturesque
and careful cultivation. If its countryside are all covered cereal interest around boasting
beautiful smile and graceful groves or orchards fertilized by the river Carrion. The city is so old
that its origin is unknown, and no only famous for being the seat of many Spanish councils,
but also by the memory of their heroic women who, having fought the British at the time of King
Don Pedro won the privilege of wearing gold bands on the headdress, to style the gentlemen. Draws
attention here in the southern gate, a stone from the tomb of the sons of Pompey discovered by a casual
excavation in the city.

Palencia is undoubtedly the "local color" or the overall look of the old Spanish cities but has special
conditions that make it significant. Its streets are generally straight, spacious and clean, and
their houses (two floors almost) no air repellent Valladolid's old. The main street is very
unusual for its two rows of arcades endless, under whose shade you see the shops and stores that
centralize all activity commercial city.

The only major monument is the Cathedral, but it alone is worth many monuments. Is of Gothic
architecture very elegant and graceful, as required by the time of its construction, and is rightly
regarded as one of the most beautiful and spacious cathedrals of Spain. Begun at the beginning
of the fourteenth century, was completed in late XVI, so it is not surprising Some of the details
belong to the Renaissance interior.

"He is evidently getting old," said I to my wife; "his judgment is not what it used to be."

At all events, our place was bought, and we moved out, well pleased, the first morning in April,
not at all remembering the ill savor of that day for matters of wisdom. Our place was a pretty
cottage, about two miles from the city, with grounds that had been tastefully laid out. There
was no lack of winding paths, arbors, flower borders, and rosebushes, with which my wife was
especially pleased. There was a little green lot, strolling off down to a brook, with a thick
grove of trees at the end, where our cow was to be pastured.

The first week or two went on happily enough in getting our little new pet of a house into
trimness and good order; for as it had been long for sale, of course there was any amount of
little repairs that had been left to amuse the leisure hours of the purchaser. Here a doorstep
had given way, and needed replacing; there a shutter hung loose, and wanted a hinge; abundance
of glass needed setting; and as to painting and papering, there was no end to that. Then my
wife wanted a door cut here, to make our bedroom more convenient, and a china closet knocked
up there, where no china closet before had been. We even ventured on throwing out a bay-window
from our sitting-room, because we had luckily lighted on a workman who was so cheap that it
was an actual saving of money to employ him. And to be sure our darling little cottage did
lift up its head wonderfully for all this garnishing and furbishing. I got up early every morning,
and nailed up the rosebushes, and my wife got up and watered geraniums, and both flattered
ourselves and each other on our early hours and thrifty habits. But soon, like Adam and Eve
in Paradise, we found our little domain to ask more hands than ours to get it into shape. So
says I to my wife, "I will bring out a gardener when I come next time, and he shall lay the
garden out, and get it into order; and after that I can easily keep it by the work of my leisure
hours."

Our gardener was a very sublime sort of man,--an Englishman, and of course used to laying out
noblemen's places,--and we became as grasshoppers in our own eyes when he talked of Lord This
and That's estate, and began to question us about our carriage drive and conservatory; and
we could with difficulty bring the gentleman down to any understanding of the humble limits
of our expectations; merely to dress out the walks, and lay out a kitchen garden, and plant
potatoes, turnips, beets and carrots, was quite a descent for him. In fact, so strong were
his æsthetic preferences, that he persuaded my wife to let him dig all the turf off from a
green square opposite the bay window, and to lay it out into divers little triangles, resembling
small pieces of pie, together with circles, mounds, and various other geometrical ornaments,
the planning and planting of which soon engrossed my wife's whole soul. The planting of the
potatoes, beets, carrots, etc., was intrusted to a raw Irishman; for as to me, to confess the
truth, I began to fear that digging did not agree with me. It is true that I was exceedingly
vigorous at first, and actually planted with my own hands two or three long rows of potatoes;
after which I got a turn of rheumatism in my shoulder, which lasted me a week. Stooping down
to plant beets and radishes gave me a vertigo, so that I was obliged to content myself with
a general superintendence of the garden; that is to say, I charged my Englishman to see that
my Irishman did his duty properly, and then got on to my horse and rode to the city. But about
one part of the matter, I must say, I was not remiss; and that is, in the purchase of seed
and garden utensils. Not a day passed that I did not come home with my pockets stuffed with
choice seeds, roots, etc.; and the variety of my garden utensils was unequaled. There was not
a priming hook of any pattern, not a hoe, rake, or spade great or small, that I did not have
specimens of; and flower seeds and bulbs were also forthcoming in liberal proportions. In fact,
I had opened an account at a thriving seed store; for when a man is driving business on a large
scale, it is not always convenient to hand out the change for every little matter, and buying
things on account is as neat and agreeable a mode of acquisition as paying bills with one's notes.

"You know we must have a cow," said my wife, the morning of our second week. He had not more
beautiful and better able to disrupt the trial of a man in love. It was the highest slender
of the two, which took the lead down the carriage as well as entering in the ballroom, arm with
a mulatto who came to meet the stirrup, and that just the regularity of her features and symmetry
of their forms, so narrow waist in contrast to the bare shoulder width, the loving expression
of your head, as slightly tan in color, she could pass by Venus in the hybrid race Ethiopian-Caucasian.
He wore knitted, illusions about white satin sheen, short sleeves with recessed, which made them look like
two small balloons, red wide band of ribbon across the chest, long silk gloves to the elbow,
three strings of bright coral neck, and a pen white marabou with flowers, which, with hair
done in a bun and order curls from temple to temple, from behind his head gave the air of old
velvet cap black, which is what she and her hairdresser had intended to counterfeit. The companion
was dressed and brushed with more or less like her, but still not nearly as sleek and beautiful did
not attract much attention.

Volvíanse women all eyes to see, the men made their way, they said
some flattery or jests, and in a moment the dull sound of: - The Virgin
of bronze, the Virgin bronze, went from one extreme to another house
dance.

The queen of it just occur without the orchestra, gave clear evidence of this motion animation and
broadcast everywhere.
 The lady evidently was serious in her intentions of
resisting any personal approaches. I cut a cudgel, and, putting on a bold face, marched towards
her, while Biddy followed with her milking stool. Apparently the beast saw the necessity of
temporizing, for she assumed a demure expression, and Biddy sat down to milk. I stood sentry,
and if the lady shook her head I shook my stick; and thus the milking operation proceeded with
tolerable serenity and success.

"There!" said I, with dignity, when the frothing pail was full to the brim. "That will do,
Biddy," and I dropped my stick. Dump! came madam's heel on the side of the pail, and it flew
like a rocket into the air, while the milky flood showered plentifully over me, and a new broadcloth
riding-coat that I had assumed for the first time that morning. "Whew!" said I, as soon as
I could get my breath from this extraordinary shower bath; "what's all this?" My wife came
running towards the cow yard, as I stood with the milk streaming from my hair, filling my eyes,
and dropping from the tip of my nose; and she and Biddy performed a recitative lamentation
over me in alternate strophes, like the chorus in a Greek tragedy. Such was our first morning's
experience; but as we had announced our bargain with some considerable flourish of trumpets
among our neighbors and friends, we concluded to hush the matter up as much as possible.

"These very superior cows are apt to be cross," said I; "we must bear with it as we do with
the eccentricities of genius; besides, when she gets accustomed to us, it will be better." But there is no
no doubt that his eyes encountered those of the individual, whose name neither mentioned, because
he sprained his brow and clear signs of distress. Cantalapiedra, however, hearing his words and
watching his face, said: What!
She was, in fact, a handsome cow, which may account, in part, for some of her sins; and this
consideration inspired me with some degree of indulgence towards her foibles.

