                   [Footnote 128: The Pell Rolls (27th Sept. 1418)
                   leave us in no doubt that John Randolf's goods were
                   forfeited, a circumstance strongly confirming the
                   report of his conspiracy. Payment is also made to
                   certain persons for carrying (Feb. 8, 1420) John
                   Randolf, of the order of Friars Minor, Shrewsbury,
                   from Normandy to the Tower.]

                   [Footnote 129: No doubt can remain as to the
                   accuracy of the London Chronicle in this
                   particular: several payments are on record,
                   expressly declared to have been made out of the
                   lands and property of this unhappy woman. Thus, the
                   issue of a thousand marks to the Abbess of Syon
                   (9th May 1421) is made from "the monies issuing
                   from the possessions of Joanna, Queen of
                   England."]

                   [Footnote 130: See Acts of Privy Council, vol. i.
                   p. 185. The Editor quotes Lobinau's Histoire de
                   Brétagne, tom. ii. pp. 874, 878; and Morice's
                   Histoire Ecclésiastique et Civile de Brétagne, tom.
                   i. p. 433.]

CHAPTER VII.

1402-1403.

If Owyn Glyndowr, as we have supposed, allowed Wales to remain undisturbed by battles and violence
through the winter[131] and spring, it was only to employ the time in preparing for a more
vigorous campaign. The first battle of which we have any historical certainty, was fought June
12, 1402, near Melienydd, (Dugdale says, "upon the mountain called Brynglas, near Knighton
in Melenyth,") in Radnorshire. The whole array of Herefordshire was routed on that field. More
than one thousand     (p. 130) Englishmen were slain, on whom the Welsh were guilty of savage,
unheard-of indignities. The women especially gave vent to their rage and fury by actions too
disgraceful to be credible were they not recorded as uncontradicted facts. For the honour of
the sex, we wish to regard them as having happened only once; whilst we would bury the disgusting
details in oblivion.[132] Owyn was victorious, and took many of high degree prisoners; among
whom was Sir Edmund Mortimer, the uncle of the Earl of March. Perhaps the most authentic statement
of this victory as to its leading features, though without any details, is found in a letter
from the King to his council, dated Berkhampstead, June 25.

                   [Footnote 131: At the opening of the year 1402
                   (January 18), one hundred marks were paid by the
                   treasury to the Bishop of Bangor, whose lands had
                   been in great part destroyed.--Pell Rolls. This
                   prelate was Richard Young, who was translated to
                   Rochester in 1404.]

                   [Footnote 132: To the present day the vestiges of
                   two temporary encampments (army against army) are
                   visible; and there are barrows in the
                   neighbourhood, which, according to the tradition of
                   the country, cover the bones of those who fell in
                   this battle, not less, they say, than three
                   thousand men. The remains of Owyn Glyndowr's camp
                   are found at a place called Monachdy, in the parish
                   of Blethvaugh; and about two miles below, in the
                   parish of Whittow, is the earthwork supposed to
                   have been thrown up by Sir Edmund Mortimer.
                   Half-way between is a hill called Brynglas, where
                   the battle is said to have been fought. The dose
                   must be regulated by the age, as also by the effect
                   that aperients generally have upon the individual.

Great care must in future be taken to avoid the cause or accidental circumstance which produced the
irregularity.

When the bowels are habitually costive, much care and judgment is necessary for their relief and
future management. Fortunately this condition is very rare in youth. The activity and exposure
to the air, usual at this period of life, render purgatives unnecessary, unless, indeed (as
just mentioned), some error in diet, or some unusual circumstance, render them accidentally
confined. Should, however, the foregoing state exist, medicine alone will avail little; there
are certain general measures which must also be acted up to, and most strictly, if the end is
to be accomplished. They consist, principally, in an observance of great regularity with respect
to the time of taking food, its quality, quantity, and due mastication; regular and sufficient
exercise, horse exercise being particularly serviceable; the shower-bath, or daily ablution;
early rising (the indulgence in the habit of lying in bed always predisposing to constipation);
and, lastly, the patient habituating himself to evacuate the bowels at a certain hour of the day.
After breakfast appears to be the time when the bowels are more disposed to act than at any other
part of the day; this is the time, then, that should be chosen.

All these points must be sedulously observed, and upon the principles laid down in the various
chapters upon these subjects, if habitual costiveness is expected to be overcome.

SECT. IV.--WORMS.
NOT SO FREQUENT AS POPULARLY SUPPOSED; AN ERROR PRODUCTIVE OF MISCHIEF.--Almost
all diseases have been, at one time or other, attributed to the generation
of worms in the intestines. And at the present day it is not at all
an uncommon occurrence for medical men to be called in to prescribe
for children, to whom the strongest purgative quack medicines have
been previously exhibited by parents, for the removal of symptoms
which, upon investigation, are found in no way connected with or produced
by worms. The results of such errors are always, more or less, mischievous,
and sometimes of so serious a nature as to lay the foundation of disease
which ultimately proves fatal. The
rebellion from first to last was protracted through almost as many years as the days he had
numbered for its utter extinction. The order on the sheriff of Derby commands him to go   (p.
133) with his contingent to Chester, "to our dearest son the Prince," on the 27th of August,
and to advance in his retinue to Wales. On this occasion,[137] it is said that Henry invaded
Wales in three points at once, himself commanding one division of his army, the second being
headed by the Prince, the third by Lord Arundel. The details of these measures, under the personal
superintendence of the King, are not found in history. Probably Walsingham's account of their
total failure must be admitted as nearest the truth. That no material injury befel Owyn from
them, and that neither were his means crippled, nor his resolution daunted, is testified by
the inroads which, not long after, he made into England with redoubled impetuosity. 

                   I refer to those duties which constitute the maternal
                   part of the management of disease.
                   
                   Medical treatment, for its successful issue,
                   is greatly dependent upon a careful, pains-taking,
                   and judicious maternal superintendence. No medical
                   treatment can avail at any time, if directions be only
                   partially carried out, or be negligently attended to; and will most
assuredly fail altogether, if counteracted by the erroneous prejudices
of ignorant attendants. Dr. Griffin, a Monmouthshire antiquary,
                   pointed out the mistake many years ago.]

                   [Footnote 134: On the 14th of July the council
                   issue commands to the Archbishop of Canterbury and
                   the Bishop of Norwich to array their clergy for the
                   defence of the realm; a measure seldom resorted to,
                   and only on occasions of great emergence and alarm.
                   A fortnight before this order (30th June), the King
                   had written from Harborough to his council,
                   acquainting them with the victory gained for him
                   over the Scots at Nisbet Moor by the Scotch Earl of
                   March, and commanding them to protect the marches.]

                   [Footnote 135: The Monk of Evesham says that in
                   this year, about August 29, (Festum Decollationis
                   Johannis Bapt.) the King went again with a great
                   force into Wales, and after twenty days returned
                   with disgrace.]

                   [Footnote 136: An order, dated Ravensdale, is made
                   on the sheriff of Lincoln to be ready,
                   notwithstanding the last order, to go towards the
                   marches of Scotland; and, if the Scots should not
                   come, then to be at Shrewsbury on the 1st of
                   September.]

                   [Footnote 137: Walsingham's words would seem to
                   apply more fitly to this second and more important
                   expedition of 1402 than the preceding one in July:
                   "Tantus armorum strepitus."]

The following winter, we may safely conclude, was spent by the Welsh chieftain in negociations
both with the malcontent lords of England, and with the courts of France and Scotland; in recruiting
his forces and improving his means of warfare;[138] for, before the next midsummer, (as we
know on the best authority,) he was prepared to engage in an expedition into England, with
a power too formidable  (p. 134) for the Prince and his retinue to resist without further reinforcement. SCARLET
FEVER, WITH SORE THROAT.--In this form of the disease, the fever and rash are accompanied with
inflammation of the throat.

SYMPTOMS.--The symptoms are more severe than in the mild form of this disease, and, in the majority
of instances, the inflammation of the throat appears with the eruption, and goes through its
progress of increase and decline with the cutaneous eruption. Sometimes, however, it precedes the
fever; whilst at others it does not appear until the rash is at its height.

                   It is generally in the course of the second day that
                   the child complains of considerable stiffness in the
                   muscles of the neck, extending to the lower jaw,
                   and under the ears;--of a roughness of the throat, and difficulty
in swallowing;--and some degree of hoarseness will be noticed: all
so many indications that the throat is affected.

                   Very shortly, an increased secretion of the mucus of
                   these parts occurs, and, collecting about the tonsils,
                   aggravates the child's sufferings, from the frequent
                   and ineffectual efforts made to expel it. If the
                   inflammatory action be more severe, exudations of lymph
                   will also be poured out, and intermingling with the
                   mucus, greatly augment the difficulty of swallowing.
                   At this time the lining membrane of the mouth,
                   as also the tongue, assume a florid red colour;
                   the red points of the latter becoming much elongated.

The
                   febrile symptoms are severe from the first; amongst
                   others, there will be headach, sometimes accompanied
                   by slight delirium, nausea, intense heat of
                   skin, languor, and considerable inquietude and anxiety:
                   and as the inflammation approaches its height,
                   the fever increases, the pulse rises, the breathing becomes oppressed,
the skin becomes more pungently hot and dry, and the thirst urgent.

                   All these symptoms being increased towards evening, when the febrile
restlessness is often succeeded by delirium.

     

     
     The rash is seldom perceptible before the third day, and then comes
     out in irregular patches on various parts of the body, particularly
     about the elbows and wrists; thus differing as to the time and
     mode of its appearance, from the mild form of the disease. It
     frequently recedes, or entirely vanishes, the day after it first
     comes out, and then reappears partially, and at uncertain times.
     This generally protracts the duration of the disorder, without,
     however, producing any perceptible change in the other symptoms.
     On the fifth or sixth day of the disease, the fever and inflammation
     of the throat begin to abate; at the same time the rash
     declines, and the peeling off of the cuticle soon follows.
     
     This is the ordinary course of scarlet fever with sore throat;
     but in many cases the symptoms run still higher, and the disease
     is alarmingly dangerous from its commencement. In some instances,
     there is an acrid discharge from the nostrils or ears, often accompanied
     with deafness; as also enlargements of the glands in the neck,
     followed by the formation of abscesses in their immediate neighbourhood.
     It is unnecessary, however, to follow out the symptoms
     of scarlet fever more fully; as all
                                         that has been attempted here, has been so to sketch out the more
prominent symptoms of this disease, that the directions upon the parental
management may be readily comprehended: they will be very brief, but
a strict attention thereto will be found all-important to the well-doing
and comfort of the child.

     
     

                   CHARACTER OF SCARLET FEVER COMPARED WITH THAT OF MEASLES.--It will
be seldom difficult to distinguish this disease from other acute eruptive
disorders.

The one to which it bears the greatest resemblance is the measles; but from this it is readily
distinguished by the absence of the cough, the inflamed and watery eye, running at the nose
and sneezing, which are the predominant symptoms in the early stage of the measles; but which do
not usually attend on scarlet fever--at least, in any high degree. In measles, also, there is
an absence of that restlessness, anxiety, and depression of spirits, by which scarlet fever is peculiarly
distinguished.--The rash, too, in measles, does not appear till two or three days later than
that of scarlet fever. It also differs in its characters. In scarlet fever, the eruption consists
of innumerable minute dots or points, diffused in patches with uneven edges of various sizes
and forms; and gives to those portions of the skin on which it appears, a diffused bright red
colour. In measles, the rash comes out in irregular semi-lunar or crescentic shaped patches, distinctly
elevated; the spots being of a deeper red in the centre than in the circumference, and leaving
intervening spaces in which the skin retains its natural pale colour.

MATERNAL
MANAGEMENT.--The chief points to which the parent's attention must
be directed, irrespective of a strict attention to the more immediate
medical treatment directed by the physician, are the following:--

VENTILATION
OF THE BED-ROOM.--Even in the mildest cases, the child must be kept
in bed from the first accession of the fever. Whilst the probability
of its having been written in the end of May 1403, is much strengthened by the ordinance of
the King, dated June 16, 1403, in which he mentions the reports which he had received from
the Prince's council then in Wales of Owyn Glyndowr's intention to invade England; and also
by the order made July 10, 1403, by the King, that the council would send 1000l. to the Prince,
to       (p. 137) enable him to keep his people together,--the very object chiefly desired
in this despatch. The letter is in French.

                   [Footnote 142: On the 1st of April 1403, the King
                   most earnestly requests loans from bishops, abbots,
                   knights, and others, in the sums severally affixed
                   to their names, to enable him to proceed against
                   the Welsh and the Scots.]

     LETTER FROM PRINCE HENRY TO THE COUNCIL.

     "FROM THE PRINCE.

     "Very dear and entirely well-beloved, we greet you well. And
     forasmuch as our soldiers desire to know from us whether they
     will be paid for the three months of the present quarter, and
     tell us that they will not remain here without being promptly
     paid their wages according to their agreements, we beseech you
     very sincerely that you will order payment for the said months,
     or supply us otherwise, and take measures in time for the
     safeguard of these marches. For the rebels are trying to find out
     every day whether we shall be paid, and they well know that
     without payment we shall not be able to continue here: and they
     propose to levy all the power of Northwales and Southwales to
     make inroads, and to destroy the march and the counties adjoining
     to it; and we have not the power here of resisting them, so as to
     hinder them from the full execution of their malicious designs.
     And when our men are withdrawn from us, we must at all events
     ourselves retire into England, or be disgraced for ever. For
     every one must know that without troops we can do no more than
     another man of inferior rank. And at present we have very great
     expenses, and we have raised the largest sum in our power to meet
     them from our little stock of jewels. Our two castles of Harlech
     and Lampadern are besieged, and have been so for a long time, and
     we must relieve them and victual them within these ten days; and,
     besides that, protect the march around us with the third of our
     forces against the invasion of the rebels. Nevertheless, if this
     campaign could be continued, the rebels never were so likely  (p. 138)
     to be destroyed as at present. And now, since we have fully shown
     the state of these districts, please to take such measures as shall
     seem best to you for the safety of these same parts, and of this
     portion of the realm of England; which may God protect, and give
     you grace to determine upon the best for the time. And our Lord
     have you in his keeping.--Given under our signet at Shrewsbury,
     the 30th day of May. And be well assured that we have fully shown
     to you the peril of whatever may happen hereafter, if remedy be
     not sent in time.

On this letter it is impossible not to remark that, so far from having an abundant supply of
money to squander on his supposed vices and follies, Henry was compelled to pawn his own little
stock of plate and jewels to raise money for the indispensable expenses of the war.

The first direct mention made of the Prince after this is found in the ordinance above referred
to, dated June 16, 1403, which informs us that he certainly was then in Wales, and strongly
implies that he had been there for some time previously. The King says, "I heard from many
persons of my son the Prince's council, now in Wales, that Owyn Glyndowr is on the point of
making an incursion into England with a great power, for the purpose of obtaining supplies.
I therefore command the sheriffs of Gloucester, Salop, Worcester, and Hereford, to make proclamation
for all knights, and gentlemen of one hundred shillings' annual income, to go and put themselves
under the governance of the Prince." Another letter from Henry to his council, dated Higham
Ferrers, July 10,   (p. 139) 1403,[143] is deeply interesting, not only as bearing testimony
to the persevering bravery of his son Henry, but as affording an example of the uncertainty
of human calculations, and the deceitfulness of human engagements and friendships. He informs
the council that he had received letters from his son, and information by his messengers, acquainting
him with the gallant and good bearing of his very dear and well-beloved son, which gave him
very great pleasure. He then commissions them to pay 1000l.[144] to the Prince for the purpose
of enabling him to keep his soldiers together. "We are now," he adds, "on our way to succour
our beloved and loyal cousins, the Earl of Northumberland and Henry his son, in the conflict
which they have honourably undertaken for us and our realm; and, as soon as that campaign shall
have ended honourably, with the aid of God, we will hasten towards Wales."[145]

                   [Footnote 143: The Pell Rolls (July 17, 1403)
                   record the appointment of the Prince as the King's
                   deputy in Wales, to see justice done on all rebels,
                   and the payment of a sum amounting to 8108l.
                   2s. 0d. for the wages of four barons and
                   bannerets, twenty knights, four hundred and
                   seventy-six esquires, and two thousand five hundred
                   archers.]

                   [Footnote 144: On the next day, July 11, the King
                   issued a proclamation against selling horses, or
                   armour and weapons, to the Welsh.]

                   [Footnote 145: Astonishing confusion pervades
                   almost all our historians as to the circumstances
                   under which Henry IV. first became acquainted with
                   the defection of the Percies, and then hastened to
                   resist their hostilities; and most absurd
                   inferences as to the national interest taken in the
                   ensuing struggle have in consequence been drawn.
                   The King is almost universally represented as
                   having left London, accompanied by all the forces
                   he could, after much preparation, command, for the
                   express purpose of quelling the rebellion of the
                   Percies; whereas he left London for the express
                   purpose of joining his forces to those of the
                   Percies, and to proceed, in conjunction with them,
                   against the Scots; and he had never heard of their
                   defection till he reached Burton-upon-Trent. The
                   news came upon him with the suddenness of an
                   unexpected thunderstorm.]

This letter had not been written more than five days when King     (p. 140) Henry became acquainted
with the rebellion of those, his "beloved and faithful lieges," to assist whom against his
northern foes he was then actually on his road. His proclamation for all sheriffs to raise
their counties, and hasten to him wherever he might be, is dated Burton-on-Trent, July 16,
1403. On the morrow he sent off a despatch to his council, informing them that Henry Percy,
calling him only Henry of Lancaster, was in open rebellion against him, and was spreading far
and wide through Cheshire the false rumours that Richard was still alive. We are not going at children
in a way to gain and hold their interest, and make them love their work. There must be a better
way of teaching, and we should find different teachers. You'll have to try the school next
year yourself, Laddie."

"I have a little plan about a piece of land I am hoping to take before then," answered Laddie.
"It's time for me to try my wings at making a living, and land is
my choice.

                   I have fully decided. I stick to the soil!"

"Amen!" cried father. "You please me mightily. I hate to see sons of mine thriving on law, literally
making their living out of the fruit of other men's discord. I dislike seeing them sharpen
their wits in trade, buying at the lowest limit, extorting the highest. I don't want their horizons
limited by city blocks, their feet on pavements, everything under the sun in their heads that
concerns a scheme to make money; not room for an hour's thought or study in a whole day, about
the really vital things of life. After all, land and its products are the basis of everything;
the city couldn't exist a day unless we feed and clothe it. In the things that I consider important,
you are a king among men, with your feet on soil you own."

"So I figure it," said Laddie.

"And you are the best educated man I have reared," said father. "Take this other thought with you:
on land, the failure of the bank does not break you. The fire another man's carelessness starts,
does not wipe out your business or home. You are not in easy reach of contagion. Any time you want
to branch out, your mother and I will stand back of you."

"Thank you!" said Laddie. "You backed none of the others. They would resent it. I'll make the best
start I can myself, and as they did, stand alone."

                   
                   Father looked at him and smiled slowly.
                   
                   "You are right, as always," he said. "I hadn't
                   thought so far. It would make trouble. At any rate,
                   let me inspect and help you select your land."

"That
                   of course!" said Laddie.
                   
                   I suspect it's not a very nice thing for me to
                   tell, but all of us were tickled silly the day Miss Amelia packed
her trunk and left for sure.

Mother said she never tried harder in all her days, but Miss Amelia was the most distinctly
unlovable person she ever had met. She sympathized with us so, she never said a word when Leon
sang:

"Believe me, if all those endearing young charms, Which I gaze on
so fondly to-day, Were to change by to-morrow, and fleet in my arms,
Like fairy-gifts fading away, Thou wouldst still be adored, as this
moment thou art, Let thy loveliness fade as it will, And around the
dear ruin each wish of my heart Would entwine itself verdantly still--"

while
Miss Amelia drove from sight up the Groveville road.

As he sang Leon
stretched out his arms after her vanishing form. "I hope," he said,
"that you caught that touching reference to 'the dear ruin,' and could
anything be expressed more beautifully and poetically than that 'verdantly
still?'"

I feel sorry for a snake. I like hoptoads, owls, and shitepokes.
I envy a buzzard the way it can fly, and polecats are beautiful; but
I never could get up any sort of feeling at all for Miss Amelia, whether
she was birdlike or her true self. So no one was any gladder than
I when she was gone. He said he had heard that at the last parliament, when the necessities of the realm
were explained by the lords of the great council to the barons and commons, the war allowance
was demanded for all the marches, Calais, Guienne and Scotland, the sea, and Ireland; that
the proposition for the Scotch marches was limited to 37,000l.; and that, as the payment for
the marches in time of truce, due to his father and to him, did not exceed 5,000l. per annum,
it excited his astonishment that it could not be paid in good faith; that it appeared to him
either that the council attached too little consideration to the said marches, where the most
formidable enemies which they had would be found, or that they were not satisfied with his
and his father's services therein; but, if they made proper inquiry, he hoped that the greatest
neglect they would discover in the marches was the neglect of payment, without which they would
find no one who could render such service. On this subject he had, he      (p. 144) said, written
to the King, entreating him that, if any injury occurred to town, castle, or march, in his
charge, from default of payment, he might not be blamed; but that the censure should rest on
those who would not pay him, agreeably to his Majesty's honourable command and desire. He begged
the council not to be displeased that he wrote ignorantly in his rude and feeble manner on
this subject, because he was compelled to do so by the necessities not merely of himself, but
of his soldiers, who were in such distress, that, without providing a remedy, he neither could
nor dared to go to the marches; and he concluded by requesting the council to take such measures
as they might think proper."

Two letters from the Earl of Northumberland, the one to the council in May, the other to the
King, dated 26th June 1403, breathe the same spirit with those of his son Hotspur, and would
have led us to anticipate the same subsequent conduct; at least they ought to have prepared
the King and council for the resentments of two such men, overflowing with bitter indignation
at the neglect and injustice with which they considered themselves to have been treated.

"The last of these letters (we quote throughout the words of the same Editor) is extremely
curious. Northumberland commenced by acknowledging the receipt of a letter from the King, wherein
Henry has expressed (p. 145) his expectation that the Earl would be at Ormeston Castle on the
day appointed, and in sufficient force, without creating any additional expense to his Majesty;
but that, on consideration, the King, reflecting that this could not be the case without expenses
being incurred by the Earl and his son Hotspur, had ordered some money to be speedily sent
to them. Of that money the Earl said he knew not the amount, nor the day of payment; that his
honour, as well as the state of the kingdom, was in question; and that the day on which he
was to be at Ormeston was so near, that, if payment was not soon ordered, it was very probable
that the fair renown of the chivalry of the realm would not be maintained at that place, to
the utter dishonour and grief of him and of his son, who were the King's loyal subjects; which
they believed could not be his wish, nor had they deserved it. 'If,' the Earl sarcastically
observed, 'we had both been paid the 60,000l. since your coronation, as I have heard you were
informed by those who do not wish to tell you the truth, then we could better support such
a charge; but to this day there is clearly due to us, as can be fully proved, 20,000l. and
more'. He then entreated the King to order his council and treasurer to pay him and his son
a large sum conformably to the grant made in the last parliament, and to their indentures,
so that no injury might arise to the realm by the non-payment of what was due to them.' To
this letter he signed himself 'Your Matathias,    (p. 146) who supplicates you to take his
state and labour to heart in this affair.'"

There is so much sound reasoning also and good sense in the review of these proceedings, presented
to us by the same pen, that we cannot do better than adopt it. The Author's subsequent researches
have all tended to confirm that Editor's view:

"This letter preceded the rebellion of the Percies by less than four weeks; and that event
may, it is presumed, be mainly attributed to the inattention shown to their requests of payment
of the large sums which they had expended in the King's service. They were not only harassed
by debts, and destitute of means to pay their followers, but their honour, as the Earl expressly
told the King, was involved in the fulfilment of their engagements; a breach of which not only
exposed them to the greatest difficulties, but, in the opinion of their chivalrous contemporaries,
perhaps affected their reputation. That under these circumstances, and goaded by a sense of
injury and injustice, the fiery Hotspur should throw off his allegiance, and revolt, is not
surprising; but it is matter of astonishment that Henry should have hazarded such a result.
To the house of Percy he was chiefly indebted for the crown; and it is scarcely credible that
at the moment of their defection it could have been his policy to offend them. The country
was at war with France and Scotland, Wales was then in open rebellion, and Henry was far from
satisfied of the general loyalty of his     (p. 147) subjects. Can it be believed that he desired
to increase his enemies by adding the most powerful family in the kingdom to the number? Nor
can Henry's constant efforts to prevent the people from becoming disaffected, be reconciled
with the wish to excite discontent in two of the most influential and distinguished personages
in the realm. It is shown in another part of this volume, (Minutes of Privy Council,) that
the King had not the slightest suspicion of Hotspur's revolt until it took place; and it appears
that, when he heard of it, he was actually on his route to join that chieftain, and, to use
his own words to his council, 'to give aid and support to his very dear and loyal cousins,
the Earl of Northumberland and his son Henry, in the expedition which they had honourably commenced
for him and his realm against his enemies the Scotch.' Instead of refusing to pay to the Percies
the money which they claimed, from the desire to lessen their power, or to inflict upon them
any species of mortification, all which is known of the state of this country justifies the
inference that Henry had the strongest motives for conciliating that family. The neglect of
their repeated demands seems, therefore, to have arisen solely from his being unable[148] to
comply with them; and the     (p. 148) King's pecuniary embarrassments are shown by the documents
in this work to have been of so pressing and so permanent a nature, that there is no difficulty
in believing such to have been the case. It is deserving of observation, however, that the
discontent which is visible in the letters of Hotspur and his father, is as much at the conduct
of the council as at that of the King; and jealousy of their superior influence with Henry,
and possibly a suspicion that they endeavoured to injure them in his estimation, as well as
to impede their exertions in his service, by withholding the necessary resources, may have
combined with other causes in producing their disaffection."[149]

                   [Footnote 148: The fact is, that in the years
                   immediately preceding their defection, the Issue
                   Rolls of the Exchequer abound with items of
                   payment, some to a very large amount, to the Earl
                   of Northumberland and his son. After that, spring
                   came pushing until you felt shoved. Our family needed
                   me then. If they never had known it before, they found
                   out there was none too many of us. Every day I
                   had to watch the blue goose, and bring in her egg
                   before it was chilled, carrying it carefully so it
                   would not be jarred. I had to hunt the turkey nests
                   and gather their eggs so they would be right for setting. There had
to be straw carried from the stack for new nests, eggs marked, and
hens set by the dozen. On the 17th July 1403,
                   payment is recorded of precisely the same sum to
                   the two Percies for their services in the North
                   March, and to the Prince for the protection of
                   Wales; in each case, no doubt, falling far short of
                   the requisite amount, but in each case probably as
                   much as the Exchequer could afford to supply.]

                   [Footnote 149: Preface to Sir H. Nicolas's Privy
                   Council of England, p. 4.]

       *       *       *       *       *

