[Sidenote: Fringe]

[Sidenote: Threading the needle]

[Sidenote: Making the fringe into tassels]

[Sidenote: Removing the fringe from the loom]

The head piece of the loom should be adjusted for the width of the rug for which the fringe
is required. A rug nine inches wide would require fringe nine inches long. Adjust the rods
one inch apart--that is, with one perforation between the rods. String the warp in every groove,
one string over each rod and three between, making five in all. Weave over and under one until
the heading is finished. If you have an extra side rod, place it in the sixth perforation from
the right-hand rod. This will make tassels a little over two inches long. If a shorter fringe
is preferred, adjust accordingly. If you have not an extra side rod remove the left one and
place as directed, leaving the right one in the heading until the whole fringe is finished.
Thread a large tape needle with two pieces of worsted, as long as the two can be conveniently
managed. If the fringe is made of two colors, take one of each for the tassels, weaving the
heading with the one which predominates in the rug. Run the ends in the grooves to fasten them.
Wind under the right rod, which was left in the heading, through the first stitch, which includes
the warp string over the rod, then over the extra rod to the right. Wind under again through
the next stitch in the heading (always around the rod) and so on until the end is reached.
To make this fringe into tassels, separate six strands of each color and tie with the two colors,
running the tape needle and worsted along from one tassel to another, or tie each one securely
and cut. The fringe will need no finishing at the ends. Run the short ends, which were wound
through the grooves in the beginning in order to fasten them, through a few stitches in the
heading. The fringe can be made of one color, and of any width. To take the fringe from the
loom, first remove the rod at the end of the tassels and cut the fringe before removing the
rods from the heading. This will insure straight cutting at the ends of the tassels. If one
prefers a knotted fringe, cut and knot before removing the heading. By examining rug fringes
in the furniture stores one can get a very good idea of the manner of knotting. (See also directions
for splicing Germantown wool on page 84.)

[Sidenote: Knotting]

A simple fringe can be knotted quickly and easily in the ends of the warp strings, after the
rug is taken from the loom. First decide upon the length of the fringe when finished. Add at
least two inches to allow for knotting. Cut each piece of wool twice this length, double, and
thread a tape needle. Pass the needle from the right side of the rug to the wrong, through
the warp strings at the end of the rug. Draw the loop of wool through and unthread the needle.
Pass the two ends of the wool down through the loop and draw it tight. When this has been done
in every pair of warp strings, knot every other piece of the fringe together, in the same way
that towel fringe is made.

This question of whether a rug should have fringe or not is much discussed at present. It is
largely a personal one. The best way, perhaps, is to study different kinds of rugs and know
which ones are usually made with fringe and which are not.

[Sidenote: Bed shoes, or socks]

[Sidenote: Bed shoes]

[Sidenote: Baby shoes]

Bed shoes of all sizes are easily woven, and make a useful holiday gift. They are made without
soles and are intended to be drawn up around the ankle like a high moccasin. Use the soft double
Germantown wool. White, fastened together with pink or blue, or white striped with a color,
may be used, and are attractive. The socks in the illustration are of white wool with a pink
seam up the instep and pink scallops around the top. One sock is shown on a last, and the other
as it appears off the foot. The stripes in the knitting can be shown in the weaving by using
a color. The full size of the loom makes a shoe of medium size. String a close warp with white
wool. If the shoe is to be all white, weave with the same, leaving the color for the finishing.
If it is to be striped, weave perhaps eight or ten times across with color and then with white;
when the weaving is finished you will have a mat 9 × 12 inches. Double one of the short edges
and sew over and over on the wrong side with white wool. This is the toe. The two long edges
now lie together. They may be crocheted, or knitted, with colored wool by holding them close
and fulling in, or by puckering a little. If this is done in color, it makes a pretty seam
on the top of the foot and front of the ankle. The top may be finished by crocheting a beading
and scallops of the colored wool. Run a ribbon or worsted cord through the beading. If desired,
the long edges may be laced together with ribbon one-half inch wide. Baby shoes are made in
the same way. To ascertain what length to adjust the loom, measure the sole, then up, back
of the heel, to a point above the ankle. For the width, measure around the foot. Finish the
cord with tassels or balls.

[Sidenote: Worsted balls for bed shoes, and other articles]

To make worsted balls, first cut two small circles from cardboard. From the center of each
cut a smaller circle. Hold one circle over the other, and with a worsted or tape needle threaded
with wool, wind over and over very closely until the hole in the center is completely filled.
Always piece the wool on the outside edge. Cut the wool all around on the outside. Make a cord
of the wool and slip between the two circles. Then tie so as to fasten all the pieces of wool
in the middle, leaving the cord long enough to tie in a bow if desired. Tear the pasteboards,
remove them, and trim the wool evenly. A second ball should be fastened on the other end of
the cord, after it has been laced through the beading.

[Sidenote: Photograph frames]

To weave photograph and picture frames of silk, chenille, raffia, celluloid, or leather, proceed
in the same way as for a bordered rug, having the oblong or square center the required size
for the picture. Foundation frames for mounting the work can be purchased, usually, at the
stores where tissue paper and flowers are sold.

[Sidenote: Table mats]

Square and oblong table mats for hot dishes can be made of candle-wicking, knitting cotton,
or cheese cloth.

[Sidenote: Tippet or scarf]

To-day, tippets and scarfs are very little used, but they are very comfortable things to wear
to school on a cold day. In order to make them, string a continuous warp of the required length
with Germantown dark colored wool. Weave the same color for the woof, and brighten it at intervals
with Roman stripes. A plaid scarf can be woven, if preferred; while with a close warp one can
have a kindergarten pattern in another, or contrasting color.

[Sidenote: Wristlets]

In making wristlets, one must decide how long they are to be, and adjust the length on the
loom. Measure around the wrist for the width, remembering that the wristlets will stretch when
pulled over the hand. Weave in stripes or plaid, or, if desired, plain, stringing the warp
with the same wool as is used in weaving. Remove the mat and sew the edges together.

[Sidenote: Sleeve protectors]

Sleeve protectors can be woven of raffia in the same way as wristlets. Make them so they can
be fastened on the outside of the sleeve, like a cuff.

[Sidenote: Purses, or chatelaine bags]

Purses, or chatelaine bags, are made of knitting-silk. Beads can be added, if desired. Adjust
the loom for the required size, and string a continuous warp, if necessary. One can obtain
the silver or nickel tops, which open and close, at the department stores.

[Sidenote: Shopping and school bags]

[Sidenote: Opera glass bags]

It will be better to use heavier material for shopping and school bags. Raffia makes a strong
bag; silk strips are serviceable, and leather strips are good for school bags. For opera-glass
bags, make two mats and lace or weave them together, or string a continuous warp. Use rope
silk, chenille, or knitting silk with beads.

When one has mastered the mysteries of weaving thoroughly enough to make a good mat, it is
very easy to "turn them into" various articles. There is no sleight of hand about it.

[Sidenote: Panels of silk canvas for boxes]

Silk canvas panels are made by adjusting the loom for the required size of the sides of the
box, and weaving a plain mat for the top. A number of suggestions have been given on page 52,
under the head of Materials.

Pretty neckties of fine knitting silk can be made on the loom by using a continuous warp of
the same material.

[Sidenote: Sofa pillows, cushions, sachet cases and veil cases]

The accompanying illustration, and another on page 98, and also the vignette on the title page,
show squares of silk canvas, and will give one many ideas of how they may be used. One has
a cross-stitched pattern of chenille, and in another the chenille was alternated with silk
in the warp, and both chenille and silk were used in the woof. The squares can be made up in
cushion and box covers, sachet cases, sofa pillows, or the larger squares can be used as veil
cases. A number of them can be joined for large sofa pillows. In the latter case they can be
made of wool, and many of them could be crocheted together for an afghan or slumber robe.

The design in the illustration is a pattern which may be used for either a Wilton or Axminster
rug, or for mats, sachet cases, cushion or box covers, or cross-stitch embroidery on burlap,
or silk, or wool canvas. The patterns given on pages 120, 125, 130, and 134 will be found adaptable
for rugs or squares.

[Sidenote: Slumber robes or afghans]

[Sidenote: Portières]

Slumber robes or afghans have been previously mentioned on page 54, under the head of Materials.
It will be found very easy, after a little experience with a continuous warp, to make strips
of any length. It is better to wind the extra lengths of warp upon spools, as has been suggested,
or around the tops of the rods. Large portières can be made of long strips of silk or silkoline
cut bias. Fasten the long strips together horizontally in imitation of Bagdad curtains.

[Sidenote: Hair receivers]

Hair receivers are easily made from raffia. Make a square mat and fold it in cornucopia form.

Chapter Twelve

ORIENTAL RUGS

[Sidenote: Rugs and draperies]

To be quite up to date, Miss Dolly should have oriental rugs and draperies in her house beautiful.
These are easily made on the loom, and the little girl or boy, who has first copied a pattern
and then seen it grow under patient fingers, has a thing of beauty and a joy forever. What
could give more pleasure than to be able to say fifty years from now: "I wove that, my dear,
when I went to school"? Truly the grandchildren would reply: "How I wish I could have gone
to grandma's school!"--only they may have something equally beautiful which will take its place
in that far-off time--who knows?

[Sidenote: Patterns]

[Sidenote: Oriental colors]

The patterns for oriental rugs familiar in the East have descended through hundreds of years,
and the exquisite colors, produced by vegetable dyes, and increasing in richness and beauty
with age, are only to be seen in old rugs. We have nothing in our modern dyes to compare with
the old color. One is soon interested in the study of these Eastern treasures, and it becomes
second nature in a short time not only to chat familiarly of Kermans, Serebends, Khivas, Bokharas,
and Kiz-Kilims, ad infinitum, but to jot down now and then in one's notebook, or still better
in one's design book (made of the kindergarten squared paper, one-eighth inch), a pretty border
or centerpiece for the rug which is to grace some doll house. The patterns of Turkish rugs
(see page 127) are of geometrical or arabesque designs--an edict from the Koran having prohibited
the reproduction of living things. The Persians, however, weave animals, birds, etc., as their
ancestors did in days gone by.

[Sidenote: Inscriptions on Persian rugs]

There is some very interesting reading in "Oriental Rug Weaving," by V. Kurdji, on the subject
of inscriptions often found on Persian rugs. He says: "If the possessors of some of the rare
pieces that are sold in this country knew the meaning of the inscriptions woven in their rugs,
the knowledge would add a charm and interest which would make them more valuable than the harmonious
colors so beautifully blended."

[Sidenote: Bokkara rugs]

[Sidenote: Khiva rugs]

Oriental rugs take their names from the countries or provinces in which they are made. Bokhara
rugs are made in mountainous districts of Turkestan, and have never been successfully imitated,
because the dyes used are made from a plant grown only in that district. The designs are geometrical,
and the colors deep maroon or blue. The pile is woven as close as velvet. They are noted for
the superior quality of their dyes. Khiva rugs, sometimes called afghan, are made in Turkestan.
They resemble the Bokhara rugs, but are coarser in texture and heavier in pile, and they differ
from them in having a wide selvage at each end. Some Khivas have a small pattern in red mosaic
over the surface with a circle in the center. One often sees a rug made of a rich golden yellow
with a background of dark red.

[Sidenote: Kiz-Kilim rugs]

The Kiz-Kilim rugs have no nap, and are woven with a needle. They are thin and almost alike
on both sides. The larger sizes are woven in two strips fastened together so that they can
be taken apart and used for curtains. "These Kiz-Kilims are woven by Armenians and Turks in
Anatolia (the land of sunrise, and the Greek name for Asia Minor). The literal translation
of the word Kiz-Kilim is bride's rug, it being a custom in that country for a bride to present
to her husband one of these rugs, which she has woven during her engagement to him. The quality
of the rug is supposed to measure the quality of the husband's affection for his bride, consequently
we have many beautiful specimens of this class, the brilliant hues and intricate designs of
which could only have been inspired by the whisperings of Cupid. They are in open-work patterns--called
perforated--and often have long tufts of colored silk tied to the rugs with blue beads, in
order to keep them from the effects of the Evil Eye." The Kiz-Kilim rug in the illustration
was copied from a genuine rug. The filling is a deep blue and the borders are in oriental colors.
The center figure is white, with red, brown, and yellow inside. There are four kinds of Kilims.
Much interesting and valuable information can be found in John Kimberley Mumford's "Oriental
Rugs"; New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1900, where directions for weaving Kiz-Kilims, Khivas,
and Bokharas are given, with a few patterns.

[Sidenote: Materials used]

[Sidenote: Perforations]

Oriental wools or carpet ravelings are used for these rugs. Copy your figures and colors from
genuine rugs. The accompanying patterns were obtained in this way. See directions on page 47
for stringing a double warp with fringe at each end. First fasten the pattern under the warp;
then weave about one-quarter inch at each end with carpet thread like the warp. This will make
it look like a "truly" Kiz-Kilim. Next to this, weave a very narrow strip of several colors
each twice across, regarding the double strings as one. Then weave each part of the narrow
border. To make the perforations, take up one thread of the double warp for one side of the
pattern, and the other thread for weaving the pattern next to it. For instance, the "steps,"
as the children call them, of triangle No. 1, when finished, will stand close to the steps
of triangle No. 2, with a little slit between. These perforations occur only where one pattern
joins another of a different color, or the dark filling. For instance, in the white figure
in the center, where three or five squares come together, the slits occur at each end, the
part between being woven over the double strings as if they were only one. In this way the
perforations of other parts are closed top and bottom. Use a tape needle and weave each section
of the pattern separately. Weave the filling last. As this peculiar tone of blue could not
be obtained in carpet ravelings, an eighth of a yard of terry was raveled for the purpose.
Take care not to draw any part of the pattern too tight, or the perforations will be too large.
The right and left edges of the rug are woven over the rods to keep them straight. Both narrow
borders were woven before the center was commenced. The pattern in the illustration is for
a Wilton or Axminster rug, but can be used for mats, or box, sachet, and cushion covers. It
is made with cross-stitch embroidery on burlap, silk, or wool canvas. (See also page 120.)

[Sidenote: Turkish patterns laid with tablets]

The children can lay these Turkish patterns with square tablets upon their desks, the pattern
being drawn upon the board, or on paper with a rubber pen. It will be a delight to the children
to transfer them to paper by drawing and then coloring, or by cutting and pasting colored papers.

[Sidenote: Stitches for Khiva and Bokhara rugs]

The genuine Khiva and Bokhara rugs are made by weaving and knotting alternately. It will be
easier at first to weave a web, or foundation. Choose a tight twisted yarn about the color
of the rug to be woven. String a close warp of the wool and weave plain up and down, one string
at a time, until you have a rug of the desired size. Put in the pattern first, and then the
filling. This work will be almost too difficult for little children. Carpet wools and Germantown
wool can be used. It will not be found difficult to follow the pattern, especially if one is
used to cross-stitch embroidery. Each stitch counts for one of cross-stitch. Keep the stitches
very close together so that the nap will stand up well when finished. Silk rugs can be copied
in the same way, using floss or rope silk for the pile. If one prefers, a piece of burlap may
be stretched across the loom and secured to the rods, instead of weaving a foundation, as suggested.

[Sidenote: Stitches for pile weaving]

[Sidenote: The first stitch]

Stitches for pile weaving are very easily made. This illustration showing examples of stitches
for pile weaving illustrates the methods used in the stitches, and may be used for Axminster
or Wilton rugs, for boxes, sachet cases, and other articles. The tape needle is the kind used
for weaving when the large needle cannot be used. It is preferable to use one of this kind
on account of the eye and blunt point, and it may be obtained at the notion counter in department
stores for a few cents. There are two stitches, each occupying half of the illustration and
numbered from left to right, beginning at the top. Make No. 1 by passing a tape needle threaded
with wool down through the web, leaving a short end, then up one stitch to the left. This is
the first step. In No. 2 continue over on the right side, past the stitch where you started,
to the stitch on the right; then down and up through the first hole, and cut off the wool the
same length as the end you left at first. No. 3 shows a stitch completed. No. 4, one row of
stitches, and No. 5, three rows, showing how one row overlaps another. When the rug is finished,
the ends should be cut evenly, so that the nap is like velvet. The children would say that
this stitch looks like a two-legged stool, and so it does.

[Sidenote: The second stitch]

The second stitch is made so that the nap lies sideways from left to right. No. a is just like
the preceding stitch. No. b shows the needle passing down the stitch where you started and
up one stitch to the right. Cut off the wool and pull the end left at first over the last one.
This pile should stand very straight and even. No. c shows a completed stitch; No. d one row,
and No. e three rows. These stitches are useful in mending Khiva and Bokhara rugs.

[Sidenote: Wilton and Axminster rugs]

Wilton, Axminster, or any rugs having a pile, can be woven with the same stitches. The pattern
in the illustration may be used for either a Wilton or Axminster rug, for a box cover, cushion,
sachet case, or mat; and can be cross-stitched embroidery, on burlap, silk or woolen canvas.

Chapter Thirteen

NAVAJO BLANKETS

[Sidenote: A sketch]

[Sidenote: Indian weaving]

[Sidenote: The colors used]

[Sidenote: Old Indian blankets are rare]

[Sidenote: Description of the illustration]

Navajo blankets were first made by the Pueblo Indians, from whom the Navajo Indians learned
the art, and not long after the latter excelled in the making of them. Among the Pueblo Indians
the men do the work; but women are the weavers among the Navajos. In the illustration on this
page is seen a miniature Navajo loom with the blanket commenced. The two cords woven at the
sides with the woof can be easily seen. Simple looms are suspended between two posts or trees,
and the weaver sits upon the ground. A twig is used for a shuttle, and a reed, fork-shaped
like a hand, is used to push down the woof threads. The blanket is made waterproof by pounding
down the threads with a batten, a good picture of which is seen in Dr. Washington Matthews'
article on Navajo weavers in the Third Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology. Separate balls
of color are used to carry out the pattern, which is sometimes traced in the sand before the
work is commenced. As many as twenty-nine different balls have been seen hanging from a single
blanket. Some of the designs have been handed down from one generation to another, and are
carried entirely in the memory. They are often symbolical "and unfold a whole legend to the
knowing eye of the native." The weaving is done from the bottom up, some working in one direction,
while others weave first at the bottom, then turn the loom upside down, and, after weaving
about the same distance there, finish in the middle. The last part of the weaving is like darning,
and is often done with a needle. The colors most used are white, gray, black, a bright yellow,
red (a scarlet, generally obtained by raveling bayeta cloth), and sometimes blue. In former
times, when the Indians used vegetable dyes, the colors were beautiful and lasting. These old
blankets are becoming more and more rare, and to-day in their places we have the bright and
not always satisfactory results of aniline dyes. The blanket in the illustration facing this
page has narrow stripes in the following colors: On each end (seven stripes) red, black, white,
orange, green, white, black. The two groups of six stripes in the middle are: Black, white,
red, green, white, black. Before the advent of the present squaw dress, the black, red, and
dark blue blankets were used as clothing, but the best blankets were, and still are, worn at
sacred dances. Dr. Matthews, in his report, gives an interesting description of the method
of making these blankets, with several pictures of the better examples. Navajo blankets are
finished with four border cords, which are secured as the weaving progresses, and the ends
are fastened at the four corners by small tassels.

[Sidenote: Method of making]

[Sidenote: Indian blankets]

Small Navajo blankets can be woven on the loom. Draw the pattern and place under the warp,
fastening it to the side rods. Use warp or carpet thread for the warp, and weave with a tape
or upholstery needle. One may weave all the pattern first, and then put in the filling; while
another will weave as the Indians do, filling in from one part of the pattern to the other
by threading the needle with a different color. This can be done, without running the thread
underneath, by hooking it in the loop of the pattern just finished. These little blankets are
very fascinating things to make, and the children become much interested in them, and in Indian
life as well.

[Sidenote: The colors in the blanket on page 141]

This very beautiful Navajo blanket, shown in the illustration, has three broad red stripes,
two narrow red stripes about one-half the width of the former, and four gray stripes about
one-half the width of narrow red stripes. The centers of all the figures are red, like the
filling--a brilliant scarlet. The colors of the large figures, beginning at the center of each,
and counting from left to right, are as follows: Nos. 1, 3, and 5, red, green, and light yellow.
Nos. 2 and 4, red, white, and black. The small figures, counting the same way, are: Nos. 1,
3, and 5, red, white, and black. Nos. 2 and 4, red, yellow, and green. The four corners are
finished with twisted red cord-like tassels. This cord also extends across the warp ends. Dr.
Matthews tells in his article on "Navajo Weavers" how two cords are twisted and woven at the
sides with the woof.

The two Navajo Indian blankets illustrated in this chapter, and the pattern on the following
page, may be easily adapted for the loom. Germantown knitting wool or carpet ravelings can
be used, although to obtain softer wool is better. Some of the handsomest Navajo blankets have
a long nap.

[Sidenote: Navajo patterns laid with tablets]

The children will take pleasure in laying Navajo patterns with triangular tablets, and then
transferring the pattern to paper by drawing and coloring, or by cutting and pasting in colors.

Chapter Fourteen

SONGS, GAMES, AND STORIES

There are many beautiful songs which can be sung during the weaving.

[Sidenote: Songs for the children]

There are songs about the birds' nests, always pleasing to the little folks, and doubly so
when they have held in their own hands the wonderful bit of weaving, so strong and yet so soft,
woven by the mother-bird for the baby-birds. Mrs. Spider is also very interesting with her
lace-like webs which are to be found even in well-regulated schoolrooms, and the songs of the
bleating sheep who give us their wool fill every little heart with delight. Miss Poulsson's
Finger Play, "The Lambs," gives the restless fingers something to do and the "eight white sheep
all fast asleep" afford a chance for a good laugh over the "two old dogs close by" (the thumbs).
One has the opportunity, too, of noticing whether the eight white sheep on the tiny hands are
really white enough to do the weaving. A smiling allusion to some small black sheep will bring
them back clean for the next session.

[Sidenote: A weaving game]

The following weaving game can be played in several ways. This extract is from the "Kindergarten
Guide," by Lois Bates: "Six children stand in a row; a tall one at each end for the border
of the mat and the other four representing the strips. The child who is to be the weaver holds
one end of a long tape, while the other is fastened to the left shoulder of the first child.
The weaver weaves the tape in and out among the children, placing the second row lower down.
It will be easily seen that the children who had it passed in front of them in the first row,
had it behind them in the second, and vice versa."

