She caught sight of the rose, seized it, glanced at its crumpled petals, glanced at me--and
her eyes, coming to a sudden halt, glittered with tears.

"What are you weeping about?" I asked.

"Why, here, about this rose. Look what has happened to it."

At this point I took it into my head to display profundity of thought.

"Your tears will wash away the mire," I said with a significant expression.

"Tears do not wash, tears scorch," she replied, and, turning toward the fireplace, she tossed
the flower into the expiring flame. 

The conflict of the Trenton Convention about to be enacted was an illustration of the poet's
line, "Where ignorant armies clash by night."

The successful side of the Convention was fighting for what they
least wanted; the defeated against what they most wanted.



IN MEMORY OF J. P. VRÉVSKY

In the mire, on damp, stinking straw, under the pent-house of an old carriage-house which had
been hastily converted into a field military hospital in a ruined Bulgarian hamlet, she had
been for more than a fortnight dying of typhus fever.

She was unconscious--and not a single physician had even glanced at her; the sick soldiers
whom she had nursed as long as she could keep on her feet rose by turns from their infected
lairs, in order to raise to her parched lips a few drops of water in a fragment of a broken jug.

She was young, handsome; high society knew her; even dignitaries inquired about her. The ladies
envied her, the men courted her ... two or three men loved her secretly and profoundly. Life
smiled upon her; but there are smiles which are worse than tears,

A tender, gentle heart ... and such strength, such a thirst for sacrifice! To help those who
needed help ... she knew no other happiness ... she knew no other and she tasted no other.
Every other happiness passed her by. But she had long since become reconciled to that, and
all flaming with the fire of inextinguishable faith, she dedicated herself to the service of
her fellow-men. What sacred treasures she held hidden there, in the depths of her soul, in
her own secret recesses, no one ever knew--and now no one will ever know.

And to what end? The sacrifice has been made ... the deed is done.

But it is sorrowful to think that no one said "thank you" even to her corpse, although she
herself was ashamed of and shunned all thanks.

May her dear shade be not offended by this tardy blossom, which I venture to lay upon her grave!

September, 1878.

THE LAST MEETING

We were once close, intimate friends.... But there came an evil moment and we parted like enemies.

Many years passed.... And lo! on entering the town where he lived I learned that he was hopelessly
ill, and wished to see me.

I went to him, I entered his chamber.... Our glances met.

I hardly recognised him. O God! How disease had changed him!

Yellow, shrivelled, with his head completely bald, and a narrow, grey beard, he was sitting
in nothing but a shirt, cut out expressly.... He could not bear the pressure of the lightest
garment. Abruptly he extended to me his frightfully-thin hand, which looked as though it had
been gnawed away, with an effort whispered several incomprehensible words--whether of welcome
or of reproach, who knows? His exhausted chest heaved; over the contracted pupils of his small,
inflamed eyes two scanty tears of martyrdom flowed down.

My heart sank within me.... I sat down on a chair beside him, and involuntarily dropping my
eyes in the presence of that horror and deformity, I also put out my hand.

But it seemed to me that it was not his hand which grasped mine.

It seemed to me as though there were sitting between us a tall, quiet, white woman. A long
veil enveloped her from head to foot. Her deep, pale eyes gazed nowhere; her pale, stern lips
uttered no sound....

That woman joined our hands.... She reconciled us forever.

Yes.... It was Death who had reconciled us....

April, 1878.

THE VISIT

I was sitting at the open window ... in the morning, early in the morning, on the first of May.

The flush of dawn had not yet begun; but the dark, warm night was already paling, already growing
chill.

No fog had risen, no breeze was straying, everything was of one hue and silent ... but one
could scent the approach of the awakening, and in the rarefied air the scent of the dew's harsh
dampness was abroad.

Suddenly, into my chamber, through the open window, flew a large bird, lightly tinkling and
rustling.

I started, looked more intently.... It was not a bird: it was a tiny, winged woman, clad in
a long, close-fitting robe which billowed out at the bottom.

She was all grey, the hue of mother-of-pearl; only the inner side of her wings glowed with
a tender flush of scarlet, like a rose bursting into blossom; a garland of lilies-of-the-valley
confined the scattered curls of her small, round head,--and two peacock feathers quivered amusingly,
like the feelers of a butterfly, above the fair, rounded little forehead.

She floated past a couple of times close to the ceiling: her tiny face was laughing; laughing
also were her huge, black, luminous eyes. The merry playfulness of her capricious flight shivered
their diamond rays.

She held in her hand a long frond of a steppe flower--"Imperial sceptre"[72] the Russian folk
call it; and it does, indeed, resemble a sceptre.

As she flew rapidly above me she touched my head with that flower.

I darted toward her.... But she had already fluttered through the window, and away she flew
headlong....

In the garden, in the wilderness of the lilac-bushes, a turtle-dove greeted her with its first
cooing; and at the spot where she had vanished the milky-white sky flushed a soft crimson.

I recognised thee, goddess of fancy! Thou hast visited me by accident--thou hast flown in to
young poets.

O poetry! O youth! O virginal beauty of woman! Only for an instant can ye gleam before me,--in
the early morning of the early spring!

May, 1878.

NECESSITAS--VIS--LIBERTAS

A BAS-RELIEF

A tall, bony old woman with an iron face and a dull, impassive gaze is walking along with great
strides, and pushing before her, with her hand as harsh as a stick, another woman.

This woman, of vast size, powerful, corpulent, with the muscles of a Hercules, and a tiny head
on a bull-like neck-and blind--is pushing on in her turn a small, thin young girl.

This girl alone has eyes which see; she resists, turns backward, elevates her thin red arms;
her animated countenance expresses impatience and hardihood.... She does not wish to obey,
she does not wish to advance in the direction whither she is being impelled ... and, nevertheless,
she must obey and advance.

    Necessitas--Vis--Libertas:

Whoever likes may interpret this.

May, 1878.

ALMS

In the vicinity of a great city, on the broad, much-travelled road, an aged, ailing man was
walking.

He was staggering as he went; his emaciated legs, entangling themselves, trailing and stumbling,
trod heavily and feebly, exactly as though they belonged to some one else; his clothing hung
on him in rags; his bare head drooped upon his breast.... He was exhausted.

He squatted down on a stone by the side of the road, bent forward, propped his elbows on his
knees, covered his face with both hands, and between his crooked fingers the tears dripped
on the dry, grey dust.

He was remembering....

He remembered how he had once been healthy and rich,--and how he had squandered his health,
and distributed his wealth to others, friends and enemies.... And lo! now he had not a crust
of bread, and every one had abandoned him, his friends even more promptly than his enemies....
Could he possibly humble himself to the point of asking alms? And he felt bitter and ashamed
at heart.

And the tears still dripped and dripped, mottling the grey dust.

Suddenly he heard some one calling him by name. He raised his weary head and beheld in front
of him a stranger: a face calm and dignified, but not stern; eyes not beaming, but bright;
a gaze penetrating, but not evil.

"Thou hast given away all thy wealth," an even voice made itself heard.... "But surely thou
art not regretting that thou hast done good?"

"I do not regret it," replied the old man, with a sigh, "only here am I dying now."

"And if there had been no beggars in the world to stretch out their hands to thee," pursued
the stranger, "thou wouldst have had no one to whom to show thy beneficence; thou wouldst not
have been able to exercise thyself therein?"

The old man made no reply, and fell into thought.

"Therefore, be not proud now, my poor man," spoke up the stranger again. "Go, stretch out thy
hand, afford to other good people the possibility of proving by their actions that they are good."

The old man started, and raised his eyes ... but the stranger had already vanished,--but far
away, on the road, a wayfarer made his appearance.

The old man approached him, and stretched out his hand.--The wayfarer turned away with a surly
aspect and gave him nothing.

But behind him came another, and this one gave the old man a small alms.

And the old man bought bread for himself with the copper coins which had been given him, and
sweet did the bit which he had begged seem to him, and there was no shame in his heart--but,
on the contrary, a tranquil joy overshadowed him.

May, 1878.

THE INSECT

I dreamed that a score of us were sitting in a large room with open windows.

Among us were women, children, old men.... We were all talking about some very unfamiliar subject--talking
noisily and unintelligibly.

Suddenly, with a harsh clatter, a huge insect, about three inches and a half long, flew into
the room ... flew in, circled about and alighted on the wall.

It resembled a fly or a wasp.--Its body was of a dirty hue; its flat, hard wings were of the
same colour; it had extended, shaggy claws and a big, angular head, like that of a dragon-fly;
and that head and the claws were bright red, as though bloody.

This strange insect kept incessantly turning its head downward, upward, to the right, to the
left, and moving its claws about ... then suddenly it wrested itself from the wall, flew clattering
through the room,--and again alighted, again began to move in terrifying and repulsive manner,
without stirring from the spot. It evoked in all of us disgust, alarm, even terror.... None
of us had ever seen anything of the sort; we all cried: "Expel that monster!" We all flourished
our handkerchiefs at it from a distance ... for no one could bring himself to approach it ...
and when the insect had flown in we had all involuntarily got out of the way.

Only one of our interlocutors, a pale-faced man who was still young, surveyed us all with surprise.--He
shrugged his shoulders, he smiled, he positively could not understand what had happened to
us and why we were so agitated. He had seen no insect, he had not heard the ominous clatter
of its wings.

Suddenly the insect seemed to rivet its attention on him, soared into the air, and swooping
down upon his head, stung him on the brow, a little above the eyes.... The young man emitted
a faint cry and fell dead.

The dreadful fly immediately flew away.... Only then did we divine what sort of a visitor we
had had.

May, 1878.

CABBAGE-SOUP

The son of a widowed peasant-woman died--a young fellow aged twenty, the best labourer in the
village.

The lady-proprietor of that village, on learning of the peasant-woman's affliction, went to
call upon her on the very day of the funeral.

She found her at home.

Standing in the middle of her cottage, in front of the table, she was ladling out empty[73]
cabbage-soup from the bottom of a smoke-begrimed pot, in a leisurely way, with her right hand
(her left hung limply by her side), and swallowing spoonful after spoonful.

The woman's face had grown sunken and dark; her eyes were red and swollen ... but she carried
herself independently and uprightly, as in church.[74]

"O Lord!" thought the lady; "she can eat at such a moment ... but what coarse feelings they have!"

And then the lady-mistress recalled how, when she had lost her own little daughter, aged nine
months, a few years before, she had refused, out of grief, to hire a very beautiful villa in
the vicinity of Petersburg, and had passed the entire summer in town!--But the peasant-woman
continued to sip her cabbage-soup.

At last the lady could endure it no longer.--"Tatyána!" said she.... "Good gracious!--I am
amazed! Is it possible that thou didst not love thy son? How is it that thy appetite has not
disappeared?--How canst thou eat that cabbage-soup?"

"My Vásya is dead," replied the woman softly, and tears of suffering again began to stream
down her sunken cheeks,--"and, of course, my own end has come also: my head has been taken
away from me while I am still alive. But the cabbage-soup must not go to waste; for it is salted"

The lady-mistress merely shrugged her shoulders and went away. She got salt cheaply.

May, 1878.

THE AZURE REALM

O azure realm! O realm of azure, light, youth, and happiness! I have beheld thee ... in my dreams.

There were several of us in a beautiful, decorated boat. Like the breast of a swan the white
sail towered aloft beneath fluttering pennants.

I did not know who my companions were; but with all my being I felt that they were as young,
as merry, as happy as I was!

And I paid no heed to them. All about me I beheld only the shoreless azure sea, all covered
with a fine rippling of golden scales, and over-head an equally shoreless azure sea, and in
it, triumphantly and, as it were, smilingly, rolled on the friendly sun.

And among us, from time to time, there arose laughter, ringing and joyous as the laughter of
the gods!

Or suddenly, from some one's lips, flew forth words, verses replete with wondrous beauty and
with inspired power ... so that it seemed as though the very sky resounded in reply to them,
and round about the sea throbbed with sympathy.... And then blissful silence began again.

Diving lightly through the soft waves, our swift boat glided on. It was not propelled by the
breeze; it was ruled by our own sportive hearts. Whithersoever we wished, thither did it move,
obediently, as though it were gifted with life.

We encountered islands, magical, half-transparent islands with the hues of precious stones,
jacinths and emeralds. Intoxicating perfumes were wafted from the surrounding shores; some
of these islands pelted us with a rain of white roses and lilies-of-the-valley; from others
there rose up suddenly long-winged birds, clothed in rainbow hues.

The birds circled over our heads, the lilies and roses melted in the pearly foam, which slipped
along the smooth sides of our craft.

In company with the flowers and the birds, sweet, sweet sounds were wafted to our ears....
We seemed to hear women's voices in them.... And everything round about,--the sky, the sea,
the bellying of the sail up aloft, the purling of the waves at the stern,--everything spoke
of love, of blissful love.

And she whom each one of us loved--she was there ... invisibly and near at hand. Yet another
moment and lo! her eyes would beam forth, her smile would blossom out.... Her hand would grasp
thy hand, and draw thee after her into an unfading paradise!

O azure realm! I have beheld thee ... in my dream!

June, 1878.

TWO RICH MEN

When men in my presence extol Rothschild, who out of his vast revenues allots whole thousands
for the education of children, the cure of the sick, the care of the aged, I laud and melt
in admiration.

But while I laud and melt I cannot refrain from recalling a poverty-stricken peasant's family
which received an orphaned niece into its wretched, tumble-down little hovel.

"If we take Kátka," said the peasant-woman; "we shall spend our last kopéks on her, and there
will be nothing left wherewith to buy salt for our porridge."

"But we will take her ... and unsalted porridge," replied the peasant-man, her husband.

Rothschild is a long way behind that peasant-man!

July, 1878.

THE OLD MAN

The dark, distressing days have come....

One's own maladies, the ailments of those dear to him, cold and the gloom of old age. Everything
which thou hast loved, to which thou hast surrendered thyself irrevocably, collapses and falls
into ruins. The road has taken a turn down hill.

But what is to be done? Grieve? Lament? Thou wilt help neither thyself nor others in that way....

On the withered, bent tree the foliage is smaller, more scanty--but the verdure is the same
as ever.

Do thou also shrivel up, retire into thyself, into thy memories, and there, deep, very deep
within, at the very bottom of thy concentrated soul, thy previous life, accessible to thee
alone, will shine forth before thee with its fragrant, still fresh verdure, and the caress
and strength of the springtime!

But have a care ... do not look ahead, poor old man!

July, 1878.

THE CORRESPONDENT

Two friends are sitting at a table and drinking tea.

A sudden noise has arisen in the street. Plaintive moans, violent oaths, outbursts of malicious
laughter have become audible.

"Some one is being beaten," remarked one of the friends, after having cast a glance out of
the window.

"A criminal? A murderer?" inquired the other.--"See here, no matter who it is, such chastisement
without trial is not to be tolerated. Let us go and defend him."

"But it is not a murderer who is being beaten."

"Not a murderer? A thief, then? Never mind, let us go, let us rescue him from the mob."

"It is not a thief, either."

"Not a thief? Is it, then, a cashier, a railway employee, an army contractor, a Russian Mæcenas,
a lawyer, a well-intentioned editor, a public philanthropist?... At any rate, let us go, let
us aid him!"

"No ... they are thrashing a correspondent."

"A correspondent?--Well, see here now, let's drink a glass of tea first."

July, 1878.

TWO BROTHERS

It was a vision....

Two angels presented themselves before me ... two spirits.

I say angels ... spirits, because neither of them had any garments on their naked bodies, and
from the shoulders of both sprang long, powerful wings.

Both are youths. One is rather plump, smooth of skin, with black curls. He has languishing
brown eyes with thick eyelashes; his gaze is ingratiating, cheerful, and eager. A charming,
captivating countenance a trifle bold, a trifle malicious. His full red lips tremble slightly.
The youth smiles like one who has authority,--confidently and lazily; a sumptuous garland of
flowers rests lightly on his shining hair, almost touching his velvet eyebrows. The spotted
skin of a leopard, pinned with a golden dart, hangs lightly from his plump shoulders down upon
his curving hips. The feathers of his wings gleam with changeable tints of rose-colour; their
tips are of a brilliant red, just as though they had been dipped in fresh, crimson blood. From
time to time they palpitate swiftly, with a pleasant silvery sound, the sound of rain in springtime.

The other is gaunt and yellow of body. His ribs are faintly discernible at every breath. His
hair is fair, thin, straight; his eyes are huge, round, pale grey in colour ... his gaze is
uneasy and strangely bright. All his features are sharp-cut: his mouth is small, half open,
with fish-like teeth; his nose is solid, aquiline; his chin projecting, covered with a whitish
down. Those thin lips have never once smiled.

It is a regular, terrible, pitiless face! Moreover, the face of the first youth,--of the beauty,--although
it is sweet and charming, does not express any compassion either. Around the head of the second
are fastened a few empty, broken ears of grain intertwined with withered blades of grass. A
coarse grey fabric encircles his loins; the wings at his back, of a dull, dark-blue colour,
wave softly and menacingly.

Both youths appeared to be inseparable companions.

Each leaned on the other's shoulder. The soft little hand of the first rested like a cluster
of grapes on the harsh collar-bone of the second; the slender, bony hand of the second, with
its long, thin fingers, lay outspread, like a serpent, on the womanish breast of the first.

And I heard a voice. This is what it uttered:

"Before thee stand Love and Hunger---own brothers, the two fundamental bases of everything living.

"Everything which lives moves, for the purpose of obtaining food; and eats, for the purpose
of reproducing itself.

"Love and Hunger have one and the same object; it is necessary that life should not cease,--one's
own life and the life of others are the same thing, the universal life."

August, 1878.

THE EGOIST

He possessed everything which was requisite to make him the scourge of his family.

He had been born healthy, he had been born rich--and during the whole course of his long life
he had remained rich and healthy; he had never committed a single crime; he had never stumbled
into any blunder; he had not made a single slip of the tongue or mistake.

He was irreproachably honest!... And proud in the consciousness of his honesty, he crushed
every one with it: relatives, friends, and acquaintances.

His honesty was his capital ... and he exacted usurious interest from it.

Honesty gave him the right to be pitiless and not to do any good deed which was not prescribed;--and
he was pitiless, and he did no good ... because good except by decree is not good.

He never troubled himself about any one, except his own very exemplary self, and he was genuinely
indignant if others did not take equally assiduous care of it!

And, at the same time, he did not consider himself an egoist, and upbraided and persecuted
egoists and egoism more than anything else!--Of course! Egoism in other people interfered with
his own.

Not being conscious of a single failing, he did not understand, he did not permit, a weakness
in any one else. Altogether, he did not understand anybody or anything, for he was completely
surrounded by himself on all sides, above and below, behind and before.

He did not even understand the meaning of forgiveness. He never had had occasion to forgive
himself.... Then how was he to forgive others?

Before the bar of his own conscience, before the face of his own God, he, that marvel, that
monster of virtue, rolled up his eyes, and in a firm, clear voice uttered: "Yes; I am a worthy,
a moral man!"

He repeated these words on his death-bed, and nothing quivered even then in his stony heart,--in
that heart devoid of a fleck or a crack.

O monstrosity of self-satisfied, inflexible, cheaply-acquired virtue--thou art almost more
repulsive than the undisguised monstrosity of vice!

December, 1878.

THE SUPREME BEING'S FEAST

One day the Supreme Being took it into his head to give a great feast in his azure palace.

He invited all the virtues as guests. Only the virtues ... he invited no men ... only ladies.

Very many of them assembled, great and small. The petty virtues were more agreeable and courteous
than the great ones; but all seemed well pleased, and chatted politely among themselves, as
befits near relatives and friends.

But lo! the Supreme Being noticed two very beautiful ladies who, apparently, were entirely
unacquainted with each other.

The host took one of these ladies by the hand and led her to the other.

"Beneficence!" said he, pointing to the first.

"Gratitude!" he added, pointing to the second.

The two virtues were unspeakably astonished; ever since the world has existed--and it has existed
a long time--they had never met before.

December, 1878.

THE SPHINX

Yellowish-grey, friable at the top, firm below, creaking sand ... sand without end, no matter
in which direction one gazes!

And above this sand, above this sea of dead dust, the huge head of the Egyptian Sphinx rears
itself aloft.

What is it that those vast, protruding lips, those impassively-dilated, up-turned nostrils,
and those eyes, those long, half-sleepy, half-watchful eyes, beneath the double arch of the
lofty brows, are trying to say?

For they are trying to say something! They even speak--but only [Oe]dipus can solve the riddle
and understand their mute speech.

Bah! Yes, I recognise those features ... there is nothing Egyptian about the low white forehead,
the prominent cheek-bones, the short, straight nose, the fine mouth with its white teeth, the
soft moustache and curling beard,--and those small eyes set far apart ... and on the head the
cap of hair furrowed with a parting.... Why, it is thou, Karp, Sídor, Semyón, thou petty peasant
of Yaroslávl, or of Ryazán, my fellow-countryman, the kernel of Russia! Is it long since thou
didst become the Sphinx?

Or dost thou also wish to say something? Yes; and thou also art a Sphinx.

And thy eyes--those colourless but profound eyes--speak also.... And their speeches are equally
dumb and enigmatic.

Only where is thine [Oe]dipus?

Alas! 'Tis not sufficient to don a cap to become thine [Oe]dipus, O Sphinx of All the Russias!

December, 1878.

NYMPHS

I was standing in front of a chain of beautiful mountains spread out in a semi-circle; the
young, verdant forest clothed them from summit to base. The southern sky hung transparently
blue above us; on high the sun beamed radiantly; below, half hidden in the grass, nimble brooks
were babbling.

And there recurred to my mind an ancient legend about how, in the first century after the birth
of Christ, a Grecian ship was sailing over the Aegean Sea.

It was midday.... The weather was calm. And suddenly, high up, over the head of the helmsman,
some one uttered distinctly: "When thou shalt sail past the islands, cry in a loud voice, 'Great
Pan is dead!'"

The helmsman was amazed ... and frightened. But when the ship ran past the islands he called
out: "Great Pan is dead!"

And thereupon, immediately, in answer to his shout, along the whole length of the shore (for
the island was uninhabited), there resounded loud sobbing groans, prolonged wailing cries:
"He is dead! Great Pan is dead!"

This legend recurred to my mind ... and a strange thought flashed across my brain.--"What if
I were to shout that call?"

But in view of the exultation which surrounded me I could not think of death, and with all
the force at my command I shouted: "He is risen! Great Pan is risen!"

And instantly,--oh, marvel!--in reply to my exclamation, along the whole wide semi-circle of
verdant mountains there rolled a vigorous laughter, there arose a joyous chattering and splashing.
"He is risen! Pan is risen!" rustled youthful voices.--Everything there in front of me suddenly
broke into laughter more brilliant than the sun on high, more sportive than the brooks which
were babbling beneath the grass. The hurried tramp of light footsteps became audible; athwart
the green grove flitted the marble whiteness of waving tunics, the vivid scarlet of naked bodies....
It was nymphs, nymphs, dryads, bacchantes, running down from the heights into the plain....

They made their appearance simultaneously along all the borders of the forest. Curls fluttered
on divine heads, graceful arms uplifted garlands and cymbals, and laughter, sparkling, Olympian
laughter, rippled and rolled among them....

In front floats a goddess. The superficial reader may find countenance lent to this latter view
in the many notes of information and advice which I addressed to the President and in the record
of his subsequent actions which were more or less in accord with
the counsel contained in some of these notes.

If the reader deduces from this the conclusion that I was the instigator
of some of the President's important policies, he will misinterpret
the facts and the President's character and mental processes; if he
concludes that I am trying to represent myself as the instigator he
will misunderstand my motives in publishing these notes.

These motives are: first, to tell the story of my association with Mr. Wilson, and part of the
record is contained in these notes; secondly, to show what liberty he allowed me to suggest
and criticize; how, so far from being offended, he welcomed counsel.

Having this privilege I exercised it.

I conceived it as part of my duty as his secretary and friend to report to him my own interpretations
of facts and public opinion as I gathered these from newspapers and conversations, and sometimes
to suggest modes of action.

These notes were memoranda for my chief's consideration.

The reader will see how frankly critical some of these notes are. The mere fact that the President
permitted me to continue to write to him in a vein of candour that was frequently brusque and blunt,
is the conclusive answer to the charge that he resented criticism.

Contrary to the misrepresentations, he had from time to time many
advisers.

In most instances, I do not possess written reports of what others said orally and in writing,
and therefore in this record, which is essentially concerned with
my own official and personal relations with him, I may seem to represent
myself as a preponderating influence.

This is neither the fact nor my intention.

The public acts of Mr. Wilson were frequently mosaics, made up of his own ideas and those
of others.

My written notes were merely stones offered for the mosaic. Sometimes the stones were rejected,
sometimes accepted and shaped by the master builder into the pattern.

It was a habit of Mr. Wilson's to meditate before taking action, to listen to advice without
comment, frequently without indicating whether or not the idea broached by others had already
occurred to him. We who knew him best knew that often the idea had occurred to him and had been
thought out more lucidly than any adviser could state it.

But he would test his own views by the touchstone of other minds' reactions to the situations and
problems which he was facing and would get the "slant" of other minds.

He

was always ahead of us all in his thinking. An admirer once said: "You could shut him up in an
hermetically sealed room and trust him to reach the right decision," but as a matter of fact he did
not work that way.

He sought counsel and considered it and acted on it or dismissed it according to his best
judgment, for the responsibility for the final action was his, and
he was boldly prepared to accept that responsibility and conscientiously
careful not to abuse it by acting rashly.

While he would on occasion make momentous decisions quickly and decisively,
the habitual character of his mind was deliberative.

He wanted all the facts and so far as possible the contingencies. Younger men like myself could counsel
immediate and drastic action, but even while we were advising we knew that he would, without
haste and without waste, calmly calculate his course.



All reddish, peasant heads. From time to time they would begin to surge, to fall, to rise again,
like ripe ears of grain when the summer breeze flits across them in a slow wave.

Suddenly some man or other stepped from behind and took up his stand alongside me.

I did not turn toward him, but I immediately felt that that man was--Christ.

Emotion, curiosity, awe took possession of me simultaneously. I forced myself to look at my
neighbour.

He had a face like that of everybody else,--a face similar to all human faces. His eyes gazed
slightly upward, attentively and gently. His lips were closed, but not compressed; the upper
lip seemed to rest upon the lower; his small beard was parted in the middle. His hands were
clasped, and did not move. And his garments were like those of every one else.

"Christ, forsooth!" I thought to myself. "Such a simple, simple man! It cannot be!"

I turned away.--But before I had time to turn my eyes from that simple man it again seemed
to me that it was Christ in person who was standing beside me.

Again I exerted an effort over myself.... And again I beheld the same face, resembling all
human faces, the same ordinary, although unfamiliar, features.

And suddenly dread fell upon me, and I came to myself. Only then did I understand that precisely
such a face--a face like all human faces--is the face of Christ.

December, 1878.

II

1879-1882

THE STONE

Have you seen an old, old stone on the seashore, when the brisk waves are beating upon it from
all sides, at high tide, on a sunny spring day--beating and sparkling and caressing it, and
drenching its mossy head with crumbling pearls of glittering foam?

The stone remains the same stone, but brilliant colours start forth upon its surly exterior.

They bear witness to that distant time when the molten granite was only just beginning to harden
and was all glowing with fiery hues.

Thus also did young feminine souls recently attack my old heart from all quarters,--and beneath
their caressing touch it glowed once more with colours which faded long ago,--with traces of
its pristine fire!

The waves have retreated ... but the colours have not yet grown dim, although a keen breeze
is drying them.

May, 1879.

DOVES

I was standing on the crest of a sloping hill; in front of me lay outspread, and motley of
hue, the ripe rye, now like a golden, again like a silvery sea.

But no surge was coursing across this sea; no sultry breeze was blowing; a great thunder-storm
was brewing.

Round about me the sun was still shining hotly and dimly; but in the distance, beyond the rye,
not too far away, a dark-blue thunder-cloud lay in a heavy mass over one half of the horizon.

Everything was holding its breath ... everything was languishing beneath the ominous gleam
of the sun's last rays. Not a single bird was to be seen or heard; even the sparrows had hidden
themselves. Only somewhere, close at hand, a solitary huge leaf of burdock was whispering and
flapping.

How strongly the wormwood on the border-strips[75] smells! I glanced at the blue mass ... and
confusion ensued in my soul. "Well, be quick, then, be quick!" I thought. "Flash out, ye golden
serpent! Rumble, ye thunder! Move on, advance, discharge thy water, thou evil thunder-cloud;
put an end to this painful torment!"

But the storm-cloud did not stir. As before, it continued to crush the dumb earth ... and seemed
merely to wax larger and darker.

And lo! through its bluish monotony there flashed something smooth and even; precisely like
a white handkerchief, or a snowball. It was a white dove flying from the direction of the village.

It flew, and flew onward, always straight onward ... and vanished behind the forest.

Several moments passed--the same cruel silence still reigned.... But behold! Now two handkerchiefs
are fluttering, two snowballs are floating back; it is two white doves wending their way homeward
in even flight.

And now, at last, the storm has broken loose--and the fun begins!

I could hardly reach home.--The wind shrieked and darted about like a mad thing; low-hanging
rusty-hued clouds swirled onward, as though rent in bits; everything whirled, got mixed up,
lashed and rocked with the slanting columns of the furious downpour; the lightning flashes
blinded with their fiery green hue; abrupt claps of thunder were discharged like cannon; there
was a smell of sulphur....

But under the eaves, on the very edge of a garret window, side by side sit the two white doves,--the
one which flew after its companion, and the one which it brought and, perhaps, saved.

Both have ruffled up their plumage, and each feels with its wing the wing of its neighbour....

It is well with them! And it is well with me as I gaze at them.... Although I am alone ...
alone, as always.

May, 1879.

TO-MORROW! TO-MORROW!

How empty, and insipid, and insignificant is almost every day which we have lived through!
How few traces it leaves behind it! In what a thoughtlessly-stupid manner have those hours
flown past, one after another!

And, nevertheless, man desires to exist; he prizes life, he hopes in it, in himself, in the
future.... Oh, what blessings he expects from the future!

And why does he imagine that other future days will not resemble the one which has just passed?

But he does not imagine this. On the whole, he is not fond of thinking--and it is well that
he does not.

"There, now, to-morrow, to-morrow!" he comforts himself--until that "to-morrow" over-throws
him into the grave.

Well--and once in the grave,--one ceases, willy-nilly, to think.

May, 1879.

NATURE

I dreamed that I had entered a vast subterranean chamber with a lofty, arched roof. It was
completely filled by some sort of even light, also subterranean.

In the very centre of the chamber sat a majestic woman in a flowing robe green in hue. With
her head bowed on her hand, she seemed to be immersed in profound meditation.

I immediately understood that this woman was Nature itself,--and reverent awe pierced my soul
with an instantaneous chill.

I approached the seated woman, and making a respectful obeisance, "O our common mother," I
exclaimed, "what is the subject of thy meditation? Art thou pondering the future destinies
of mankind? As to how it is to attain the utmost possible perfection and bliss?"

The woman slowly turned her dark, lowering eyes upon me. Her lips moved, and a stentorian voice,
like unto the clanging of iron, rang out:

"I am thinking how I may impart more power to the muscles in the legs of a flea, so that it
may more readily escape from its enemies. The equilibrium of attack and defence has been destroyed....
It must be restored."

"What!" I stammered, in reply.--"So that is what thou art thinking about? But are not we men
thy favourite children?"

The woman knit her brows almost imperceptibly.--"All creatures are my children," she said,
"and I look after all of them alike,--and I annihilate them in identically the same way."

"But good ... reason ... justice...." I stammered again.

"Those are the words of men," rang out the iron voice. Never before was the ignorance of a boss made
more manifest. As a matter of fact, at that very time there was no more implacable foe of
Woodrow Wilson in the state of New Jersey than Moses Taylor Pyne, who headed the opposition
to Mr. Wilson in the Princeton fight.

I was about to answer ... but the earth round about me uttered a dull groan and trembled--and
I awoke.

August, 1879.

"HANG HIM!"

"It happened in the year 1803," began my old friend, "not long before Austerlitz. The regiment
of which I was an officer was quartered in Moravia.

"We were strictly forbidden to harry and oppress the inhabitants; and they looked askance on
us as it was, although we were regarded as allies.

"I had an orderly, a former serf of my mother's, Egór by name. He was an honest and peaceable
fellow; I had known him from his childhood and treated him like a friend.

