No, he was not swamped by classicism, but he was affected by it, and just here, and in that
self-consciousness which Shakespeare was free from, and which may have been more or less the
result of his classic erudition, he fails of being one of the universal poets of mankind. The
genius of Shakespeare lay in his power to so use the real and individual facts of life as to
raise in the minds of his readers a broader and nobler conception of human life than they had
conceived before. This is creative genius; this is the idealist dealing faithfully with realistic
material; this is, as we should say in our day, the work of the artist as distinguished from
the work of the photographer. It may be an admirable but it is not the highest work of the
sculptor, the painter, or the writer, that does not reveal to the mind--that comes into relation
with it something before out of his experience and beyond the facts either brought before him
or with which he is acquainted.

What influence Shakespeare had upon the culture and taste of his own time and upon his immediate
audience would be a most interesting inquiry. We know what his audiences were. He wrote for
the people, and the theatre in his day was a popular amusement for the multitude, probably
more than it was a recreation for those who enjoyed the culture of letters. A taste for letters
was prevalent among the upper class, and indeed was fashionable among both ladies and gentlemen
of rank. In this the court of Elizabeth set the fashion. The daughter of the duchess was taught
not only to distill strong waters, but to construe Greek. When the queen was translating Socrates
or Seneca, the maids of honor found it convenient to affect at least a taste for the classics.
For the nobleman and the courtier an intimacy with Greek, Latin, and Italian was essential
to "good form." But the taste for erudition was mainly confined to the metropolis or the families
who frequented it, and to persons of rank, and did not pervade the country or the middle classes.
A few of the country gentry had some pretension to learning, but the majority cared little
except for hawks and hounds, gaming and drinking; and if they read it was some old chronicle,
or story of knightly adventure, "Amadis de Gaul," or a stray playbook, or something like the
"History of Long Meg of Westminster," or perhaps a sheet of news. To read and write were still
rare accomplishments in the country, and Dogberry expressed a common notion when he said reading
and writing come by nature. Sheets of news had become common in the town in James's time, the
first newspaper being the English Mercury, which appeared in April, 1588, and furnished food
for Jonson's satire in his "Staple of News." His accusation has a familiar sound when he says
that people had a "hunger and thirst after published pamphlets of news, set out every Saturday,
but made all at home, and no syllable of truth in them."

Though Elizabeth and James were warm patrons of the theatre, the court had no such influence
over the plays and players as had the court in Paris at the same period. The theatres were
built for the people, and the audiences included all classes. There was a distinction between
what were called public and private theatres, but the public frequented both. The Shakespeare
theatres, at which his plays were exclusively performed, were the Globe, called public, on
the Bankside, and the Blackfriars, called private, on the City side, the one for summer, the
other for winter performances. The Blackfriars was smaller than the Globe, was roofed over,
and needed to be lighted with candles, and was frequented more by the better class than the
more popular Globe. There is no evidence that Elizabeth ever attended the public theatres,
but the companies were often summoned to play before her in Whitehall, where the appointments
and scenery were much better than in the popular houses.

The price of general admission to the Globe and Blackfriars was sixpence, at the Fashion Theatre
twopence, and at some of the inferior theatres one penny. The boxes at the Globe were a shilling,
at the Blackfriars one-and-six. The usual net receipts of a performance were from nine to ten
pounds, and this was about the sum that Elizabeth paid to companies for a performance at Whitehall,
which was always in the evening and did not interfere with regular hours. The theatres opened
as early as one o'clock and not later than three in the afternoon. The crowds that filled the
pit and galleries early, to secure places, amused themselves variously before the performance
began: they drank ale, smoked, fought for apples, cracked nuts, chaffed the boxes, and a few
read the cheap publications of the day that were hawked in the theatre. It was a rough and
unsavory audience in pit and gallery, but it was a responsive one, and it enjoyed the acting
with little help to illusion in the way of scenery. In fact, scenery did not exist, as we understand
it. A board inscribed with the name of the country or city indicated the scene of action. The viewing of
the exalted anagogic conception as a perspective vanishing point, makes allowance for the possible
errors of superposition in the anagogic aspect of the elementary types.

The tripartite division, which we meet in the great work, shows the
frequently doubted inner qualification of the three degrees of freemasonry.

   As they answer a need, they have again prevailed, although they were
not existent in the masonic form of the royal art at the beginning
(about two centuries ago); I say “again,” because similar needs have
already earlier produced similar forms.

(Cf. L. Keller’s writings.) Whether we consider ethical education in general or the intensive
(introversion) form of it, mysticism, we have in either case a process of development, and degrees are
necessary to express it symbolically.
 I am recalling these details to show that the amusement
was popular and cheap. The ordinary actors, including the boys and men who took women's parts
(for women did not appear on the stage till after the Restoration) received only about five
or six shillings a week (for Sundays and all), and the first-class actor, who had a share in
the net receipts, would not make more than ninety pounds a year. The ordinary price paid for
a new play was less than seven pounds; Oldys, on what authority is not known, says that Shakespeare
received only five pounds for "Hamlet."

The influence of the theatre upon politics, contemporary questions that interested the public,
and morals, was early recognized in the restraints put upon representations by the censorship,
and in the floods of attacks upon its licentious and demoralizing character. The plays of Shakespeare
did not escape the most bitter animadversions of the moral reformers. We have seen how Shakespeare
mirrored his age, but we have less means of ascertaining what effect he produced upon the life
of his time. Until after his death his influence was mainly direct, upon the play-goers, and
confined to his auditors. He had been dead seven years before his plays were collected. However
the people of his day regarded him, it is safe to say that they could not have had any conception
of the importance of the work he was doing. They were doubtless satisfied with him. It was
a great age for romances and story-telling, and he told stories, old in new dresses, but he
was also careful to use contemporary life, which his hearers understood.

It is not to his own age, but to those following, and especially to our own time, that we are
to look for the shaping and enormous influence upon human life of the genius of this poet.
And it is measured not by the libraries of comments that his works have called forth, but by
the prevalence of the language and thought of his poetry in all subsequent literature, and
by its entrance into the current of common thought and speech. It may be safely said that the
English-speaking world and almost every individual of it are different from what they would
have been if Shakespeare had never lived. Of all the forces that have survived out of his creative
time, he is one of the chief.