Every angel receives the heaven which is around him according to the heaven which is within
him. Unless heaven is within a man, none of the heaven around him flows in and is received.

Love to the Lord is the love regnant in the heavens; for there the Lord is loved above all
things. Thus the Lord is All in all there. He flows into all the angels, and into each of them.
He disposes them; He induces a likeness of Himself on them, and causes Heaven to be where He
is. Hence an angel is heaven in the least form; a society is heaven in a greater form; and
all the societies together are heaven in the greatest form.

--Heaven and Hell, nn. 319, 54, 58

AN ACTUAL WORLD

In general, what appears in heaven, appears the same as it does in our material world of three
kingdoms. Things appear before the eyes of angels just as objects of the three kingdoms do
before the eyes of men in the world. Still there is this difference: the things which appear
in heaven, have a spiritual origin, and those which appear in our world a material origin.
Objects of a spiritual origin affect the senses of angels because these senses are spiritual,
as those of a material origin affect the senses of men, inasmuch as their senses are material.
Heavenly objects are said to have a spiritual origin, because they exist from the Divine which
proceeds from the Lord as a Sun; and the Divine that proceeds from the Lord as a Sun is spiritual.
For there the Sun is not fire, but Divine Love, appearing before the eyes of the angels as
the sun of the world does before the eyes of men; and whatever proceeds from the Divine Love
is Divine and is spiritual. Of this origin are all things which exist in the heavens, and they
appear in forms like those in our world. It is due to the order of creation that they appear
in such forms. According to that order, things which are of love and wisdom with the angels,
on descending into the lower sphere in which angels are in respect of their bodies and of their
sensation, present themselves in such forms and under such types. These are correspondences.

--Apocalypse Explained, n. 926

A WORLD OF ACTION

All heaven's delights are united to uses and inhere in them, because uses are the goods of
love and charity, in which the angels are. The angels find all their happiness in use, from
use, and according to use. There is the highest freedom in this because it proceeds from interior
affection, and is conjoined with ineffable delight. Uses exist in the heavens in all variety
and diversity. Never is the use of one angel quite the same as that of another; nor the delight.
What is more, the delights of any one person's use are countless. These countless and various
delights are nevertheless united in an order so that they mutually regard one another, as do
the uses of every member, organ and inner part of the body. They are even more like the uses
of each vessel and fibre in every member, organ and vital part; each and all of which are so
related that they regard each of its own good in the other, and thus in all, and all in each.
As a result of this general and several regard they act as one.

--Heaven and Hell, nn. 402, 403, 404, 405

OUR CHILDREN IN HEAVEN

Every little child, wheresoever born, whether within the Church or out of it, whether of pious
parents or of impious, is received by the Lord at death; is educated in heaven; is taught and
imbued with affections of good and by these with knowledges of truth; and then, as he is perfected
in intelligence and wisdom, is introduced into heaven and becomes an angel. They have only
the rudimentary capacity of becoming angels; for children are not yet angels, but are to become
angels. In this world, therefore, infants must learn to walk, to control the body's motions,
and to talk. Even their senses, like sight and hearing, must be developed by use. It is quite
otherwise with children in the other life.

The Lord flows into the ideas of children chiefly from their inmost soul, for nothing has closed
their ideas, as with adults. No false principles have closed them to the understanding of truth,
nor any evil life to the reception of good, nor to becoming wise.

--Heaven and Hell, nn. 416, 330, 331, 836

TOWARD THE MORNING OF LIFE

The Lord is present with every human being, urgent and instant to be received; and when a man
receives Him, as he does when he acknowledges Him as his God, Creator, Redeemer and Saviour,
then is His first Coming, which is called the dawn. From this time the man begins to be enlightened,
as to understanding in things spiritual, and to advance into a more and more interior wisdom.
As he receives this wisdom from the Lord, so he advances through morning into day, and this
day lasts with him into old age, even to death; and after death he passes into heaven to the
Lord Himself, and there, though he died an old man, he is restored to the morning of his life,
and to eternity he develops the beginnings of the wisdom that was implanted in the natural world.

--True Christian Religion, n. 766

The people of heaven are continually advancing towards the spring-time of life; and the more
thousands of years they live, the more delightful and happy is the spring to which they attain. "Should
prisoners make conditions?" was the sharp, insolent retort.

The insult was conspicuous, and trouble might have followed, but that Doltaire came between them,
shifting the attack.

"Prisoners, my dear Duvarney," said he, "are most delicate and exacting;
they must be fed on wine and milk.

It is an easy life, and hearts grow soft for them.

As thus-- Indeed, it is most sad: so young and gallant; in speech,
too, so confiding!

And if we babble all our doings to him, think you he takes it seriously? No, no--so gay and thoughtless,
there is a thoroughfare from ear to ear, and all's lost on the other side. Poor simple gentleman,
he is a claimant on our courtesy, a knight without a sword, a guest without the power to leave
us--he shall make conditions, he shall have his caprice.

La, la! my dear Duvarney and my Lancy!"

He spoke in a clear, provoking tone, putting a hand upon the shoulder
of each young gentleman as he talked, his eyes wandering over me idly,
and beyond me.

I saw that he was now sharpening the sickle to his office. His next words made this more plain
to me:

"And if a lady gives a farewell sign to one she favours for the moment,
shall not the prisoner take it as his own?"

(I knew he was recalling Alixe's farewell gesture to me at the manor.)
"Who shall gainsay our peacock?

Shall the guinea cock?

The golden crumb was thrown to the guinea cock, but that's no matter.
The peacock clatters of the crumb." At that he spoke an instant in
Duvarney's ear. Love to the
Lord and love toward the neighbor rule in the heavens and also constitute them. These loves
are diametrically opposite. Love of self consists in wishing well to oneself alone, and not
to others except for the sake of oneself, not even to the Church, to one's country, or to any
human society; also in doing good to them, but for the sake of one's reputation, honor and
glory. Unless he sees these in the services he renders them, he says in his heart, "Of what
use is it? Why should I do it? Of what advantage will it be to me?", and he leaves it undone.
His delight is only that of self-love. And because the delight which springs from his love
makes the life of a man, therefore his life is the life of self; and the life of self is life
from man's proprium; and the proprium of man, viewed in itself, is nothing but evil. Love of
self is of such a quality, too, that, as far as the reins are given it, it rushes on until
at length it desires to rule not only over the whole earth, but over the whole heaven, too,
and over the Divine Himself.

--Heaven and Hell, nn. 554, 556, 559

"OUR NAME IS LEGION"

Men have believed hitherto that there is some one devil who is over the hells, and that he
was created an angel of light; but that after he turned rebel, he was cast down with his crew
into hell. Man does not know that in respect to his mind he is in the midst of spirits because
the spirits with whom he is in company in that world, think and speak spiritually. The spirit
of man, however, while in the material body, thinks and speaks naturally; and spiritual thought
and speech cannot be understood, nor perceived, by the natural human being; nor the reverse.
Hence, too, it is that spirits cannot be seen. Yet when a man's spirit is in society with spirits
in their world, then he is in spiritual thought and speech with them, too, because his inner
mind is spiritual, but the outer natural; wherefore by his inner nature he communicates with
them, and by his outer being with men. By this communication a man perceives and thinks analytically.
If there were no such communication, man would no more think than a beast, nor any differently
from a beast. Indeed, were all commerce with spirits cut off, a man would instantly die.

--True Christian Religion, n. 475

"MINISTERS OF HIS, THAT DO HIS PLEASURE"

Man is quite ignorant that he is governed by the Lord through angels and spirits, and that
there are at least two spirits with a man and two angels. Through the spirits a communication
of the man with the world of spirits is effected; and through the angels, with heaven. As long
as a man is not regenerated, he is governed quite otherwise than when he is regenerated. While
unregenerated, there are evil spirits with him, who dominate him so fully that the angels,
though present, can scarcely do more than guide him, so that he shall not hurl himself into
the lowest evil, and bend him to some good--to some good by means of his own desires, indeed,
and to some truth through even fallacies of sense. Then, through the spirits who are with him,
he has communication with the world of spirits, but not so much with heaven, for the evil spirits
rule with him, and the angels only avert their rule. When, however, a man is regenerated, then
the angels rule and inspire in him all good and truth, and a horror and dread of evil and falsity.
The angels lead the man indeed, but serve only as ministers, for it is the Lord alone, Who,
by angels and spirits, governs man.

--Arcana Coelestia, n. 50

It is an office of the angels to inspire charity and faith in a man, to observe the direction
his enjoyments take, and to restrain and bend them to good, as far as they can in man's free
choice. They are forbidden to act violently, and so to break a man's cupidities and principles;
but are bidden to act gently. It is also an office of theirs to govern evil spirits who are
from hell. When evil spirits infuse evils and what is false, the angels instill what is true
and good, by which they at least temper an evil. Infernal spirits are continually assaulting,
and angels constantly giving protection. Especially do the angels call forth goods and truths
which are with a man, and oppose them to the evils and falsities which the evil spirits excite.
Hence a man is in the midst, nor does he apperceive the evil or the good; and being in the
midst, is free to turn himself to the one or to the other. By such means angels from the Lord
lead and protect a man, and this every moment, and every moment of a moment. For, should the
angels intermit their care a single instant, man would be plunged into evil from which he could
never afterward be led forth. These offices the angels do from a love which they have from
the Lord; for they know nothing pleasanter and happier than to remove evils from a man, and
to lead him to heaven. That this is their joy, see Luke, XV, 7. Scarcely any man believes that
the Lord has such a care for man, and this continually, from the first thread of his life to
the last, and on to eternity.

--Arcana Coelestia, n. 5992

WHOLESOME AND UNWHOLESOME COMMUNICATION

Many believe that a man can be taught by the Lord through spirits who speak with him. They
who believe so, and will this communication, do not know, however, that it is attended with
danger to their souls. While a man is living in the world, he is in the midst of spirits as
to his spirit; nevertheless spirits do not know they are with man, nor a man that he is with
spirits. But as soon as spirits begin to speak with a man, they come out of their spiritual
state into the man's natural state; and then they know that they are with man, and they unite
themselves to the thoughts of his affection, and they speak with him from those thoughts. Thence
it is that the spirit speaking is in the same principles as the man, whether these be true
or false. These he stirs up, and through his affection, united to the man's, strongly confirms
them. All this shows the danger in which a man is who speaks with spirits, or who manifestly
perceives their operation. Of the nature of his affection, good or bad, a man is ignorant,
also with what others he is associated. If his is a pride of self-intelligence, the spirit
favors every thought from that source. Likewise there is the favoring of principles which are
inflamed from the fire which those have who are not in truths from any genuine affection for
them. Whenever from a like affection a spirit favors a man's thoughts or principles, then the
former leads the latter, as the blind lead the blind, until both fall into the ditch.

It is otherwise with those whom the Lord leads. He leads those who love and will truths from
Him. Such are enlightened when they read the Word, for there the Lord is, and He speaks with
every one according to the latter's apprehension. When these hear speech from spirits, as they
do sometimes, they are not taught, but are led, and this so prudently that the man is still
left to himself. "My father liked Sir John greatly, and they grew exceedingly friendly, walking
forth in the streets of Glasgow, Sir John's hand upon my father's arm. One day they came to
the school in High Street, where I learned Latin and other accomplishments,
together with fencing from an excellent master, Sergeant Dowie of
the One Hundredth Foot.

They found me with my regiment at drill; for I had got full thirty
of my school-fellows under arms, and spent all leisure hours in mustering,
marching, and drum-beating, and practising all manner of discipline
and evolution which I had been taught by my grandfather and Sergeant
Dowie.

"Those were the days soon after which came Dettingen and Fontenoy and Charles Edward the Pretender,
and the ardour of arms ran high. Sir John was a follower of the Stuarts, and this was the one point
at which he and my father paused in their good friendship.

When Sir John saw me with my thirty lads marching in fine order,
all fired with the little sport of battle--for to me it was all real,
and our sham fights often saw broken heads and bruised shoulders--he
stamped his cane upon the ground, and said in a big voice, 'Well done!
well done!

For that you shall have a hundred pounds next birthday, and as fine
a suit of scarlet as you please, and a sword from London too.'

"Then
he came to me and caught me by both shoulders.

'But alack, alack! there needs some blood and flesh here, Robert Moray,' said he. 'You have
more heart than muscle.'

"This was true. I had ever been more eager than my strength--thank God, that day is gone!--and sometimes,
after Latin and the drill of my Lightfoots, as I called them, I could have cried for weakness
and weariness, had I been a girl and not a proud lad.

And Sir John kept his word, liking me better from that day forth,
and coming now and again to see me at the school,--though he was much
abroad in France--giving many a pound to my Lightfoots, who were no
worse soldiers for that.

His eye ran us over sharply, and his head nodded, as we marched past
him; and once I heard him say, 'If they had had but ten years each
on their heads, my Prince!'

"About this time my father died--that
is, when I was fourteen years old.

Sir John became one of the executors with my mother, and at my wish, a year afterwards, I was
sent to the university, where at least fifteen of my Lightfoots went also; and there I formed
a new battalion of them, though we were watched at first, and even held in suspicion, because
of the known friendship of Sir John for me; and he himself had twice been under arrest for his
friendship to the Stuart cause.
 To-day, again, for similar reasons, the Word has been interiorly
opened, and divine truths still more interior have been revealed, which are to serve a New
Church, which will be called the New Jerusalem.

--Apocalypse Explained, n. 948

A NEW CHURCH

It was foretold in the Apocalypse (XXI, XXII) that at the end of the former Church a New Church
was to be instituted, in which this would be the chief teaching: that God is One in Person
as well as in Essence, in Whom is the Trinity, and that that God is the Lord. This Church is
what is there meant by the New Jerusalem, into which only he can enter who acknowledges the
Lord alone as God of Heaven and earth.

--Divine Providence, n. 263

The descent of the New Jerusalem cannot take place in a moment, but becomes a fact as the falsities
of the former Church are removed. For what is new cannot enter where falsities have previously
been engendered, unless these are eradicated; which will take place with the clergy, and so
with the laity.

--True Christian Religion, n. 784

THE ULTIMATE GOAL

Were it received as a principle, that love to the Lord and charity to the neighbor are what
the whole Law hangs on and are what all the Prophets speak of, and thus are the essentials
of all doctrine and worship, then the mind would be enlightened in innumerable things in the
Word, which otherwise lie hidden in the obscurity of a false principle. In fact, heresies would
be scattered then, and out of many one Church would come to be, however the doctrines flowing
therefrom or leading thereto, and the rituals, might differ. Were the case so, all men would
be governed as a single human being by the Lord; for all would be as members and organs of
one body, which, dissimilar in form and function though they are, still have relation to one
heart only, whereon they each and all depend. Then, in whatever doctrine or outward worship
one might be, he would say of another, "This man is my brother. I see that he worships the
Lord, and that he is a good man."

--Arcana Coelestia, n. 2385

MEMORABLE SAYINGS

MEMORABLE SAYINGS

All religion has relation to life; and the life of religion is to do good.

Love in act is work and deed.

Heaven is a kingdom of uses.

No one who believes in God and lives well is condemned.

Shunning evils as sins is the mark of faith.

To resist one evil is to resist many; for every evil is united with countless evils.

If you wish to be led by the Divine Providence, employ prudence as a servant and attendant
who faithfully dispenses his Lord's goods.

Where men know doctrine and think according to it, there the Church may be; but where men act
according to doctrine, there alone the Church is.

It is not the desire of an intelligent man to be able to confirm whatever he pleases; but to
be able to see truth as truth, and falsity as falsity, and to confirm his insight, is the way
of an intelligent man.

To reason only whether a thing is so or not, is like reasoning about the fit of a cap or a
shoe without ever putting it on.