THE DISCOVERY OF MUSCOVY ETC.

Contents:
   Introduction
   The New Navigation and Discovery of The Kingdom Of Muscovy
   The Coins, Weights, and Measures, used in Russia
   The Voyage of the Ambassedor
   The Manners, Usages, and Ceremonies of the Russians
   The Voyages of Ohthere and Wulfstan
   King Alfred's Orosius
   The Geography of Europe.
   Elegiac verses by William Wordsworth

INTRODUCTION

The first relations between England and Russia were established in Queen Elizabeth's reign,
in the manner here set forth, by the expedition undertaken by Sir Hugh Willoughby and completed
by Richard Chanceler or Chancellor, captain of the Edward Bonaventure. Chanceler went on after
Willoughby and the crew of his ship, The Admiral, with the crew of another vessel in the expedition,
had been parted from Chanceler in a storm in the North Sea, and Willoughby's men were all frozen
to death.  A few men belonging to the other ship were believed to have found their way back
to England.  The story of Chanceler's voyage and the following endeavours to open Muscovy to
English trade is here given, as it was told in Hakluyt's collection of "The Principal Navigations,
Voyages, and Discoveries made by the English Nation," the folio published in 1589.

The story of our first contact with Russia belongs to the days of Ivan the Terrible.  The Russians
are a Slavonic people, with Finnish elements to the North and Mongolian to the South, and old
contact with the Swedes, from whom they are supposed to have got their name through the Finnish
Ruotsi, a corruption, it is said, of the Swedish rothsmenn--rowers.  Legends point also to
a Scandinavian settlement in the ninth century in Northern Russia.  A chief Igor, whose name
is supposed to represent the Scandinavian Ingvar, was trained by a warrior chief Oleg (Scandinavian
Helgi?), who attacked Byzantium and wrung tribute from the Greeks.  After the death of Oleg,
Igor reigned, and after the death of Igor his wife Olga was regent, and was baptised at Byzantium
in the year 955.  Her son Sviotoslaff the first chief with a Slavonic name, was a conquering
chief, who did not become Christian.  He was killed in battle, and his skull was made into
a drinking-cup.  His son Vladimir was a cruel warrior, who took to Christianity, was baptised
in the year 988, and caused the image of the Slavonic god of Thunder, Perun, to be first cudgelled
and then thrown into a river.  Vladimir, who first introduced Christianity, divided his dominions,
leaving Novgorod to his son Yaroslaff, who established the first code of laws.  After the death
of Yaroslaff, in the year 1054, Russia was broken into petty principalities, until the year
1238, when there was a great invasion of the Mongols, who became a great disturbing power,
and remained so until the year 1462, when Ivan III. began the consolidation of a Russian empire.
He reigned forty-three years, suppressed the liberties of many independent regions, annexed
states, checked the Mongols, married a Byzantine princess, and so brought Greek culture into
Moscow.  Ivan III. bequeathed his throne to a son Basil, who made further addition to the dominions
of Muscovy, and treated with foreign princes.  Herberstein, an ambassador to him from Germany,
has left a description of his court.  Then followed the reign of Basil's son Ivan IV., Ivan
the Terrible, who was, when his father died, a child of three years old.  He was at first,
from 1533 to 1538, under the care of his mother, Helen Glinska, a Pole. If it does so, no thickness
is of any avail in keeping out the cold; hence the advantage of skin carosses, buffalo robes,
leather sheets, and macintosh rugs. All clothes lose much of their closeness of texture in a
hot, dry climate; the fibres shrink extremely, and the wind blows through the tissue as through
network. It is in order to make their coverings wind-proof, that shepherd-lads on the hills in
Scotland, when the nights are cold, dip their plaids in water, before sitting or lying down in
them. The wet swells up the fibres of the plaid, and makes the texture of it perfectly dense
and close.

It is also of importance that the outer covering should have a certain
weight, so as not to be too easily displaced, either by the person
fidgeting in his sleep or by the blowing of the wind.

In dry weather there is nothing like furs; but in a rainy country I prefer a thick blanket bag
(see "Sleeping Bags"), a large spare blanket, and a macintosh sheet and counterpane. It may
be objected that the bag and macintosh would be close and stuffy,
but be assured that the difficulty when sleeping on mother earth,
on a bitter night, is to keep the fresh air out, not to let it in.

On fine nights I should sleep on the bag and under the spare blanket.

Stuffy Bedding.--It must be understood that while recommending coverlets that resist the wind, I am
very far from advocating extreme stuffiness, and for the following reason. Though a free passage of the
wind abstracts an excessive amount of animal heat from the sleeper, yet the freshness of pure
air stimulates his body to give it out in an increased proportion. On the other hand, sleeping-clothes
that are absolutely impervious to the passage of the wind, necessarily retain the cutaneous
excretions: these poison the sleeper, acting upon his blood through his skin, and materially
weaken his power of emitting vital heat: the fire of his life burns more languidly. I therefore
suspect it would be more dangerous to pass a very cold night enclosed tightly in thin macintosh
buttoned up to the chin, than without it.  And whereas at the same
time one Sebastian Cabot, a man in those days very renowned, happened to be in London, they
began first of all to deal and consult diligently with him, and after much speech and conference
together, it was at last concluded that three ships should be prepared and furnished out for
the search and discovery of the Northern part of the world, to open a way and passage to our
men for travel to new and unknown kingdoms.

And whereas many things seemed necessary to be regarded in this so hard and difficult a matter,
they first made choice of certain grave and wise persons in manner of a senate or company which
should lay their heads together and give their judgments and provide things requisite and profitable
for all occasions; by this company it was thought expedient that a certain sum of money should
publicly be collected to serve for the furnishing of so many ships.  And lest any private man
should be too much oppressed and charged, a course was taken that every man willing to be of
the society should disburse the portion of twenty and five pounds apiece, so that in a short
time by this means the sum of six thousand pounds being gathered, the three ships were bought,
the most part whereof they provided to be newly built and trimmed.  But in this action, I wot
not whether I may more admire the care of the merchants, or the diligence of the shipwrights:
for the merchants, they get very strong and well seasoned planks for the building, the shipwrights,
they with daily travail and their greatest skill, do fit them for the dispatch of the ships,
they caulk them, pitch them, and among the rest, they make one most staunch and firm, by an
excellent and ingenious invention.  For they had heard that in certain parts of the ocean a
kind of worm is bred which many times pierceth and eateth through the strongest oak that is,
and therefore that the mariners and the rest to be employed in this voyage might be free and
safe from this danger, they cover a piece of the keel of the ship with thin sheets of lead;
and having thus built the ships, and furnished them with armour and artillery, then followed
a second care no less troublesome and necessary than the former, namely the provision of victuals
which was to be made according to the time and length of the voyage.  And whereas they afore
determined to have the east part of the world sailed unto, and yet that the sea towards the
same was not open, except they kept the northern tract where as yet it was doubtful whether
there were any passage yea or no, they resolved to victual the ships for eighteen months, which
they did for this reason.  For our men being to pass that huge and cold part of the world,
they wisely foreseeing it, allow them six months' victual to sail to the place, so much more
to remain there if the extremity of the winter hindered their return, and so much more also
for the time of their coming home.  This man was brought up by one Master Henry Sidney, a noble
young gentleman and very much beloved of King Edward, who this time coming to the place where
the merchants were gathered together, began a very eloquent speech or oration, and spake to
them after this manner following:-

"My very worshipful friends, I cannot but greatly commend your present godly and virtuous intention
in the serious enterprising (for the singular love you bear to your country), a matter which
(I hope) will prove profitable for this nation, and honourable to this our land.  Which intention
of yours we also of the nobility are ready to our power to help and further:  neither do we
hold anything so dear and precious unto us, which we will not willingly forego, and lay out
in so commendable a cause.  But principally I rejoice in myself, that I have nourished and
maintained that wit which is like by some means and in some measure to profit and stead you
in this worthy action.  But yet I would not have you ignorant of this one thing, that I do
now part with Chanceler not because I make little reckoning of the man, or that his maintenance
is burdensome and chargeable unto me, but that you might conceive and understand my goodwill
and promptitude for the furtherance of this business, and that the authority and estimation
which he deserveth may be given him.  You know the man by report, I by experience, you by words,
I by deeds, you by speech and company, but I by the daily trial of his life, have a full and
perfect knowledge of him.  And you are also to remember into how many perils for your sakes,
and his country's love, he is now to run:  whereof it is requisite that we be not unmindful,
if it please God to send him good success.  We commit a little money to the chance and hazard
of fortune:  he commits his life (a thing to a man of all things most dear) to the raging sea,
and the uncertainties of many dangers.  We shall here live and rest at home, quietly with our
friends and acquaintance; but he in the meantime labouring to keep the ignorant and unruly
mariners in good order and obedience, with how many cares shall he trouble and bear himself,
with how many troubles shall he break himself, and how many disquietings shall he be forced
to sustain:  we shall keep our own coasts and country, he shall seek strange and unknown kingdoms.
He shall commit his safety to barbarous and cruel people, and shall hazard his life amongst
the monstrous and terrible beasts of the sea.  Wherefore in respect of the greatness of the
dangers, and the excellency of his charge, you are to favour and love the man thus departing
from us, and if it falls so happily out that he return again, it is your part and duty also
liberally to reward him."

After that this noble young gentleman had delivered this or some such like speech, much more
eloquently than I can possibly report it, the company then present began one to look upon another,
one to question and confer with one another; and some (to whom the virtue and sufficiency of
the man was known) began secretly to rejoice with themselves and to conceive a special hope,
that the man would prove in time very rare and excellent, and that his virtues already appearing
and shining to the world would grow to the great honour and advancement of this kingdom.

After all this, the company growing to some silence, it seemed good to them that were of greatest
gravity amongst them to inquire, search, and seek what might be learned and known concerning
the easterly part or tract of the world.  For which cause two Tartars (Tartarians) which were
then of the king's stable were sent for, and an interpreter was gotten to be present, by whom
they were demanded touching their country, and the manners of their nation.  But they were
able to answer nothing to the purpose:  being indeed more acquainted (as one there merrily
and openly said) to toss pots than to learn the states and dispositions of people.  But after
much ado and many things passed about this matter, they grew at last to this issue, to set
down and appoint a time for the departure of the ships:  because divers were of opinion that
a great part of the best time of the year was already spent, and if the delay grew longer the
way would be stopped and hard by the frost of the ice, and the cold climate; and therefore
it was thought best by the opinion of them all that by the 20th day of May the captains and
mariners should take shipping and depart from Ratcliffe upon the ebb, if it so pleased God.
They having saluted their acquaintance, one his wife, another his children, another his kinsfolks,
and another his friends dearer than his kinsfolks, were present and ready at the day appointed,
and having weighed anchor, they departed with the turning of the water, and sailing easily,
came first to Greenwich.  The greater ships were towed down with boats and oars, and the mariners
being all apparelled in watchet or sky-coloured cloth, rowed amain, and made way with diligence.
One stood in the poop of the ship, and by his gesture bids farewell to his friends in the best
manner he could.  Another walks upon the hatches, another climbs the shrouds, another stands
upon the main yard, and another in the top of the ship.

But to proceed in the matter.  The ships going down with the tide, came at last to Woolwich
where they stayed and cast anchor, with purpose to depart therehence again, as soon as the
turning of the water and a better wind should draw them to set sail.  Many of them looked oftentimes
back, and could not refrain from tears, considering into what hazards they were to fall, and
what uncertainties of the sea they were to make trial of.

The very same day in the afternoon, about four of the clock, so great a tempest suddenly arose,
and the seas were so outrageous, that the ships could not keep their intended course, but some
were perforce driven one way and some another way, to their great peril and hazard.  The General,
with his loudest voice, cried out to Richard Chanceler and earnestly requested him not to go
far from him; but he neither would nor could keep company with him if he sailed still so fast,
for the Admiral was of better sail than his ship.  But the said Admiral (I know not by what
means), bearing all his sails, was carried away with so great force and swiftness, that not
long after he was quite out of sight, and the third ship also, with the same storm and like
rage, was dispersed and lost us.

The ship-boat of the Admiral, striking against the ship, was overwhelmed in the sight and view
of the mariners of the Bonaventure; and as for them that are already returned and arrived,
they know nothing of the rest of the ships what was become of them.

But if it be so that any miserable mishap have overtaken them, if the rage and fury of the
sea have devoured those good men, or if as yet they live, and wander up and down in strange
countries, I must needs say they were men worthy of better fortune; and if they be living,
let us wish them safety and a good return, but if the cruelty of death hath taken hold of them,
God send them a Christian grave and sepulchre.

Now, Richard Chanceler with his ship and company being thus left alone, and become very pensive,
heavy, and sorrowful by this dispersion of the fleet, he (according to the order before taken)
shapeth his course for Wardhouse, in Norway, there to expect and abide the arrival of the rest
of the ships.  And being come thither, and having stayed there the space of seven days, and
looked in vain for their coming, he determined at length to proceed alone in the purposed voyage;
and as he was preparing himself to the part, it happened that he fell in company and speech
with certain Scottish men, who having understanding of his intention, and wishing well to his
actions, began earnestly to dissuade him from the further prosecution of the discovery by amplifying
the dangers which he was to fall into, and omitted no reason that might serve to that purpose.

And as for them which were with Master Chanceler in his ship, although they had great cause
of discomfort by the loss of their company (whom the aforesaid tempest had separated from them),
and were not a little troubled with cogitations and perturbations of mind in respect of their
doubtful course, yet, notwithstanding, they were of such content and agreement of mind with
Master Chanceler, that they were resolute and prepared under his direction and government to
make proof and trial of all adventures without all fear or mistrust of future dangers.  Which
constancy of mind in all the company did exceedingly increase their captain's carefulness;
for he being swallowed up with like goodwill and love towards them, feared lest, through any
error of his, the safety of the company should be endangered.  And having the benefit of this
perpetual light for certain days, at length it pleased God to bring them into a certain great
bay, which was of one hundred miles or thereabout over.  Whereinto they entered and somewhat
far within it cast anchor, and looking every way about them, it happened that they espied afar
off a certain fisher boat, which Master Chanceler, accompanied with a few of his men, went
towards to commune with the fishermen that were in it, and to know of them what country it
was, and what people, and of what manner of living they were.  But they being amazed with the
strange greatness of his ship (for in those parts before that time they had never seen the
like), began presently to avoid and to flee.  But he still following them, at last overtook
them, and being come to them, they (being in great fear as men half dead) prostrated themselves
before him, offering to kiss his feet; but he (according to his great and singular courtesy)
looked pleasantly upon them, comforting them by signs and gestures, refusing those duties and
reverences of theirs, and taking them up in all loving sort from the ground.  And it is strange
to consider how much they were afterwards in that place this humanity of his did purchase to
himself.  For they being dismissed, spread by-and-by a report abroad of the arrival of a strange
nation of a singular gentleness and courtesy, whereupon the common people came together offering
to those new-come guests victuals freely, and not refusing to traffic with them, except they
had been bound by a certain religious use and custom not to buy any foreign commodities without
the knowledge and consent of the king.

By this time our men had learned that this country was called Russia or Muscovy, and that Ivan
Vasilivich (which was at that time their king's name) ruled and governed far and wide in those
places.  And the barbarous Russians asked likewise of our men whence they were and what they
came for.  Whereunto answer was made that they were Englishmen sent into those coasts from
the most excellent King Edward VI., having from him in commandment certain things to deliver
to their king, and seeking nothing else but his amity and friendship and traffic with his people,
whereby they doubted not but that great commodity and profit would grow to the subjects of
both kingdoms. The barbarians heard these things very gladly, and promised their aid and furtherance
to acquaint their king out of hand with so honest and reasonable a request.

In the meantime Master Chanceler entreated victuals for his money of the governor of that place,
who, together with others, came aboard him, and required hostages of them likewise for the
more assurance of safety to himself and his company.  To whom the governors answered that they
knew not in that case the will of their king, and yet were willing in such things as they might
lawfully do to pleasure him, which was as then to afford him the benefit of victuals.  Now
whilst these things were a-doing, they secretly sent a messenger unto the Emperor to certify
him of the arrival of a strange nation, and withal to know his pleasure concerning them. Which
message was very welcome unto him, insomuch that voluntarily he invited them to come to his
court.  But if by reason of the tediousness of so long a journey they thought it not best so
to do, then he granted liberty to his subjects to bargain and to traffic with them.  And further
promised that if it would please them to come to him, he himself would bear the whole charges
of post-horses. In the meantime the governors of the place deferred the matter from day to
day, pretending divers excuses, and saying one while that the consent of all the governors,
and another while that the great and weighty affairs of the kingdom compelled them to defer
their answer. And this they did of purpose, so long to protract the time until the messenger
(sent before to the king) did return with relation of his will and pleasure.

But Master Chanceler (seeing himself held in this suspense with long and vain expectation and
thinking that of intention to delude him, they posted the matter off so often) was very instant
with them to perform their promise, which if they would not do he told them that he would depart
and proceed in his voyage.  So that the Muscovites (although as yet they knew not the mind
of their king) yet fearing the departure indeed of our men, who had such wares and commodities
as they greatly desired, they at last resolved to furnish our people with all things necessary,
and to conduct them by land to the presence of their king.  And so Master Chanceler began his
journey, which was very long and most troublesome, wherein he had the use of certain sledges
which in that country are very common, for they are carried themselves upon sledges, and all
their carriages are in the same sort, the people almost not knowing any other manner of carriage,
the cause whereof is the exceeding hardness of the ground, congealed in the winter time by
the force of the cold, which in those places is very extreme and horrible, whereof hereafter
we will say something.  But now, they having passed the greater part of their journey, met
at last with the sledgeman (of whom I spake before) sent to the king secretly from the justices
or governors, who by some ill-hap had lost his way, and had gone to the seaside which is near
to the country of the Tartars, thinking there to have found our ship.  But having long erred
and wandered out of his way, at the last in his direct return, he met, as he was coming, our
Captain on the way.  To whom he by-and-by delivered the Emperor's letters, which were written
to him with all courtesy, and in the most loving manner that could be:  wherein express commandment
was given that post horses should be gotten for him and the rest of his company without any
money.  Which thing was of all the Russians in the rest of their journey so willingly done,
that they began to quarrel, yea, and to fight also in striving and contending which of them
should put their post-horses to the sled:  so that after much ado, and great pains taken in
this long and weary journey (for they had travelled very near fifteen hundred miles), Master
Chanceler came at last to Moscow, the chief city of the kingdom, and the seat of the king,
of which city, and of the Emperor himself, and of the principal cities of Muscovy, we will
speak immediately more at large in this discourse.

OF MUSCOVY, WHICH IS ALSO CALLED RUSSIA

Muscovy, which hath the name also of Russia the White, is a very large and spacious country,
every way bounded with divers nations. Towards the south and east it is compassed with Tartaria,
the northern side of it stretcheth to the Scythian Ocean; upon the west part border the Lappians,
a rude and savage nation, living in woods, whose language is not known to any other people;
next unto these, more towards the south, is Swecia, then Finlandia, then Livonia, and last
of all Lithuania.  This country of Muscovy hath also very many and great rivers in it, and
is marsh ground in many places; and as for the rivers, the greatest and most famous amongst
all the rest is that which the Russians in their own tongue call Volga, but others know it
by the name of Rha.  Next unto it in fame is Tanais, which they call Don, and the third Boristhenes,
which at this day they call Dnieper.  Tanais, springing from a fountain of great name in those
parts, growing great near to his head, spreads itself at length very largely and makes a great
lake; and then growing narrow again, doth so run for certain miles until it fall into another
lake, which they call Ivan:  and there hence, fetching a very crooked course, comes very near
to the river Volga; but disdaining, as it were, the company of any other river, doth there
turn itself again from Volga, and runs towards the south, and falls at last into the Lake of
Moeotis.  Boristhenes, which comes from the same head that Rha doth (as we said before), carrieth
both itself, and other waters that are near unto it, towards the south, not refusing the mixture
of other small rivers; and, running by many great and large countries, falls at last into Pontus
Euxinus.  Besides these rivers are also in Muscovy certain lakes and pools--the lakes breed
fish by the celestial influence, and amongst them all the chiefest and most principal is called
Belij Jesera, which is very famous by reason of a very strong tower built in it, wherein the
kings of Muscovy reserve and repose their treasure in all time of war and danger.

Touching the Riphean Mountains, whereupon the snow lieth continually, and where hence in times
past it was thought that Tanais the river did spring, and that the rest of the wonders of Nature
which the Grecians feigned and invented of old were there to be seen, our men which lately
came from thence neither saw them, nor yet have brought home any perfect relation of them,
although they remained there for the space of three months, and had gotten in that time some
intelligence of the language of Muscovy.  The whole country is plain and champaign, and few
hills in it; and towards the north it hath very large and spacious woods, wherein is great
store of fir-trees--a wood very necessary and fit for the building of houses.  There are also
wild beasts bred in those woods, as buffes, bears, and black wolves, and another kind of beast
unknown to us, but called by them "roffomakka;" and the nature of the same is very rare and
wonderful, for when it is great with young, and ready to bring forth, it seeketh out some narrow
place between two stakes, and so going through them, presseth itself, and by that means is
eased of her burden, which otherwise could not be done.  They hunt their buffes for the most
part a-horseback, but their bears afoot, with wooden forks.  Our mariners which we left in
the ship in the meantime to keep it, in their going up only from their cabins to the hatches,
had their breath oftentimes so suddenly taken away, that they eftsoons fell down as men very
near dead, so great is the sharpness of that cold climate; but as for the south parts of the
country, they are somewhat more temperate.

OF MOSCOW, THE CHIEF CITY OF THE KINGDOM, AND OF THE EMPEROR THEREOF.

It remaineth that a large discourse be made of Moscow, the principal city of that country,
and of the prince also, as before we have promised.  The empire and government of the king
is very large, and his wealth at this time exceeding great. The packing, to be effective, should
be sufficiently close to prevent as much as possible friction of the steel with the cast iron
needle bar ways. Lubrication of the steel is insured by keeping the hemp packing moistened with
oil.

Cylindrical needle bars, when combined with an effective system of brushing, have proved themselves
superior to every other form of slide for lock stitch machines. But their introduction is by
no means a thing of yesterday. They were used freely in sewing machines as far back as 1860,
but were never very successful until united with the lubricating brush. Some makers go a step further,
and elaborate the system by the introduction of steel brushes, easily renewable.

Every effort is now made to reduce, as much as possible, not only
the extent of movement of the parts in high speed machines, but the
weight of the parts themselves.

Indeed, so far has this been carried that, in some of the Wheeler & Wilson machines now shown, the
needle bars consist really of steel tubes. Small moving parts are made as light as possible, but
rigidity is secured by the free use of strengthening ribs. Many of the parts are of cast iron,
rendered malleable by annealing, and finally casehardened. Such parts are found to be quite
as durable as if made of forged steel, and are, of course, less costly. As to the automatic
tools now used in the construction of the machines, it may be said
that scarcely a file, hammer, or chisel touches the frame or parts
while they are being assembled to work together.

The interchangeable system of construction is, of course, the only one possible for the accurate
production of the millions of sewing machines now manufactured annually.

High Arm Construction.--Sewing machines, as now constructed, exhibit a rather short and very high
arm, a form of framework that has been found to contribute in no small degree to the light running
capabilities of fast speed machines. While it reduces the length of the various parts concerned
in the transference of the motive power, it adds to their rigidity and diminishes their weight,
maintaining at the same time the capacity of the machine to accommodate the largest garments
beneath the arm.

But the specific improvements in plain sewing machines, to which I have had the honor of drawing
your attention, do not exhaust the list, and, time permitting, it might be considerably augmented.
Nor must it be inferred that advancement has taken place exclusively
in those systems of sewing machinery now before us.  They go, and being conducted into the Golden
Court (for so they call it, although not very fair), they find the Emperor sitting upon a high
and stately seat, apparelled with a robe of silver, and with another diadem on his head; our
men, being placed over against him, sit down.  In the midst of the room stood a mighty cupboard
upon a square foot, whereupon stood also a round board, in manner of a diamond, broad beneath,
and towards the top narrow, and every step rose up more narrow than the other.  Upon this cupboard
was placed the Emperor's plate, which was so much that the very cupboard itself was scant able
to sustain the weight of it.  The better part of all the vessels and goblets was made of very
fine gold; and, amongst the rest, there were four pots of very large bigness, which did adorn
the rest of the plate in great measure, for they were so high, that they thought them at the
least five feet long.  There were also upon this cupboard certain silver casks, not much differing
from the quantity of our firkins, wherein was reserved the Emperor's drink. On each side of
the hall stood four tables, each of them laid and covered with very clean table-cloths, whereunto
the company ascended by three steps or degrees, all which were filled with the assembly present.
The guests were all apparelled with linen without, and with rich skins within, and so did notably
set out this royal feast. The Emperor, when he takes any bread or knife into his hand, doth
first of all cross himself upon his forehead.  They that are in special favour with the Emperor
sit upon the same bench with him, but somewhat far from him; and before the coming in of the
meat the Emperor himself, according to an ancient custom of the Kings of Muscovy, doth first
bestow a piece of bread upon every one of his guests, with a loud pronunciation of his title
and honour in this manner, "The Great Duke of Muscovy and Chief Emperor of Russia, John Basiliwich
(and then the officer nameth the guest), doth give thee bread," whereupon all the guests rise
up and by-and-by sit down again.  This done, the Gentleman Usher of the hall comes in with
a notable company of servants carrying the dishes, and having done his reverence to the Emperor,
puts a young swan in a golden platter upon the table, and immediately takes it thence again,
delivering it to the carver and seven other of his fellows to be cut up, which being performed,
the meat is then distributed to the guests with the like pomp and ceremonies.

We may not forget that there were one hundred and forty servitors arrayed in cloth of gold,
that in the dinner-time changed thrice their habit and apparel, which servitors are in like
sort served with bread from the Emperor as the rest of the guests.  The Russians told our men
that the reason thereof, as also of the bestowing of bread in like manner, was to the end that
the Emperor might keep the knowledge of his own household, and withal, that such as are under
his displeasure might by this means be known.

OF THE DISCIPLINE OF WAR AMONGST THE RUSSIANS.

Whensoever the injuries of their neighbours do call the king forth to battle, he never armeth
a less number against the enemy than three hundred thousand soldiers, one hundred thousand
whereof he carrieth into the field with him, and leaveth the rest in garrison in some fit places
for the better safety of his empire.  He presseth no husbandmen nor merchant; for the country
is so populous that these being left at home the youth of the realm is sufficient for all his
wars.  As many as go out to warfare do provide all things of their own cost; they fight not
on foot, but altogether on horseback: their armour is a coat of mail, and a helmet; the coat
of mail without is gilded, or else adorned with silk, although it pertain to a common soldier;
they have a great pride in showing their wealth; they use bows and arrows as the Turks do;
they carry lances also into the field.  They ride with a short stirrup after the manner of
the Turks; they are a kind of people most sparing in diet, and most patient in extremity of
cold above all others.  For when the ground is covered with snow, and is grown terrible and
hard with the frost, this Russian hangs up his mantle or soldier's coat against that part from
whence the wind and snow drives, and so making a little fire, lieth down with his back towards
the weather; this mantle of his serves him for his bed, wall, house and all; his drink is the
cold water of the river, mingled with oatmeal, and this is all his good cheer, and he thinketh
himself well and daintily fed therewith, and so sitteth down by his fire, and upon the hard
ground, roasteth, as it were, his weary sides thus daintily stuffed; the hard ground is his
feather bed, and some block or stone his pillow; and as for his horse, he is, as it were, a
chamber-fellow with his master, faring both alike.  How justly may this barbarous and rude
Russian condemn the daintiness and niceness of our captains, who, living in a soil and air
much more temperate, yet commonly use fur boots and cloaks! but thus much of the furniture
of their common soldiers.  But those that are of higher degrees come into the field a little
better provided.  As for the furniture of the Emperor himself, it is then above all other times
most notable.  Their horses can well abstain two whole days from any meat. They feed upon the
barks of trees and the most tender branches in all the time of war.  And this scant and miserable
manner of living both the horse and his master can well endure, sometimes for the space of
two months lusty and in good state of body.  If any man behave himself valiantly in the field
to the contentation of the Emperor, he bestoweth upon him in recompense of his service some
farm or so much ground as he and his may live upon, which, notwithstanding, after his death
returneth again to the Emperor if he die without a male issue.  For although his daughters
be never so many, yet no part of that inheritance comes to them, except, peradventure, the
Emperor of his goodness give some portion of the land amongst them to bestow them withal. 
As for the man, whosoever he be, that is in this sort rewarded by the Emperor's liberality,
he is bound in a great sum to maintain so many soldiers for the war, when need shall require,
as that land in the opinion of the Emperor is able to maintain.  But all this is done of all
people so willingly at the Emperor's commandment, that a man would think they would rather
make restitution of other men's goods than give that which is their own to other men.  Now
the Emperor having taken these goods into his hands, bestoweth them among his courtiers according
to their deserts, and the oftener that a man is sent to the wars, the more favour he thinketh
is borne to him by the Emperor, although he go upon his own charge, as I said before.  So great
is the obedience of all men generally to their prince.

OF THE AMBASSADORS OF THE EMPEROR OF MUSCOVY.

The Muscovite, with no less pomp and magnificence than that which we have spoken of, sends
his ambassadors to foreign princes in the affairs of estate.  For while our men were abiding
in the city of Moscow, there were two ambassadors sent to the King of Poland, accompanied with
500 notable horse; and the greater part of the men were arrayed in cloth of gold and of silk,
and the worst apparel was of garments of a blue colour, to speak nothing of the trappings of
the horses, which were adorned with gold and silver, and very curiously embroidered; they had
also with them one hundred white and fair spare horses, to use them at such times as any weariness
came upon them.  But now the time requireth me to speak briefly of other cities of the Muscovites,
and of the wares and commodities that the country yieldeth.

NOVOGORODE.

Next unto Moscow, the city of Novogorode is reputed the chiefest of Russia; for although it
be in majesty inferior to it, yet in greatness it goeth beyond it.  It is the chiefest and
greatest mart town of all Muscovy; and albeit the Emperor's seat is not there, but at Moscow,
yet the commodiousness of the river falling into the gulf which is called Sinus Finnicus, whereby
it is well frequented by merchants, makes it more famous than Moscow itself.  This town excels
all the rest in the commodities of flax and hemp; it yields also hides, honey, and wax.  But
the Emperor, believing rather the king's letters which our men brought than the lying and false
suggestions of the Flemings, used no ill treaty towards them.

YERASLAVE.

Yeraslave also is a town of some good fame for the commodities of hides, tallow, and corn,
which it yields in great abundance.  Cakes of wax are there also to be sold, although other
places have greater store; this Yeraslave is distant from Moscow about two hundred miles, and
betwixt them are many populous villages.  Their fields yield such store of corn, that in conveying
it towards Moscow, sometimes in a forenoon, a man shall see seven hundred or eight hundred
sleds going and coming, laden with corn and salt fish; the people come a thousand miles to
Moscow to buy that corn, and then carry it away upon sleds; and these are those people that
dwell in the north parts, where the cold is so terrible that no corn doth grow there, or, if
it spring up, it never comes to ripeness.  The commodities that they bring with them are salt
fish, skins, and hides.

VOLOGDA.

Vologda being from Moscow five hundred and fifty miles, yields the commodities of hemp and
flax, although the greatest store of flax is sold at Novogorode.

PLESCO.

The town of Plesco is frequented of merchants for the good store of honey and wax that it yieldeth.

COLMAGRO.

The north parts of Russia yield very rare and precious skins; and amongst the rest those principally
which we call sables, worn about the necks of our noblewomen and ladies.  It hath also martens'
skins, white, black, and red fox skins, skins of hares and ermines and others, which they call
and term barbarously as beavers, minxes, and minevers.  The sea adjoining breeds a certain
beast which they call mors, which seeketh his food upon the rocks, climbing up with the help
of his teeth.  The Russians used to take them for the great virtue that is in their teeth,
whereof they make as great account as we do of the elephant's tooth.  These commodities they
carry upon deers' backs to the town of Lampas; and from thence to Colmagro, and there in the
winter time are kept great fairs for the sale of them.

OF CONTROVERSIES IN LAW, AND HOW THEY ARE ENDED.  If any controversy arise among them they
first make their landlords judges in the matter, and if they cannot end it, then they prefer
it to the magistrate.  The plaintiff craveth of the said magistrate that he may have leave
to enter law against his adversary, and having obtained it, the officer fetcheth the defendant
and beateth him on the legs till he bring forth a surety for him; and if he be not of such
credit as to procure a surety, then are his hands by an officer tied to his neck, and he is
beaten all the way till he come before the judge.  The judge then asketh him (as, for example,
in the matter of debt) whether he oweth anything to the plaintiff.  If he denies it, then saith
the judge, "How canst thou deny it?"  The defendant answereth by an oath; thereupon the officer
is commanded to cease from beating of him until the matter be further tried.  They have no
lawyers, but every man is his own advocate; and both the complaint of the accuser and the answer
of the defendant are in manner of petition delivered to the Emperor, entreating justice at
his hands.  The Emperor himself heareth every great controversy, and, upon the hearing of it,
giveth judgment, and that with great equity, which I take to be a thing worthy of special commendation
in the majesty of a prince.  But although he do this with a good purpose of mind, yet the corrupt
magistrates do wonderfully pervert the same; but if the Emperor take them in any fault, he
doth punish them most severely.  Now at the last, when each party hath defended his cause with
his best reasons, the judge demandeth of the accuser whether he hath any more to say for himself.
He answereth that he will try the matter in fight by his champion, or else entreateth that
in fight betwixt themselves the matter may be ended, which being granted, they both fight it
out; or if both of them, or either of them, seem unfit for that kind of trial, then they have
public champions to be hired which live by ending of quarrels.  These champions are armed with
iron axes and spears, and fight on foot; and he whose champion is overcome is by- and-by taken
and imprisoned and terribly handled, until he agree with his adversary.  But if either of them
be of any good calling and degree, and do challenge one another to fight, the judge granteth
it; in which case they may not use public champions.  And he that is of any good birth doth
contemn the other if he be basely born, and will not fight with him. And there are some among
them that used willingly to make themselves, their wives, and children bondslaves unto rich
men--to have a little money at the first into their hands, and so for ever after content themselves
with meat and drink, so little account do they make of liberty.

OF PUNISHMENTS UPON THIEVES.  The third time he is hanged.  There are many cut-purses among
them, and if the rigour of the prince did not cut them off, they could not be avoided.

OF THEIR RELIGION.

They maintain the opinions of the Greek Church; they suffer no graven images of saints in their
churches, but their pictures painted in tables they have in great abundance, which they do
adore, and offer unto and burn wax candles before them, and cast holy water upon them, without
other honour.  They say that our images, which are set up in churches, and carved, have no
divinity in them.  If any form or stool stand in his way, he oftentimes beateth his brow upon
the same, and often, ducking down with his head and body, worshippeth the chief image. The
habit and attire of the priests and of the laymen doth nothing at all differ; as for marriage,
it is forbidden to no man:  only this is received, and held amongst them for a rule and custom,
that if a priest's wife do die, he may not marry again nor take a second wife; and, therefore,
they of secular priests, as they call them, are made monks, to whom then chastity for ever
is commanded.  Their divine service is all done and said in their own language, that every
man may understand it; they receive the Lord's Supper with leavened bread, and after the consecration
they carry it about the church in a saucer, and prohibit no man from receiving and taking of
it that is willing so to do.  They use both the Old and the New Testament, and read both in
their own language, but so confusedly that they themselves that do read understand not what
they themselves do say; and while any part of either Testament is read there is liberty given
by custom to prattle, talk, and make a noise; but in the time of the rest of the service they
use very great silence and reverence, and behave themselves very modestly and in good sort.
As touching the Lord's Prayer, the tenth man amongst them knows it not; and for the Articles
of our Faith and the Ten Commandments, no man, or, at the least, very few of them, do either
know them or can say them:  their opinion is that such secret and holy things as they are should
not rashly and imprudently be communicated with the common people.  They hold for a maxim amongst
them that the old Law, and the Commandments also, are all abolished by the death and blood
of Christ; all studies and letters of humanity they utterly refuse; concerning the Latin, Greek,
and Hebrew tongues, they are altogether ignorant in them.

Every year they celebrate four several fasts, which they call according to the names of the
saints:  the first begins with them at the time that our Lent begins; the second is called
amongst them the Fast of St. Peter; the third is taken from the Day of the Virgin Mary; and
the fourth, and last, begins upon St. Philip's Day.  But as we begin our Lent upon Wednesday,
so they begin theirs upon the Sunday.  Upon the Saturday they eat flesh.  Whensoever any of
those fasting feasts do draw near, look what week doth immediately go before them; the same
week they live altogether upon white meats, and in their common language they call those weeks
the fast of butter.

In the time of their fasts the neighbours everywhere go from one to another, and visit one
another, and kiss one another with kisses of peace, in token of their mutual love and Christian
concord; and then also they do more often than at any other time go to the Holy Communion.
When seven days are past, from the beginning of the fast, then they often do either go to their
churches or keep themselves at home and use often prayer; and for that seven nights they eat
nothing but herbs; but after that seven night fast is once past, then they return to their
old intemperance of drinking, for they are notable toss-pots.  As for the keeping of their
fasting days, they do it very straitly, neither do they eat anything besides herbs and salt
fish as long as those fasting days do endure; but upon every Wednesday and Friday, in every
week throughout the year, they fast.

There are very many monasteries of the order of Saint Benedict amongst them, to which many
great livings, for their maintenance, do belong; for the friars and the monks do at the least
possess the third part of the livings throughout the whole Muscovite Empire.  To those monks
that are of this order there is amongst them a perpetual prohibition that they may eat no flesh;
and, therefore, their meat is only salt fish, milk, and butter; neither is it permitted them
by the laws and customs of their religion to eat any fresh fish at all, and at those four fasting
times whereof we spake before they eat no fish at all:  only they live with herbs, and cucumbers,
which they do continually for that purpose cause, and take order, to grow and spring for their
use and diet.

As for their drink, it is very weak and small.  For the discharge of their office they do every
day say service, and that early in the mornings, before day; and they do in such sort and with
such observation begin their service, that they will be sure to make an end of it before day;
and about nine of the clock in the morning they celebrate the Communion.  When they have so
done they go to dinner, and after dinner they go again to service, and the like also after
supper; and in the meantime, while they are at dinner, there is some exposition or interpretation
of the Gospel used.

Whensoever any abbot of any monastery dieth, the Emperor taketh all his household stuff, beasts,
flocks of sheep, gold, silver, and all that he hath, or else he that is to succeed him in his
place and dignity doth redeem all those things, and buyeth them of the Emperor for money.

Their churches are built of timber, and the towers of their churches for the most part are
covered with shingle boards.  At the doors of their churches they usually build some entrance
or porch, as we do, and in their churchyards they erect a certain house of wood, wherein they
set up their bells--wherein sometimes they have but one, in some two, and in some also three.

There is one use and custom amongst them which is strange and rare, yet it is very ridiculous,
and that is this:  when any man dieth amongst them they take the dead body and put it in a
coffin or chest, and in the hand of the corpse they put a little scroll, and in the same there
are these words written, that the same man died a Russian of Russia, having received the faith
and died in the same.

ON THE MUSCOVITES THAT ARE IDOLATERS, DWELLING NEAR TO TARTARIA.

There is a certain part of Muscovy, bordering upon the countries of the Tartars, wherein those
Muscovites that dwell are very great idolaters; they have one famous idol amongst them, which
they call the Golden Old Wife, and they have a custom that whensoever any plague or any calamity
doth afflict the country, as hunger, war, or such like, then they go by-and-by to consult with
their idol, which they do after this manner:  they fall down prostrate before the idol, and
pray unto it, and put in the presence of the same a cymbal, and about the same certain persons
stand, which are chosen amongst them by lot:  upon their cymbal they place a silver toad, and
sound the cymbal, and to whomsoever of those lotted persons that toad goeth he is taken, and
by-and-by slain; and immediately, I know not by what illusions of the devil or idol, he is
again restored to life, and then doth reveal and deliver the causes of the present calamity.
And by this means knowing how to pacify the idol, they are delivered from the imminent danger.

OF THE FORM OF THEIR PRIVATE HOUSES, AND OF THE APPAREL OF THE PEOPLE.

The common houses of the country are everywhere built of beams of fir-trees; the lower beams
do so receive the round hollowness of the uppermost, that by the means of the building thereupon
they resist and expel all winds that blow, and where the timber is joined together, there they
stop the chinks with moss.  The form and fashion of their houses in all places is four-square,
with straight and narrow windows, whereby with a transparent easement made or covered with
skin like to parchment they receive the light.  The roofs of their houses are made of boards
covered without with the bark of trees:  within their houses they have benches or grieves hard
by their walls, which commonly they sleep upon, for the common people know not the use of beds:
they have stoves wherein in the morning they make a fire, and the same fire doth either moderately
warm or make very hot the whole house.

The apparel of the people for the most part is made of wool, their caps are picked like unto
a rike or diamond, broad beneath, and sharp upward.  In the manner of making whereof there
is a sign and representation of nobility; for the loftier or higher their caps are, the greater
is their birth supposed to be, and the greater reverence is given them by the common people.

THE CONCLUSION TO QUEEN MARY.

These are the things, most excellent Queen, which your subjects newly returned from Russia
have brought home concerning the state of that country:  wherefore if your Majesty shall be
favourable, and grant a continuance of the travel, there is no doubt but that the honour and
renown of your name will be spread amongst those nations, whereunto three only noble personages
from the very creation have had access, to whom no man hath been comparable.

THE COPY OF THE DUKE OF MUSCOVY AND EMPEROR OR RUSSIA HIS LETTERS, SENT TO KING EDWARD VI.,
BY THE HANDS OF RICHARD CHANCELER.  In the strength of the twentieth year of our governance,
be it known, that at our sea coasts arrived a ship, with one Richard and his company, and said,
that he was desirous to come into our dominions, and according to his request hath seen our
Majesty and our eyes; and hath declared unto us your Majesty's desire as that we should grant
unto your subjects, to go and come, and in our dominions, and among our subjects to frequent
free marts, with all sorts of merchandises, and upon the same to have wares for their return.
And they have also delivered us your letters which declare the same request.  And hereupon
we have given order, that wheresoever your faithful servant Hugh Willoughbie land or touch
in our dominions, to be well entertained, who as yet is not arrived, as your servant Richard
can declare.

"And we, with Christian belief and faithfulness, and according to your honourable request and
my honourable commandment will not leave it undone, and are furthermore willing that you send
unto us your ships and vessels, when, and as often as they may have passage, with good assurance
on our part to see them harmless.  And if you send one of your Majesty's council to treat with
us, whereby your country merchants may with all kinds of wares, and where they will, make their
market in our dominions, they shall have their free mart with all free liberties through my
whole dominions with all kinds of wares, to come and go at their pleasure, without any let,
damage, or impediment, according to this our letter, our word, and our seal, which we have
commanded to be under-sealed.  Written in our dominion in our town and in our palace in the
Castle of Moscow, in the year seven thousand and sixty, the second month of February."

This letter was written in the Muscovian tongue, in letters much like to the Greek letters,
very fair written on paper with a broad seal hanging at the same, sealed in paper upon wax.
This seal was much like the broad seal of England, having on the one side the image of a man
on horseback in complete harness fighting with a dragon.

Under this letter was another paper written in the Dutch tongue, which was the interpretation
of the other written in the Muscovian letters.  These letters were sent the next year after
the date of King Edward's letters, 1554.

THE COINS, WEIGHTS, AND MEASURES, USED IN RUSSIA Written by JOHN HASSE in the year 1554.

Forasmuch as it is most necessary for all merchants which seek to have traffic in any strange
regions, first to acquaint themselves with the coins of those lands with which they do intend
to join in traffic, and how they are called from the valuation of the highest piece to the
lowest, and in what sort they make their payments, as also what their common weights and measures
be.  For these causes I have thought good to write something thereof, according to mine own
knowledge and experience, to the end that the merchants of that new adventure may the better
understand how the wealth of that new frequented trade will arise.  But I will not stand upon
this, because it is no current money amongst merchants.

Of silver coins there be these sorts of pieces:  the least is a poledenga; the second, a denga;
the third, nowgrote, which is as much to say in English, as halfpenny, penny, and twopence;
and for other valued money than this there is none.  There are oftentimes there coins of gold,
but they come out of foreign countries; whereof there is no ordinary valuation, but they pass
according to the agreement of merchants.

Their order in summing of money is this:  as we say in England, halfpenny, penny, shilling,
and pound, so say they, poledenga, denga, altine, and rubble (rouble).  There goeth two poledengas
to a denga, six dengaes to an altine, and twenty-three altines and two dengaes to a rubble.

Concerning the weights of Russia, they are these.  There are two sorts of pounds in use amongst
them--the one great, the other small. The great pound is just two small pounds; they call the
great weight by the name of beasemar, and the small they call the skallawaight.  And as for
their great weight, which they call the beasemar, they sell by pode or ship pound.  The pode
doth contain of the great weight, forty pounds; and of the small, eighty.  There go ten podes
to a ship pound.

Yet you must consider that their great weight is not full with ours; for I take not their great
pound to be full thirteen ounces, but above twelve I think it be.  But for your just proof,
weigh six rubbles of Russian money with our pound weight, and then shall you see what it lacketh;
for six rubbles of Russia is, by the Emperor's standard, the great pound.  So that I think
it the next way to know the just weight as well of the great pound as of the small.

There is another weight needful to be known, which is the weight of Wardhouse; for so much
as they weigh all their dry fish by weight, which weight is the basemere as they of Russia
do use, notwithstanding there is another sort in it.  The names of those weights are these:
the marke pound, the great pound, the wee and the ship pound.  The marke pound is to be understood
as our pound, and their great is twenty-four of their marke pound; the wee is three great pound;
and eight wee is a ship pound.

Now, concerning their measures.  As they have two sorts of weights, so they have also two sorts
of measures, wherewith they measure cloth, both linen and woollen.  They call the one an areshine,
and the other a locut.  The areshine I take to be as much as the Flanders ell, and their locut
half an English yard.  With their areshine they may mete all such sorts of cloths as cometh
into the land, and with the locut all such cloth, both linen and woollen, as they make themselves.
And whereas we used to give yard and inch, or yard and handfull, they do give nothing but bare
measure.

They have also a measure wherewith they do mete their corn, which they call a set-forth, and
the half of that an osmine.  This set- forth I take to be three bushels of London measure.

Concerning the tolls and customs of Russia, it was reported to me in Muscovy that the Turks
and Armenians pay the tenth penny custom of all the wares they bring into the Emperor's land,
and above that they pay for all such goods as they weigh at the Emperor's beam two pence of
the rouble, which the buyer or seller must make report of to the master of the beam.  They
also pay a certain horse toll, which is in divers places of his realm four pence of a horse.

The Dutch nation are free of this; notwithstanding for certain offences, they had lost their
privileges, which they have recovered this summer, to their great charge.  It was reported
to me by a justice of that country, that they paid for it thirty thousand roubles, and also
that Rye, Dorpt, and Revel, have yielded themselves under the government of the Emperor of
Russia; whether this was a brag of the Russians or not, I know not, but thus he said, and,
indeed, while we were there, there came a great ambassador out of Liffeland for the assurance
of their privileges.

To speak somewhat of the commodities of this country, it is to be understood that there is
a certain place fourscore miles from the sea called Colmogro; to which place there resort all
the sorts of wares that are in the north parts--as oils, salt, stock-fish, salmon, feathers,
and furs; their salt they make of salt water by the seaside; their oils they make of seals,
whereof they have great store, which is brought out of the bay where our ships came in; they
make it in the spring of the year, and bring it to Colmogro to sell, and the merchants there
carry it to Novogrod, and so sell it to the Dutch nation.  Their stock-fish and salmon cometh
from a place called Mallums, not far from Wardhouse; their salmon and their salt they carry
to Moscow, and their dried fish they carry to Novogrod, and sell it there to the Leeflanders.

The furs and feathers which come to Colmogro, as sables, beavers, minks, ermine lettis, graies,
wolverins, and white foxes, with deer- skins, they are brought thither by the men of Penninge,
Lampne, and Powstezer, which fetch them from the Samoydes that are counted savage people, and
the merchants that bring these furs do use to truck with the merchants of Colmogro for cloth,
tin, batrie, and such other like, and the merchants of Colmogro, carry them to Novogrod, Vologda,
or Moscow, and sell them there.  The feathers which come from Penning they do little esteem.

The town of Vologda is meetest for our merchants, because it lieth amongst all the best towns
of Russia, and there is no town in Russia but trades with it; also the water is a great commodity
to it.  If they plant themselves in Moscow or Novogrod their charge will be great and wonderful,
but not so in Vologda, for all things will there be had better cheap by the one-half; and for
their vent, I know no place so meet; it is likely that some will think the Moscow to be the
meetest by the reason of the court, but by that reason I take it to be worse; for the charge
there would be so great by cravers and expenses that the moiety of the profit would be wholly
consumed, which in the other place will be saved.  And yet, notwithstanding, our merchants
may be there in the winter to serve the Emperor and his Court.  The Emperor is a great merchant
himself of wax and sables, which with good foresight may be procured to their hands; as for
other commodities there are little or none in Muscovy besides those above rehearsed; if there
be other it is brought thither by the Turks, who will be dainty to buy our cloths considering
the charges of carriages overland.

Our merchants may do well to provide for the Russians such wares as the Dutch nation doth serve
them of, as Flanders and Holland cloths, which I believe they shall serve better with less
charge than they of Rye or Dorpt, or Revel; for it is no small adventure to bring their cloths
out of Flanders to either of these places, and their charge not little to carry them overland
to Novogrod which is from Rye nine hundred Russian miles.

They have in Russia two sorts of flax, the one is called great flax, and the other small; that
which they call great flax is better by four roubles in a hundred bundles than the small. 
It is much longer than the other, and cleaner, without wood; and whereas of the small flax
there go twenty-seven or twenty-eight bundles to a ship pound; there goeth not of the greater
sort above twenty-two or twenty-four at the most.  There are many other trifles in Russia,
as soap, mats, &c., but I think there will be no great account made of them.

Articles conceived and determined for the Commission of the Merchants of this Company resiant
(resident) in Russia, and at the Wardhouse, for the second voyage, 1555, the first of May,
as followeth.

2.  Item, it is also committed, as above, to the said agents, to bind and charge the said company
by debt for wares upon credit, as good opportunity and occasion shall serve, with power to
charge and bind the said company and their successors for the payments of such things as shall
be taken up for credit, and the said agents to be relieved, ab opere satis dandi.

3.  Item, full authority and power is committed to the said first- named factors, together
with Richard Chanceler, grand pilot of this fleet, to repair to the Emperor's court, there
to present the King and Queen's Majesty's letters, written in Greek, Polish, and Italian, and
to give and exhibit the merchants' presents at such time and place as shall be thought most
expedient; they, or one of them, to demand, and humbly desire of the Emperor, such further
grants and privileges to be made to this company as may be beneficial for the same, to continue
in traffic with his subjects, according to such instructions as be in this behalf devised and
delivered to the agents whereunto relation is to be had, and some one of these persons to attend
upon the court for the obtaining of the same, as to their discretions shall be thought good.

4.  Item, that all the said agents do well consider, ponder, and weigh such articles as be
delivered to them, to know the natures, dispositions, laws, customs, manners, and behaviours
of the people of the countries where they shall traffic, as well of the nobility as of the
lawyers, merchants, mariners, and common people, and to note diligently the subtleties of their
bargaining, buying and selling, making as few debts as possibly may be; and to be circumspect,
that no law, neither of religion nor positive, be broken or transgressed by them, or any minister
under them, nor yet by any mariner or other person of our nation; and to foresee that all tolls,
customs, and such other rights, be so duly paid, that no forfeiture or confiscation may ensue
to our goods either outward or inward; and that all things pass with quiet, without breach
of the public peace or common tranquillity of any of the places where they shall arrive or traffic.

5.

8.  Item, that the said agents and factors shall daily one hour in the morning confer and consult
together what shall be most convenient and beneficial for the company; and such orders as they
shall determine, to be written by the secretary of the company, in a book to be provided for
that purpose; and no inferior person to infringe or break any such order or device, but to
observe the same exactly, upon such reasonable pain as the agents shall put him to by discretion.

9.  Item, that the said agents shall in the end of every week, or oftener, as occasion shall
require, peruse, see, and try, not only the cashier's books, reckonings, and accounts, firming
the same with their hands, but also shall receive and take weekly the account of every other
officer, as well of the vendes, as of the empteous, and also of the state of the household
expenses, making thereof a perfect declaration as shall appertain; the same accounts also to
be firmed by the said agents' hands.

10.  Item, that no inferior minister shall take upon him to make any bargain or sale of any
wares, merchandises, or goods, but by the commission and warranties of the said agents under
their hands; and he not to transgress his commission by any way, pretence, or colour.

11.  Item, that every inferior minister--that is to understand, all clerks and young merchants
being at the order of the said agents-- shall ride, go, sail, and travel to all such place
and places as they or he shall be, appointed unto by the said agents, and effectually to follow
and do that which to him or them shall be committed, well and truly to the most benefit of
the company, according to the charge to him or them committed, even as by their oaths, duties,
and bonds of their masters they be bounden and charged to do.

12.  Item, that at every month's end all accounts and reckonings shall be brought into perfect
order into the ledger or memorial; and the decrees, orders, and rules of the agents, together
with the privileges and copies of letters, may and shall be well and truly written by the secretary,
in such form as shall be appointed for it, and that the copies of all their doings may be sent
home with the said ship at her return.

13.  Item, that all the agents do diligently learn and observe all kinds of wares, as well
naturals as foreign, that be beneficial for this realm, to be sold for the benefit of the company;
and what kind of our commodities and other things of these west parts be most vendable in those
realms with profit, giving a perfect advice of all such things requisite.

14.  Item, if the Emperor will enter into bargain with you for the whole mass of your stock,
and will have the trade of it to utter to his own subjects, then debating the matter prudently
among yourselves, set such high prices of your commodities as you may assure yourselves to
be gainers in your own wares, and yet--to buy theirs at such base prices as you may here also
make a commodity and gain at home, having in your minds the notable charges that the company
have defrayed in advancing this voyage; and the great charges that they sustain daily in wages,
victuals, and other things, all which must be requited by the wise handling of this voyage,
which, being the first precedent shall be a perpetual precedent for ever; and therefore all
circumspection is to be used; and foreseeing in this first enterprise, which God bless and
prosper under you to His glory and the public wealth of this realm, whereof the Queen's majesty
and the Lords of the Council have conceived great hope, whose expectations are not to be frustrated.

15.

17. "Oh, no," he rejoined, "you can afford to spread out wide, you are so well planted in the mud,"
giving the compliment, however, a practical turn, as he glanced at the deep mire on the then
unpaved street. It was this same condition of Polk Street which had caused the crown prince
of Belgium when he was brought upon a visit to Hull-House to shake his head and meditatively
remark, "There is not such a street--no, not one--in all the territory of Belgium."

At the end of five years the residents of Hull-House published some first found facts and our
reflections thereon in a book called "Hull-House Maps and Papers." The maps were taken from information
collected by one of the residents for the United States Bureau of Labor in the investigation
into "the slums of great cities" and the papers treated of various neighborhood matters with
candor and genuine concern if not with skill. The first edition became exhausted in two years,
and apparently the Boston publisher did not consider the book worthy of a second.

[Editor: Mary Mark Ockerbloom]

CHAPTER VII

PROBLEMS OF POVERTY

That neglected and forlorn old age is daily brought to the attention
of a Settlement which undertakes to bear its share of the neighborhood
burden imposed by poverty, was pathetically clear to us during our
first months of residence at Hull-House.

One day a boy of ten led a tottering old lady into the House, saying that she had slept for
six weeks in their kitchen on a bed made up next to the stove; that she had come when her son died,
although none of them had ever seen her before; but because her son had "once worked in the
same shop with Pa she thought of him when she had nowhere to go." The little fellow concluded
by saying that our house was so much bigger than theirs that he thought we would have more roomfor
beds. The old woman herself said absolutely nothing, but looking on with that gripping fear of the
poorhouse in her eyes, she was a living embodiment of that dread which is so heartbreaking that
the occupants of the County Infirmary themselves seem scarcely less
wretched than those who are making their last stand against it.

This look was almost more than I could bear for only a few days before some frightened women had
bidden me come quickly to the house of an old German woman, whom two men from the country agent's
office were attempting to remove to the County Infirmary. The poor old creature had thrown
herself bodily upon a small and battered chest of drawers and clung
there, clutching it so firmly that it would have been impossible to
remove her without also taking the piece of furniture .

She did not weep nor moan nor indeed make any human sound, but between her broken gasps for
breath she squealed shrilly like a frightened animal caught in a trap. The little group of women
and children gathered at her door stood aghast at this realization of the black dread which
always clouds the lives of the very poor when work is slack, but which constantly grows more
imminent and threatening as old age approaches. The neighborhood women and I hastened to make
all sorts of promises as to the support of the old woman and the country officials, only too
glad to be rid of their unhappy duty, left her to our ministrations. This dread of the poorhouse,
the result of centuries of deterrent Poor Law administration, seemed to me not without some justification
one summer when I found myself perpetually distressed by the unnecessary idleness and forlornness
of the old women in the Cook County Infirmary, many of whom I had known in the years when activity
was still a necessity, and when they yet felt bustlingly important. To take away from an old
woman whose life has been spent in household cares all the foolish
little belongings to which her affections cling and to which her very
fingers have become accustomed, is to take away her last incentive
to activity, almost to life itself.

To give an old woman only a chair and a bed, to leave her no cupboard in which her treasures may
be stowed, not only that she may take them out when she desires occupation, but that their mind
may dwell upon them in moments of revery, is to reduce living almost
beyond the limit of human endurance.

Finally, for the service and due accomplishment of all the premises, every agent and minister
of, and for, this voyage hath not only given a corporal oath upon the Evangelists to observe,
and cause to be observed, this commission, and every part, clause, and sentence of the same,
as much as in him lieth, as well for his own part as for any other person, but also have bound
themselves and their friends to the company in several sums of money, expressed in the acts
and records of this society, for the truth and fidelities of them for the better, and also
manifester testification of the truth, and of their oaths, promises, and bands aforesaid, they
have to this commission subscribed particularly their several hands, and the company also in
confirmation of the same, have set their seal. Given the day, month, and years first above
mentioned.

THE OATH MINISTERED TO THE SERVANTS OF THE FELLOWSHIP.

Ye swear by the holy contents of that book, that ye shall well, faithfully, and truly and uprightly,
and with all your endeavour, serve this right worshipful company in that order, which by this
fellowship's agent or agents in the dominions of the Emperor of Russia, &c., shall be unto
you committed, by commission, commandment, or other his direction.  And that you shall be obedient
and faithful to the same, our agent or agents, and that well and truly and uprightly, according
to the commission, charge, commandment, or other direction of the said agent or agents to you
from time to time given and to be given, you shall prosecute and do all that which in you lieth
for the good renown, commodity, benefit, and profit of the said fellowship; and you shall not,
directly or indirectly, openly or covertly, do, exercise, or use any hide or feat of merchandises
for your own private account, commodity, gain, or profit, or for the account of or for any
other person or persons without consent or license of this said fellowship first obtained in
writing.  And if you shall know or understand any other person or persons to use, exercise,
or do any trade, traffic, or feat of merchandise to or for his or their own account or accounts,
at any time or times hereafter, that then ye shall truly and plainly disclose, open, utter,
and reveal, and show the same unto the said fellowship, without fraud, colour, covin, or delay:
So help you God, &c.

THE LETTER OF MASTER GEORGE KILLINGWORTH, THE COMPANY'S FIRST AGENT IN MUSCOVY, Touching their
entertainment in their second voyage.  Anno 1555, the 27th of November, in Moscow.

Right worshipful, my duty considered, &c.--It may please your worship to understand that at
the making hereof we all be in good health, thanks be to God, save only William, our cook,
as we came from Colmogro fell into the river out of the boat and was drowned. And the 11th
day of September we came to Vologda, and there we laid all our wares up, and sold very little;
but one merchant would have given us twelve roubles for a broadcloth (and he said he would
have had them all) and four altines for a pound of sugar, but we did refuse it because he was
the first, and the merchants were not come thither, nor would not come before winter, trusting
to have more; but I fear it will not be much better; yet, notwithstanding, we did for the best.
And the house that our wares lie in cost from that day until Easter ten roubles.  And the 28th
day of September we did determine with ourselves that it was good for Masters Gray, Arthur
Edwards, Thomas Hattery, Christopher Hudson, John Sedgewicke, Richard Johnson, and Richard
Good, to tarry at Vologda, and Masters Chanceler, Henry Lane, Edward Prise, Robert Best, and
I, should go to Moscow.  And we did lade the Emperor's sugar, with part of all sorts of wares
to have had to the Moscow with us, and the way was so deep that we were fain to turn back and
leave it still at Vologda till the frost.  And we went forth with post-horse, and the charge
of every horse, being still ten in number, comes to 10s. 7.5d., besides the guides; and we
came to the Moscow the fourth day of October, and were lodged that night in a simple house;
but the next day we were sent for to the Emperor his secretary, and he bade us welcome with
a cheerful countenance and cheerful words, and we showed him that we had a letter from our
Queen's grace to the Emperor his grace, and then he desired to see them all (and that they
might remain with him, to have them perfect, that the true meaning might be declared to the
Emperor), and so we did; and then we were appointed to a better house; and the seventh day
the secretary sent for us again, and then he showed us that we should have a better house,
for it was the Emperor his will that we should have all things that we did lack, and did send
us mead of two sorts, and two hens, our house free, and every two days to receive eight hens,
seven altines, and twopence in money and medow and a certain poor fellow to make clean our
house and to do that whereunto we should set him; and we had given many rewards before, which
you shall perceive by other, and so we gave the messengers a reward with thanks; and the ninth
day we were sent to make us ready to speak with the Emperor on the morrow.  And the letters
were sent us that we might deliver them ourselves, and we came before him the tenth day; and
before we came to his presence we went through a great chamber, where stood many small tons,
pails, bowls, and pots of silver (I mean like washing-bowls), all parcel gilt; and within that
another chamber, wherein sat (I think) near a hundred in cloth of gold, and then into the chamber
where his grace sat, and there, I think, were more than in the other chamber, also in cloth
of gold; and we did our duty, and showed his grace our Queen's grace's letters, with a note
of your present which was left in Vologda, and then his grace did ask how our Queen's grace
did, calling her cousin, saying that he was glad that we were come in health into his realm,
and we went one by one unto him and took him by the hand, and then his grace did bid us go
in health, and come to dinner again; and we dined in his presence, and were set with our faces
towards his grace, and none in the chamber sat with their backs towards him, being, I think,
near a hundred at dinner then, and all served with gold as platters, chargers, pots, cups,
and all not slender, but very massive, and yet a great number of platters of gold, standing
still on the cupboard, not moved.  And divers times in the dinner- time his grace sent us meat
and drink from his own table; and when we had dined we went up to his grace and received a
cup with drink at his own hand, and the same night his grace sent certain gentlemen to us with
divers sorts of wine and medow, to whom we gave a reward. And afterwards we were by divers
Italians counselled to take heed whom we did trust to make the copy of the privileges that
we would desire to have for fear it should not be written in the Russian tongue, as we did
mean.  So first, a Russian did write for us a breviate to the Emperor, the tenour whereof was,
that we did desire a stronger privilege.  And when the secretary saw it he did deliver it to
his grace; and when we came again his grace willed us to write our minds, and he would see
it, and so we did.  And his grace is so troubled with preparations to wars that as yet we have
no answer. But we have been required of his secretary, and of the under- chancellor, to know
what wares we have brought into the realm, and what wares we do intend to have that are or
may be had in this realm.  And we showed them; that they showed the Emperor thereof. And then
they said his grace's pleasure was that his best merchants of the Moscow should be spoken to
to meet and talk with us.  And so a day was appointed, and we met in the secretary his office,
and there was the under-chancellor, who was not past two years since the Emperor's merchant,
and not his chancellor.  And then the conclusion of our talk was that the chancellor willed
us to bethink us where we would desire to have a house or houses, that we might come to them
as to our own house, and for merchandise to be made preparation for us, and they would know
our prices of our wares and frise.  And we answered, that for our prices they must see the
wares before we could make any price thereof, for the like in goodness had not been brought
into the realm, and we did look for an example of all sorts of our wares to come from Vologda
with the first sled way, and then they should see them, and then we would show them the prices
of them.  And likewise we could not tell them what we would give them justly till we did know
as well their just weight as their measures (for in all places where we did come all weights
and measures did vary).  Then the secretary (who had made promise unto us before) said that
we should have all the just measures under seal, and he that was found faulty in the contrary
to buy or sell--with any other measure than that, the law, was that he should be punished.
He said, moreover, that if it so happen that any of our merchants do promise by covenant at
any time to deliver you any certain sum of wares in such a place, and of such like goodness,
at such a day, for such a certain price, that then because of variance we should cause it to
be written, according as the bargain is, before a justice or the next ruler to the place. 
If he did not keep covenant and promise in all points, according to his covenant, that then
look what loss or hindrance we could justly prove that we have thereby, he should make it good
if he be worth so much.  And in like case we must do to them; and to that we did agree, save
only if it were to come over the sea, then if any such fortune should be (as God forbid) that
the ship should mischance or be robbed, and the proof to be made that such kind of wares were
laden, the English merchants to bear no loss to the other merchant.  Then the chancellor said,
"Methinks you shall do best to have your house at Colmogro, which is but one hundred miles
from the right discharge of the ships; and yet I trust the ships shall come nearer hereafter,
because the ships may not tarry long for their lading, which is one thousand miles from Vologda
by water, and all our merchants shall bring all our merchandise to Colmogro to you, and so
shall our merchants neither go empty nor come empty.  For if that they lack lading homeward,
there is salt, which is good ware here, that they may come laden again."  So we were very glad
to hear that, and did agree to his saying.  For we shall, nevertheless, if we list, have a
house at Vologda and at the Moscow, yea, and at Novogrod, or where we will in Russland.  But
the three-and-twentieth of this present we were with the secretary, and then among other talk
we moved, that if we should tarry at Colmogro with our wares, and should not come to Vologda,
or, further, to seek our market, but tarry still at Colmogro, and then the merchants of the
Moscow and others should not come and bring their wares, and so the ships should come, and
not have their lading ready, that then it were a great loss and hindrance for us. And to that
we did answer, that after the time that we do appoint with them to bring their wares to Colmogro,
God willing, they should never come thither but at the beginning of the year, they should find
that our merchants would have at the least for a thousand roubles, although the ships were
not come.  So that he said, that then we must talk further with the merchants.  So that as
yet I know not but that we shall have need of one house at Colmogro and another at Vologda,
and if that they bring not their wares to Colmogro, then we shall be sure to buy some at Vologda,
and to be out of bondage.

And thus may we continue three or four years, and in this space we shall know the country and
the merchants, and which way to save ourselves best, and where to plant our houses, and where
to seek for wares.  For the Moscow is not best for any kind of wares for us to buy, save only
wax, which we cannot have under sevenpence the Russian pound, and it lacks two ounces of our
pound; neither will it be much better cheap, for I have bidden sixpence for a pound.  And I
have bought more--five hundred weight of yarn--which stands me in eightpence farthing the Russian
pound, one with another.  And if we had received any store of money, and were dispatched here
of that we tarry for, as I doubt not but we shall be shortly (you know what I mean), then as
soon as we have made sail, I do intend to go to Novogrod and to Pletsco, whence all the great
number of the best tow flax cometh, and such wares as are there I trust to buy part.  And I
have written to Dantiske already to them for the conveyance of letters from thence.

And to certify you of the weather here, men say, that these three hundred years was never so
warm weather in this country at this time of the year.  But as yesternight we received a letter
from Christopher Hudson from a city called Yereslave, who is coming hither with certain of
our wares, but the winter did deceive him, so that he was fain to tarry by the way; and he
wrote that the Emperor's present was delivered to a gentleman at Vologda, and the sled did
overthrow, and the butte of Hollocke was lost, which made us all very sorry.

I pray you be not offended with these my rude letters, for lack of time; but as soon as sales
be made I will find the means to convey you a letter with speed; for the way is made so doubtful,
that the right messenger is so much in doubt, that he would not have any letters of any effect
sent by any man if he might, for he knows not of these; and to say the truth, the way is not
for him to crawl in. But I will make another shift beside, which I trust shall serve the turn
till he come, if sales be made before he be ready, which is and shall be as pleaseth God; Who
ever preserve your worship, and send us good sales.  Written in haste,

By yours to command,

GEORGE KILLINGWORTH, Draper.

Certain Instructions delivered in the Third Voyage, Anno 1556, for Russia, to every Purser
and the rest of the Servants, taken for the Voyage, which may serve as good and necessary Directions
to all other like Adventurers.

1.  First, you shall, before the ship doth begin to lade, go aboard, and shall there take and
write one inventory by the advice of the master, or of some other principal officer, there
aboard, of all the tackle, apparel, cables, anchors, ordnance, chambers, shot, powder, artillery,
and of all other necessaries whatsoever doth belong to the said ship; and the same justly taken
you shall write in a book, making the said master, or such officer, privy of that which you
have so written, so that the same may not be denied when they shall call account thereof. 
That done, you shall write a copy of the same with your own hand, which you shall deliver before
the ship shall depart for the voyage, to the company's bookkeeper, here to be kept to their
behalf, to the end that they may be justly answered the same when time shall require; and this
order to be seen and kept every voyage orderly, by the pursers of the company's own ship in
any wise.

2.  Also, when the ship beginneth to lade, you shall be ready aboard with your book to enter
such goods as shall be brought aboard to be laden for the company, packed or unpacked, taking
the marks and numbers of every pack, fardell, truss, or packet, coronoya, chest, vat, butt,
pipe, puncheon, whole barrel, half barrel, firkin, or other cask, maunde, or basket, or any
other thing which may or shall be packed by any other manner of way or device.  And first,
all such packs or trusses, etc., as shall be brought aboard to be laden not marked by the company's
mark, you shall do the best to let that the same be not laden, and to inquire diligently to
know the owners thereof, if you can, and what commodity the same is that is so brought aboard
to be laden; if you cannot know the owners of such goods learn what you can thereof, as well
making a note in your book, as also to send or bring word thereof to the agent, and to some
one of the four merchants with him adjoined so speedily as you can, if it be here laden, or
to be laden in this river, being not marked with the company's mark, as is aforesaid; and when
the said ship hath received in all that the company's agent will have laden, you shall make
a just copy of that which is laden, reciting the parcels, the marks and numbers of everything
plainly, which you shall likewise deliver to the said bookkeeper to the use aforesaid.

3.  Also, when the ship is ready to depart, you shall come for your cockets and letters to
the agent, and shall show him all such letters as you have received of any person or persons
privately or openly, to be delivered to any person or persons in Russia or elsewhere, and also
to declare if you know any other that shall pass in the ship either master or mariner that
hath received any letters to be privily delivered to any there, directed from any person or
persons, other than from the agent here to the agent there; which letters so by you received,
you shall not carry with you, without you be licensed so to do by the agent here, and some
of the four merchants as is aforesaid; and such others as do pass, having received any privy
letters to be delivered, you shall all that in you lieth let the delivery of them at your arriving
in Russia; and also if you have, or do receive, or shall know any other that doth or hath received
any goods of ready money to be employed in Russia, or to be delivered there to any person or
persons from any person or persons other than such as be the company's goods, and that under
their mark, you shall, before the ship cloth depart, declare the same truly to the said agent,
and to some of the other merchants to him adjoined, as it is before declared.

4.  Also, when the ship is ready to depart, and hath the master and the whole company aboard,
you shall diligently foresee and take heed, that there pass not any privy person or persons,
other than such as be authorised to pass in the said ship, without the licence and warrant
of one of the governors and of the assistants, for the same his passage, to be first shown.
And if there be any such person or persons that is to pass and will pass without showing the
same warrant, you shall let the passage of any such to the uttermost of your power; and for
that there may no such privy person pass under the cloak and colour of some mariner, you shall
upon the weighing of your ship's anchor call the master and the mariners within board by their
names, and that by your books, to the end that you may see that you have neither more nor less,
but just the number for the voyage.

5.  If you do hire any to bring your letters, write that which he must have for the postage.
And for your better knowledge and learning, you shall do very well to keep a daily note of
the voyage both outwards and homewards.

6.  And principally see that you forget not daily in all the voyage, both morning and evening,
to call the company within board to prayer, in which doing you shall please God, and the voyage
will have the better success thereby and the company prosper the better.

7.  Also in calm weather and at other times when you shall fortune to come to anchor in the
seas during the voyage, you shall for the company's profit, and for good husbanding of the
victuals aboard, call upon the boatswain and other of the company to use such hooks and other
engines as they have aboard to take fish with, that such fish so taken may be eaten for the
cause aforesaid; and if there be no such engines aboard, then to provide some before you go
from hence.

8.  And when God shall send you in safety into the Bay of St. Nicholas at anchor, you shall
go ashore with the first boat that shall depart from the ship, taking with you such letters
as you have to deliver to the agent there:  and if he be not there at your coming ashore, then
send the company's letters to Colmogro to him by some sure mariner or otherwise, as the master
and you shall think best; but go not yourself at any hand, nor yet from aboard the ship unless
it be ashore to treat with the agent for the lading of the ship that you be appointed in, which
you shall apply diligently to have done so speedily as may be.  And for the discharging of
the goods therein in the bay, to be carried from thence, see that you do look well to the unlading
thereof, that there be none other goods sent ashore than the company's, and according to the
notes entered in your book as aforesaid:  if there be, inquire diligently for whom they be,
and what goods they be, noting who is the receiver of the said goods, in such sort that the
company may have the true knowledge thereof at your coming home.

9.  Also there ashore, and likewise aboard, you shall spy, and search as secretly as you may,
to learn and know what bargaining, buying, and selling there is with the master and mariners
of the ship, and the Russians, or with the company's servants there; and that which you shall
perceive and learn you shall keep a note thereof in your book, secretly to yourself, which
you shall open and disclose at your coming home, to the governors and the assistants, in such
sort as the truth of their secret trades and occupyings may be revealed and known.  You shall
need always to have Argus' eyes, to spy their secret packing and conveyance, as well on land
as aboard the ship, of and for such furs, and other commodities, as yearly they do use to buy,
pack, and convey hither.  If you will be vigilant and secret in this article, you cannot miss
to spy their privy packing one with another, either on shore or aboard the ship; work herein
wisely, and you shall deserve great thanks of the whole country.

10.

11.  Thus, when the ship is fully laden again, and all things aboard in good order, and that
you do fortune to go ashore to the agent for your letters, and despatch away, you shall demand
whether all the goods be laden that were brought thither, and to know the truth thereof you
shall repair to the company's storehouse there, at St. Nicholas, to see if there be any goods
left in the said storehouse; if there be, you shall demand why they be not had laden, and to
note what kind of goods they be, that be so left; and seeing any of the ships there, not fully
laden, you shall put the agent in remembrance to lade those goods so left, if any such be to
be laden, as is aforesaid.  And thus, God sending you a fair wind, to make speed and away.

12.  Finally, when God shall send you to arrive again upon this coast in safety, either at
Harwich or elsewhere, go not you ashore, if you may possible, to the end that when you be gone
ashore there may no goods be sent privily ashore to be sold, or else to be sold aboard the
ship in your absence, but keep you still aboard, if you can by any means, for the causes aforesaid,
and write the company a letter from the ship of your good arrival, which you may convey to
them by land, by some boy or mariner of the ship, or otherwise as you shall think best and
likewise when God shall send you and the ship into the river here, do not in any wise depart
out of the ship that you be in, until the company do send some other aboard the ship, in your
stead and place, to keep the said ship in your absence.

A DISCOURSE

Of the honourable receiving into England of the first Ambassador from the Emperor of Russia,
in the year of Christ 1556, and in the third year of the reign of Queen Mary, serving for the
third voyage to Moscow.--Registered by Master John Incent, Protonotarie.  The third, videlicet
the Philip and Mary, arrived in the Thames nigh London the eighteenth day of April, in the
year of our Lord 1557.  The Edward Bonaventura, traversing the seas for months, finally, the
tenth day of November, of the aforesaid year of our Lord 1556, arrived within the Scottish
coast in a bay named Pettislego, where, by outrageous tempests and extreme storms, the said
ship, being beaten from her ground tackles, was driven upon the rocks on shore, where she broke
and split in pieces; in such sort as the grand pilot, using all carefulness for the safety
of the body of the ambassador and his train, taking the boat of the said ship, trusting to
attain the shore and so to save and preserve the body, and seven of the company or attendants
of the said ambassador, the same boat by rigorous waves of the seas was by dark night overwhelmed
and drowned, wherein perished, not only the body of the said grand pilot, with seven Russians,
but also divers of the mariners of the said ship; the noble personage of the said ambassador,
with a few others (by God's preservation and special favour), only with much difficulty saved.
In which shipwreck, not only the said ship was broken, but also the whole mass and body of
the goods laden in her was, by the rude and ravenous people of the country thereunto adjoining,
rifled, spoiled, and carried away, to the manifest loss and utter destruction of all the lading
of the said ship, and together with the ship, apparel, ordnance, and furniture, belonging to
the company, in value of 1,000 pounds of all, which was not restored towards the costs and
charges to the sum of 500 li. sterling.

As soon as by letters addressed to the said company, and in London delivered the 6th of December
last past, it was to them certainly known of the loss of their pilot, men, goods, and ship,
the same merchants with all celerity and expedition obtained, not only the Queen's Majesty's
most gracious and favourable letters to the Lady Dowager and Lords of the Council of Scotland
for the gentle comfortment and entertainment of the said ambassador, his train and company,
with preservation and restitution of his goods, as in such miserable cases to Christian pity,
princely honour, and mere justice appertaineth, but also addressed two gentlemen of good learning,
bravity, and estimation, videlicet Master Lawrence Hussie, Doctor of the Civil Law, and George
Gilpin, with money and other requisites, into the realm of Scotland, to comfort, aid, assist,
and relieve him and his there, and also to conduct the ambassador into England, sending with
them by post a talmack or speechman, for the better furniture of the service of the said ambassador,
trusting thereby to have the more ample and speedy redress of restitution; which personages,
using diligence, arrived at Edinburgh (where the Queen's Court was) the three-and-twentieth
day of the said month of December, who, first visiting the said ambassador, declaring the causes
of their coming and commission, showing the letters addressed in his favour, the order given
them for his solace and furniture of all such things as he would have, together with their
daily and ready service to attend upon his person and affairs, repaired consequently to the
Dowager Queen, delivering the letters.

Whereupon they received gentle answers with hope and comfort of speedy restitution of the goods,
apparel, jewels, and letters; for the more apparance whereof the Queen sent first certain commissioners
with a herald of arms to Pettislego, the place of the shipwreck, commanding by proclamation
and other edicts all such persons (no degree excepted) as had any part of such goods as were
spoiled and taken out or from the ship, to bring them in, and to restore the same with such
further order as Her Grace by advice of her council thought expedient; by reason whereof, not
without great labours, pains, and charges, (after a long time) divers small parcels of wax,
and other small trifling things of no value, were by the poorer sort of the Scots brought to
the commissioners; but the jewels, rich apparel, presents, gold, silver, costly furs, and such-
like, were conveyed away, concealed, and utterly embezzled.  The next day being Saturday, and
the last day of February, he was by the merchants adventuring for Russia, to the number of
one hundred and forty persons, and so many or more servants in one livery as above said, conducted
towards the City of London, where by the way he had not only the hunting of the fox and such-like
sport shown him, but also by the Queen's Majesty's commandment was received and embraced by
the Right Honourable Viscount Montagu, sent by her Grace for his entertainment.  Where, after
that he had delivered his letters, made his oration, given two timber of sables, and the report
of the same both in English and Spanish, in most loving manner embraced, was with much honour
and high entertainment, in sight of a great confluence of people, lords and ladies, soon after
remitted by water to his former lodging, to the which, within two days after, by assignment
of the King's and Queen's Majesties, repaired and conferred with him secretly two grave councillors--that
is, the Lord Bishop of Ely and Sir William Peter Knight, Chief Secretary to their Highnesses,
who, after divers secret talks and conference, reported to their Highnesses their proceedings,
the gravity, wisdom, and stately behaviour of the said ambassador, in such sort as was much
to their Majesties' satisfaction.

Finally, concluding upon such treaties and articles of amity as the letters of the King's and
Queen's Majesties most graciously, under the Great Seal of England, to him by the said councillors
delivered, doth appear.

The four-and-twentieth of April, being the Feast of St. George wherein was celebrated the solemnity
of the Noble Order of the Gaiter at Westminster, the same lord ambassador was soon after required
to have an audience; and therefore conducted from the said lodging to the Court by the Right
Noble the Lords Talbot and Lumley to their Majesties' presence, where (after his oration made,
and thanks both given and received) he most honourably took his leave, with commendations to
the Emperor, which being done, he was with special honour led unto the chapel, where, before
the King and Queen's Majesties, in sight of the whole Order of the Garter, was prepared for
him a stately seat, wherein he, accompanied with the Duke of Norfolk, the lords last above
mentioned, and many other honourable personages, was present at the whole service, in ceremonies
which were to him most acceptable.  The divine service ended, he was quickly remitted and reduced
to his barge, and so repaired to his lodgings in like order and gratulation of the people universally
as before.

The time of the year hasting the departure of the ambassador, the merchants having prepared
four goodly and well-trimmed ships laden with all kinds of merchandise apt for Russia, the
same ambassador making provision for such things as him pleased, the same ships in good order
valed (sailed?) down the river of Thames from London to Gravesend, where the same ambassador,
with his train and furniture, was embarked towards his voyage homeward, which Cod prosper in
all felicity.  And, also, the said nine-and-twentieth day of April the said merchants, assembling
themselves together in the house of the Drapers' Hall of London, exhibited and gave unto the
said ambassador a notable supper garnished with music, interludes, and banquets, in the which
a cup of wine being drunk to him in the name and lieu of the whole company, it was signified
to him that the whole company, with most liberal and friendly hearts, did frankly give to him
and his all manner of costs and charges and victuals, riding from Scotland to London during
his abode there, and until setting of sail aboard the ship, requesting him to accept the same
in good part, as a testimony and witness of their good hearts, zeal, and tenderness towards
him and his country.

It is to be considered that of the Bona Speranza no word nor knowledge was had at this present
day, nor yet of the arrival of the ships or goods from Scotland.

The third of May the ambassador departed from London to Gravesend, accompanied with divers
aldermen and merchants, who in good guard set him aboard the noble ship the Primrose, admiral
to the fleet, where leave was taken on both sides and parts, after many embracements and divers
farewells, not without expressing of tears.

Memorandum, that the first day of May the councillors, videlicet the Bishop of Ely and Sir
William Peter, on behalf of the King's and Queen's Majesties, repairing to the Lord Ambassador,
did not only deliver unto him their Highnesses' letters of recommendation under the Great Seal
of England to the Emperor, very tenderly and friendly written, but also, on their Majesties'
behalf, gave and delivered certain notable presents to the Emperor's person, and also gifts
for the Lord Ambassador's proper use and behoof, as by the particulars under-written appeareth,
with such further good words and commendations as the more friendly have not been heard; whereby
it appeareth how well affected their honours be to have and continue amity and traffic between
their honours and their subjects; which thing as the King's and Queen's Majesties have shown
of their princely munificences and liberalities, so have likewise the merchants and fellowship
of the adventurers for and to Russia manifested to the world their good-wills, minds, and zeals
borne to this new-commenced voyage, as by the discourse above mentioned, and other the notable
acts overlong to be recited in this present memorial, doth and may most clearly appear, the
like whereof is not in any precedent or history to be shown. Given the day, month, and year
under-written, of which instrument into every of the said ships one testimonial is delivered,
and the first remaineth with the said company in London.

Gifts sent to the King and Queen's Majesties of England by the Emperor of Russia, by the report
of the Ambassador, and spoiled by the Scots after the Shipwreck.

1.  First, six timber of sables rich in colour and hair.

2.  Item, twenty entire sables exceeding beautiful with teeth, ears, and claws.

3.  Item, four living sables with chains and collars.

4.  Item, thirty Lausannes large and beautiful.

5.  Item, six large and great skins, very rich and rare, worn only by the Emperor for worthiness.

6.  Item, a large and fair white Jerfawcon, for the wild swan, crane, goose, and other great
fowls. In the long vacations I pressed plants, stuffed birds and pounded
rocks in some vague belief that I was approximating the new method,
and yet when my stepbrother who was becoming a real scientist, tried
to carry me along with him to the merest outskirts of the methods
of research, it at once became evident that I had no aptitude and
was unable to follow intelligently Darwin's careful observations on
the earthworm.

I made a heroic effort, although candor compels me to state that
I never would have finished if I had not been pulled and pushed by
my really ardent companion, who in addition to a multitude of earthworms
and a fine microscope, possessed untiring tact with one of flagging
zeal.

As our boarding-school days neared the end, in the consciousness of approaching separation
we vowed eternal allegiance to our "early ideals," and promised each
other we would "never abandon them without conscious justification,"
and we often warned each other of "the perils of self-tradition."

We believed, in our sublime self-conceit, that the difficulty of life
would lie solely in the direction of losing these precious ideals
of ours, of failing to follow the way of martyrdom and high purpose
we had marked out for ourselves, and we had no notion of the obscure
paths of tolerance, just allowance, and self-blame wherein, if we
held our minds open, we might learn something of the mystery and complexity
of life's purposes.

The year after I had left college I came back, with a classmate, to receive the degree we had
so eagerly anticipated.

Two of the graduating class were also ready and four of us were dubbed B.A. on the very day that
Rockford Seminary was declared a college in the midst of tumultuous anticipations. Having had a
year outside of college walls in that trying land between vague hope and definite attainment,
I had become very much sobered in my desire for a degree, and was already beginning to emerge
from that rose-colored mist with which the dream of youth so readily
envelops the future.

Whatever may have been the perils of self-tradition, I certainly did not escape them, for it required
eight years--from the time I left Rockford in the summer of 1881 until Hull-House was opened
in the the autumn of 1889--to formulate my convictions even in the least satisfactory manner,
much less to reduce them to a plan for action. During most of that time I was absolutely at sea
so far as any moral purpose was concerned, clinging only to the desire
to live in a really living world and refusing to be content with a
shadowy intellectual or aesthetic reflection of it.



There are three great towns between the Moscow and Vologhda--that is to say, Yereslava, Rostave,
and Pereslava.  Upon one side of Yereslava runneth a famous river, which is called Volga. 
It runneth into the Caspian Sea, and it divideth itself, before it come into the Mare Caspium,
in fifty parts or more:  and near unto the same sea there stands a great city called Boghare;
the inhabitants of the which are called by the same name.

The people of the said city do traffic in the city of Moscow:  their commodities are spices,
musk, ambergris, rhubarb, with other drugs. They bring also many furs, which they buy in Siberia,
coming towards the Moscow.  The said people are of the sect of Mahomet.

The 12th of September we came unto the city of Moscow, where we were brought by Napea and two
of the Emperor's gentlemen unto a large house, where every one of us had his chamber appointed.
We gave thanks unto his Majesty, and so departed until the dinner was ready.

When dinner-time approached we were brought again into the Emperor's dining chamber, where
we were set on one side of a table that stood over against the Emperor's table, to the end
that he might well behold us all, and when we came into the aforesaid chamber we found there
ready set these tables following:-

First, at the upper end of one table were set the Emperor's Majesty, his brother, and the Emperor
of Cassan, who is prisoner.  About two yards lower sat the Emperor of Cassan's son, being a
child of five years of age, and beneath him sat the most part of the Emperor's noblemen.

And at another table near unto the Emperor's table there was set a monk all alone, who was
in all points as well served as the Emperor. At another table sat another kind of people called
Chirkasses, which the Emperor entertaineth for men of war to serve against his enemies; of
which people and of their country I will hereafter make mention.

All the tables aforesaid were covered only within salt and bread, and after that we had sat
awhile, the Emperor sent unto every one of us a piece of bread, which was given and delivered
unto every man severally with these words:  "The Emperor and Great Duke giveth thee bread this
day;" and in like manner three or four times before dinner was ended he sent unto every man
drink, which was given with these words:  "The Emperor and Great Duke giveth thee to drink."
All the tables aforesaid were served in vessels of pure and fine gold, as well basins and ewers,
platters, dishes, and saucers, as also of great pots, with an innumerable sort of small drinking-pots
of divers fashions, whereof a great number were set with stone.  As for costly meats, I have
many times seen better; but for change of wines, and divers sorts of meads, it was wonderful;
for there was not left at any time so much void room on the table that one cup more might have
been set, and as far as I could perceive all the rest were in the like manner served.

In the dinner-time there came in six singers who stood in the midst of the chamber, and their
faces towards the Emperor, who sang there before dinner was ended three several times, whose
songs or voices delighted our ears little or nothing.

The Emperor never putteth morsel of meat in his mouth but he first blesseth it himself, and
in like manner as often as he drinketh; for after his manner he is very religious, and he esteemeth
his religious persons above his noblemen.

This dinner continued about the space of five hours, which being ended, and the tables taken
up, we came into the midst of the chamber, where we did reverence unto the Emperor's Majesty,
and then he delivered unto every one of us with his own hands a cup of mead, which when every
man had received and drunk a quantity thereof we were licensed to depart, and so ended that
dinner.  And because the Emperor would have us to be merry, he sent to our lodging the same
evening three barrels of mead of sundry sort, of the quantity in all of one hogshead.

The 16th day of September the Emperor sent home unto our lodging for every one of us a Tartary
horse to ride from place to place as we had occasion, for that the streets of Moscow are very
foul and miry in the summer.

The 18th of September there were given unto Master Standish, doctor in physic, and the rest
of our men of our occupations, certain furred gowns of branched velvet and gold, and some of
red damask, of which Master Doctor's gown was furred with sables, and the rest were furred,
some with white ermine, and some with grey squirrel, and all faced and edged round about with
black beaver.

The 1st of October, in the morning, we were commanded to come unto the Emperor's Court, and
when we came thither we were brought unto the Emperor, unto whom we did our duties accordingly,
whereupon he willed us to dine with him that day, and so with thanks unto his Majesty we departed
until dinner-time, at which time we came and found the tables covered with bread and salt as
at the first; and after that we were all set upon one side of the table, the Emperor's Majesty
according to his accustomed manner sent unto every man of us a piece of bread by some of the
dukes who attended upon his Highness.

And whereas the 14th of September we were served in vessels of gold, we were now served in
vessels of silver, and yet not so abundantly as was the first of gold; they brought drink unto
the table in silver bowls, which contained at the least six gallons apiece, and every man had
a small silver cup to drink in, and another to dip or to take his drink out of the great bowl
withal.  The dinner being ended, the Emperor gave unto every one of us a cup with mead, which
when we had received, we gave thanks and departed.

Moreover, whensoever the Emperor's pleasure is that any stranger shall dine with him, he doth
send for them in the morning, and when they come before him, he with his own mouth biddeth
them to dinner, and this order he always observeth.

The 10th of October the Emperor gave unto Master Standish seventy roubles in money and to the
rest of our men of occupations thirty roubles apiece.

The 3rd of November we dined again with the Emperor, where we were served as before.

The 6th of December being St. Nicholas' Day, we dined again at the Emperor's, for that is one
of the principal feasts which the Muscovites hold.  We were served in silver vessels, and ordered
in all points as before, and it was past seven of the clock at night before dinner was ended.

The Emperor's Majesty useth every year in the month of December to have all his ordnance that
is in the city of Moscow carried into the fields which are without the suburbs of the city,
and there to have it planted and bent upon two houses of wood filled within with earth.  Against
which two houses there were two fair white marks set up, at which marks they discharge all
their ordnance, to the end the Emperor may see what his gunners can do.  They have also a great
many of mortar  pieces or pot guns, out of which pieces they shoot wild fire.

The 12th of December the Emperor's Majesty and all his nobility came into the field on horse-back
in most goodly order, having very fine jennets and Turkey horses garnished with gold and silver
abundantly; the Emperor's Majesty having on him a gown of rich tissue and a cap of scarlet
on his head, set not only with pearls, but also with a great number of rich and costly stones;
his noblemen were all in gowns of cloth of gold, who did ride before him in good order by three
and three, and before them there went 5,000 arquebusiers, which went by five and five in a
rank in very good order, every of them carrying his gun upon his left shoulder and his match
in his right hand, and in this order they marched into the field where the aforesaid ordnance
was planted.

And before the Emperor's Majesty came into the field there was a certain stage made of small
poles, which was a quarter of a mile long, and about three score yards off from the stage of
poles were certain pieces of ice of two feet thick and six feet high set up, which rank of
ice was as long as the stage of poles; and as soon as the Emperor's Majesty came into the field,
the arquebusiers went upon the stage of poles, where they settled themselves in order. And
when the Emperor's Majesty was settled where he would be, and where he might see all the ordnance
discharged and shot off, the arquebusiers began to shoot off at the bank of ice as though it
had been in any skirmish or battle, who ceased not shooting until they had beaten all the ice
flat on the ground.

After the hand-guns, they shot off their wild fire up into the air, which was a goodly sight
to behold.  And after this they began to discharge the small pieces of brass, beginning with
the smallest, and so orderly bigger and bigger, until the last and biggest.  This triumph being
ended, the Emperor departed and rode home in the same order that he came forth into the field.
The ordnance is discharged every year in the month of December, according to the order before
mentioned.

On Christmas Day we were all willed to dine with the Emperor's Majesty, where for bread, meat,
and drink we were served as at other times before.  But for goodly and rich plate we never
saw the like or so much before.  There dined that day in the Emperor's presence above 500 strangers
and 200 Russians, and all they were served in vessels of gold, and that as much as could stand
one by another upon the tables.  Besides this there were four cupboards garnished with goodly
plate, both of gold and silver.  Among the which there were twelve barrels of silver containing
above twelve gallons apiece, and at each end of every barrel were six hoops of fine gold. 
This dinner continued about six hours.

Every year upon the Twelfth Day they use to bless or sanctify the river Moska, which runneth
through the city of Moscow (Moscovia), after this manner:-

First, they make a square hole in the ice about three fathoms large every way, which is trimmed
about the sides and edges with white boards.  Then about nine of the clock they come out of
the church with procession towards the river in this wise:-

First and foremost there go certain young men with wax tapers burning, and one carrying a great
lantern.  Then follow certain banners, then the cross, then the images of Our Lady and St.
Nicholas, and of other saints, which images men carry upon their shoulders.  After the images
follow certain priests to the number of 100 or more.  After them the Metropolitan, who is led
between two priests; and after the Metropolitan came the Emperor, with his crown upon his head,
and after his Majesty all his noblemen orderly.  Thus they followed the procession unto the
water, and when they came unto the hole that was made, the priests set themselves in order
round about it.  And at one side of the same pool there was a scaffold of boards made, upon
which stood a fair chair, in which the Metropolitan was set, but the Emperor's Majesty stood
upon the ice.

After this the priests began to sing, to bless, and to cense, and did their service, and so
by the time that they had done the water was holy, which being sanctified, the Metropolitan
took a little thereof in his hands and cast it on the Emperor, likewise upon certain of the
dukes, and then they returned again to the church with the priests that sat about the water;
but the press that there was about the water when the Emperor was gone was wonderful to behold,
for there came above 5,000 pots to be filled of that water. It is easy enough for them to extricate
themselves; they can do so almost with a bound.

The Spanish Custom-house officers who watch the same frontier, use
their cloaks and other wraps, which are far more weighty, and far
inferior in warmth and protection to the bags.  After the press was
a little gone, the Emperor's jennets and horses were brought to drink of the same water, and
likewise many other men brought their horses thither to drink, and by that means they make
their horses as holy as themselves.

All these ceremonies being ended, we went to the Emperor to dinner, where we were served in
vessels of silver, and in all other points as we had been beforetime.

The Russians begin their Lent always eight weeks before Easter:  the first week they eat eggs,
milk, cheese, and butter, and make great cheer with pancakes and such other things, one friend
visiting another, and from the same Sunday until our Shrove Sunday there are but few Russians
sober; but they are drunk day by day, and it is accounted for no reproach or shame among them.

The next week, being our first week of Lent, or our cleansing week, beginning our Shrove Sunday,
they make and keep a great fast.  It is reported, and the people do verily believe, that the
Metropolitan neither eateth nor drinketh any manner of thing for the space of seven days; and
they say that there are many religious men who do the like.

The Emperor's Majesty eateth but one morsel of bread and drinketh but one draught of drink
but once in the day during that week, and all men that are of any reputation come not out of
their houses during that time; so that the streets are almost void of company, saving a few
poor folk who wander to and fro.  The other six weeks they keep as we do ours, but not one
of them will eat either butter, cheese, eggs, or milk.  After this there followed certain young
men with wax tapers in their hands burning and a great lantern, that all the light should not
go out; after them followed two with long banners, and six with round plates set upon long
staves (the plates were of copper, very full of holes, and thin); then followed six carrying
painted images upon their shoulders; after the images follow certain priests to the number
of one hundred or more, with goodly vestures, whereof ten or twelve are of white damask set
and embroidered round about with fair and Orient pearls as great as peas, and among them certain
sapphires and other stones.  After them followed the one-half of the Emperor's noblemen; then
cometh the Emperor's Majesty and the Metropolitan, after this manner:-

First, there is a horse covered with white linen cloth down to the ground, his ears being made
long with the same cloth like to an ass's ears.  Upon this horse the Metropolitan sitteth sidelong,
like a woman; in his lap lieth a fair book, with a crucifix of goldsmith's work upon the cover,
which he holdeth fast with his left hand; and in his right hand he has a cross of gold, with
which cross he ceaseth not to bless the people as he rideth.

There are, to the number of thirty, men who spread abroad their garments before the horse,
and as soon as the horse is passed over any of them they take them up again and run before
and spread them again, so that the horse doth always go on some of them.  They who spread the
garments are all priests' sons, and for their labours the Emperor giveth unto them new garments.

The rest of this week until Easter Day they keep very solemnly, continuing in their houses
for the most part; and upon Monday or Thursday the Emperor doth always use to receive the Sacrament,
and so doth most part of his nobles.

Upon Good Friday they continue all the day in contemplation and prayers, and they use every
year on Good Friday to let loose a prisoner in the stead of Barabbas.  The night following
they go to the church, where they sleep unto the next morning; and at Easter they have the
Resurrection, and after every of the Lents they eat flesh the next week following Friday, Saturday
and all.

They have an order at Easter which they always observe, and that is this:- Every year, against
Easter, to dye or colour red with brazil a great number of eggs of which every man and woman
giveth one unto the priest of their parish upon Easter Day, in the morning; and, moreover,
the common people use to carry in their hands one of these red eggs, not only upon Easter Day,
but also three or four days after; and gentlemen and gentlewomen have eggs gilded, which they
carry in like manner.  They use it, as they say, for a great love, and in token of the Resurrection,
whereof they rejoice; for when two friends meet during the Easter holidays, they come and take
one another by the hand:  the one of them saith, "The Lord or Christ is risen," the other answereth,
"It is so, of a truth;" and then they kiss and exchange their eggs (both men and women), continuing
in kissing four days together.

The 12th of April being Tuesday in the Easter week, Master Jenkinson and Master Gray and certain
other of us Englishmen dined with the Emperor, where we were served as we had been beforetime.
And after dinner the Emperor's Majesty gave unto Master Jenkinson and unto Master Gray, and
so orderly unto every one of us, a cup of mead, according to his accustomed manner, which when
every man had received and given thanks, Master Jenkinson stepped into the midst of the chamber
before the Emperor's Majesty and gave thanks to his Highness for his goodness unto him extended,
desiring his Grace to license him for to depart; and in like manner did Master Gray.  His Majesty
did not only license them to depart, but also granted unto Master Jenkinson his letters, under
his Great Seal, unto all princes through whose dominions Master Jenkinson should have occasion
to pass, that he might the sooner and quietlier pass by means thereof. Which being granted,
Masters Jenkinson and Gray lowly submitted themselves, thanking his Majesty.  So the Emperor
gave unto either of them a cup of mead to drink, and willed them to depart at their pleasure
in God's peace.

The 14th of April, in the morning, when Master Gray and I were ready to depart towards England,
the Chancellors sent unto us, and willed us to come to their office in the Chancery, where
at our coming they showed us a great number of the Emperor's jewels and rich robes, willing
us to mark and behold them well, to the end that at our arrival into England we might make
report what we had seen there.  The same crown was lined with a fair black sable worth by report
forty roubles.

We saw all his Majesty's robes, which were very richly set with stones; they showed us many
other great stones of divers kinds, but the most part of these were uneven, in manner as they
came out of the work, for they do more esteem the greatness of stones than they do the proportion
of them.

We saw two goodly gowns, which were as heavy as a man could easily carry, all set with pearls
over and over; the guards or borders round about them were garnished with sapphires and other
good stones abundantly.  One of the same gowns was very rich, for the pearls were very large,
round, and Orient.  As for the rest of his gowns and garments, they were of rich tissue and
cloth-of-gold, and all furred with very black sables.

When we had sufficiently perused all these things, they willed Master Gray, at his arrival
in England, to provide, if he could, such jewels and rich clothes as he had seen there, and
better if he could, declaring that the Emperor would gladly bestow his money upon such things.

So we took our leave the same time, and departed towards Vologhda immediately.

THE MANNERS, USAGES, AND CEREMONIES OF THE RUSSIANS

OF THE EMPEROR.

The Emperor's name in their tongue is Evan Vasilivich; that is as much as to say, John, the
son of Vasilie.  And by his princely state he is called Otesara, as his predecessors have been
before; which, to interpret, is "A King that giveth not tribute to any man."  And this word
Otesara, his Majesty's interpreters have of late days interpreted to be an Emperor; so that
now he is called Emperor and Great Duke of all Russia, &c.  Before his father, they were neither
called Emperors nor Kings, but only Ruese Velike; that is to say, Great Duke.  And as this
Emperor, which now is Ivan Vasilivich, doth exceed his predecessors in name--that is, from
a Duke to an Emperor- -even so much by report he doth exceed them in stoutness of courage and
valiantness, and a great deal more:  for he is no more afraid of his enemies, which are not
a few, than the hobby of the larks.

His enemies with whom he hath wars for the most part are these:- Litto Poland, Sweden, Denmark,
Lifland, the Crimmes, Nagaians, and the whole nation of the Tartarians, which are a stout and
a hardy people as any under the sun.

This Emperor useth great familiarity, as well unto all his nobles and subjects, as also unto
Strangers which serve him either in his wars or in occupations:  for his pleasure is that they
shall dine oftentimes in the year in his presence; and, besides that, he is oftentimes abroad,
either at one church or another, and walking with his noblemen abroad.  And by this means he
is not only beloved of his nobles and commons, but also had in great dread and fear through
all his dominions, so that I think no prince in Christendom is more feared of his own than
he is, nor yet better beloved.  For if he bid any of his dukes go, they will run; if he give
any evil or angry word to any of them, the party will not come into his Majesty's presence
again for a long time if he be not sent for, but will feign him to be very sick, and will let
the hair of his head grow very long, without either cutting or shaving, which is an evident
token that he is in the Emperor's displeasure; for when they be in their prosperity, they account
it a shame to wear long hair--in consideration whereof they use to have their heads shaven.

His Majesty heareth all complaints himself, and with his own mouth giveth sentence and judgment
of all matters, and that with expedition; but religious matters he meddleth not withal, but
referreth them wholly unto the Metropolitan.

His Majesty retaineth and well rewardeth all strangers that come to serve him, and especially
men of war.

He delighteth not greatly in hawking, hunting, or any other pastime, nor in hearing instruments
or music, but setteth all his whole delight upon two things:  first, to serve God, as undoubtedly
he is very devout in his religion; and the second, how to subdue and conquer his enemies.

He hath abundance of gold and silver in his own hands or treasury; but the most part of his
know not a crown from a counter, nor gold from copper--they are so much cumbered (combred)
therewithal; and he that is worth two, three, or four groats is a rich man.

OF THEIR RELIGIOUS MEN.

The Metropolitan is next unto God, Our Lady and St. Nicholas excepted; for the Emperor's Majesty
judgeth and affirmeth him to be of higher dignity than himself:  "For that," saith he, "he
is God's spiritual officer, and I, the Emperor, am His temporal officer;" and therefore his
Majesty submitteth himself unto him in many things concerning religious matters, as in leading
the Metropolitan horse upon Palm Sunday, and giving him leave to sit on a chair upon the Twelfth
Day, when the river Moscow was in blessing, and his Majesty standing on the ice.

All matters of religion are reformed by the Metropolitan:  he heareth the causes and giveth
sentence as himself listeth, and is authorised so to do.  Whether it be to whip, hang, or burn,
his will must needs be fulfilled.

They have both monks, friars, and nuns, with a great number of great and rich monasteries;
they keep great hospitality, and do relieve much poor people day by day.  I have been in one
of the monasteries called Troities, which is walled about with brick very strongly, like a
castle, and much ordnance of brass upon the walls of the same.  They told me themselves that
they are seven hundred brethren of them which belong unto that house.  The most part of the
lands, towns, and villages which are within forty miles of it belong unto the same.  They showed
me the church, wherein were as many images as could hang about, or upon the walls of the church
roundabout; and even the roof of the church was painted full of images.  The chief image was
of Our Lady, which was garnished with gold, rubies, sapphires, and other rich stones abundantly.
In the midst of the church stood twelve wax tapers of two yards long, and a fathom about in
bigness.  There stands a kettle full of wax, with about one hundredweight, wherein there is
always the wick of a candle burning- -as it were, a lamp which goeth not out day nor night.

They showed me a coffin, covered with cloth-of-gold, which stood upon one side within their
church, in which they told me lay a holy man, who never ate nor drank, and yet he liveth. 
And they told me (supposing that I had believed them) that he healeth many diseases, and giveth
the blind their sight, with many other miracles; but I was hard of belief, because I saw him
work no miracle whilst I was there.

After this they brought me into their cellars, and made me taste of divers kinds of drinks,
both wine and beer, mead and quassia, of sundry colours and kinds.  Such abundance of drink
as they have in their cellars, I do suppose few princes have more, or so much at once.

Their barrels or vessels are of an unmeasurable bigness and size, some of them are three yards
long and more, and two yards and more broad in their heads.  They contain six or seven tons
apiece.  They have none in their cellars of their own making that are less than a ton.  They
have nine or ten great vaults, which are full of those barrels, which are seldom removed, for
they have trunks which come down through the roof of the vaults in sundry places, through which
they pour the drink down, having the cask right under it to receive the same, for it should
be a great trouble to bring it all down the stairs.

They give bread, meat, and drink unto all men that come to them, not only while they are at
their abbey, but also when they depart, to serve them by the way.

There are a great number of such monasteries in the realm, and the Emperor's Majesty rideth
oftentimes from one to another of them, and lieth at them three or four days together.

The same monks are as great merchants as any in the land of Russia, and do occupy buying and
selling as much as any other men, and have boats which pass to and fro in the rivers with merchandise
from place to place where any other of their country do traffic.

They eat no flesh during their lives, as it is reported; but upon Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Thursday, and Saturday, it is lawful for them to eat eggs, butter, cheese, and milk, and at
all times to eat fish; and after this sort they lead their lives.

They wear all black garments, and so do none other in all the land, but at that abbey only.

They have no preachers--no, not one in all the land to instruct the people, so that there are
many, and the most part of the poor in the country, who if one ask them how many gods there
be, they will say a great many, meaning that every image which they have is a god; for all
the country and the Emperor's Majesty himself will bless and bow and knock their heads before
their images, insomuch that they will cry earnestly unto their images to help them to the things
which they need.  All men are bound by their law to have those images in their houses; and
over every gate in all their towns and cities are images set up, unto which the people bow
and bend, and knock their heads against the ground before them.  As often as they come by any
church or cross, they do in like manner.  And when they come to any house, they bless themselves
three or four times before they will salute any man in the house.

They reckon and hold it for great sin to touch or handle any of their images within the circle
of the board where the painting is, but they keep them very daintily, and rich men deck them
over and about with gold, silver, and stones, and hang them over and about with cloth-of-gold. 

Then the traveller must recommence the work from the very beginning, under the disadvantage of
increasing darkness. I have made many experiments myself, and have seen many novices as well
as old campaigners try to make fires; and have concluded that, to ensure success, the traveller
should be provided with small bundles of sticks of each of the following
sizes:--1st, size of lucifer-match; 2nd, of lead pencil; 3rd, smaller
than little finger; 4th, size of fore-finger; 5th, stout stakes.

In wet Weather, the most likely places to find wherewithal to light a fire, are under large
stones and other shelter; but in soaking wet weather, little chips of dry wood can hardly
be procured except by cutting them with an axe out of the middle
of a log.

The fire may then be begun, as the late Admiral the Hon. C. Murray
well recommended in his travels in North America, in the frying-pan
itself, for want of a dry piece of ground.

To kindle a Spark into a Flame.--By whirling.--1st. Arrange the fuel into logs; into small
fuel, assorted as described above, and into shreds and fibres. 2nd. Make a loose nest of the
fibre, just like a sparrow's nest in shape and size, and let the
finer part of the fibres be inwards.

3rd. Drop the lighted tinder in the next. 4th. Holding the "nest" quite loosely in the half-closed
hand, whirl the outstretched arm in vertical circles round the shoulder-joint, as indicated by
the dotted line in the diagram. In 30 seconds, or about 40 revolutions, it will begin to glow,
and will shortly after burst out in a grand flame. 5th Drop it, and pile small twigs round it, and
nurse the young fire carefully, bearing in mind the proverb that "small sticks kindle a flame,
but large ones put it out."

By blowing.--Savages usually kindle the flame by blowing at the live spark and feeding it with
little bits of stick, just so much as is necessary. But it is difficult to acquire the art of
doing this well, and I decidedly recommend the plan I have described in the foregoing paragraph,
in preference to it. When the wind blowssteadily and freshly, it suffices to hold up the "nest"
against the wind.

Sulphur matches are so very useful to convert a spark into a flame, and they are so easily made,
in any quantity, out of split wood, straw, etc., if the traveller
will only take the trouble of carrying a small lump of sulphur in
his baggage, that they always ought to be at hand.

The sulphur is melted on a heated stone, or in an old spoon, bit of crockery, bit of tin with
a dent made in it, or even a piece of paper, and the points of the pieces of wood dipped in
the molten mass. A small chip of sulphur pushed into the cleft end of a splinter of wood makes
a fair substitute for a match. (See "Lucifer-matches.")

Camp Fires.--Large Logs.--The principle of making large logs to burn brightly, is to allow air
to reach them on all sides, and yet to place them so closely together,
that each supports the combustion of the rest. A common plan is to
make the fire with three logs, whose ends cross each other, as in
the diagram. The dots represent the extent of the fire. As the ends
burn away, the logs are pushed closer together. Another plan is to
lay the logs parallel with the burning ends to the windward, then
they continue burning together.  And she sendeth unto him
a shirt, handkerchiefs, and some such things of her own making.  And now to the effect.

When they are agreed, and the day of marriage appointed, when they shall go towards the church,
the bride will in no wise consent to go out of the house, but resisteth and striveth with them
that would have her out, and feigneth herself to weep; yet in the end two women get her out,
and lead her towards the church, her face being covered close, because of her dissimulation,
that it should not be openly perceived; for she maketh a great noise, as though she were sobbing
and weeping, until she come at the church, and then her face is uncovered.  Then they go home
again, the woman's face being uncovered. The boys in the streets cry out and make a noise in
the meantime with very dishonest words.

When they come home, the wife is set at the upper end of the table, and the husband next unto
her.  They fall then to drinking, till they be all drunk; they perchance have a minstrel or
two.  And two naked men, who led her from the church, dance naked a long time before all the
company.  And this is as much as I have learned of their matrimony; but one common rule is
amongst them--if the woman be not beaten with the whip once a week, she will not be good, and
therefore they look for it orderly; and the women say that if their husbands did not beat them,
they should not love them.

They use to marry there very young--their sons at sixteen and eighteen years old, and the daughters
at twelve or thirteen years, or younger.  They use to keep their wives very closely--I mean,
those that be of any reputation; so that a man shall not see one of them but at a chance, when
she goeth to church at Christmas or at Easter, or else going to visit some of her friends.

The most part of the women use to ride astride in saddles with stirrups, as men do, and some
of them on sleds, which in summer is not commendable.

The husband is bound to find the wife colours to paint her withal, for they use ordinarily
to paint themselves; it is such a common practice among them that it is counted for no shame.
They grease their faces with such colours that a man may discern them hanging on their faces
almost a fight-shot off.  I cannot so well liken them as to a miller's wife, for they look
as though they were beaten about the face with a bag of meal; but their eyebrows they colour
as black as jet.

The best property that the women have, is that they can sew well, and embroider with silk and
gold excellently.

OF THEIR BURIAL.

When any man or woman dieth, they stretch him out, and put a new pair of shoes on his feet,
because he hath a great journey to go; then do they wind him in a sheet, as we do; but they
forget not to put a testimony in his right hand, which the priest giveth him to testify unto
St. Nicholas that he died a Christian man or woman. And they put the corse always in a coffin
of wood, although the party be very poor--and when they go towards the church, the friends
and kinsmen of the party departed carry in their hands small wax candles, and they weep and
howl and make much lamentation.

They that be hanged or beheaded, or suchlike, have no testimony with them; how they are received
into heaven, it is a wonder, without their passport.

There are a great number of poor people among them who die daily for lack of sustenance, which
is a pitiful case to behold; for there hath been buried in a small time, within these two years,
above eighty persons young and old, who have died only for lack of sustenance; for if they
had straw and water enough, they would make shift to live; for a great many are forced in the
winter to dry straw and stamp it, and to make bread thereof--or, at the least, they eat it
instead of bread.  In the summer they make good shift with grass, herbs, and roots; barks of
trees is good meat with them at all times.  There is no people in the world, as I suppose,
that live so miserably as do the poor in those parts; and the most part of them that have sufficient
for themselves, and also to relieve others that need, are so unmerciful that they care not
how many they see die of famine or hunger in the streets.

It is a country full of diseases, divers and evil; and the best remedy is for any of them,
as they hold opinion, to go often unto the hothouses, as a manner every man hath one of his
own, which he heateth commonly twice every week, and all the household sweat and wash themselves
therein.

THE VOYAGES OF OHTHERE AND WULFSTAN To the White Sea and to the Mouth of the Vistula in the
Time of Alfred the Great, with Notes on the Geography of Europe inserted by KING ALFRED, In
his Translation of Orosius.

KING ALFRED'S OROSIUS.  (FROM "ENGLISH WRITERS.")

One of King Alfred's labours for the enlightenment of his countrymen was a translation of the
"Universal History of Orosius, from the Creation to the year of our Lord 416."  This book had
long been in high repute by the familiar name of "Orosius" among students and teachers in the
monasteries; and it retained its credit so, that after the invention of printing it was one
of the first works put into type, and appeared in numerous editions.  The author was a Spanish
Christian of the fifth century.  Born at Tarragona and educated in Spain, he crossed over to
Africa about the year 414, and received instruction from St. Augustine upon knotty questions
of the origin of the soul and other matters.  In Augustine's works are contained the "Consultation
of Orosius with Augustine on the Error of the Priscillianists and Origenists," and a letter
from Augustine to Orosius against them.  Augustine sent Orosius to consult Jerome, who was
in Palestine; and in his letter of introduction said, "Behold, there has come to me a religious
young man, in catholic peace a brother, in age a son, in rank a co-presbyter, Orosius--of active
talents, ready eloquence, ardent application, longing to be in God's house a vessel useful
for disproving false and destructive doctrines, which have killed the souls of Spaniards much
more grievously than the barbarian sword their bodies."  In Palestine, towards the latter half
of the year 415, Orosius attacked the Pelagians by writing against them a treatise on Free
Will, and presenting a memorial against them to the Council of Diospolis.  It was at the request
of St Augustine that Orosius wrote his History. The sack of Rome by Alaric having caused the
Christians of Rome to doubt the efficacy of their faith, Augustine, while he himself wrote
his "De Civitate Dei" to show from the history of the Church that the preaching of the Gospel
could not augment the world's misery, incited Orosius to show the same thing in a compendium
of profane history also.  Orosius began his work in the year 410, when Augustine had got through
ten books of his, and he finished it about the year 416.  Like a good old-fashioned controversialist,
he made very light of the argument of terror from the sack of Rome by Alaric, so representing
the event that King Alfred, in his translation, thus abridged the detail:-

"Alaric, the most Christian and the mildest of kings, sacked Rome with so little violence,
that he ordered no man should be slain, and that nothing should be taken away or injured that
was in the churches.  Soon after that, on the third day, they went out of the city of their
own accord.  There was not a single house burnt by their order."

In translating and adapting this book to the uses of his time, King Alfred did not trouble
himself at all with its old ecclesiastical character, as what Pope Gelasius I. had called a
book written "with wonderful brevity against heathen perversions.  Looking to it exclusively
as a digest of historical and geographical information, Alfred abridged, omitted, imitated,
added, with a single regard to his purpose of producing a text-book of that class of knowledge.
Omitting the end of the fifth book and the beginning of the sixth, and so running two books
into one, he made the next and last book the sixth instead of the seventh, as it is in the
original.

The "History of Orosius" itself is bald, confused; but it was enriched and improved by Alfred's
addition to the first book of much new matter, enlarging knowledge of the geography of Europe,
which he calls Germania, north of the Rhine and Danube.  Alfred adds also to the same book
geographical narratives taken from the lips of two travellers.  One was Ohthere, a Norwegian,
who sailed from Halgoland, on the coast of Norway, round the North Cape into the Cwen-Sae,
or White Sea, and entered the mouth of the river Dwina, the voyage ending where there is now
Archangel, the most northern of the Russian seaports.  Ohthere afterwards made a second voyage
from Halgoland along the west and south coast of Norway to the Bay of Christiania, and Sciringeshael,
the port of Skerin, or Skien, near the entrance of the Christiania fjord.  He then sailed southward,
and reached in five days the Danish port aet Haedum, the capital town called Sleswic by the
Saxons, but by the Danes Haithaby.  The other traveller was Wulfstan, who sailed in the Baltic,
from Slesvig in Denmark to Frische Haff within the Gulf of Danzig, reaching the Drausen Sea
by Elbing.  These voyages were taken from the travellers' own lips.  Of Wulfstan's, the narrative
passes at one time into the form of direct personal narration--"Wulfstan said that he went
. . . that he had . . . And then we had on our left the land of the Burgundians [Bornholmians],
who had their own king.  After the land of the Burgundians we had on our left," &c.  The narrative
of the other voyage opens with the sentence, "Ohthere told his lord, King Alfred."  These three
additions to "Orosius"--the Description of Europe, the two voyages of Ohthere, and the voyage
of Wulfstan-- may be considered Alfred's own works.

The Description is the king's own account of Europe in his time, and the only authentic record
of the Germanic nations, written by a contemporary, so early as the ninth century.  The fame
of his voyages attracted to him the attention of King Alfred.  Ohthere may have obtained some
of his wealth by whale-fishing.  He relates only what he saw.  "The Biarmians," he says, "told
him many stories both about their own land and about the countries which were around them,
but he knew not what was true, because he did not see it himself."

Wulfstan was perhaps a Jutlander, and his voyage was confined to the Baltic.  Neither his account
nor that of Ohthere contradicts the opinion then held, that Scandinavia was a large island,
and the Gulf of Bothnia or Cwaener Sea flowed into the North Sea.

THE GEOGRAPHY OF EUROPE BY KING ALFRED, ETC.

Translated in 1807 by the Rev. James Ingram, M.A., Professor of Anglo-Saxon at the University
of Oxford.

Now will we describe the geography of Europe, so far, at least, as our knowledge of it extends.
From the river Tanais, westward to the river Rine (which takes its rise from the Alps and runs
directly north thenceforward on to the arm of the ocean that surrounds Bryttania), then southward
to the river Danube (whose source is near the river Rine, running afterwards in its course
along the confines of Northern Greece, till it empties itself into the Mediterranean), and
northward even unto the ocean, which men call Cwen-sea; within these boundaries are many nations;
but the whole of this tract of country is called Germany.

Then to the north of the source of the Danube, and to the east of the Rine, are the Eastern
Franks, and to the south of them are the Suabians; on the opposite bank of the Danube, and
to the south and east, are the Bavarians, in that part which is called Regnesburh. Due east
from thence are the Bohemians, and to the north-east the Thyringians, to the north of these
are the Old Saxons, to the north- west are the Frieslanders, and to the west of the Old Saxons
is the mouth of the Elbe, as also Friesland.  Hence to the west-north is that land which is
called Angleland, Sealand, and some part of Den- marc; to the north is Apdrede, and to the
east-north the wolds, which are called the Heath-wolds.  Hence eastward is the land of the
Veneti (who are also called Silesae), extending south-west over a great part of the territory
of the Moravians.  These Moravians have to the west the Thyringians and Bohemians, as also
part of Bavaria, and to the south, on the other side of the Danube, is the country of the Carinthians,
lying southward even to the Alps.  To the same mountains also extend the boundaries of the
Bavarians and the Suabians.  Thence to the eastward of Carinthia, beyond the waste, is the
land of the Bulgarians.  To the east of them is the land of the Greeks, and to the east of
Moravia is Wisle-land; to the east of that are the Dacae, who were originally a tribe of Goths.
To the north-east of the Moravians are the Dalamensae; east of the Dalamensians are the Horithi,
and north of the Dalamensians are the Servians; to the west also are the Silesians.  To the
north of the Horiti is Mazovia, and north of Mazovia are the Sarmatians, quite to the Riphaean
mountains.  To the west of the Southern Danes is the arm of the ocean that surrounds Britannia,
and to the north of them is the arm of the sea called Ost Sea; to the east and to the north
of them are the Northern Danes, both on the continent and on the islands; to the east of them
are the Afdrede; and to the south is the mouth of the Elb, with some part of Old Saxony.  The
Northern Danes have to the north of them the same arm of the sea called Ost Sea; to the east
of them is the nation of the Estonians, and the Afdrede to the south.  The Estonians have to
the north of them the same arm of the sea, and also the Winedae and Burgundae, and to the South
are the Heath-wolds.  The Burgundians have the same arm of the sea to the west of them, and
the Sweons to the north; to the east of them are the Sarmatians, and to the south the Servians.
The Sweons have to the south of them the same arm of the sea, called Ost Sea; to the east of
them the Sarmatians; and to the north, over the wastes, is Cwenland; to the west-north of them
are the Scride- Finnas, and to the west the Northmen.

"Ohthere told his lord, King Alfred, that he lived to the north of all the Northmen.  He says
that he dwelt on the mainland to the northward, by the west sea; that the land, however, extends
to a very great length thence onward to the north; but it is all waste, except in a few places
where the Finlanders occasionally resort, for hunting in the winter, and in the summer for
fishing along the sea- coast.  He said that he was determined to find out, on a certain time,
how far this country extended northward, or whether any one lived to the north of the waste.
With this intent he proceeded northward along the coast, leaving all the way the waste land
on the starboard, and the wide sea on the backboard, for three days.  He was then as far north
as the whale-hunters ever go.  He then continued his voyage, steering yet northward, as far
as he could sail within three other days.  Then the land began to take a turn to the eastward,
even unto the inland sea, but he knows not how much farther.  He remembers, however, that he
stayed there waiting for a western wind, or a point to the north, and sailed thence eastward
by the land as far as he could in four days.  Then he was obliged to wait for a due north wind,
because the land there began to run southward, quite to the inland sea; he knows not how far.
He sailed thence along the coast southward, as far as he could in five days. There lay then
a great river a long way up in the land, into the mouth of which they entered, because they
durst not proceed beyond the river from an apprehension of hostilities, for the land was all
inhabited on the other side of the river.  Ohthere, however, had not met with any inhabited
land before this since he first set out from his own home.  All the land to his right, during
his whole voyage, was uncultivated and without inhabitants, except a few fishermen, fowlers,
and hunters, all of whom were Finlanders; and he had nothing but the wide sea on his left all
the way.  The Biarmians, indeed, had well cultivated their land; though Ohthere and his crew
durst not enter upon it; but the land of the Torne-Finnas was all waste, and it was only occasionally
inhabited by hunters, and fishermen, and fowlers.

"The Biarmians told him many stories, both about their own land and about the other countries
around them; but Ohthere knew not how much truth there was in them, because he had not an opportunity
of seeing with his own eyes.  It seemed, however, to him, that the Finlanders and the Biarmians
spoke nearly the same language.  The principal object of his voyage, indeed, was already gained;
which was, to increase the discovery of the land, and on account of the horse- whales, because
they have very beautiful bone in their teeth, some of which they brought to the king, and their
hides are good for ship-ropes.  This sort of whale is much less than the other kinds, it is
not longer commonly than seven ells:  but in his own country (Ohthere says) is the best whale-hunting;
there the whales are eight and forty ells long, and the largest fifty; of these, he said, he
once killed (six in company) sixty in two days.  He was a very rich man in the possession of
those animals, in which their principal wealth consists, namely, such as are naturally wild.
He had then, when he came to seek King Alfred, six hundred deer, all tamed by himself, and
not purchased.  They call them reindeer.  Of these six were stall-reins, or decoy deer, which
are very valuable amongst the Finlanders, because they catch the wild deer with them.

"Ohthere himself was amongst the first men in the land, though he had not more than twenty
rother-beasts, twenty sheep, and twenty swine; and what little he ploughed, he ploughed with
horses.  The annual revenue of these people consists chiefly in a certain tribute which the
Finlanders yield them.  This tribute is derived from the skins of animals, feathers of various
birds, whalebone, and ship- ropes, which are made of whales' hides and of seals.

"Ohthere moreover said that the land of the Northmen was very long and very narrow; all that
is fit either for pasture or ploughing lies along the sea coast, which, however, is in some
parts very cloddy; along the eastern side are wild moors, extending a long way up parallel
to the cultivated land.  The Finlanders inhabit these moors, and the cultivated land is broadest
to the eastward; and, altogether, the more northward it lies, the more narrow it is. Eastward
it may perhaps be sixty miles broad, in some places broader; about the middle, thirty miles,
or somewhat more; and northward, Ohthere says (where it is narrowest), it may be only three
miles across from the sea to the moors, which, however, are in some parts so wide, that a man
could scarcely pass over them in two weeks, though in other parts perhaps in six days. ALL Persons
who within five Years past, have had any Shoes or Boots, seiz'd and taken from them, in the Town
of Boston, by any of the Searches and Sealers of Leather there, for being made of Leather unduly tann'd
or curried, or on Pretence thereof; are hereby notified to give or send in to the Printers
hereof, an Account in Writing, of the Number of Shoes, &c. so taken from them, the Time when
(as near as they can) with the Name of the Person that seiz'd and took them, and the Name of
the Justice of Peace to whom Complaint or Information was made concerning
such Shoes, &c. by the eighth Day of March next, if they desire any
Recompence for the Injuries they have suffer'd by such Seizures.

  Thither he said that a man could not sail in a month,
if he watched in the night, and every day had a fair wind; and all the while he shall sail
along the coast; and on his right hand first is Island, and then the islands which are between
Island and this land.  Then this land continues quite to Sciringes-heal; and all the way on
the left is Norway.  To the south of Sciringes- heal a great sea runs up a vast way into the
country, and is so wide that no man can see across it.  (Jutland is opposite on the other side,
and then Sealand.)  This sea lies many hundred miles up into the land.  Ohthere further says
that he sailed in five days from Sciringes-heal to that port which men call AEt-Haethum, which
stands between the Winedae, the Saxons, and the Angles, and is subject to the Danes.

"When Ohthere sailed to this place from Sciringes-heal, Denmark was on his left, and on his
right the wide sea, for three days; and for the two days before he came to Haethum, on his
right hand was Jutland, Sealand, and many islands; all which lands were inhabited by the English,
before they came hither; and for these two days the islands which are subject to Denmark were
on his left."

"Wulfstan said that he went from Haethum to Truso in seven days and nights, and that the ship
was running under sail all the way. Weonodland was on his right, and Langland, Laeland, Falster,
and Sconey, on his left, all which land is subject to Denmark.  "Then on our left we had the
land of the Burgundians, who have a king to themselves.  Then, after the land of the Burgundians,
we had on our left the lands that have been called from the earliest times Blekingey, and Meore,
and Eowland, and Gotland, all which territory is subject to the Sweons; and Weonodland was
all the way on our right, as far as Weissel-mouth.  The Weissel is a very large river, and
near it lie Witland and Weonodland.  Witland belongs to the people of Eastland; and out of
Weonodland flows the river Weissel, which empties itself afterwards into Estmere.  This lake,
called Estmere, is about fifteen miles broad.  Then runs the Ilfing east (of the Weissel) into
Estmere, from that lake on the banks of which stands Truso.  These two rivers come out together
into Estmere, the Ilfing east from Eastland, and the Weissel south from Weonodland. Then the
Weissel deprives the Ilfing of its name, and, flowing from the west part of the lake, at length
empties itself northward into the sea, whence this point is called the Weissel-mouth.  This
country called Eastland is very extensive, and there are in it many towns, and in every town
is a king.  There is a great quantity of honey and fish; and even the king and the richest
men drink mare's milk, whilst the poor and the slaves drink mead.  There is a vast deal of
war and contention amongst the different tribes of this nation.  There is no ale brewed amongst
the Estonians, but they have mead in profusion.

"There is also this custom with the Estonians, that when anyone dies the corpse continues unburnt
with the relations and friends for at least a month, sometimes two; and the bodies of kings
and illustrious men, according to their respective wealth, lie sometimes even for half a year
before the corpse is burned, and the body continues above ground in the house, during which
time drinking and sports are prolonged till the day on which the body is consumed. Then, when
it is carried to the funeral pile, the substance of the deceased, which remains after these
drinking festivities and sports, is divided into five or six heaps; sometimes into more, according
to the proportion of what he happens to be worth.  These heaps are so disposed that the largest
heap shall be about one mile from the town; and so gradually the smaller at lesser intervals,
till all the wealth is divided, so that the least heap shall be nearest the town where the
corpse lies.

"Then all those are to be summoned together who have the fleetest horses in the land, for a
wager of skill, within the distance of five or six miles from these heaps; and they all ride
a race toward the substance of the deceased.  Then comes the man that has the winning horse
toward the first and largest heap, and so each after other, till the whole is seized upon.
He procures, however, the least heap who takes that which is nearest the town; and then everyone
rides away with his share, and keeps the whole of it.  On account of this custom fleet horses
in that country are wonderfully dear.  When the wealth of the deceased has been thus exhausted,
then they carry out his corpse from the house and burn it, together with his weapons and clothes;
and generally they spend his whole substance by the long continuance of the body within the
house, together with what they lay in heaps along the road, which the strangers run for, and
take away.

"It is also an established custom with the Estonians that the dead bodies of every tribe or
family shall be burned, and if any man findeth a single bone unconsumed, they shall be fined
to a considerable amount.  These Estonians also have the power of producing artificial cold;
and it is thus the dead body continues so long above ground without putrefying, on which they
produce this artificial cold; and, though a man should set two vessels full of ale or of water,
they contrive that either shall be completely frozen over; and this equally the same in the
summer as in the winter."

Now will we speak about those parts of Europe that lie to the south of the river Danube; and
first of all, concerning Greece.  The sea which flows along the eastern side of Constantinople
(a Grecian city) is called Propontis.  To the north of this Grecian city an arm of the sea
shoots up westward from the Euxine; and to the west by north the mouths of the river Danube
empty themselves south-east into the Euxine.  To the south and west of these mouths are the
Moessians, a tribe of Greeks; to the west of the city are the Thracians; and to the west also
are the Macedonians.  To the south of this city, towards the southern part of that arm of the
sea which is called the Egean, Athens and Corinth are situated.  And to the west by south of
Corinth is the land of Achaia, near the Mediterranean.  To the west of Achaia, along the Mediterranean,
is Dalmatia, on the north side of the sea; to the north of Dalmatia are the boundaries of Bulgaria
and Istria.  To the south of Istria is that part of the Mediterranean which is called the Adriatic;
to the west are the Alps; and to the north that desert which is between the Carinthians and
the Bulgarians.

Italy, which is of great length west by north, and also east by south, is surrounded by the
Mediterranean on every side but towards the west-north.  At that end of it lie the Alps, which
begin westward from the Mediterranean, in the Narbonense country, and end eastward in Dalmatia,
near the [Adriatic] sea.

With respect to the territory called Gallia Belgica, to the east of it is the river Rine, to
the south the Alps, to the west by south the sea called the British Ocean, and to the north,
on the other side of the arm of the ocean, is Britannia.  The land to the west of the river
Loire is AEquitania; to the south of AEquitania is some part of the Narbonense; to the west
by south is the territory of Spain; and to the south the ocean.  To the south of the Narbonense
is the Mediterranean, where the Rone empties itself into the sea, having Provence both on the
east and west.  Over the Pyrenean wastes is Ispania citerior, to the west of which, by north,
is AEquitania, and the province of Gascony to the north.  Provence has to the north of it the
Alps; to the south of it is the Mediterranean; to the north-east of it are the Burgundians;
and the people of Gascony to the west.

Spain is triangular, and entirely guarded on the outside by the sea, either by the great ocean
or by the Mediterranean, and also well guarded within over the land.  One of the angles lies
south-west against the island of Gades, the second eastward against the Narbonense territory,
and the third north-west against Braganza, a town of Gallicia.  And against Scotland (i.e.,
Ireland), over the arm of the sea, in a straight line with the mouth of the Shannon, is Ispania
ulterior.  To the west of it is the ocean; and to the south and east of it, northward of the
Mediterranean, is Ispania citerior; to the north of which are the lands of Equitania; to the
north-east is the weald of the Pyrenees, to the east the Narbonense, and to the south the Mediterranean.
Igbernia, which we call Scotland, is surrounded on every side with the ocean; and hence, because
the rays of the setting sun strike on it with less interruption than on other countries, the
weather is milder there than it is in Britain.  Thence, to the west- north of Ibernia, is that
utmost land called Thila, which is known to a few men only, on account of its exceeding great
distance.

Thus have we now sufficiently described all the landmarks of Europe, according to their respective
situations. 

The Wheeler & Wilson Company appear to be the first who utilized the
engineer's shifting box as an antifriction device for round needle
bars.

They packed their bars round with felt rings, and compressed the
whole by a screw cap.

In the Singer machines the same excellent device has been adopted, hemp packing and screw bushes being
used (Fig. 8); f and g show the direct action on the needle bar.

This method of forming needle bar bearings, partially of metal and partially of felt or hemp,
has afforded the most surprising results.

When the bars are of hard or finely polished steel, no perceptible wear can be detected in
them, even after they have been in daily use in factories for twelve months, whereas bars not
so bushed might show considerable wear in that space of time.

Yet then, when called ashore, he sought The tender peace of rural thought: In more than happy
mood To your abodes, bright daisy Flowers! He then would steal at leisure hours, And loved
you glittering in your bowers, A starry multitude.

But hark the word!--the ship is gone; - Returns from her long course:- anon Sets sail:- in
season due, Once more on English earth they stand: But, when a third time from the land They
parted, sorrow was at hand For Him and for his crew.

Ill-fated Vessel?--ghastly shock! - At length delivered from the rock, The deep she hath regained;
And through the stormy night they steer; Labouring for life, in hope and fear, To reach a safer
shore--how near, Yet not to be attained!

"Silence!" the brave Commander cried; To that calm word a shriek replied, It was the last death-shriek.
- A few (my soul oft sees that sight) Survive upon the tall mast's height; But one dear remnant
of the night - For Him in vain I seek.

Six weeks beneath the moving sea He lay in slumber quietly; Unforced by wind or wave To quit
the Ship for which he died, (All claims of duty satisfied); And there they found him at her
side; And bore him to the grave.

Vain service! yet not vainly done For this, if other end were none, That He, who had been cast
Upon a way of life unmeet For such a gentle Soul and sweet, Should find an undisturbed retreat
Near what he loved, at last -

That neighbourhood of grove and field To Him a resting-place should yield, A meek man and a
brave! The birds shall sing and ocean make A mournful murmur for HIS sake; And Thou, sweet
Flower, shalt sleep and wake Upon his senseless grave.

