"Hurrah! My story was accepted and Lowell asked if it was not a translation from the German,
it was so unlike other tales. I felt much set up, and my fifty dollars will be very happy money....
I have not been pegging away all these years in vain, and I may yet have books and publishers,
and a fortune of my own. Success has gone to my head, and I wander a little.

"Twenty-seven years old and very happy!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The prediction of "books, publishers and a fortune" came true in 1868, when a Boston firm urged
her to write a story for girls, and she had the idea of describing the early life of her own
home, with its many episodes and incidents. She wrote the book and called it Little Women,
and was the most surprised person in the world, when from her cozy corner of Concord she watched
edition after edition being published, and found that she had become famous. From that moment
Louisa Alcott belonged to the public, and one has but to turn to the pages of her ably edited
Life, Letters and Journals, to realize the source from which she got the material for her "simple
story of simple girls," bound by a beautiful tie of family love, that neither poverty, sorrow
nor death could sever. Four little pilgrims, struggling onward and upward through all the difficulties
that beset them on their way, in Concord, Boston, Walpole and elsewhere, had provided human
documents which the genius of Louisa Alcott made into an imperishable story for the delight
and inspiration of succeeding generations of girls.

Little Women was followed by Little Men, Old Fashioned Girl, Eight Cousins, Rose in Bloom,
Under the Lilacs, and a long line of other charming books for young people. And, although the
incidents in them were not all taken from real life as were those of her first "immortal,"
yet was each and every book a faithful picture of every-day life. That is where the genius
of Louisa Alcott came in. From the depicting of fairies and gnomes, princes and kings, she
early turned to paint the real, the vital and the heroic, which is being lived in so many households
where there is little money and no luxury, but much light-hearted laughter, tender affection
for one another, and a deep and abiding love of humanity.

Well may all aspiring young Americans take example from the author of Little Women, and when
longing to set the world on fire in the expression of their genius, learn not to despise or
to turn away from the simple, commonplace details of every-day life.

And for successful life and work, there is no better inspiration than the three rules given
Louisa Alcott in girlhood for her daily guidance:

     Rule yourself;
     Love your neighbor;
     Do the duty which lies nearest you.

CLARA MORRIS: THE GIRL WHO WON FAME AS AN ACTRESS

A certain young person who lived in a boarding-house in the city of Cleveland, Ohio, was approaching
her thirteenth birthday, which fact made her feel very old, and also very anxious to do some
kind of work, as she saw her mother busily engaged from morning to night, in an effort to earn
a living for her young daughter and herself.

Spring came in that year with furious heat, and the young person, seeing her mother cruelly
over-worked, felt hopelessly big and helpless. The humiliation of having some one working to
support her--and with the dignity of thirteen years close upon her, was more than she could
bear. Locking herself into her small room, she flung herself on her knees and with a passion
of tears prayed that God would help her.

"Dear God," she cried, "just pity me and show me what to do. Please!" Her entreaty was that
of the child who has perfect confidence in the Father to whom she is speaking. "Help me to
help my mother. If you will, I'll never say 'No!' to any woman who comes to me all my life long!"

In her story of her life, which the young person wrote many years later, she says, in telling
of that agonized plea: "My error in trying to barter with my Maker must have been forgiven,
for my prayer was answered within a week.... I have tried faithfully to keep my part of the
bargain, for no woman who has ever sought my aid has ever been answered with a 'No!'"

Somewhat relieved at having made known her longing to Some One whom she believed would understand
and surely help, the young person went through the dreary routine of boarding-house days more
cheerfully, to her mother's joy. And at night, when she lay tossing and trying to sleep despite
the scorching heat, she seemed to be reviewing the thirteen years of her existence as if she
were getting ready to pigeon-hole the past, to make ready for a fuller future.

With clear distinctness she remembered having been told by her mother, in the manner of old-fashioned
tellers, that, "Once upon a time, in the Canadian city of Toronto, in the year 1849, on the
17th of March--the day of celebrating the birth of good old St. Patrick, in a quiet house not
far from the sound of the marching paraders, the rioting of revelers and the blare of brass
bands, a young person was born." Memory carried on the story, as she lay there in the dark,
still hours of the night, and she repeated to herself the oft-told tale of those few months
she and her mother spent in the Canadian city before they journeyed back to the United States,
where in Cleveland the mother tried many different kinds of occupations by which to support
the child and herself. It was a strange life the young person remembered in those early days.
She and her mother had to flit so often--suddenly, noiselessly. Often she remembered being
roused from a sound sleep, sometimes being simply wrapped up without being dressed, and carried
through the dark to some other place of refuge. Then, too, when other children walked in the
streets or played, bare-headed or only with hat on, she wore a tormenting and heavy veil over
her face. At an early age she began to notice that if a strange lady spoke to her the mother
seemed pleased, but if a man noticed her she looked frightened, and hurried her away as fast
as possible. At first this was all a mystery to the child, but later she understood that the
great fear in her mother's eyes, and the hasty flights, were all to be traced to a father who
had not been good to the brave mother, and so she had taken her little girl and fled from him.
But he always found her and begged for the child. Only too well the young person remembered
some of those scenes of frantic appeal on the father's side, of angry refusal by her mother,
followed always by another hasty retreat to some new place of concealment. At last--never-to-be
forgotten day--there was a vivid recollection of the time when the father asserted brutally
that "he would make life a misery to her until she gave up the child"--that "by fair means
or foul he would gain his end." Soon afterward he did kidnap the young person, but the mother
was too quick for him, and almost immediately her child was in her own arms again.

This necessary habit of concealment, and also the mother's need to earn her own living, made
life anything but an easy matter for them both. The mother's terror lest her child be taken
from her again made her fear to allow the little girl to walk out alone, even for a short distance,
and in such positions as the older woman was able to secure, it was always with the promise
that the child should be no nuisance. And so the young person grew up in a habit of self-effacement,
and of sitting quietly in corners where she could not be seen or heard, instead of playing
with other children of her own age. Then came a great hope, which even as she lay in bed and
thought about it, brought the tears to her eyes, she had so longed to have it come true.

When she was six years old, she and her mother had been living in a boarding-house in Cleveland,
where there was a good-natured actress boarding, who took such a fancy to the shy little girl
who was always sitting in a corner reading a book, that one day she approached the astonished
mother with a proposition to adopt her daughter. Seeing surprise on the mother's face, she
frankly told of her position, her income and her intention to give the girl a fine education.
She thought a convent school would be desirable, from then, say, until the young person was
seventeen.

The mother was really tempted by the offer of a good education, which she saw no way to give
her daughter, and might have accepted it if the actress had not added:

"When she reaches the age of seventeen, I will place her on the stage."

That ended the matter. The mother was horror-stricken, and could hardly make her refusal clear
and decided enough. Even when her employer tried to make her see that by her refusal she might
be doing her daughter a great injustice, she said, sharply: "It would be better for her to
starve trying to lead an honorable life, than to be exposed to such publicity and such awful
temptations." And thus, in ignorance of what the future had in store for her child, did she
close the door on a golden opportunity for developing her greatest talent, and the young person's
first dream of freedom and a fascinating career had come to grief. As she reviewed her disappointment
and the dreary days that followed, a flood of self-pity welled up in the girl's heart, and
she felt as if she must do something desperate to quiet her restless nature.

Fortunately the disappointment was followed by a welcome change of scene, for mother and daughter
left Cleveland and went to try their fortunes in what was then "the far west." After a long
trip by rail and a thirty-mile drive across the prairie, they arrived at their journey's end,
and the marvelous quiet of the early May night in the country soothed the older woman's sore
heart and filled the child with the joy of a real adventure.

They remained in that beautiful world beyond the prairie for two years, and never did the charm
of the backwoods's life pall on the growing girl, who did not miss the city sights and sounds,
but exulted in the new experiences as, "with the other children on the farm, she dropped corn
in the sun-warmed furrows, while a man followed behind with a hoe covering it up; and when
it had sprouted and was a tempting morsel for certain black robbers of the field, she made
a very active and energetic young scarecrow."

While the out-of-door life was a fine thing for the young person, still more to her advantage
was it that she was now thrown with other children, who were happy, hearty, rollicking youngsters,
and, seeing that the stranger was new to farm-life, had rare fun at her expense. For instance,
as she later told:

"They led me forth to a pasture, shortly after our arrival at the farm, and, catching a horse,
they hoisted me up on to its bare, slippery back. I have learned a good bit about horses since
then," she says, "have hired, borrowed and bought them, but never since have I seen a horse
of such appalling aspect. His eyes were the size of soup-plates, large clouds of smoke came
from his nostrils. He had a glass-enamelled surface, and if he was half as tall as he felt,
some museum manager missed a fortune. Then the young fiends, leaving me on my slippery perch,
high up near the sky, drew afar off and stood against the fence, and gave me plenty of room
to fall off. But when I suddenly felt the world heave up beneath me, I uttered a wild shriek--clenched
my hands in the animal's black hair and, madly flinging propriety to any point of the compass
that happened to be behind me, I cast one pantalette over the enameled back, and thus astride
safely crossed the pasture--and lo, it was not I who fell, but their faces instead! When they
came to take me down somehow the animal seemed shrunken, and I hesitated about leaving it,
whereupon the biggest boy said I had 'pluck.' I had been frightened nearly to death, but I
always could be silent at the proper moment; I was silent then, and he would teach me to ride
sideways, for my mother would surely punish me if I sat astride like that. In a few weeks,
thanks to him, I was the one who was oftenest trusted to take the horses to water at noon,
riding sideways and always bare-back, mounted on one horse and leading a second to the creek,
until all had had their drink. Which habit of riding--from balance--" the young person adds,
"has made me quite independent of stirrups since those far-away days."

Besides the riding, there were many other delightful pastimes which were a part of life on
the farm, and on rainy days, when the children could not play out of doors, they would flock
to the big barn, and listen eagerly to stories told by the city girl, who had read them in
books. Two precious years passed all too swiftly on the farm, and the young person was fast
shooting up into a tall, slender girl, who had learned a love of nature in all its forms, which
never left her. She had also grown stronger, which satisfied her mother that the experiment
had been successful. But now there was education to be thought of, and when news came of the
death of that father, who had been the haunting specter of the mother's life, they went back
at once to Cleveland, where the mother obtained employment, and the growing daughter was sent
to a public school. But at best it gave a meager course of study to one who had always been
a reader of every book on which she could lay her hands. To make the dreary, daily routine
less tiresome, she supplemented it by a series of "thinks." These usually took place at night
after her candle had been blown out, and the young person generally fell asleep in a white
robe and a crown of flowers, before she had gathered up all the prizes and diplomas and things
she had earned in the world of reverie, where her dream self had been roving.

And now came the approach of her thirteenth birthday, and her plea that she might be made more
useful in the world. And then, came this:

In the boarding-house where she and her mother were living, the mother acting as assistant
to the manager, the young person occupied with enduring her monotonous existence and with watching
the boarders, there were two actresses, a mother and daughter. The daughter, whose name was
Blanche, was only a year or two older than the young person whose eyes followed her so eagerly,
because Blanche was one of those marvelous creatures whose real life was lived behind the foot-lights.

Something in the silent, keen-eyed girl who was so near her own age attracted Blanche, and
the two became good friends, spending many an hour together when the young person was not in
school. In exchange for her thrilling stories of stage life, Blanche's new friend would tell
vivid tales which she had read in books, to all of which good-natured Blanche would listen
with lazy interest, and at the finish of the narrative often exclaimed:

"You ought to be in a theater. You could act!"

Although this assertion was always met by determined silence, as her friend thought she was
being made fun of, yet the young person did not fail to brood over the statement when she was
alone. Could there be any truth in the statement, she wondered? Then came a marvelous event.
Blanche hurried home from the theater one day to tell her young friend that extra ballet girls
were wanted in their company. She must go at once and get engaged.

"But," gasped the young person, "maybe they won't take me!"

"Well," answered Blanche, "I've coaxed your mother, and my mother says she'll look out for
you--so at any rate, go and see. I'll take you to-morrow."

To-morrow! "Dimly the agitated and awed young person seemed to see a way opening out before
her, and again behind her locked door she knelt down and said 'Dear God! Dear God!' and got
no further, because grief has so many words, and joy has so few."

That was Friday, and the school term had closed that day. The next morning, with a heart beating
almost to suffocation, the young person found herself on the way to the theater, with self-possessed
Blanche, who led the way to the old Academy of Music. Entering the building, the girls went
up-stairs, and as they reached the top step Blanche called to a small, dark man who was hurrying
across the hall:

"Oh, Mr. Ellsler--wait a moment, please--I want to speak to you."

The man stopped, but with an impatient frown, for as he himself afterward said in relating
the story:

"I was much put out about a business matter, and was hastily crossing the corridor when Blanche
called me, and I saw she had another girl in tow, a girl whose appearance in a theater was
so droll I must have laughed had I not been more than a little cross. Her dress was quite short--she
wore a pale-blue apron buttoned up the back, long braids tied at the ends with ribbons, and
a brown straw hat, while she clutched desperately at the handle of the biggest umbrella I ever
saw. Her eyes were distinctly blue and big with fright. Blanche gave her name, and said she
wanted to go in the ballet. I instantly answered that she was too small--I wanted women, not
children. Blanche was voluble, but the girl herself never spoke a single word. I glanced toward
her and stopped. The hands that clutched the umbrella trembled--she raised her eyes and looked
at me. I had noticed their blueness a moment before, now they were almost black, so swiftly
had their pupils dilated, and slowly the tears rose in them. All the father in me shrank under
the child's bitter disappointment; all the actor in me thrilled at the power of expression
in the girl's face, and I hastily added:

"'Oh, well, you may come back in a day or two, and if any one appears meantime who is short
enough to march with you, I'll take you on.' Not until I had reached my office did I remember
that the girl had not spoken a single word, but had won an engagement--for I knew I should
engage her--with a pair of tear-filled eyes."

As a result of his half-promise, three days later, the young person again presented herself
at the theater, and was engaged for the term of two weeks to go on the stage in the marches
and dances of a play called "The Seven Sisters," for which she was to receive the large sum
of fifty cents a night. She, who was later to be known as one of the great emotional actresses
of her day, whose name was to be on every lip where the finest in dramatic art was appreciated,
had begun to mount the ladder toward fame and fortune.

Very curiously and cautiously she picked her way around the stage at first, looking at the
scenes, so fine on one side, so bare and cheap on the other; at the tarletan "glass windows,"
at the green calico sea lying flat and waveless on the floor. At last she asked Blanche:

"Is everything only make-believe in a theater?"

And Blanche, with the indifference of her lackadaisical nature answered, "Yes, everything's
make-believe, except salary day."

Then came the novice's first rehearsal, which included a Zouave drill to learn, as well as
a couple of dances. She went through her part with keen relish and learned the drill so quickly
that on the second day she sat watching the others, while they struggled to learn the movements.
As she sat watching the star came along and angrily demanded, "Why are you not drilling with
the rest?"

"The gentleman sent me out of the ranks, sir," she answered, "because he said I knew the manual
and the drill."

The star refused to believe this and, catching up a rifle, he cried: "Here, take hold, and
let's see how much you know. Now, then, shoulder arms!"

Standing alone, burning with blushes, blinded with tears of mortification, she was put through
her paces, but she really did know the drill, and it was no small reward for her misery when
her persecutor took the rifle from her and exclaimed:

"Well, saucer-eyes, you do know it! I'm sorry, little girl, I spoke so roughly to you!" Holding
out his hand to her, he added, "You ought to stay in this business--you've got your head with you!"

Stay in it! The question was would the manager want her when the fatal night of her first stage
appearance had come and gone!

In those days of rehearsals, costumes were one of her most vital interests; for a ballet girl's
dress is most important, as there is so little of it, that it must be perfect of its kind.
The ballet of which the young person was now a member were supposed to be fairies in one dance.
For the second act they wore dancing-skirts, and for the Zouave drill, they wore the regular
Fire Zouave uniform.

At last, the first performance of the play came. It was a very hot night, and so crowded was
the tiny dressing-room occupied by the ballet corps, that some of the girls had to stand on
the one chair while they put their skirts on. The confusion was great, and the new-comer dressed
as quickly as possible, escaped down-stairs, and showed herself to Blanche and her mother,
to see if her make-up was all right.

To her surprise, after a moment of tense silence they both burst into loud laughter, their
eyes staring into her face. In telling of that night later, she said; "I knew you had to put
on powder, because the gas made you yellow, and red because the powder made you ghastly, but
it had not occurred to me that skill was required in applying the same, and I was a sight to
make any kindly disposed angel weep! I had not even sense enough to free my eyelashes from
the powder clinging to them. My face was chalk white, and low down on my cheeks were nice round,
bright red spots.

"Mrs. Bradshaw said: 'With your round blue eyes and your round white and red face, you look
like a cheap china doll. Come here, my dear!'

"She dusted off a few thicknesses of the powder, removed the hard red spots, and while she
worked she remarked; 'To-morrow, after you have walked to get a color, go to your glass and
see where the color shows itself.... Of course, when you are making up for a character part
you go by a different rule, but when you are just trying to look pretty, be guided by Nature.'
As she talked, I felt the soft touch of a hare's foot on my burning cheeks and she continued
her work until my face was as it should be to make the proper effect.

"That lesson was the beginning and the ending of my theatrical instruction. What I learned
later was learned by observation, study, and direct inquiry--but never by instruction, either
free or paid for."

And now the moment of stage entry had arrived. "One act of the play represented the back of
a stage during a performance. The scenes were turned around with their unpainted sides to the
audience. The scene-shifters and gas-men were standing about; everything was supposed to be
going up. The manager was giving orders wildly, and then a dancer was late. She was called
frantically, and finally, when she appeared on the run, the manager caught her by the shoulders,
rushed her across the stage, and fairly pitched her onto the imaginary stage, to the great
amusement of the audience. The tallest and prettiest girl in the ballet had been picked out
to do this bit of work, and she had been rehearsed day after day with the greatest care for
the small part.

"All were gathered together ready for their first entrance and dance, which followed a few
moments after the scene already described. The tall girl had a queer look on her face as she
stood in her place; her cue came, but she never moved.

"I heard the rushing footsteps of the stage-manager; 'That's you,' he shouted; 'Go on! Go on!
Run! Run!' Run? She seemed to have grown fast to the floor....

"'Are you going on?' cried the frantic prompter.

"She dropped her arms limply at her sides and whispered; 'I--I--c-a-n't.'

"He turned, and as he ran his imploring eye over the line of faces, each girl shrank back from
it. He reached me. I had no fear, and he saw it.

"'Can you go on there?' he cried. I nodded.

"'Then for God's sake go--go!'

"I gave a bound and a rush that carried me half across the stage before the manager caught
me, and so, I made my first entrance on the stage, and danced and marched and sang with the
rest, and all unconsciously took my first step on the path that I was to follow through shadow
and through sunshine--to follow by steep and stony places, over threatening bogs, through green
and pleasant meadows--to follow steadily and faithfully for many and many a year to come."

To the surprise of every one, when salary day came around the new ballet girl did not go to
claim her week's pay. Even on the second she was the last one to appear at the box-office window.
Mr. Ellsler himself was there, and he opened the door and asked her to come in. As she signed
her name, she paused so noticeably that he laughed, and said, "Don't you know your own name?"

The fact was, on the first day of rehearsal, when the stage-manager had taken down all names,
he called out to the latest comer, who was staring at the scenery and did not hear him:

"Little girl, what is your name?"

Some one standing near him volunteered: "Her name is Clara Morris, or Morrissey or Morrison,
or something like that." At once he had written down Morris--dropping the last syllable from
her rightful name. So when Mr. Ellsler asked, "Don't you know your name?" it was the moment
to have set the matter straight, but the young person was far too shy. She made no reply, but
signed up and received two weeks' salary as Clara Morris, by which name she was known ever
afterward.

In her story of life on the stage, she says, "After having gratefully accepted my two weeks'
earnings, Mr. Ellsler asked me why I had not come the week before. I told him I preferred to
wait because it would seem so much more if I got both weeks' salary all at one time. He nodded
gravely, and said, 'It was rather a large sum to have in hand at one time,' and though I was
very sensitive to ridicule, I did not suspect him of making fun of me. Then he said:

"'You are a very intelligent little girl, and when you went on alone and unrehearsed the other
night, you proved you had both adaptability and courage. I'd like to keep you in the theater.
Will you come and be a regular member of the company for the season that begins in September next?'

"I think it must have been my ears that stopped my ever-widening smile, while I made answer
that I must ask my mother first.

"'To be sure,' said he, 'to be sure! Well, suppose you ask her then, and let me know whether
you can or not.'"

She says, "Looking back and speaking calmly, I must admit that I do not now believe Mr. Ellsler's
financial future depended entirely upon the yes or no of my mother and myself; but that I was
on an errand of life or death every one must have thought who saw me tearing through the streets
on that ninety-in-the-shade day.... One man ran out hatless and coatless and looked anxiously
up the street in the direction from which I came. A big boy on the corner yelled after me:
'Sa-ay, sis, where's the fire?' But, you see they did not know that I was carrying home my
first real earnings, that I was clutching six damp one-dollar bills in the hands that had been
so empty all my life!

"I had meant to take off my hat and smooth my hair, and with a proper little speech approach
my mother, and then hand her the money. But alas! as I rushed into the house I came upon her
unexpectedly, for, fearing dinner was going to be late, she was hurrying things by shelling
a great basket of peas as she sat by the dining-room window. At sight of her tired face all
my nicely planned speech disappeared. I flung my arm about her neck, dropped the bills on top
of the empty pods and cried:

"'Oh, mother, that's mine and it's all yours!'

"She kissed me, but to my grieved amazement put the money back into my hand and said, 'No,
you have earned this money yourself--you are to do with it exactly as you please.'"

And that was why, the next morning, a much-excited and very rich young person took a journey
to the stores, and as a result bought a lavender-flowered muslin dress which, when paid for,
had made quite a large hole in the six dollars. By her expression and manner she plainly showed
how proud and happy she was to be buying a dress for the mother who for thirteen years had
been doing and buying for two. "Undoubtedly," says Miss Morris, "had there been a fire just
then I would have risked my life to save that flowered muslin gown."

Up to that time, the only world Clara Morris had known had been narrow and sordid, and lay
chill under the shadow of poverty.... Now, standing humbly at the knee of Shakespeare, she
began to learn something of another world--fairy-like in fascination, marvelous in reality.
A world of sunny days and jeweled nights, of splendid palaces, caves, of horrors, forests of
mystery, and meadows of smiling candor. All people, too, with such soldiers, statesmen, lovers,
clowns, such women of splendid honor, fierce ambition, thistle-down lightness, as makes the
heart beat fast to think of.

That was the era of Shakesperian performances, and out of twenty-eight stars who played with
the support of Mr. Ellsler's company, eighteen acted in the famous classic plays. All stars
played a week's engagement, some two, so at least half of the season of forty-two weeks was
given over to Shakespeare's plays, and every actor and actress had his lines at their tongues'
tips, while there were endless discussions about the best rendering of famous passages.

"I well remember," says Miss Morris, "my first step into theatrical controversy. 'Macbeth'
was being rehearsed, and the star had just exclaimed: 'Hang out our banners on the outward
walls!' That was enough--argument was on. It grew animated. Some were for: 'Hang out our banners!
On the outward walls the cry is still, they come!' while one or two were with the star's reading.

"I stood listening, and looking on, and fairly sizzling with hot desire to speak, but dared
not take the liberty. Presently an actor, noticing my eagerness, laughingly said:

"'Well, what is it, Clara? You'll have a fit if you don't ease your mind with speech.'

"'Oh, Uncle Dick,' I answered, my words fairly tripping over one another in my haste, 'I have
a picture home, I cut out of a paper; it's a picture of a great castle with towers and moats
and things, and on the outer walls are men with spears and shields, and they seem to be looking
for the enemy, and, Uncle Dick, the banner is floating over the high tower! So, don't you think
it ought to be read: "Hang out our banners! On the outward walls"--the outward wall, you know,
is where the lookouts are standing--"the cry is still, they come!"'

"A general laugh followed my excited explanation, but Uncle Dick patted me on the shoulder
and said:

"'Good girl, you stick to your picture--it's right, and so are you. Many people read that line
that way, but you have worked it out for yourself, and that's a good plan to follow.'

"And," says Miss Morris, "I swelled and swelled, it seemed to me, I was so proud of the gentle
old man's approval. But that same night I came woefully to grief. I had been one of the crowd
of 'witches.' Later, being off duty, I was, as usual, planted in the entrance, watching the
acting of the grown-ups and grown-greats. Lady Macbeth was giving the sleep-walking scene,
in a way that jarred upon my feelings. I could not have told why, but it did. I believed myself
alone, and when the memory-haunted woman roared out:

"'Yet who would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him?' I remarked, under
my breath. 'Did you expect to find ink in him?'

"A sharp 'ahem' right at my shoulder told me I had been overheard, and I turned to face--oh,
horror! the stage-manager. He glared angrily at me and demanded my ideas on the speech, which
in sheer desperation at last I gave, saying:

"'I thought Lady Macbeth was amazed at the quantity of blood that flowed from the body of such
an old man--for when you get old, you know, sir, you don't have so much blood as you used to,
and I only thought that, as the "sleeping men were laced, and the knives smeared and her hands
bathed with it," she might perhaps have whispered, "Yet who would have thought the old man
to have so much blood in him?"' I didn't mean an impertinence. Down fell the tears, for I could
not talk and hold them back at the same time.

"He looked at me in dead silence for a few moments, then he said: 'Humph!' and walked away,
while I rushed to the dressing-room and cried and cried, and vowed that never, never again
would I talk to myself--in the theater, at all events.

"Only a short time afterward I had a proud moment when I was allowed to go on as the longest
witch in the caldron scene in 'Macbeth.' Perhaps I might have come to grief over it had I not
overheard the leading man say: 'That child will never speak those lines in the world!' And
the leading man was six feet tall and handsome, and I was thirteen and a half years old, and
to be called a child!

"I was in a secret rage, and I went over and over my lines at all hours, under all circumstances,
so that nothing should be able to frighten me at night. And then, with my pasteboard crown
and white sheet and petticoat, I boiled up in the caldron and gave my lines well enough for
the manager to say low:

"'Good! Good!' and the leading man next night asked me to take care of his watch and chain
during his combat scene, and," says Miss Morris, "my pride of bearing was unseemly, and the
other girls loved me not at all, for, you see, they, too, knew he was six feet tall and handsome."

The theatrical company of which Clara Morris had become a member was what was called by the
profession, a "family theater," in which the best parts are apt to be absorbed by the manager
and his family, while all the poor ones are placed with strict justice where they belong. At
that time, outside of the star who was being supported, men and women were engaged each for
a special line of business, to which "line" they were strictly kept. However much the "family
theater" was disliked by her comrades in the profession, it was indeed an ideal place for a
young girl to begin her stage life in. The manager, Mr. Ellsler, was an excellent character
actor; his wife, Mrs. Ellsler, was his leading woman--his daughter, Effie, though not out of
school at that time, acted whenever there was a very good part that suited her. Other members
of the company were mostly related in some way, and so it came about that there was not even
the "pink flush of a flirtation over the first season," in fact, says Miss Morris, "during
all the years I served in that old theater, no real scandal ever smirched it." She adds: "I
can never be grateful enough for having come under the influence of the dear woman who watched
over me that first season, Mrs. Bradshaw, the mother of Blanche, one of the most devoted actresses
I ever saw, and a good woman besides. From her I learned that because one is an actress it
is not necessary to be a slattern. She used to say:

"'You know at night the hour of morning rehearsal--then get up fifteen minutes earlier, and
leave your room in order. Everything an actress does is commented on, and as she is more or
less an object of suspicion, her conduct should be even more correct than that of other women.'
She also repeated again and again, 'Study your lines--speak them just as they are written.
Don't just gather the idea of a speech, and then use your own words--that's an infamous habit.
The author knew what he wanted you to say. If he says, "My lord, the carriage waits," don't
you go on and say, "My lord, the carriage is waiting!"'"

These and many other pieces of valuable advice were stored up in Clara Morris's mind, and she
made such good use of them that they bore rich fruit in later years.

There was great consternation for mother and daughter, on a certain day when Clara brought
home the startling news that the company was to be transferred to Columbus, Ohio, for the remainder
of the season. It was a great event in the young actress's life, as it meant leaving her mother
and standing alone. But as she confesses: "I felt every now and then my grief and fright pierced
through and through with a delicious thrill of importance; I was going to be just like a grown-up,
and would decide for myself what I should wear. I might even, if I chose to become so reckless,
wear my Sunday hat to a rehearsal, and when my cheap little trunk came, with C. M. on the end,
showing it was my very own, I stooped down and hugged it." But she adds with honesty, "Later,
when my mother, with a sad face, separated my garments from her own, I burst into sobs of utter
forlornness."

The salary of the ballet corps was now raised to $5 a week, and all set to work to try to solve
the riddle of how a girl was to pay her board bill, her basket bill, her washing bill, and
all the small expenses of the theater--powder, paint, soap, hair-pins, etc.--to say nothing
of shoes and clothing, out of her earnings. Clara Morris and the Bradshaws solved the problem
in the only possible way by rooming together in a large top-floor room, where they lived with
a comparative degree of comfort, and with less loneliness for Clara than she could have felt
elsewhere.

During that first season she learned to manage her affairs and to take care of herself and
her small belongings, without admonition from any one. At the same time she was learning much
of the technique of the profession, and was deeply interested as she began to understand how
illusions are produced. She declares that one of the proofs that she was meant to be an actress
was her enjoyment of the mechanism of stage effects.

"I was always on hand when a storm had to be worked," she says, "and would grind away with
a will at a crank that, turning against a tight band of silk, made the sound of a tremendously
shrieking wind. And no one sitting in front of the house, looking at a white-robed woman ascending
to heaven, apparently floating upward through the blue clouds, enjoyed the spectacle more than
I enjoyed looking at the ascent from the rear, where I could see the tiny iron support for
her feet, the rod at her back with the belt holding her securely about the waist, and the men
hoisting her through the air, with a painted, sometimes moving sky behind her.

"This reminds me," says Miss Morris, "that Mrs. Bradshaw had several times to go to heaven
(dramatically speaking), and as her figure and weight made the support useless, she always
went to heaven on the entire gallery, as it is called, a long platform the whole width of the
stage, which is raised and lowered by windlass. The enormous affair would be cleaned and hung
about with nice white clouds, and then Mrs. Bradshaw, draped in long white robes, with hands
meekly crossed upon her breast and eyes piously uplifted, would rise heavenward, slowly, as
so heavy an angel should. But alas! There was one drawback to this otherwise perfect ascension.
Never, so long as the theater stood, could that windlass be made to work silently. It always
moved up or down to a succession of screaks, unoilable, blood-curdling, that were intensified
by Mrs. Bradshaw's weight, so that she ascended to the blue tarletan heaven accompanied by
such chugs and long-drawn yowlings as suggested a trip to the infernal regions. Her face remained
calm and unmoved, but now and then an agonized moan escaped her, lest even the orchestra's
effort to cover up the support's protesting cries should prove useless. Poor woman, when she
had been lowered again to terra firma and stepped off, the whole paint frame would give a kind
of joyous upward spring. She noticed it, and one evening looked back and said; 'Oh, you're
not one bit more glad than I am, you screaking wretch!'"

Having successfully existed through the Columbus season, in the spring the company was again
in Cleveland, playing for a few weeks before disbanding for that horror of all theatrical persons--the
summer vacation.

As her mother was in a position, and could not be with Clara, the young actress spent the sweltering
months in a cheap boarding-house, where a kindly landlady was willing to let her board bill
run over until the fall, when salaries should begin again. Clara never forgot that kindness,
for she was in real need of rest after her first season of continuous work. Although her bright
eyes, clear skin, and round face gave an impression of perfect health, yet she was far from
strong, owing partly to the privations of her earlier life and to a slight injury to her back
in babyhood. Because of this, she was facing a life of hard work handicapped by that most cruel
of torments, a spinal trouble, which an endless number of different treatments failed to cure.

Vacation ended, to her unspeakable joy she began work again as a member of the ballet corps,
and during that season and the next her ability to play a part at short notice came to be such
an accepted fact that more than once she was called on for work outside of her regular "line,"
to the envy of the other girls, who began to talk of "Clara's luck." "But," says Clara, "there
was no luck about it. My small success can be explained in two words--extra work." While the
others were content if they could repeat a part perfectly to themselves in their rooms, that
was only the beginning of work to their more determined companion. "I would repeat those lines,"
said Miss Morris, "until, had the very roof blown off the theater at night, I should not have
missed one." And so it was that the youngest member of the ballet corps came to be looked on
as a general-utility person, who could be called on at a moment's notice to play the part of
queen or clown, boy or elderly woman, as was required.

Mr. Ellsler considered that the young girl had a real gift for comedy, and when Mr. Dan Setchell,
the comedian, played with the company, she was given a small part, which she played with such
keen perception of the points where a "hit" could be made, that at last the audience broke
into a storm of laughter and applause. Mr. Setchell had another speech, but the applause was
so insistent that he knew it would be an anti-climax and signaled the prompter to ring down
the curtain. But Clara Morris knew that he ought to speak, and was much frightened by the effect
of her business, which had so captured the fancy of the audience, for she knew that the applause
belonged to the star as a matter of professional etiquette. She stood trembling like a leaf,
until the comedian came and patted her kindly on the shoulder, saying:

"Don't be frightened, my girl--that applause was for you. You won't be fined or scolded--you've
made a hit, that's all!"

But even the pleasant words did not soothe the tempest of emotion surging in the young girl's
heart. She says:

"I went to my room, I sat down with my head in my hands. Great drops of sweat came out on my
temples. My hands were icy cold, my mouth was dry--that applause rang in my ears. A cold terror
seized on me--a terror of what? Ah, a tender mouth was bitted and bridled at last! The reins
were in the hands of the public, and it would drive me, where?"

As she sat there, in her hideous make-up, in a state of despair and panic, she suddenly broke
into shrill laughter. Two women came in, and one said; "Why, what on earth's the matter? Have
they blown you up for your didoes to-night? What need you care. You pleased the audience."
The other said, quietly: "Just get a glass of water for her; she has a touch of hysteria. I
wonder who caused it?" No person had caused it. Clara Morris was merely waking from a sound
sleep, unconsciously visioning that woman of the dim future who was to conquer the public in
her portrayal of great elemental human emotion.

With incessant work and study, and a firm determination to stop short of nothing less than
the perfection of art, those early years of Clara Morris's life on the stage went swiftly by,
and in her third season she was more than ever what she herself called "the dramatic scrape-goat
of the company," one who was able to play any part at a moment's notice.

"This reputation was heightened when one day, an actor falling suddenly sick, Mr. Ellsler,
with a furrowed brow, begged Clara to play the part. Nothing daunted, the challenge was calmly
accepted, and in one afternoon she studied the part of King Charles, in 'Faint Heart Never
Won Fair Lady,' and played it in borrowed clothes and without any rehearsal whatever, other
than finding the situations plainly marked in the book! It was an astonishing thing to do,
and she was showered with praise for the performance; but even this success did not better
her fortunes, and she went on playing the part of boys and old women, or singing songs when
forced to it, going on for poor leading parts even, and between times dropping back into the
ballet, standing about in crowds, or taking part in a village dance."

It was certainly an anomalous position she held in Mr. Ellsler's company--but she accepted
its ups and downs without resistance, taking whatever part came to hand, gaining valuable experience
from every new rôle assigned her, and hoping for a time when the returns from her work would
be less meager.

She was not yet seventeen when the German star, Herr Daniel Bandmann, came to play with the
company. He was to open with "Hamlet," and Mrs. Bradshaw, who by right should have played the
part of Queen Mother, was laid up with a broken ankle. Miss Morris says: "It took a good deal
in the way of being asked to do strange parts to startle me, but the Queen Mother did it. I
was just nicely past sixteen, and I was to go on the stage for the serious Shakesperian mother
of a star. Oh, I couldn't!"

"Can't be helped--no one else," growled Mr. Ellsler; "Just study your lines, right away, and
do the best you can."

"I had been brought up to obey," says Miss Morris, "and I obeyed. The dreaded morning of rehearsal
came. There came a call for the Queen. I came forward. Herr Bandmann glanced at me, half smiled,
waved his arms, and said, 'Not you, not the Player-Queen, but GERTRUDE.'

"I faintly answered, 'I'm sorry, sir, but I have to play Gertrude!'

"'Oh no, you won't!' he cried, 'not with me!' Then, turning to Mr. Ellsler, he lost his temper
and only controlled it when he was told that there was no one else to take the part; if he
would not play with me, the theater must be closed for the night. Then he calmed down and condescended
to look the girl over who was to play such an inappropriate rôle.

"The night came--a big house, too, I remember," says Miss Morris. "I wore long and loose garments
to make me look more matronly, but, alas, the drapery Queen Gertrude wears was particularly
becoming to me and brought me uncommonly near to prettiness. Mr. Ellsler groaned, but said
nothing, while Mr. Bandmann sneered out an 'Ach Himmel!' and shrugged his shoulders, as if
dismissing the matter as hopeless."

But it was not. "As Bandmann's great scene advanced to its climax, so well did the young Queen
Mother play up to Hamlet, that the applause was rapturous. The curtain fell, and to her utter
amaze she found herself lifted high in the air and crushed to Hamlet's bosom, with a crackling
sound of breaking Roman pearls and in a whirlwind of German exclamations, kissed on brow, cheeks
and eyes. Then disjointed English came forth; 'Oh, you are so great, you kleine apple-cheeked
girl! You maker of the fraud--you so great, nobody. Ach, you are fire--you have pride--you
are a Gertrude who have shame!' More kisses, then suddenly realizing that the audience was
still applauding, he dragged her before the curtain, he bowed, he waved his hands, he threw
one arm around my shoulders. 'He isn't going to do it all over again--out here, is he?' thought
the victim of his enthusiasm, and began backing out of sight as quickly as possible."

That amusing experience led to one of the most precious memories of Clara Morris's career,
when, a month after the departure of the impetuous German, who should be announced to play
with the company but Mr. Edwin Booth. As Clara Morris read the cast of characters, she says,
"I felt my eyes growing wider as I saw--

     QUEEN GERTRUDE............Miss Morris.

"I had succeeded before, oh yes, but this was a different matter. All girls have their gods--some
have many of them. My gods were few, and on the highest pedestal of all, grave and gentle,
stood the god of my professional idolatry--Edwin Booth. It was humiliating to be forced on
any one as I should be forced upon Mr. Booth, since there was still none but my 'apple-cheeked'
self to go on for the Queen, and though I dreaded complaint and disparaging remarks from him,
I was honestly more unhappy over the annoyance this blemish on the cast would cause him. But
it could not be helped, so I wiped my eyes, repeated my childish little old-time 'Now I lay
me,' and went to sleep.

"The dreaded Monday came, and at last--the call, 'Mr. Booth would like to see you for a few
moments in his room.'

"He was dressed for Hamlet when I entered. He looked up, smiled, and, waving his hand, said
in Bandmann's very words: 'No, not you--not the Player-Queen--but GERTRUDE.'

"My whole heart was in my voice as I gasped: 'I'm so sorry, sir, but I have to do Queen Gertrude.
You see,' I rushed on, 'our heavy woman has a broken leg and can't act. But if you please,'
I added, 'I had to do this part with Mr. Bandmann, too, and--and--I'll only worry you with
my looks, sir, not about the words or business.'

"He rested his dark, unspeakably melancholy eyes on my face, then he sighed and said: 'Well,
it was the closet scene I wanted to speak to you about. When the ghost appears you are to be--'
He stopped, a faint smile touched his lips, and he remarked:

"'There's no denying it, my girl, I look a great deal more like your father than you look like
my mother--but--' He went on with his directions, and, considerate gentlemen that he was, spoke
no single unkind word to me, though my playing of that part must have been a great annoyance
to him.

"When the closet scene was over, the curtain down, I caught up my petticoats and made a rapid
flight roomward. The applause was filling the theater. Mr. Booth, turning, called after me:
'You--er--Gertrude--er--Queen! Oh, somebody call that child back here!' and somebody roared,
'Clara, Mr. Booth is calling you!' I turned, but stood still. He beckoned, then came and took
my hand, saying, 'My dear, we must not keep them waiting too long,' and led me before the curtain
with him. I very slightly bent my head to the audience, whom I felt were applauding Hamlet
only, but turned and bowed myself to the ground to him whose courtesy had brought me there.

"When we came off he smiled amusedly, tapped me on the shoulder, and said: 'My Gertrude, you
are very young, but you know how to pay a pretty compliment--thank you, child!'

"So," says Miss Morris, "whenever you see pictures of nymphs or goddesses floating in pink
clouds and looking idiotically happy, you can say to yourself: 'That is just how Clara Morris
felt when Edwin Booth said she had paid him a compliment.' Yes, I floated, and I'll take a
solemn oath, if necessary, that the whole theater was filled with pink clouds the rest of that
night, for girls are made that way, and they can't help it."

The young actress was now rapidly acquiring a knowledge of her ability to act; she also knew
that as long as she remained with Mr. Ellsler there would be no advancement for her, and a
firm determination took possession of her to take a plunge into the big world, where perhaps
there might be a chance not only to earn enough to take care of herself, but also enough so
that her mother would no longer be obliged to work, which was Clara's bitter mortification.

While she was considering the advisability of making a change, she received an offer from a
Mr. Macaulay, manager of Wood's Museum, at Cincinnati, Ohio. He offered a small salary, but
as she was to be his leading woman she decided to accept the offer. "When the matter was apparently
settled, he wrote, saying that 'because of the youth of his new star, he wished to reserve
a few parts which his wife would act.' Only too well did Clara Morris understand what that
meant--that the choicest parts would be reserved. Then an amusing thing happened. She, who
was so lacking in self-confidence, suddenly developed an ability to stand up for her rights.
By return mail she informed Mr. Macaulay that her youth had nothing to do with the matter--that
she would be the leading woman and play all parts or none. His reply was a surprise, as it
contained a couple of signed contracts and a pleasant request to sign both and return one at
once. He regretted her inability to grant his request, but closed by expressing his respect
for her firmness in demanding her rights. Straightway she signed her first contract, and went
out to mail it. When she returned she had made up her mind to take a great risk. She had decided
that her mother should never again receive commands from any one--that her shoulders were strong
enough to bear the welcome burden, that they would face the new life and its possible sufferings
together--together, that was the main thing." She says:

"As I stood before the glass smoothing my hair, I gravely bowed to the reflection and said,
'Accept my congratulations and best wishes, Wood's leading lady!'--and then fell on the bed
and sobbed ... because, you see, the way had been so long and hard, but I had won one goal--I
was a leading woman!"

Leaving behind the surroundings of so many years was not a light matter, nor was the parting
with the Ellslers, of whose theatrical family she had been a member for so long, easy. When
the hour of leave-taking came, she was very sad. She had to make the journey alone, as her
mother also was to join her only when she had found a place to settle in. Mr. Ellsler was sick
for the first time since she had known him. She said good-by to him in his room, and left feeling
very despondent, he seemed so weak. "Judge then," says Miss Morris, "my amazement when, hearing
a knock on my door and calling, 'Come in'--Mr. Ellsler, pale and almost staggering, entered.
A rim of red above his white muffler betrayed his bandaged throat, and his poor voice was but
a husky whisper:

"'I could not help it,' he said. 'You were placed under my care once by your mother. You were
a child then, and though you are pleased to consider yourself a woman now, I could not bear
to think of your leaving the city without some old friend being by for a parting God-speed.'

"I was inexpressibly grateful, but he had yet another surprise for me. He said, 'I wanted,
too, Clara, to make you a little present that would last long and remind you daily of--of--er--the
years you have passed in my theater.'

"He drew a small box from his pocket. 'A good girl and a good actress,' he said, 'needs and
ought to own a'--he touched a spring, the box flew open--'a good watch,' he finished.

"Literally, I could not speak, having such agony of delight in its beauty, of pride in its
possession, of satisfaction in a need supplied, of gratitude and surprise immeasurable. 'Oh!'
and again 'Oh!' was all that I could cry, while I pressed it to my cheek and gloated over it.
My thanks must have been sadly jumbled and broken, but my pride and pleasure made Mr. Ellsler
laugh, and then the carriage was there, and laughter stilled into a silent, close hand-clasp.
As I opened the door of the dusty old hack, I saw the first star prick brightly through the
evening sky. Then the hoarse voice said, 'God bless you'--and I had left my first manager."

To say that Clara Morris made a success in Cincinnati is the barest truth. Her first appearance
was in the rôle of a country girl, Cicely, a simple milkmaid with only one speech to make,
but one which taxed the ability of an actress to the uttermost to express what was meant. Clara
played this part in a demure black-and-white print gown, with a little hat tied down under
her chin. On the second night, she played what is called a "dressed part," a bright, light-comedy
part in which she wore fine clothes; on the third night hers was a "tearful" part. In three
nights she completely won the public, and on the third she received her first anonymous gift,
a beautiful and expensive set of pink corals set in burnished gold. "Flowers, too, came over
the foot-lights, the like of which she had never seen before, some of them costing more than
she earned in a week. Then one night came a bolder note with a big gold locket, which, having
its sender's signature, went straight back to him the next morning. As a result it began to
be whispered about that the new star sent back all gifts of jewelry; but when one matinée a
splendid basket of white camelias came with a box of French candied fruit, it delighted her
and created a sensation in the dressing-room. That seemed to start a fashion, for candies in
dainty boxes came to her afterward as often as flowers."

On the night of her first appearance, a lawyer of Cincinnati who saw her play the part of Cicely
was so delighted with her interpretation of the small rôle that he at once asked: "Who is she?
What is her history?"--only to find that, like most happy women, she had none. She came from
Cleveland, she lived three doors away with her mother--that was all.

Having seen her a second time, he exclaimed, "That girl ought to be in New York this very moment!"
and he added, "I know the foreign theaters--their schools and styles, as well as I know the
home theaters and their actors. I believe I have made a discovery!"

After seeing her in the "tearful part," he said firmly: "I shall never rest till this Clara
Morris faces New York. She need clash with no one, need hurt no one, she is unlike any one
else, and New York has plenty of room for her. I shall make it my business to meet her and
preach New York until she accepts the idea and acts upon it."

As a result of that determination, at a later date, he met the object of his interest and roused
her to such an enthusiasm in his New York project that she wrote to Mr. Ellsler, begging his
aid in reaching New York managers, and one day, shortly afterward, she held in her hand a wee
sheet of paper, containing two lines scrawled in an illegible handwriting:

     "If you send the young woman to me, I will willingly
     consider proposal. Will engage no actress without seeing
     her.--A. DALY."

It was a difficult proposition, for to obtain leave of absence she would be obliged to pay
a substitute for at least two performances--would have to stop for one night at a New York
hotel, and so spend what she had saved toward a summer vacation. But the scheme was too compelling
to be set aside. That very night she asked leave of absence, made all other necessary arrangements,
and before she had time to falter in her determination found herself at the Fifth Avenue Hotel
in the great bustling city of her dreams. She breakfasted, and took from her bag a new gray
veil, a pair of gray gloves and a bit of fresh ruffling. Then, having made all the preparation
she could to meet the arbiter of her fate, in her usual custom she said a prayer to that Father
in whose protecting care she had an unfaltering trust. Then, she says, "I rose and went forth,
prepared to accept success or defeat, just as the good Lord should will."

Having found Mr. Daly, she looked bravely into his eyes and spoke with quick determination
to lose no time: "I am the girl come out of the West to be inspected. I'm Clara Morris!"

That was the preface to an interview which ended in his offer to engage her, but without a
stated line of business. He would give her thirty-five dollars a week, he said (knowing there
were two to live on it), and if she made a favorable impression he would double that salary.

A poor offer--a risky undertaking, exclaimed Clara. "In my pocket was an offer which I had
received just before leaving for New York, from a San Francisco manager, with a salary of one
hundred dollars, a benefit, and no vacation at all, unless I wished it. This offer was fairly
burning a hole in my pocket as I talked with Mr. Daly, who, while we talked, was filling up
a blank contract, for my signature. Thirty-five dollars against one hundred dollars. 'But if
you make a favorable impression you'll get seventy dollars.' I thought, and why should I not
make a favorable impression? Yet, if I fail now in New York, I can go West or South not much
harmed. If I wait till I am older and fail, it will ruin my life. I slipped my hand in my pocket
and gave a little farewell tap to the contract for one hundred dollars; I took the pen; I looked
hard at him. 'There's a heap of trust asked for in this contract,' I remarked. 'You won't forget
your promise about doubling the contract?'

"'I won't forget anything,' he answered.

"Then I wrote 'Clara Morris' twice, shook hands, and went out and back to Cincinnati, with
an engagement in a New York theater for the coming season."

As the tangible results of a benefit performance Clara was able to give her mother a new spring
gown and bonnet and send her off to visit in Cleveland, before turning her face toward Halifax,
where she had accepted a short summer engagement. At the end of it she went on to New York,
engaged rooms in a quiet old-fashioned house near the theater, and telegraphed her mother to
come. "She came," says Miss Morris, "and that blessed evening found us housekeeping at last.
We were settled, and happily ready to begin the new life in the great, strange city."

From that moment, through the frenzied days of rehearsal with a new company, and with a large
number of untoward incidents crowded into each day, life moved swiftly on toward the first
appearance of Clara Morris on the New York stage.

With a sort of dogged despair she lived through the worry of planning how to buy costumes out
of her small reserve fund. When at last all her gowns were ready, she had two dollars and thirty-eight
cents left, on which she and her mother must live until her first week's salary should be paid.
Worse than that, on the last awful day before the opening night she had a sharp attack of pleurisy.
A doctor was called, who, being intoxicated, treated the case wrongly. Another physician had
to be summoned to undo the work of the first, and as a result Daly's new actress was in a condition
little calculated to give her confidence for such an ordeal as the coming one. She says, "I
could not swallow food--I could not! As the hour drew near my mother stood over me while with
tear-filled eyes I disposed of a raw beaten egg; then she forced me to drink a cup of broth,
fearing a breakdown if I tried to go through five such acts as awaited me without food. I always
kissed her good-by, and that night my lips were so cold and stiff with fright that they would
not move. I dropped my head for one moment on her shoulder; she patted me silently with one
hand and opened the door with the other. I glanced back. Mother waved her hand and called:
'Good luck! God bless you!' and I was on my way to my supreme test."

A blaze of lights, a hum of voices, a brilliant throng of exquisitely gowned, bejeweled women
and well-groomed men, in fact a house such as Wood's leading lady had never before confronted!
A chance for triumph or for disaster--and triumph it was! Like a rolling snowball, it grew
as the play advanced. Again and again Clara Morris took a curtain call with the other actresses.
Finally the stage manager said to Mr. Daly, "They want her," and Mr. Daly answered, sharply:
"I know what they want, and I know what I don't want. Ring up again!"

He did so. But it was useless. At last Mr. Daly said, "Oh, well, ring up once more, and here,
you take it yourself."

Alone, Clara Morris stood before the brilliant throng, vibrating to the spontaneous storm of
enthusiasm, and as she stood before them the audience rose as one individual, carried out of
themselves by an actress whose work was as rare as it was unique--work which never for one
moment descended to mere stagecraft, but in its simplest gesture was throbbing with vital human
emotion.

As the curtain fell at last, while there was a busy hum of excited voices, the young person
whose place on the New York stage was assured slipped into her dressing-room, scrambled into
her clothes, and rushed from the theater, hurrying to carry the good news to the two who were
eagerly awaiting her--her mother and her dog. "At last she saw the lighted windows that told
her home was near. In a moment, through a tangle of hat, veil, and wriggling, welcoming dog,
she cried:

"'It's all right, mumsey--a success! Lots and lots of "calls," dear, and, oh, is there anything
to eat? I am so hungry!'

"So while the new actress's name was floating over many a restaurant supper its owner sat beneath
one gas-jet, between mother and pet, eating a large piece of bread and a small piece of cheese,
telling her small circle of admirers all about it, and winding up with the declaration, 'Mother,
I believe the hearts are just the same, whether they beat against Western ribs or Eastern ribs!'"

Then, supper over, she stumbled through the old-time 'Now I lay me,' and, adding some blurred
words of gratitude, she says, "I fell asleep, knowing that through God's mercy and my own hard
work I was the first Western actress who had ever been accepted by a New York audience, and
as I drowsed off I murmured to myself:

"'And I'll leave the door open, now that I have opened it--I'll leave it open for all the others.'"

She did. Through that open door has passed a long procession from West to East since the day
when the young woman from Cleveland brought New York to her feet by her unique ability and
dramatic perception. A lover of literature from childhood, a writer of books in later days,
Clara Morris moved on through the years of her brilliant dramatic career to a rare achievement,
not led by the lure of the foot-lights or the flimsier forms of so-called dramatic art, but
by the call of the highest.

Well may the matinée girl of to-day, or the stage-struck young person who responds to the glitter
and glare, the applause and the superficial charm of the theatrical world, listen to Miss Morris's
story of "Life on the Stage," and realize that laurels only crown untiring effort, success
only comes after patient labor, and great emotional actresses come to their own through the
white heat of sacrifice, struggle, and supreme desire.

ANNA DICKINSON: THE GIRL ORATOR

A very well-known lawyer of Philadelphia was sitting in his private office one morning when
word was brought in to him that a young lady wished to see him. The office-boy had never seen
her before, and she had not given her name, but she was very firm in her intention not to be
refused an interview.

"Show her in," said the lawyer, pushing back his chair with a bored expression and a resolution
to send the stranger away at short notice if she was not a client. What was his surprise when
a very young girl, still wearing short dresses, was ushered in, and stood before him with such
an earnest expression in her bright eyes that she instantly attracted him. Motioning her to
take a seat, he asked her errand.

"I wish some copying to do," was the reply, in such a musical voice that the lawyer became
still more interested.

"Do you intend to do it yourself?" he asked.

She bowed assent. "Yes," she said. "We are in need of money and I must help. I write a clear hand."

So pleased was he with her manner and her quiet words, "We are in need of money and I must
help," as well as touched by her self-reliance at an age when girls are generally amusing themselves,
that he gave her some copying which he had intended to have done in the office. With a grateful
glance from her brilliant dark eyes, she thanked him, and, promising to bring the work back
as soon as possible, she left the office.

As the door closed behind her the lawyer opened a drawer and took from it a little faded photograph
of a young girl with dark eyes and curly hair, looked at it long and sadly, then replaced it
in the drawer and went on with his work.

On the following day, when the office-boy announced "the young lady with the copying," she
was summoned to his office at once and given a hearty hand-clasp.

"I am glad to see you again," the lawyer said. "I had a daughter you remind me of strongly.
She died when she was twelve years old. Be seated, please, and tell me a little about yourself.
You are very young to be doing such work as this. Is your father living, and why are you not
in school?"

Compelled by his kindly interest, the young girl talked as freely with him as if he were an
old friend. Her name, she said, was Anna Elizabeth Dickinson, and she was born in Philadelphia,
thirteen years before, on the 28th of October. Her father, John Dickinson, and her mother,
who had been Mary Edmundson before her marriage, were both persons who were interested in the
vital questions of the day, and Anna had been brought up in an atmosphere of refinement and
of high principles. All this her new friend learned by a series of friendly questions, and
Anna, having begun her story, continued with a degree of frankness which was little less than
surprising, after so short an acquaintance. Her father had been a merchant, and had died when
she was two years old, leaving practically no income for the mother to live on and bring up
her five children. Both mother and father were Quakers, she said, and she was evidently very
proud of her father, for her eyes flashed as she said: "He was a wonderful man! Of course,
I can't remember it, but mother has told me that the last night of his life, when he was very
sick, he went to an anti-slavery meeting and made a remarkably fine speech. Yes, father was
wonderful."

"And your mother?" queried her new friend.

Tears dimmed the young girl's eyes. "There aren't any words to express mother," she said. "That
is why I am trying to work at night, or at least part of the reason," she added, with frank
honesty. "We take boarders and mother teaches in a private school, too, but even that doesn't
give enough money for six of us to live on, and she is so pale and tired all the time." She
added, with a toss of her curly head: "And I must have money to buy books, too, but helping
mother is more important."

Entirely absorbed in her own narrative now, she continued to pour out a flood of facts with
such an eloquence and persuasive use of words that her hearer was lost in amazement over a
young girl who was so fluent in her use of language. From her frank tale he gathered that she
had been a wayward, wilful, intense, and very imaginative child, who, despite her evident devotion
to her mother, had probably given her many hours of worry and unhappiness. It was evident also
that as a younger child she had been considered an incorrigible pupil at school, for she seemed
to have always rebelled against discipline which she thought unnecessary.

"They could punish me all they liked," she said, with flashing eyes. "I would never obey a
rule that had not been explained to me and that wasn't fair--never! Teachers and mothers were
always telling good little girls not to play with me, and I was glad! Girls the teachers call
'good' sometimes are not that at all; they just know how to hide things from the teachers."
As her hearer made no comment, but listened with an amused smile curving his lips, Anna continued:
"I adore books, but, oh, how I hate school, when the rich girls laugh at my clothes and then
at me if I tell them that my mother is poor and we work for all we have! It isn't fair, because
we can't help it, and we do the best we can. I never would say it to them in the world--never!
In the first school I went to they used to tease the children who were timid, and bother them
so much that they would forget their lessons and get punished when it was not their fault.
But I looked after them," declared Anna, proudly. "I fought their battles for them, until the
others left them alone, because they were afraid to fight me, I was so strong. Oh, sir," she
cried, "why can't people always be fair and square, I wonder?"

As if mesmerized by the intensity of this remarkable young reformer, the lawyer found himself
repeating, "I wonder!" as if he had no opinions on the subject, but at the same time he was
doing some thinking in regard to such a unique character as this one before him. When she had
finished speaking he rose and put a bundle of work in her hand. "I will help you and your brave
mother all I can," he said. "While you are doing that copying I will speak to other lawyers,
who, I am sure, will give you more to do. I have looked over what you have done, and can warmly
recommend you as a copyist. I hope we shall have many more long talks together."

So with her package under her arm, and a warm feeling of satisfaction in her heart because
she had found a new friend who said she could do good work, she hurried home.

Almost from baby days it had been evident that Anna Dickinson was no ordinary child, and how
to curb the restless spirit and develop the strong nature into a fine woman was a great problem
for the already over-burdened mother. Even as a young child Anna had an iron will, and discipline,
of which she later learned the value, so chafed her independent nature that she was generally
in a state of rebellion. From her own story it was clear that she must have been a terror to
unjust teachers or pupils; but she did not mention the many devoted friends she had gained
by her championship of those who were not being treated fairly according to her ideas. Hers
was a strong, talented, courageous, fearless nature, which was bound to be a great power for
good or evil. The scales were turned in the right direction by her passionate love for her
mother and an intense desire to lift some of the burden of financial worry from her shoulders,
as she saw Mrs. Dickinson, with tireless industry, struggle to make ends meet, and to feed,
clothe, and educate her fatherless children. Her one determination was to have them grow up
into noble men and women, but in Anna's early life it seemed as if the tumultuous nature would
never be brought to any degree of poise and self-control. She showed a marked love of books,
even when she was only seven years old, and would take one of her mother's volumes of Byron's
poems and, hiding under a bed, where she would not be disturbed, read for hours.

When she was about twelve years old Anna went to the "Westover Boarding-school of Friends,"
where she remained for almost two years, and from which she went to the "Friends' Select School"
in Philadelphia, where she was still studying when she applied for copying and found a new
friend. Both of the schools were free Quaker schools, as her mother could not afford to send
her elsewhere, and in both she stood high for scholarship, if not for deportment. In the latter
institution she was noted for never failing in a recitation, although she was taking twelve
subjects at one time, and was naturally looked upon with awe and admiration by less brilliant
pupils. A new scholar once questioned her as to her routine of work, and the reply left her
questioner speechless with wonder.

"Oh, I haven't any," said Anna, with a toss of her curly head. "And I don't study. I just go
to bed and read, sometimes till one o'clock in the morning--poetry, novels, and all sorts of
things; then just before I go to sleep I look my lessons over." Evidently the new-comer was
a bit doubtful of being able to follow her leader, for Anna added, reassuringly: "Oh yes, you
can, if you try. It's easy when you get the habit!" and went off, leaving a much-amazed girl
behind her.

At the time of her visit to the lawyer's office Anna begged to be allowed to leave school to
try and add to the family income, but her practical mother persuaded her not to do this for
at least a year or so, and, seeing the wisdom of the advice, Anna remained in the "Friends'
School." So active was her mind that for weeks at a time she did not sleep over five hours
a night; the remaining time she spent in doing all the copying she could get and in reading
every book on which she could lay her hands. Newspapers, speeches, tracts, history, biography,
poetry, novels and fairy-tales--she devoured them all with eager interest. A favorite afternoon
pastime of hers was to go to the Anti-Slavery Office, where, curled up in a cozy corner, she
would read their literature or listen to arguments on the subject presented by persons who
came and went. At other times she would be seized with a perfect passion for a new book, and
would go out into the streets, determined not to return home until she had earned enough to
buy the coveted prize. At such a time she would run errands or carry bundles or bags for passengers
coming from trains until she had enough money for her book. Then she would hurry to a bookstore,
linger long and lovingly over the piles of volumes, and finally buy one, which she would take
home and devour, then take it to a second-hand bookshop and sell it for a fraction of what
it cost, and get another.

Among her other delights were good lectures, and she eagerly watched the papers to find out
when George William Curtis, Wendell Phillips, or Henry Ward Beecher was going to lecture in
the city; then she would start out on a campaign to earn the price of a ticket for the lecture.

One day when she had read much about Wendell Phillips, but never heard him, she saw that he
was to lecture in Philadelphia on "The Lost Arts." It happened that there was no copying for
her to do at that time, and she had no idea how to earn the twenty-five cents which would give
her the coveted admittance; but go to the lecture she must. As she walked past a handsome residence
she noticed that coal had just been put in and the sidewalk left very grimy. Boldly ringing
the bell, she asked if she might scrub the walk, and as a result of her exertion a triumphant
young girl was the first person to present herself at the hall that night, and quite the most
thrilled listener among the throng that packed the house to hear Wendell Phillips. Although
her career was so soon to find her out, little did Anna dream on that night, as she listened
spellbound to the orator of the occasion, that not far in the future many of that audience
were to be applauding a young girl with dark eyes, curly hair, and such force of character
and personal magnetism that she was to sway her audiences even to a greater extent than the
man to whom she was listening.

When she was seventeen Anna left school for good, feeling that she could not afford to give
any more time to study while her mother needed so many comforts and necessities which money
could buy. So she left the "Friends' Select School," and in her unselfish reason for this,
and the fact that she was forced to support herself and others at such an early age, when she
longed for a more thorough education, lies an appeal for kindly criticism of her work rather
than a verdict of superficiality, which some gave who did not understand or appreciate the
nature, the inspiration, or the real genius of the young and enthusiastic girl.

She was offered a position as teacher in a school in New Brighton, Beaver County, and accepting
it she spent a few months there, but as she did not like it she applied for a district-school
position that was vacant in the same town. When she had made all but the final arrangements
with the committee she asked, "What salary do you give?"

A committeeman replied: "A man has had the position until now. We gave him twenty-eight dollars
a month, but we should not think of giving a girl more than sixteen." Something in his manner
and words stung Anna like a lash, and, drawing herself up to her full height, she turned to
leave the room.

"Sir," she said, "though I am too poor to-day to buy a pair of cotton gloves, I would rather
go in rags than degrade my womanhood by accepting anything at your hands!" And off she went,
to try her fate in some other place and way, absolutely sure that in some unknown manner she
was to wrest success from the future. Young, inexperienced, penniless, and with few friends,
she passed weeks looking for a situation in vain. At last she was offered work in a store,
but when she found that she must tell what was not true about goods to customers rather than
lose a sale, she put on her hat and left at once, and again began her weary quest of work.
Everywhere she found that, if she had been a boy, she could have secured better positions and
pay than she could as a girl. Also in her wide range of reading she discovered that many of
the advantages of life and all of the opportunities, at that time, were given to men rather
than to women. Her independent nature was filled with determination to do something to alter
this, if she ever had a chance. It came sooner than she would have dared to hope.

One Sunday she was sitting at home, reading a newspaper, when she saw a notice of a meeting
to be held that afternoon in a certain hall by the "Association of Progressive Friends," to
discuss "Woman's Rights and Wrongs." She would go. Having decided this, she went to the home
of a young friend and persuaded her to go, too, and together they walked to the hall and were
soon deeply engrossed in the arguments presented by the speakers. The presiding officer of
the afternoon was a Doctor Longshore, who announced before the meeting began that at the close
of the formal discussion ladies were requested to speak, as the subject was one in which they
were especially interested.

"One after another, women rose and gave their views on the question. Then, near the center
of the house a girl arose whose youthful face, black curls, and bright eyes, as well as her
musical voice and subdued but impressive manner, commanded the attention of the audience. She
spoke twice as long as each speaker was allowed, and right to the point, sending a thrill of
interest through her listeners, who remembered that speech for many a long day. At the close
of the meeting more than one in the audience came forward and spoke to the beaming girl, thanking
her for her brilliant defense of her sex, and asking her to surely come to the meeting on the
following Sunday." Flushed with triumph and excitement, she received the praise and congratulations
and promised to be present the next week. When the time came she again rose and spoke in glowing
language of the rights and privileges which should be given to women as well as to men. As
soon as she sat down a tall, nervous man, with an air of proud assurance that the world was
made for his sex, rose and spoke firmly against Anna's arguments, voicing his belief that men
were by right the lords and masters of creation. While he spoke he fixed his eyes on Anna,
as if enchanted by the sight of her rapidly crimsoning cheeks and flashing eyes, which showed
emotions at white heat. The moment he finished she stood again, and this time, young and inexperienced
though she was, with little education and less knowledge of the great world, she held her audience
spellbound by the clear ideas which she poured out in almost flawless English, and by her air
of conviction which carried belief in her arguments with it. She spoke clearly, steadily, as
she summed up all the wrongs she had been obliged to suffer through a struggling girlhood,
as well as all she had seen and read about and felt in her soul to be true, although she had
no tangible proofs. On flowed the tide of her oratory in such an outburst of real feeling that
her hearers were electrified, amazed, by the rare magnetism of this young and unknown girl.
As she spoke she drew nearer to the man, whose eyes refused now to meet her keen dark ones,
and who seemed deeply confused as she scored point after point in defense, saying, "You, sir!
said so and so," ... with each statement sweeping away his arguments one by one until he had
no ground left to stand on. When her last word had been said and she took her seat amid a storm
of applause, he swiftly and silently rose and left the hall, to the great amusement of the
audience, whose sympathies were entirely with the young girl who had stated her case so brilliantly.

"Who is she?" was the question asked on every side as the eager crowd pushed its way out of
the building, all curious to get a nearer view of the youthful speaker. Doctor Longshore, who
had opened the meeting, as on the previous Sunday, was now determined to become acquainted
with Anna and find out what had gone into the making of such a remarkable personality, and
at the close of the meeting he lost no time in introducing himself to her and making an engagement
to go to the Dickinson home to meet her family.

Before the time of his promised call--in fact, before Anna had even mentioned her success as
a speaker to her mother--while she was out one day two gentlemen called at the house and inquired
if Miss Anna Dickinson lived there. Her mother's cheeks paled with fright, for she feared Anna
had been doing some unconventional thing which the strangers had come to report. When they
said they had heard her speak at a public meeting and were so much pleased with her speech
that they had come to find out something about her home surroundings, Mrs. Dickinson's brow
cleared, and, leading them into the house, she spent a pleasant half-hour with them, and was
secretly delighted with their comments on her daughter's first appearance in public. When Anna
came home Mrs. Dickinson took her to task for not telling her about such a great event, and
was surprised to see the real diffidence which the girl showed when she was questioned about
the meetings and her speeches. A few days later Doctor Longshore called with her brother, Elwood,
and with their flattering assurances that her daughter was a born speaker, and that she had
already made some valuable points on a vital subject, Mrs. Dickinson began to feel that all
her worry over Anna's turbulent childhood and restless girlhood had not been in vain, that
she was born to do great things, and from that time she took a genuine pride in all the achievements
of the young girl who came so rapidly into public notice.

The Longshores took Anna into their hearts and home at once, and many of her happiest hours
were spent with them. "We felt toward her," Doctor Longshore said, "as if she were our own
child. We were the first strangers to show an interest in her welfare and future plans, and
she returned our friendship with confidence and love." She was always so buoyant, so full of
vitality and gayety, that her visits were eagerly anticipated, and for hours at a time she
would entertain her new friends with vivid and droll accounts of her experiences at home and
in school and of her attempts to make money. And as she had won her way into the hearts of
her audience, at those first meetings, so now she kept the Longshores enthralled, making them
laugh at one moment and cry at another. One night she had a horrible dream to relate.

"I had been reading an account of the horrors of the slave system at its worst," she said.
"After going to bed, I was long in falling asleep. Finally I slept and dreamed that I was a
slave girl, and, oh, the agony of the knowledge! The hot sun scorched my burning skin as I
toiled in the fields, with almost no clothing to soften the sun's heat. I was hungry, but there
was insufficient food. At last I was dressed in clean, showy clothes and led to the auction-block,
where I was auctioned off to the highest bidder. He led me away in triumph to even worse experiences,
and when I woke up I could not throw off the horror of the awful nightmare."

Seeing her tremble under the misery of the recollection, Doctor Longshore soothed her by saying
that the dream was a natural result of the highly colored account she had been reading before
going to sleep, that all slaves were not by any means treated in such a cruel manner, and at
last she grew calm. But whenever in future she spoke on the subject of slavery this terrible
memory would come back to her so vividly that it would intensify her power to speak with conviction.

For several Sundays she went regularly to the "Progressive Friends'" meeting and spoke with
unvarying success. Then she was invited to go to Mullica Hill, New Jersey, to speak on the
subject, "Woman's Work." After discussing the matter with her mother and the Longshores, she
accepted the invitation and set herself to prepare the lecture which she was to give. Then,
on the first Sunday in April, the seventeen-year-old orator went to her trial experience as
an invited speaker. By that time her praises had been widely sung, and when she rose and saw
her audience there was a sea of upturned, eager faces looking into hers. Speaking from the
depths of her own experience, she held the audience in breathless silence for over an hour.
There was, it was said, an indescribable pathos in her full, rich voice that, aside from what
she said, touched the hearts of her hearers and moved many to tears, while all were spellbound,
and at the close of her address no one moved. Finally a man rose and voiced the feeling of
the people.

"We will not disperse until the speaker promises to address us again this evening," he said,
and a burst of applause greeted his statement. A starry-eyed girl stood and bowed her acknowledgment
and agreed to speak again. As the audience dispersed Anna heard some one say, "If Lucretia
Mott had made that speech it would be thought a great one."

As she promised, in the evening she spoke again on slavery, with equal success. A collection
which was taken up for her amounted to several dollars, the first financial result of what
was to be her golden resource.

But Anna had no thought of doing public speaking as her only means of earning her living. She
continued to look for positions, but without success. Finally she took a district school in
Bucks County, at a monthly salary of twenty-five dollars. So interested was she in the "Progressive
Friends'" Sunday meetings that she went home every second week to attend them, and her speeches
always won applause from an audience that had learned to anticipate the impassioned statements
of the bright-eyed girl who was so much younger and so much more intense than any other speaker.

And now she began to receive invitations to speak in other places. On her eighteenth birthday
she spoke in a small village about thirty miles out of Philadelphia, when she fairly electrified
her hearers by the force of her arguments and the form in which she presented them. She continued
to teach, although during her summer vacation she made many speeches in New Jersey. On one
occasion she spoke in the open air, in a beautiful grove where hundreds had come to hear "the
girl orator" give her views on temperance and slavery. Her earnestness and conviction of the
truth of what she said made a profound impression, and even those who later criticized her
speech as being the product of an immature and superficial mind were held as by a spell while
she spoke, and secretly admired her while they openly ridiculed her arguments. At another time
she was asked to speak at the laying of the corner-stone of a new Methodist church. The clergymen
who gathered together were inclined to be severe in their judgment of the remarks of a "slip
of a girl." Anna knew that and resolved to speak with more than usual pathos and power. When
she began her address amusement was evident on the faces of the dignified men looking at her.
Gradually they grew more interested, the silence became intense, and when the men rose to leave
they were subdued, and some of them even were not ashamed to be seen wiping away tears. One
of them introduced himself to her and with a cordial hand-shake said: "Miss Dickinson, I have
always ridiculed Woman's Rights, but, so help me God, I never shall again."

But this time the young orator could not help feeling the power she had to sway great masses
of people, and with a thrill of joy she began to believe that perhaps in this work which she
loved above anything else in the world she would some day find her vocation, for she was already
receiving commendation from men and women of a high order of intelligence and being given larger
contributions as a result of her speeches. 

Though no further word was spoken, the sense of satisfaction on each face was very plain, and
I have no doubt in each heart there was a throb of pleasure that words have no language for.

I
went on my way, but the saying, "With a will, Joe," went with me. How much there was in that simple
phrase, "With a will!"

How different is our work according as we do it with or against our will. This little fellow
might have cried or murmured, or left his mother to do the work, and been dissatisfied with
himself, and a source of discontent to his mother, but he had spurred himself on to toil and
duty, with his words, powerful in their simplicity--"With a will, Joe."

Often since have I recalled the scene and the saying. When some young lady complains to me, "I
have no time to give to doing good. I've visits to make, and shopping to do, and embroidery to finish,
how can I help the poor when I'm so pressed for time?" I am apt to say mentally, "How different
it would be with her, if she had ever said to herself, 'With a will.'"

Yes, with a will we can do almost anything that ought to be done; and without a will we can do nothing
as it should be done. To all of us, whatever our station, there come difficulties and trials.
If we yield to them we are beaten down and conquered. But if we, ourselves, conquer the temptation
to do wrong, calling the strength of God to aid us in our struggle with the enemy, we shall
grow stronger and more valiant with every battle, and less liable to again fall into temptation.
Our wisdom and our duty are to rouse ourselves,--to speak to our own hearts as the child did
in his simple words, "With a will, Joe."

When there is any wrong thing that we want to do, our will then is strong enough. The Evil One
comes with his temptation, and helps us to our ruin, with his strength.

The times when we flag are when we want to do right.

"When I would do good, evil is present with me," was the testimony of the apostle of the Gentiles,
and it is the experience of all, unless they go to Him who can make our wills obedient to his will.

DO
WITH YOUR MIGHT.

Whatsoe'er you find to do, Do it, boys, with all your might! Never be a little true, Or a little
in the right. Trifles even Lead to heaven, Trifles make the life of man; So in all things,
Great or small things, Be as thorough as you can.

+------------------------------------+-------------------------------+ |Against Liquor |Against
Tobacco | | | | |Recognizing in alcoholic beverages a|Acknowledging smoking, chewing,| |deadly
enemy to the delicate |or snuffing tobacco to be | |functions of
the human system, a |always detrimental to the human| |menace to the
home, and their use as|system, an enemy to perfect | |a drink an outrage
against society, |health and happiness, and an | |the State and the
Nation, I hereby |offense against good form and | |promise to not
only abstain from |respectable society, I hereby | |them myself, but
to use my influence|express myself against the use | |against their
manufacture, sale, and|of this vile poison.

I shall | |consumption. |also endeavor to discourage its| | |use among my friends and | | Name
|associates. I Cor. 6:9, 10.

"And I have drunk my last glass of whisky," said a young man who had long been given up as sunk too
low ever to reform, and as utterly beyond the reach of those who had a deep interest in his
welfare.

NELLIE ALTON'S MOTHER

"Mamma, O mamma!" cried an eager young voice; and Nellie Alton, a plump, rosy schoolgirl of twelve
summers, rushed into her mother's room, and, flinging her text-books on the sofa, seated herself
on an ottoman at her mother's feet. Mrs. Alton looked up from her sewing with a quiet smile, and
said, as she pushed back the tangled curls from Nellie's uplifted forehead,--

"What is the matter with my daughter? Has anything serious occurred at the institute?"

"O mamma," said Nellie, half reproachfully, "you can't have forgotten that it is just a week to-day
since I received that invitation to Minnie Shelburne's party.

You said at the time, that you didn't know whether I might accept, and I think I've been very
patient not to tease you about it. Almost all the girls are going. Mrs. Doane has bought the
loveliest silk for Carrie and Jessie; and Mrs. Hilton has three women sewing on Emma's dress.
Here I am not knowing whether I can go. Cousin Sue said she thought my 'mother a woman of great
deliberation.'"

"In years to come you will rejoice over the truth of that remark, my darling."

"But, mamma, please decide now, won't you?"

"I have decided, my dear. Last night your father and I had a long talk about the matter, and we
agreed--"

"To let me go?" cried eager Nellie.

"No, dear. Anxious for your truest good, we were sorry we should have to disappoint you. But we
cannot grant you a harmful pleasure." Nellie bit her lip, while her eyes filled with tears.

"May
I ask your reasons, mamma?"

"Yes, dear; and I feel that my sensible little daughter cannot but be satisfied with them. All
the advantages you are now having tend to make you, at some future
time, a useful woman in society.

To obtain their full benefit, your mind must remain undiverted from your studies, and you must
be kept free from everything that will detract from your health and strength. Parties will
excite you, deprive you of sleep, fill your mind with foolish fancies, retard you in your school
work, and make you thin, pale, and irritable. We should sadly miss our bright, blooming Nellie.
Do you wonder we refuse to let you attend the party?"

"But just once cannot hurt me," pleaded Nellie.

"The one party, my child, will be followed by a score of them. If you go to Miss Shelburne's,
the other girls will wonder why you cannot attend theirs, and ill feeling will arise. We will talk
no more about it now. Sometime you will thank me for my course. Are you satisfied?"

"I'll try to be, mamma," said Nellie; but there were a few suspicious drops on her eyelashes.

The
night of the party arrived. Nellie had had a very trying week at school, for the girls thought
of nothing else besides their fine preparations. She bore it bravely, and after tea sat resolutely
down to her lessons, which were unusually difficult. Half-past eight found her closing her
books with the air of a conqueror, while she exclaimed,--

"Now, mamma, they're all done, every one. May I run over and see Cousin Sue off?"

Consent was given, and Nellie entered her uncle's vestibule just as Sue was descending the
stairs, in a cloud of lace and pink silk. She felt a little choking in her throat, but said, quietly,
"Sue, you look lovely; but to-morrow's French exercise is terribly hard."

"And Miss Propriety Stay-at-home has prepared for it, I infer. Aren't you sorry you can't go?"
said Sue, settling her flounces with a satisfied air.

"Mother knows best," said Nellie, decidedly; then she went home. While her sixth hour of sleep,
sweet and restful, was passing by, poor, tired, cross Sue returned home, and wearily climbed
the stairs to her room.

Next day Nellie came home, saying, "I am at the head of all my classes. Some of the girls were
late, others had headaches, all of them were disagreeable, and none
of them had half prepared their lessons.

Professor Marshly was very angry, but he thanked me for my good example to others. You dearest mother!
I'll trust you as long as I live." And grateful Nellie sealed the
compact with a kiss.

Years afterward, two ladies were seated in a pleasant room engaged in conversation. One of them reclined
on a sofa, and her sallow features and restless, dissatisfied manner marked her an invalid.
The face of the other was bright with health and vivacity. Her sunny smile and cheery voice
showed her a stranger to sickness and pain.

"Nellie, my dear," sighed the former, "you can have no idea of the dreadful condition of my nervous
system. I spend the greater part of the day on the sofa. The children are a perfect worriment,
everything about the house goes wrong, Ralph looks so discontented. I cannot enjoy society at
all. In fact, the doctor says I had too much dissipation when young, and ruined my constitution
with the parties and late suppers. I would give my fortune for your good health and cheerful
spirits."

"Cousin Sue, I remember when you used to drive off to parties, and
think scornfully of my quiet home evenings."

"I remember, Nellie. Do hand me the hartshorn and another cushion, and please lower that shade
a little. There, thank you. Now will you inform me to what you owe
your healthy, happy life?"

At this moment the door opened, and a silver-haired, sweet-faced lady entered. Nellie rose to
meet her, and twining one arm about the lady's waist, "Cousin Sue," she said, "my perfect health,
my calm, happy mind, the good I am enabled to do for God and humanity, the comfort I succeed
in giving to my husband and children, the knowledge I have of my
heavenly Father, and the love I bear him, I owe to the judicious care,
the wise counsel, and the tender love and prayers of my mother."

LOOK TO YOUR THOUGHTS.

Many suppose that if they can guard themselves against improper words and wicked deeds, they
cannot be very guilty on account of thoughts which may revolve in their minds, however corrupt
they may be. They look upon their thoughts as things which spring up in the heart by some laws
of association which they cannot understand, or which, if understood, they cannot control.
As they have not summoned, so neither, in their view, can they dismiss them; but must surrender
themselves to their influence for a period, longer or shorter, until some circumstance occurs
which gives a new direction to the current of thinking. When they confess their sins, there are
oftentimes words and deeds which they admit to be grievously in conflict
with the demands of the divine Word.

But it rarely happens that any unhallowed imaginations in which they have indulged awaken emotions
of genuine sorrow.

Now the thoughts are the guests we entertain--the company we receive into the innermost privacy
of our bosoms. And just as a man is censurable who voluntarily and habitually consorts with
corrupting company, so is he to be condemned who deliberately entertains depraved thoughts.

Let every one, and especially every young man, remember that God holds us responsible for our thoughts.
Man can take cognizance only of the outward appearance. His observation must be limited to those
words and actions which can be perceived by the senses. But the scrutiny of Omniscience extends
further, penetrating the evil which hides our inner selves from the
view of others; it explores the most private recesses of the spirit,
and perfectly understands that portion of our character which others
cannot scan.

Man can only call us good or evil, as our words and actions authorize. But He whose glance enters
the heart and surveys the emotions which are there cherished, condemns, as wicked, every unhallowed
thought; and will as surely take these into the account in determining our final retribution as
he will consider in that reckoning our outward acts, "Guard well your thoughts." "Your thoughts
are heard in heaven," says a distinguished poet.

Never was there a more scriptural sentiment.

But perhaps there may be those to whom this may look like a harsh procedure. If it were true, as
some suppose, that we could not control our thoughts--that they rushed
uninvited upon our attention, that they detained that attention for
a time, longer or shorter, just as they pleased, and that they departed
as unceremoniously as they entered our mind--then I grant that it
would be hard to make us responsible for such visitors.

If we had no power over our own mental operations, it would seem as unjust to punish us for our
delinquencies in these particulars as to censure us for the depravity of a resident of Asia or
Africa. But can you defend such a position as this? Have you no power
to determine what themes shall and what shall not employ your meditations?
Are you the mere slave for your thoughts, compelled to follow as they,
by some caprice, may direct? No intelligent mind in which the will
is ruler is prepared to admit that it has been subjected to such vassalage.

The
truth is, and I appeal to your own consciences in support of the declaration,
that you are endowed with the power of thinking upon just such subjects
as you may prefer. You can, at pleasure, direct your attention to
any topic, agreeable or disagreeable, lawful or unlawful, connected
with the past, present, or future; you can revolve it in your mind
for a longer or shorter period, and then you can dismiss it entirely
from your consideration. If this were not true; if your thoughts were
not under the control of the will, you would be incompetent to manage
your business; you would be disqualified for every pursuit of life
involving the exercise of reason. You would in truth be insane.

Now
it is because God has given us the power over our own thinking that
it assumes a moral complexion in his sight. The man who resigns himself
to unholy reveries, or who entertains in his own heart purposes which,
if acted out, would render him liable to the censure of his fellow
men, and to condemnation from God, is as certainly guilty, though
it may not be to the same extent, as though he had been openly corrupt
and abandoned. "Out of the heart," says the Saviour, "proceed evil
thoughts." Here observe that our Lord plainly teaches that our thoughts
may be evil or sinful, and therefore may expose him who harbors them
to punishment. And lest any one should be disposed to look upon evil
thoughts as an offense too trivial to awaken any concern, mark the
company in which this sin is found. Learn from those offenses with
which it is classed something of the enormity to which it may rise.

One
of the most important counsels in the entire volume of Revelation,
is the direction of the wise man: "Keep thy heart with all diligence."
This is the fountain whence issue the streams which are to fertilize
and gladden, or to pollute and destroy. No one was ever wicked in
speech or action who was not first wicked in heart. The deeds of atrocity
which shock us in execution were first performed in heart--in thought.
Had this been "kept," had the early idea been restrained, the result
so fearful in development might have been averted. Young men, look
to the springs of action, as you would avoid acts which involve you
in ruin and disgrace. Keep the heart as you would secure a conduit,
which, with God's blessing, will make you honorable, lawful, and happy
now, and all that you desire hereafter. Look to your thoughts.

That district was lost by a large majority, while the others went strongly Republican, and
it is interesting to note that when the good news reached headquarters the Governor-elect himself
personally sent Anna thanks for her eloquent speeches, and to her amazement she was serenaded,
feasted, and praised in a way that would have turned the head of a young woman who had been
more interested in her own success than in victory for a cause for which she stood. But that
and the money she could make and pass on to her mother were Anna's supreme objects in whatever
she undertook, and although she would have been less than human if the praise and recognition
had not pleased her, yet her real joy lay in the good-sized checks which she could now add
to the family treasury.

"Having done such good work in the New Hampshire election, her next field of endeavor was Connecticut,
where the Republicans were completely disheartened, for nothing, they said, could prevent the
Democrats from carrying the State. The issue was a vital one, and yet so discouraged were the
Connecticut politicians that they were about to give up the fight without further effort, when
it was decided to try having the successful young girl speaker see what she could do for them.
Anna was only too delighted to accept the challenge, and at once started on a round of stump-speaking
and speechmaking, with all the enthusiasm of her intense nature added to the inspiration of
her recent success in a neighboring State. The results were almost miraculous. Two weeks of
steady work not only turned the tide of popular feeling, but created a perfect frenzy of interest
in the young orator. Even the Democrats, in spite of scurrilous attacks made on her by some
of their leaders, received her everywhere with the warmest welcome, tore off their party badges,
and replaced them by her picture, while giving wild applause to all she said. The halls where
she spoke were so densely packed that the Republicans stayed away to make room for the Democrats,
and the women were shut out to leave room for those who could vote."

Well had her mother's struggle to make a fine woman of her turbulent daughter been repaid.
Never was there such a furore over any orator in the history of this country. The critical
time of her appearance, the excited condition of the people, her youth, beauty, and remarkable
voice, all heightened the effect of her genius. Her name was on every lip. Ministers preached
about her, prayed for her as a second Joan of Arc raised up by God to save their State for
the loyal party, and through it the nation to freedom and humanity. And through all the excitement
and furore the youthful heroine moved with calm poise and a firm determination toward her goal,
attempting to speak clearly and truthfully in regard to what were her sacred beliefs.

Election Day was at hand, and missionary work must not slacken even for one moment. On the
Saturday night before the fateful day Anna spoke before an audience of over one thousand of
the working-men of Hartford, Connecticut. Sorrow sooner or later comes to all, and it works
in the heart of each patience or despair. It all depends upon the way and manner in which they
receive it."

"Perhaps you have the power to choose," said Maggie, "but I have not. It is not so much for you
to be patient; it is your nature, and then you can't have so great
cause for grief."

How Miss Levick's heart went backward at the words
of this weeping child, while she repeated to herself many a precious
promise. Such was
the view from the stage.... To such an audience Miss Dickinson spoke for two hours and twenty
minutes, and hardly a listener left the hall during that time. Her power over the audience
was marvelous. She seemed to have that absolute mastery of it which Joan of Arc is reported
to have had over the French troops. They followed her with that deep attention which is unwilling
to lose a word, but greeted her, every few moments, with the most wild applause.... The speech
in itself and its effect was magnificent--this strong adjective is the proper one.... The work
of the campaign is done. It only remains in the name, we are sure, of all loyal men in this
district to express to Miss Dickinson heartfelt thanks for her splendid, inspiring aid. She
has aroused everywhere respect, enthusiasm and devotion, let us not say to herself alone, but
to the country; while such women are possible in the United States, there isn't a spot big
enough for her to stand on that won't be fought for so long as there is a man left."

Even that achievement was not the height of the young orator's attainment. Her next ovation
was at Cooper Institute in New York City, where she spoke in May of the same year. Faded newspaper
accounts of that meeting fill us with amazement that such a triumph could be, with only a girl's
indomitable will, an insufficient education and much reading of books back of it.

"Long before the appointed hour for the lecture the hall was crowded. The people outside were
determined to get in at all hazards, ushers were beaten down, those with tickets rushed in,
and those without tickets were pushed aside, while thousands went home unable to get standing
room even in the lobbies and outer halls.

"On the platform sat some of the most distinguished men of the day: clergymen, lawyers, generals,
admirals, leaders of the fashionable set--all eager to do homage to the simple girl of whom
the press said:

"'She is medium in height, slight in form, graceful in movement, her head, well poised, adorned
with heavy dark hair, displaying to advantage a pleasant face which has all the signs of nervous
force and of vigorous mental life. In manner she is unembarrassed, without a shade of boldness;
her gestures are simple, her voice is of wonderful power, penetrating rather than loud, as
clear as the tone of metal, and yet with a reed-like softness. Her vocabulary is simple, and
in no instance has there been seen a straining after effective expressions; yet her skill in
using ordinary language is so great that with a single phrase she presents a picture and delivers
a poem in a sentence.'"

At the close of the meeting, which had been opened by Henry Ward Beecher, he rose and said,
with real emotion, "Let no man open his lips here to-night; music is the only fitting accompaniment
to the eloquent utterances we have heard." Then the famous Hutchinson family sang and closed
the meeting with the John Brown song, in which the vast audience joined with thrilling effect.

From that Cooper Institute meeting Anna received almost one thousand dollars, an incredible
amount for a simple speech to her unmercenary spirit, but one which was to be duplicated many
times before her career was over.

After that meeting in New York her reputation as a public speaker was established, despite
the carping critics, and she continued to win fresh laurels, not only for herself, but for
vital issues. "Have you any bad news?" inquired Arthur, laying a detaining hand on the stranger's
arm; "because, if you have, I'd rather you wouldn't mention it to-day. My name is Arthur Mulford,
and we've had such a happy Christmas."
"No fear, my boy, bless your tender heart! Despite this and the fact
that the victorious party owed its success largely to the young orator, the committee never
paid her one cent for her services--to their great discredit, probably having spent all their
campaign funds in some other less legitimate way and thinking they could more easily defraud
a girl than a more shrewd man.

Nothing daunted, she continued to speak wherever she could get a hearing, and at last came
an invitation to make an address in Washington, D. C. Here indeed was a triumph! She hesitated
long before accepting the invitation, for it would be a trying ordeal, as among her audience
would be the President and many diplomats and high government officials. But with sturdy courage
she accepted, and as a result faced, as she later said, the most brilliant audience ever assembled
to hear her speak. It was a unique sensation for the dignitaries and men of mark to sit as
listeners at the feet of this slender girl, who was speaking on profound questions of the day;
but she made a deep impression, even on those who did not agree with her opinions, and it was
a proud moment of her life when at the close of the meeting she met the President and his Cabinet.
The Chief Executive gladly granted her an interview for the following day, and like other men
of lesser rank, was carried out of himself as he watched the play of expression, the light
and shade on her mobile face, as they talked together of the vital topics of the day.

Anna Dickinson was now an orator beyond a doubt; in fact, the only girl orator the country
had ever known. More than that, she made use of her eloquence, her magnetism, her flow of language,
not for any minor use, but in presenting to the public the great problems of her day and in
pleading for honor and justice, freedom and fullness of joy for the individual, with such intensity
of purpose as few men have ever used in pleading a cause.

That she wrote and acted in a play dealing with one of the subjects nearest her heart, and
that she published a novel of the same kind, added nothing to her fame. She was wholly an orator
with an instinctive knowledge of the way to play on the emotions of her listeners. Her faults
were the faults of an intense nature too early obliged to grapple with hard problems; her virtues
were those of a strong, independent, unselfish nature. It has been said that she rose to fame
on the crest of three waves: the negro wave, the war wave, and the woman wave. If that is so,
then was her success as a public speaker something of which to be proud, for to have spoken
on such subjects surely betokens a great nature. Anna Dickinson has been called the "Joan of
Arc" of her day and country. If she had not the delicate spiritual vision of the Maid of France,
she had her superb courage in reaching up toward an ideal. What she was and what she accomplished
as an American girl, who was an orator at eighteen, gives an incentive and a new enthusiasm
to young Americans of the twentieth century, for what girls have done girls can do, and we
believe, with that greatest of poets, that "the best is yet to be."

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The writer of this book gratefully acknowledges her indebtedness for valuable material gleaned
from many sources. Especially does she tender appreciative thanks to the authors of the following
works:

S. G. Drake; Book of the Indians of North America. 

Are you going home with me?"

It was a sensible conjecture; for why else should I follow on?

"I am going to see you safely at the door, and to help you over all
the crossings."

"There's only one more, sir, and here it is; we live down there at
No. 3, on the third floor back."

The child looked kindly, and as she sweetly bade me "good by, sir,"
I thrust my hand in my pocket and drew from it all the change it contained,
which was a bright fifty cent piece, and placed it in her little palm.

McGeorge, J. C.; "A N. J. Heroine of the Revolution" (Am. Monthly Magazine).

Beymer, W. G.; On Hazardous Service.

James, George Wharton; Heroines of California.

Houten, E. L.; The Donner Party.

Murphy, Virginia Reed; "Across the Plains in the Donner Party." (Cent. Mag., 1891.)

Ellet, E. E.; Pioneer Women of the West.

Ellet, E. E.; Women of the American Revolution.

Parton, James; Eminent Women of the Age.

Barton, Clara; Story of the Red Cross.

Epler, P. H.; Life of Clara Barton.

Bonselle & De Forest; Little Women Letters from the Home of Alcott.

Cheney; Life and Letters of Louisa Alcott.

Morris, Clara; Life on the Stage.

Outlook, Outing, Century, Munsey, Hist. Mag., Etc.

Christian; History of Richmond.

Anonymous; Famous Prison Escapes.

Anonymous; Richmond Prisons.

McMasters; Primary History of United States.

Memorial to Clara Barton.

Hyphenation has been made consistent without note; it has been left unchanged where there is
variation in quotations.

Page 128 had an obscured section of text, which reads "... then the children must [blank] back
after school hours." In the context, and with the space and few visible marks, the missing
text would seem to be "be rowed" so those words have been used.

Page 258 contains a quotation which includes the term "scrape-goat" which would appear to be
a deliberate spelling on the part of the writer rather than a printing error. It has therefore
been retained.