  "The unmitigated blackguards and miserable spalpeens who
  raised the standard of revolt against the brave and gallant
  O'Mahony are knocked into the most infinitesimal
  smithereens, and chawed up until there is not as much left
  of them as remained after the tooth-and-nail conflict of the
  Kilkenny cats.  The blessed and holy St Patrick (may the
  heavens be his bed in glory!) never more thoroughly
  extinguished the toads, snakes, bedbugs, mosquitoes, and
  varmint in general, which he drove out of Ould Ireland, than
  O'Mahony, the gallant Head Centre, squelched, exterminated,
  crushed out, and extinguished the cantankerous Senators and
  rebellious disciples of the brotherhood who thought to
  clutch the evergreen laurels and verdant greenbacks with
  which a patriotic and confiding people have encircled his
  brow and lined his wallet.  As the blessed St Patrick afore
  said compelled the varmints to betake themselves to the
  swamps and morasses, and `chased the frogs into the bogs,'
  so the redoubtable 0'Mahony has compelled the rebellious
  Fenians to hide their diminished heads and betake themselves
  to the recesses of oblivion, where their contortions will be
  watched by the observer of futurity, as the visitors of
  Blarney Castle are edified by the gambols of the 'comely
  eels in the verdant mud.'  The brave 0'Mahony has come forth
  from the contest like gold from the crucible, or whisky from
  the still, purified, etherealised, and elevated, while his
  antagonists have shrunk away like dross or swill, never more
  to mingle with the Olympian deliberation, and Jove-like
  councils of the Moffatt Mansion.  Instead of participating
  in these august deliberations, they will go back to their
  shanties, and there behold the glories they are unworthy to
  share.  As if the O'Mahony bludgeon had not knocked the
  breath completely out of the revolters, the idolised
  Stephens, who, like the Roman Curtius, jumped into the gulf
  of Irish nationality, published a letter and a proclamation
  which must satisfy the public that the recreants 'kilt
  intirely,' and may as well give their neighbours a pleasant
  wake and a decent burial as expect to survive the period of
  their inevitable dissolution.  His proclamation comes down
  on them like a shillaly in Donnybrook; and if it does not
  ventilate their skulls, it is because those cranial
  envelopes are as impervious to physical force as to the
  gentle influence of reason or patriotism.  Having demolished
  the rebellious Senate and their backers, the next thing
  0'Mahony has to do is to wipe out the bloody Saxon and
  re-establish the nationality of the Emerald Isle as it
  existed in the days of Brian Boru.  As Queen Victoria is a
  woman, we do not expect to see her locked up like Jeff.
  Davis, but she will be allowed to emigrate to New York, and
  open a boarding-school or a dry-goods store, where she will
  remain unmolested as long as she behaves herself."

JOHN CAMDEN HOTTEN, Piccadilly, W.  Jan. 30, 1865.

                                           To Home, April 1866.

The Finians conveened in our town the other night, and took steps toord freein Ireland. God is
a law TO nature. It is his WILL that things so should be; and when it is his will they will not
be so, but otherwise.

Not LAWS of nature, but the SPIRIT of God, as the Psalms truly say,
gives life and breath to all things. Of him and by him is all.
And it's all owin to my own improodens. Not feelin like eating a full meal when the cars stopt
for dinner, in the South, where I lately was, I went into a Resterater and et 20 hard biled
eggs.  I think they effected my Liver.

My wife says, Po, po.  She says I've got a splendid liver for a man of my time of life.  I've
heard of men's livers gradooally wastin' away till they hadn't none.  It's a dreadful thing
when a man's liver gives him the shake.

Two years ago comin this May, I had a 'tack of fever-'n-ager, and by the advice of Miss Peasley
who continues single and is correspondinly unhappy in the same ratios I consulted a Spiritul
mejum--a writin' mejum.  I got a letter from a cel'brated Injin chief, who writ me, accordin
to the mejum, that he'd been ded two hundred and seventeen (217) years, and liked it.  He then
said, let the Pale face drink sum yarb tea.  I drinkt it, and it really helpt me.  I've writ
to this talented savige this time thro' the same mejum, but as yet I hain't got any answer.
Perhaps he's in a spear where they haint' got any postage stamps.

But thanks to careful nussin, I'm improvin rapid.

The Town Hall was jam-full of peple, mostly Irish citizens, and the enthusiasm was immense.
They cheer'd everybody and everything. They cheer'd me.

"Hurroo for Ward!  Hurroo!"

They was all good nabers of mine, and I ansered in a pleasant voice, "All right, boys, all
right.  Mavoorneen, och hone, aroon, Cooshla macree!"

These Irish remarks bein' received with great applaus, I added, "Mushler! mushler!"

"Good! good!" cried Captain Spingler, who desires the Irish vote for country clerk; "that's
fus' rate."

"You see what I'm drivin at, don't you, Cap?" I said.

"Certainly."

"Well," I ansered, "I'm very glad you do, becaus I don't."

This made the Finians larf, and they said, "Walk up onto the speaker's platform sir."

The speeches was red hot agin England, and hir iron heel, and it was resolved to free Ireland
at onct.  But it was much desirable before freein her that a large quantity of funds should
be raised.  And, like the gen'rous souls as they was, funs was lib'rally contribooted.  Then
arose a excitin discussion as to which head center they should send 'em to--O'Mahony or McRoberts.
There was grate excitement over this, but it was finally resolved to send half to one and half
to 'tother.

Then Mr. Finnigan rose and said, "We have here to-night sum citizens of American birth, whom
we should be glad to hear.  It would fill our harts with speechless joy to hear from a man
whose name towers high in the zoological and wax-figger world--from whose pearly lips--

Says I, "Go slow, Finny, go slow."

"We wish to hear," continued Mr. Finnigan, moderatin his stile summut, "from our townsman,
Mr. Ward."

I beg'd to be declined, but it wan't no use.  I rose amid a perfeck uproar of applause.

I said we had convened there in a meetin, as I understood it, or rather in a body, as it were,
in reference to Ireland. I will begin by saying that there are several things in this chapter
which I do not understand, and cannot explain to you. Be it so. That is no reason why we should not
look at the parts of the chapter which we can understand and can
explain.  That's
the kind of man I be!"

Squire Thaxter interrupted me.  The Squire feels the wrongs of Ireland deeply, on accounts
of havin onct courted the widder of a Irish gentleman who had lingered in a loathsum dunjin
in Dublin, placed there by a English tarvern-keeper, who despotically wanted him to pay for
a quantity of chops and beer he had consoom'd. Besides, the Squire wants to be re-elected Justice
of the Peace. "Mr. Ward," he said, "you've bin drinkin.  You're under the infloo'nce of licker,
sir!"

Says I, "Squire, not a drop of good licker has passed my lips in fifteen years.

[Cries of "Oh, here now, that won't do."]

"It is troo," I said.  "Not a drop of good licker has passed my lips in all that time.  I don't
let it pass 'em.  I reach for it while it's goin by!" says I.  "Squire, harness me sum more!"

"I beg pardon," said the Squire, "for the remark; you are sober; but what on airth are you
drivin at?"

