Hopelessly unsystematic as Coleridge may have been, his significance in regard to the Utilitarians
is noteworthy. It is indicated in a famous article which J. S. Mill contributed to the Westminster
Review in March 1840.[636] Mill's concessions to Coleridge rather scandalised the faithful;
and it is enough to observe here that it marks the apogee of Mill's Benthamism. Influences,
of which I shall have to speak, had led him to regard his old creed as imperfect, and to assent
to great part of Coleridge's doctrine. Mill does not discuss the metaphysical or theological
views of the opposite school, though he briefly intimates his dissent. But it is interesting
to observe how Coleridge impressed a disciple of Bentham. The vine, on the other hand, cannot be
cultivated to any extent if the mean temperature be above 72 deg. Fahr. Such, then, must have
been the temperature of Palestine, in former ages; and by all that is known of its present
climate, the mean temperature seems to be the same now. Nor has the time of harvest undergone any change.
Snow and ice, which were known, though rarely, in ancient times, are occasionally met with now
and at present, as in former times. The error of the French philosophers had been their negative
and purely critical tendency. They had thought that it was enough to sweep away superstition,
priestcraft, and despotism, and that no constructive process was necessary. They had not perceived
the necessity of social discipline, of loyalty to rulers, or of patriotic feeling among the
subjects. They had, therefore, entirely failed to recognise the historical value of old creeds
and institutions, and had tried to remodel society 'without the binding forces which hold society
together.'[637] Hence, too, the philosophes came to despise history; and D'Alembert is said
to have wished that all record of past events could be blotted out. Their theory, in its popular
version at least, came to be that states and churches had been got up 'for the sole purpose
of picking people's pockets.'[638] This had become incredible to any intelligent reasoner,
and any Tory could prove that there was something good in the past. The peculiarity of the
'Germano-Coleridgian' school was that they saw beyond the immediate controversy. They were
the first to inquire with any power into 'the inductive laws of the existence and growth of
human society'; the first to recognise the importance of the great constructive principles;
and the first to produce not a piece of party advocacy, but 'a philosophy of society in the
only form in which it is yet possible, that of a philosophy of history.' Hence arose that 'series
of great writers and thinkers, from Herder to Michelet,' who have given to past history an
intelligible place in the gradual evolution of humanity.[639] This very forcible passage is
interesting in regard to Mill, and shows a very clear perception of some defects in his own
philosophy. It also raises an important question.

Accepting Mill's view, it is remarkable that the great error of his own school, which professed
to be based upon experience, was the rejection of history; and the great merit of the a priori
and 'intuitionist' school was precisely their insistence upon history. To this I shall have
to return hereafter. Meanwhile, Mill proceeds to show how Coleridge, by arguing from the 'idea'
of church and state, had at least recognised the necessity of showing that political and social
institutions must have a sufficient reason, and be justified by something more than mere obstinate
prejudice. Men like Pitt and Sir Robert Peel, if they accepted Coleridge's support, would have
to alter their whole position. Coleridge's defence of his ideal church was at once the severest
satire upon the existing body and a proof, as against Bentham and Adam Smith, of the advantages
of an endowed class for the cultivation and diffusion of learning. Coleridge, moreover, though
he objected to the Reform Bill, showed himself a better reformer than Lord John Russell. He
admitted what the Whigs refused to see, the necessity of diminishing the weight of the landowner
interest. Landowners were not to be ultimate sources of power, but to represent one factor
in a reasoned system. In short, by admitting that all social arrangements in some sense were
embodiments of reason, he admitted that they must also be made to conform to reason.

