We left Chalons on the morning of the 1st, in high spirits at the thought that there were but
little more than two hundred miles between us and Paris. In walking over the cold, muddy plain,
we passed a family of strolling musicians, who were sitting on a heap of stones by the roadside.
An ill-dressed, ill-natured man and woman, each carrying a violin, and a thin, squalid girl,
with a tamborine, composed the group. Their faces bore that unfeeling stamp, which springs
from depravity and degradation. When we had walked somewhat more than a mile, we overtook a
little girl, who was crying bitterly. By her features, from which the fresh beauty of childhood
had not been worn, and the steel triangle which was tied to her belt, we knew she belonged
to the family we had passed. Her dress was thin and ragged and a pair of wooden shoes but ill
protected her feet from the sharp cold. I stopped and asked her why she cried, but she did
not at first answer. However, by questioning, I found her unfeeling parents had sent her on
without food; she was sobbing with hunger and cold. Our pockets were full of bread and cheese
which we had bought for breakfast, and we gave her half a loaf, which stopped her tears at
once. She looked up and thanked us, smiling; and sitting down on a bank, began to eat as if
half famished.

The physiognomy of this region is very singular. It appears as if the country had been originally
a vast elevated plain, and some great power had scooped out, as with a hand, deep circular
valleys all over its surface. In winding along the high ridges, we often looked down, on either
side, into such hollows, several miles in diameter, and sometimes entirely covered with vineyards.
At La Rochepot, a quaint, antique village, lying in the bottom of one of these dells, we saw
the finest ruin of the middle ages that I have met with in France. An American lady had spoken
to me of it in Rome, and I believe Willis mentions it in his "Pencillings," but it is not described
in the guide books, nor could we learn what feudal lord had ever dwelt in its halls. It covers
the summit of a stately rock, at whose foot the village is crouched, and the green ivy climbs
up to the very top of its gray towers.

As the road makes a wide curve around the side of the hill, we descended to the village by
the nearer foot-path, and passed among its low, old houses, with their pointed gables and mossy
roofs. The path led close along the foot of the rock, and we climbed up to the ruin, and stood
in its grass-grown courtyard. Only the outer walls and the round towers at each corner are
left remaining; the inner part has been razed to the ground, and where proud barons once marshalled
their vassals, the villagers now play their holiday games. On one side, several Gothic windows
are left standing, perfect, though of simple construction, and in the towers we saw many fire-places
and door-ways of richly cut stone, which looked as fresh as if just erected.

We passed the night at Ivry (not the Ivry which gained Henri Quatre his kingdom) and then continued
our march over roads which I can only compare to our country roads in America during the spring
thaw. In addition to this, the rain commenced early in the morning and continued all day, so
that we were completely wet the whole time. The plains, too high and cold to produce wine,
were varied by forests of beech and oak, and the population was thinly scattered over them
in small villages. Travelers generally complain very much of the monotony of this part of France,
and, with such dreary weather, we could not disagree with them.

As the day wore on, the rain increased, and the sky put on that dull, gray cast, which denotes
a lengthened storm. We were fain to stop at nightfall, but there was no inn near at hand--not
even a hovel of a cabaret in which to shelter ourselves, and, on enquiring of the wagoners,
we received the comforting assurance that there was yet a league and a half to the nearest
stopping place. On, then, we went, with the pitiless storm beating in our faces and on our
breasts, till there was not a dry spot left, except what our knapsacks covered. We could not
have been more completely saturated if we had been dipped in the Yonne. At length, after two
hours of slipping and sliding along in the mud and wet and darkness, we reached Saulieu, and,
by the warm fire, thanked our stars that the day's dismal tramp was over.

By good or bad luck (I have not yet decided which) a vehicle was to start the next morning
for Auxerre, distant sixty miles, and the fare being but five francs, we thought it wisest
to take places. It was always with reluctance that we departed from our usual mode of traveling,
but, in the present instance, the circumstances absolutely compelled it.

Next morning, at sunrise, we took our seats in a large, square vehicle on two wheels, calculated
for six persons and a driver, with a single horse. But, as he was fat and round as an elephant,
and started off at a brisk pace, and we were well protected from the rain, it was not so bad
after all, barring the jolts and jarred vertebræ. We drove on, over the same dreary expanse
of plain and forest, passing through two or three towns in the course of the day, and by evening
had made somewhat more than half our journey. Owing to the slowness of our fresh horse, we
were jolted about the whole night, and did not arrive at Auxerre until six o'clock in the morning.
After waiting an hour in a hotel beside the rushing Yonne, a lumbering diligence was got ready,
and we were given places to Paris for seven francs. As the distance is one hundred and ten
miles, this would be considered cheap, but I should not want to travel it again and be paid
for doing so. Twelve persons were packed into a box not large enough for a cow, and no cabinet-maker
ever dove-tailed the corners of his bureaus tighter than we did our knees and nether extremities.
It is my lot to be blessed with abundance of stature, and none but tall persons can appreciate
the misery of sitting for hours with their joints in an immovable vice. The closeness of the
atmosphere--for the passengers would not permit the windows to be opened for fear of taking
cold--combined with loss of sleep, made me so drowsy that my head was continually falling on
my next neighbor, who, being a heavy country lady, thrust it indignantly away. I would then
try my best to keep it up awhile, but it would droop gradually, till the crash of a bonnet
or a smart bump against some other head would recall me, for a moment, to consciousness.

We passed Joigny, on the Yonne, Sens, with its glorious old cathedral, and at dusk reached
Montercau, on the Seine. This was the scene of one of Napoleon's best victories, on his return
from Elba. In driving over the bridge, I looked down on the swift and swollen current, and
hoped that its hue might never be darkened again so fearfully as the last sixty years have
witnessed. No river in Europe has such an association connected with it. We think of the Danube,
for its majesty, of the Rhine, for its wild beauty, but of the Seine--for its blood! 

It may seem arrogant for an obscure and nameless individual to claim
the glory of having put to death the most formidable of all recorded
heroes.

    But a shadowy champion may be overthrown
      by a shadowy antagonist. Many a terrific
    spectre has been laid by the beams
      of a halfpenny candle. And if I have
    succeeded in making out, in the foregoing
      pages, a probable case of suspicion,
    it must, I think, be admitted, that there
      is some ground for my present boast, of having killed Napoleon Buonaparte.

 With matted hair, wild, glaring eyes, and dusty and dishevelled
habiliments, we entered the gay capital, and blessed every stone upon which we placed our feet,
in the fulness of our joy.

In paying our fare at Auxerre, I was obliged to use a draft on the banker, Rougemont de Lowenberg.
The ignorant conductor hesitated to change this, but permitted us to go, on condition of keeping
it until we should arrive. Therefore, on getting out of the diligence, after forty-eight hours
of sleepless and fasting misery, the facteur of the office went with me to get it paid, leaving
B---- to wait for us. I knew nothing of Paris, and this merciless man kept me for three hours
at his heels, following him on all his errands, before he did mine, in that time traversing
the whole length of the city, in order to leave a chèvre-feuille at an aristocratic residence
in the Faubourg St. Germain. Yet even combined weariness and hunger could not prevent me from
looking with vivid interest down a long avenue, at the Column of the place Vendôme, in passing,
and gazing up in wonder at the splendid portico of the Madeleine. But of anything else I have
a very faint remembrance. "You can eat breakfast, now, I think," said he, when we returned,
"we have walked more than four leagues!"

I know we will be excused, that, instead of hurrying away to Notre Dame or the Louvre, we sat
down quietly to a most complete breakfast. Even the most romantic must be forced to confess
that admiration does not sit well on an empty stomach. Our first walk was to a bath, and then,
with complexions several shades lighter, and limbs that felt us if lifted by invisible wings,
we hurried away to the Post Office. I seized the welcome missives from my far home, with a
beating heart, and hastening back, read till the words became indistinct in the twilight.

CHAPTER XLV.

POETICAL SCENES IN PARIS.

What a gay little world in miniature this is! I wonder not that the French, with their exuberant
gaiety of spirit, should revel in its ceaseless tides of pleasure, as if it were an earthly
Elysium. I feel already the influence of its cheerful atmosphere, and have rarely threaded
the crowds of a stranger city, with so light a heart as I do now daily, on the thronged banks
of the Seine. And yet it would be difficult to describe wherein consists this agreeable peculiarity.
You can find streets as dark and crooked and dirty anywhere in Germany, and squares and gardens
as gay and sunny beyond the Alps, and yet they would affect you far differently. You could
not, as here, divest yourself of every particle of sad or serious thought and be content to
gaze for hours on the showy scene, without an idea beyond the present moment. It must be that
the spirit of the croud is magnetically contagious.

The evening of our arrival we walked out past the massive and stately Hotel de Ville, and took
a promenade along the Quais. The shops facing the river presented a scene of great splendor.
Several of the Quais on the north bank of the Seine are occupied almost entirely by jewellers,
the windows of whose shops, arranged in a style of the greatest taste, make a dazzling display.
Rows of gold watches and chains are arranged across the crystal panes, and heaped in pyramids
on long glass slabs; cylindrical wheels of wire, hung with jewelled breastpins and earrings,
turn slowly around by some invisible agency, displaying row after row of their glittering treasures.

From the centre of the Pont Neuf, we could see for a long distance up and down the river. The
different bridges traced on either side a dozen starry lines through the dark air, and a continued
blaze lighted the two shores in their whole length, revealing the outline of the Isle da la
Cité. I recognized the Palaces of the Louvre and the Tuileries in the dusky mass beyond. Eastward,
looming against the dark sky, I could faintly trace the black towers of Notre Dame, The rushing
of the swift waters below mingled with the rattling of a thousand carts and carriages, and
the confusion of a thousand voices, till it seemed like some grand nightly festival.

I first saw Notre Dame by moonlight. The shadow of its stupendous front was thrown directly
towards me, hiding the innumerable lines of the ornamental sculpture which cover its tall,
square towers. I walked forward until the interlacing, Moorish arches between them stood full
against the moon, and the light, struggling through the quaint openings of the tracery, streamed
in silver lines down into the shadow. The square before it was quite deserted, for it stands
on a lonely part of the Isle de la Cité, and it looked thus far more majestic and solemn than
in the glaring daylight.

The great quadrangle of the Tuileries encloses the Place du Carrousel, in the centre of which
stands a triumphal arch, erected by Napoleon after his Italian victories. Standing in the middle
of this arch, you look through the open passage in the central building of the palace, into
the Gardens beyond. Further on, in a direct line, the middle avenue of the Gardens extends
away to the Place de la Concorde, where the Obelisk of Luxor makes a perpendicular line through
your vista; still further goes the broad avenue through the Elysian Fields, until afar off,
the Arc de l'Etoile, two miles distant, closes this view through the palace doorway.

Let us go through it, and on, to the Place de la Concorde, reserving the Gardens for another
time. What is there in Europe--nay, in the world,--equal to this? In the centre, the mighty
obelisk of red granite pierces the sky,--on either hand showers of silver spray are thrown
up from splendid bronze fountains--statues and pillars of gilded bronze sweep in a grand circle
around the square, and on each side magnificent vistas lead the eye off, and combine the distant
with the near, to complete this unparalleled view! Eastward, beyond the tall trees in the garden
of the Tuileries, rises the long front of the Palace, with the tri-color floating above; westward,
in front of us, is the Forest of the Elysian Fields, with the arch of triumph nearly a mile
and a half distant, looking down from the end of the avenue, at the Barriere de Neuilly. To
the right and left are the marble fronts of the Church of the Madeleine and the Chamber of
Deputies, the latter on the other side of the Seine. Thus the groves and gardens of Paris--the
palace of her kings--the proud monument of her sons' glory--and the masterpieces of modern
French architecture are all embraced in this one splendid coup d'oeil.

Following the motley multitude to the bridge, I crossed and made my way to the Hotel des Invalides.
Along the esplanade, playful companies of children were running and tumbling in their sports
over the green turf, which was as fresh as a meadow; while, not the least interesting feature
of the scene, numbers of scarred and disabled veterans, in the livery of the Hospital, basked
in the sunshine, watching with quiet satisfaction the gambols of the second generation they
have seen arise. What tales could they not tell, those wrinkled and feeble old men! What visions
of Marengo and Austerlitz and Borodino shift still with a fiery vividness through their fading
memories! Some may have left a limb on the Lybian desert; and the sabre of the Cossack may
have scarred the brows of others. They witnessed the rising and setting of that great meteor,
which intoxicated France with such a blaze of power and glory, and now, when the recollection
of that wonderful period seems almost like a stormy dream, they are left to guard the ashes
of their ancient General, brought back from his exile to rest in the bosom of his own French
people. It was to me a touching and exciting thing, to look on those whose eyes had witnessed
the filling up of such a fated leaf in the world's history.

Entrance is denied to the tomb of Napoleon until it is finished, which will not be for three
or four yours yet. I went, however, into the "Church of the Banners"--a large chapel, hung
with two or three hundred flags taken by the armies of the Empire. The greater part of them
were Austrian and Russian. It appeared to be empty when I entered, but on looking around, I
saw an old gray-headed soldier kneeling at one side. His head was bowed over his hands, and
he seemed perfectly absorbed in his thoughts. Perhaps the very tattered banners which hung
down motionless above his head, he might have assisted in conquering. I looked a moment on
those eloquent trophies, and then noiselessly withdrew.

There is at least one solemn spot near Paris; the laughing winds that come up from the merry
city sink into sighs under the cypress boughs of Pere Lachaise. And yet it is not a gloomy
place, but full of a serious beauty, fitting for a city of the dead. I shall never forget the
sunny afternoon when I first entered its gate and walked slowly up the hill, between rows of
tombs, gleaming white amid the heavy foliage, while the green turf around them was just beginning
to be starred by the opening daisies, From the little chapel on its summit I looked back at
the blue spires of the city, whose roar of life dwindled to a low murmur. Countless pyramids,
obelisks and urns, rising far and wide above the cedars and cypresses, showed the extent of
the splendid necropolis, which is inhabited by pale, shrouded emigrants from its living sister
below. The only sad part of the view, was the slope of the hill alloted to the poor, where
legions of plain black crosses are drawn up into solid squares on its side and stand alone
gloomy--the advanced guard of the army of Death! I mused over the tombs of Molière and La Fontaine;
Massena, Mortier and Lefebre; General Foy and Casimir Perier; and finally descended to the
shrine where Abelard reposes by the side of his Heloise. The old sculptured tomb, brought away
from the Paraclete, still covers their remains, and pious hands (of lovers, perhaps,) keep
fresh the wreaths of immortelles above their marble effigies.

In the Theatre Français, I saw Rachel, the actress. She appeared in the character of "Virginia,"
in a tragedy of that name, by the poet Latour. Her appearance as she came upon the stage alone,
convinced me she would not belie her renown. She is rather small in stature, with dark, piercing
eyes and rich black hair; her lips are full, but delicately formed, and her features have a
marked yet flexible outline, which conveys the minutest shades of expression. Her voice is
clear, deep and thrilling, and like sonic grand strain of music, there is power and meaning
in its slightest modulations. Her gestures embody the very spirit of the character; she has
so perfectly attained that rare harmony of thought, sound and action, or rather, that unity
of feeling which renders them harmonious, that her acting seems the unstudied, irrepressible
impulse of her soul. With the first sentence she uttered, I forgot Rachel. I only saw the innocent
Roman girl; I awaited in suspense and with a powerful sympathy, the developement of the oft-told
tragedy. My blood grew warm with indignation when the words of Appius roused her to anger,
and I could scarcely keep back my tears, when, with a voice broken by sobs, she bade farewell
to the protecting gods of her father's hearth.

Among the bewildering variety of ancient ornaments and implements in the Egyptian Gallery of
the Louvre, I saw an object of startling interest. A fragment of the Iliad, written nearly
three thousand years ago! One may even dare to conjecture that the torn and half-mouldered
slip of papyrus, upon which he gazes, may have been taken down from the lips of the immortal
Chiun. The eyes look on those faded characters, and across the great gulf of Time, the soul
leaps into the Past, brought into shadowy nearness by a mirage of the mind. There, as in the
desert, images start up, vivid, yet of a vague and dreamy beauty. We see the olive groves of
Greece--white-robed youths and maidens sit in the shade of swaying boughs--and one of them
reads aloud, in words that sound like the clashing of shields, the deeds of Achilles.

As we step out the western portal of the Tuileries, a beautiful scene greets us. We look on
the palace garden, fragrant with flowers and classic with bronze copies of ancient sculpture.
Beyond this, broad gravel walks divide the flower-bordered lawns and ranks of marble demigods
and heroes look down on the joyous crowd. Children troll their hoops along the avenues or skip
the rope under the clipped lindens, whose boughs are now tinged a pale yellow by the bursting
buds. The swans glide about on a pond in the centre, begging bread of the bystanders, who watch
a miniature ship which the soft breeze carries steadily across. Paris is unseen, but heard,
on every side; only the Column of Luxor and the Arc de Triomphe rise blue and grand above the
top of the forest. What with the sound of voices, the merry laughter of the children and a
host of smiling faces, the scene touches a happy chord in one's heart, and he mingles with
it, lost in pleasant reverie, till the sounds fade away with the fading light.

Just below the Baths of the Louvre, there are several floating barges belonging to the washer-women,
anchored at the foot of the great stone staircase leading down to the water. They stand there
day after day, beating their clothes upon flat boards and rinsing them in the Seine. One day
there seemed to have been a wedding or some other cause of rejoicing among them, for a large
number of the youngest were talking in great glee on one of the platforms of the staircase,
while a handsome, German-looking youth stood near, with a guitar slung around his neck. He
struck up a lively air, and the girls fell into a droll sort of a dance. They went at it heavily
and roughly enough, but made up in good humor what they lacked in grace; the older members
of the craft looked up from their work with satisfaction and many shouts of applause wore sent
down to them from the spectators on the Quai and the Pont Neuf. Not content with this, they
seized on some luckless men who were descending the steps, and clasping them with their powerful
right arms, spun them around like so many tops and sent them whizzing off at a tangent. Loud
bursts of laughter greeted this performance, and the stout river maidens returned to their
dance with redoubled spirit.

Yesterday, the famous procession of the "boeuf gras" took place for the second time, with great
splendor. The order of march had been duly announced beforehand, and by noon all the streets
and squares through which it was to pass, were crowded with waiting spectators. Mounted gens
d'armes rode constantly to and fro, to direct the passage of vehicles and keep an open thoroughfare.
Thousands of country peasants poured into the city, the boys of whom were seen in all directions,
blowing distressingly through hollow ox-horns. Altogether, the spirit of nonsense which animated
the crowd, displayed itself very amusingly.

A few mounted guards led the procession, followed by a band of music. Then appeared Roman lictors
and officers of sacrifice, leading Dagobert, the famous bull of Normandy, destined to the honor
of being slaughtered as the Carnival beef. He trod rather tenderly, finding, no doubt, a difference
between the meadows of Caen and the pavements of Paris, and I thought he would have been willing
to forego his gilded horns and flowery crown, to get back there again. His weight was said
to be four thousand pounds, and the bills pompously declared that he had no rival in France,
except the elephant in the Jardin des Plantes.

After him came the farmer by whom he was raised, and M. Roland, the butcher of the carnival,
followed by a hundred of the same craft, dressed as cavaliers of the different ages of France.
They made a very showy appearance, although the faded velvet and soiled tinsel of their mantles
were rather too apparent by daylight.

After all these had gone by, came an enormous triumphal car, very profusely covered with gilding
and ornamental flowers. A fellow with long woollen hair and beard, intended to represent Time,
acted as driver. In the car, under a gilded canopy, reposed a number of persons, in blue silk
smocks and yellow "fleshtights," said to be Venus, Apollo, the Graces, &c. but I endeavored
in vain to distinguish one divinity from another. However, three children on the back seat,
dressed in the same style, with the addition of long flaxy ringlets, made very passable Cupids.
This closed the march; which passed onward towards the Place de la Concorde, accompanied by
the sounds of music and the shouts of the mob. The broad, splendid line of Boulevards, which
describe a semi-circle around the heart of the city, were crowded, and for the whole distance
of three miles, it required no slight labor to make one's way. People in masks and fancy costumes
were continually passing and re-passing, and I detected in more than one of the carriages,
checks rather too fair to suit the slouched hunter's hats which shaded them. It seemed as if
all Paris was taking a holiday, and resolved to make the most of it.

CHAPTER XLVI.

A GLIMPSE OF NORMANDY.

After a residence of five weeks, which, in spite of some few troubles, passed away quickly
and delightfully, I turned my back on Paris. It was not regret I experienced on taking my seat
in the cars for Versailles, but that feeling of reluctance with which we leave places whose
brightness and gaiety force the mind away from serious toil. Steam, however, cuts short all
sentiment, and in much less time than it takes to bid farewell to a German, we had whizzed
past the Place d'Europe, through the barrier, and were watching the spires start up from the
receding city, on the way to St. Cloud.

At Versailles I spent three hours in a hasty walk through the palace, which allowed but a bare
glance at the gorgeous paintings of Horace Vernet. His "Taking of Constantine" has the vivid
look of reality. The white houses shine in the sun, and from the bleached earth to the blue
and dazzling sky, there seems to hang a heavy, scorching atmosphere. The white smoke of the
artillery curls almost visibly off the canvass, and the cracked and half-sprung walls look
as if about to topple down on the besiegers. One series of halls is devoted to the illustration
of the knightly chronicles of France, from the days of Charlemagne to those of Bayard and Gaston
de Foix. Among these pictured legends, I looked with the deepest interest on that of the noble
girl of Orleans. Her countenance--the same in all these pictures and in a beautiful statue
of her, which stands in one of the corridors--is said to be copied from an old and well-authenticated
portrait. United to the sweetness and purity of peasant beauty, she has the lofty brow and
inspired expression of a prophetess. There is a soft light in her full blue eye that does not
belong to earth. I wonder not the soldiery deemed her chosen by God to lead them to successful
battle; had I lived in those times I could have followed her consecrated banner to the ends
of the earth. In the statue, she stands musing, with her head drooping forward, as if the weight
of the breastplate oppressed her woman's heart; the melancholy soul which shines through the
marble seems to forebode the fearful winding-up of her eventful destiny.

The afternoon was somewhat advanced, by the time I had seen the palace and gardens. After a
hurried dinner at a restaurant, I shouldered my knapsack and took the road to St. Germain.
The day was gloomy and cheerless, and I should have felt very lonely but for the thought of
soon reaching England. There is no time of the year more melancholy than a cold, cloudy day
in March; whatever may be the beauties of pedestrian traveling in fairer seasons, my experience
dictates that during winter storms and March glooms, it had better be dispensed with. However,
I pushed on to St. Germain, threaded its long streets, looked down from the height over its
magnificent tract of forest and turned westward down the Seine. Owing to the scantiness of
villages, I was obliged to walk an hour and a half in the wind and darkness, before I reached
a solitary inn. As I opened the door and asked for lodging, the landlady inquired if I had
the necessary papers. I answered in the affirmative and was admitted. While I was eating supper,
they prepared their meal on the other end of the small table and sat down together. They fell
into the error, so common to ignorant persons, of thinking a foreigner could not understand
them, and began talking quite unconcernedly about me. "Why don't he take the railroad?" said
the old man: "he must have very little money--it would be bad for us if he had none." "Oh!"
remarked his son, "if he had none, he would not be sitting there so quiet and unconcerned."
I thought there was some knowledge of human nature in this remark. "And besides," added the
landlady, "there is no danger for us, for we have his passport." Of course I enjoyed this in
secret, and mentally pardoned their suspicions, when I reflected that the high roads between
Paris and London are frequented by many imposters, which makes the people naturally mistrustful.
I walked all the next day through a beautiful and richly cultivated country. The early fruit
trees were bursting into bloom, and the farmers led out their cattle to pasturage in the fresh
meadows. The scenery must be delightful in summer--worthy of all that has been said or sung
about lovely Normandy. On the morning of the third day, before reaching Rouen, I saw at a distance
the remains of Chateau Galliard, the favorite castle of Richard Coeur de Lion. Rouen breathes
everywhere of the ancient times of Normandy. Nothing can be more picturesque than its quaint,
irregular wooden houses, and the low, mossy mills, spanning the clear streams which rush through
its streets. The Cathedral, with its four towers, rises from among the clustered cottages like
a giant rook, split by the lightning and worn by the rains of centuries is into a thousand
fantastic shapes.

Resuming my walk in the afternoon, I climbed the heights west of the city, and after passing
through a suburb four or five miles in length, entered the vale of the Cailly. This is one
of the sweetest scenes in France. It lies among the woody hills like a Paradise, with its velvet
meadows and villas and breathing gardens. The grass was starred with daisies and if I took
a step into the oak and chesnut woods, I trampled on thousands of anemones and fragrant daffodils.
The upland plain, stretching inward from the coast, wears a different character. As I ascended,
towards evening, and walked over its monotonous swells, I felt almost homesick beneath its
saddening influence. The sun, hazed over with dull clouds, gave out that cold and lifeless
light which is more lonely than complete darkness. The wind, sweeping dismally over the fields,
sent clouds of blinding dust down the road, and as it passed through the forests, the myriads
of fine twigs sent up a sound as deep and grand as the roar of a roused ocean. Every chink
of the Norman cottage where I slept, whistled most drearily, and as I looked out the little
window of my room, the trees were swaying in the gloom, and long, black clouds scudded across
the sky. Though my bed was poor and hard, it was a sublime sound that cradled me into slumber.
Homer might have used it as the lullaby of Jove.

My last day on the continent came. I rose early and walked over the hills towards Dieppe. The
scenery grew more bleak as I approached the sea, but the low and sheltered valleys preserved
the pastoral look of the interior. In the afternoon, as I climbed a long, elevated ridge, over
which a strong northwester was blowing, I was struck with a beautiful rustic church, in one
of the dells below me. While admiring its neat tower I had gained unconsciously the summit
of the hill, and on turning suddenly around, lo! there was the glorious old Atlantic stretching
far before and around me! A shower was sweeping mistily along the horizon and I could trace
the white line of the breakers that foamed at the foot of the cliffs. The scene came over me
like a vivid electric shock, and I gave an involuntary shout, which might have been heard in
all the valleys around. After a year and a half of wandering over the continent, that gray
ocean was something to be revered and loved, for it clasped the shores of my native America.

I entered Dieppe in a heavy shower, and after finding an inn suited to my means and obtaining
a permis d'embarquement from the police office, I went out to the battlements and looked again
on the sea. The landlord promised to call me in time for the boat, but my anxiety waked me
sooner, and mistaking the strokes of the cathedral bell, I shouldered my knapsack and went
down to the wharf at one o'clock. No one was stirring on board the boat, and I was obliged
to pace the silent, gloomy streets of the town for two hours. I watched the steamer glide out
on the rainy channel, and turning into the topmost berth, drew the sliding curtain and strove
to keep out cold and sea-sickness. But it was unavailing; a heavy storm of snow and rain rendered
our passage so dreary that I did not stir until we were approaching the chain pier of Brighton.

I looked out on the foggy shores of England with a feeling of relief; my tongue would now be
freed from the difficult bondage of foreign languages, and my ears be rejoiced with the music
of my own. After two hours' delay at the Custom House, I took my seat in an open car for London.
The day was dull and cold; the sun resembled a milky blotch in the midst of a leaden sky. I
sat and shivered, as we flew onward, amid the rich, cultivated English scenery. At last the
fog grew thicker; the road was carried over the tops of houses; the familiar dome of St. Paul's
stood out above the spires; and I was again in London!

My circumstances, on arriving at London, were again very reduced. A franc and a half constituted
the whole of my funds. This, joined to the knowledge of London expenses, rendered instant exertion
necessary, to prevent still greater embarrassment. I called on a printer the next morning,
hoping to procure work, but found, as I had no documents with me to show I had served a regular
apprenticeship, this would be extremely difficult, although workmen were in great demand. Mr.
Putnam, however, on whom I had previously called, gave me employment for a time in his publishing
establishment, and thus I was fortunately enabled to await the arrival of a remittance from home. 

Then those kings spake kindly unto the men of Paris, saying, Be of good cheer, there shall no
harm happen unto you. Then were the men of Paris glad, and said, Napoleon is a tyrant; he
shall no more rule over us. Also all the princes, the judges, the counsellors, and the captains
whom Napoleon had raised up even from the lowest of the people, sent unto Lewis the brother of
King Lewis, whom they had slain, and made him king over France." ...

... ... ... ... ... ... ...

"And when Napoleon saw that the kingdom
was departed from him, he said unto the rulers which came against
him, Let me, I pray you, give the kingdom unto my son: but they would
not hearken unto him.

Then he spake yet again, saying, Let me, I pray you, go and live in the island of Elba, which is
over against Italy, nigh unto the coast of France; and ye shall give me an allowance for me and
my household, and the land of Elba also for a possession. So they made him ruler of Elba."...

...
... ... ... ... ... ...

"In those days the Pope returned unto his own land.

Now the French, and divers other nations of Europe, are servants of the Pope, and hold him
in reverence; but he is an abomination unto the Britons, and to the Prussians, and to the Russians,
and to the Swedes. Howbeit the French had taken away all his lands, and robbed him of all that
he had, and carried him away captive into France. But when the Britons, and the Prussians, and the
Russians, and the Swedes, and the rest of the nations that were confederate against France, came
thither, they caused the French to set the Pope at liberty, and to restore all his goods that
they had taken; likewise they gave him back all his possessions;
and he went home in peace, and ruled over his own city as in times
past."...

... ... ... ... ... ... ...

"And it came to pass when
Napoleon had not yet been a full year at Elba, that he said unto his
men of war that clave unto him, Go to, let us go back to France, and
fight against King Lewis, and thrust him out from being king.

    

    But on my mental vision rise
       Bright scenes of beauty still:
    Morn's splendor, evening's glowing skies,
       Valley, and grove, and hill.

    Nor can infirmities o'erwhelm
       The purer pleasures brought
    From the immortal spirit's realm
       Of feeling and of Thought!

    My heart! let not dismay or doubt
       In thee an entrance win!
    Thou hast enjoyed thyself without--
       Now seek thy joy within!

During breakfast he related to us a pleasant anecdote of Scott. He once wrote to the poet in
behalf of a young lady, who wished to have the description of Melrose, in the "Lay of the last
Minstrel," in the poet's own writing. Scott sent it, but added these lines to the conclusion:

    "Then go, and muse with deepest awe
    On what the writer never saw;
    Who would not wander 'neath the moon
    To see what he could see at noon!"

We went afterwards into Lockhart's library, which was full of interesting objects. I saw the
private diary of Scott, kept until within a short time of his death. It was melancholy to trace
the gradual failing of all his energies in the very wavering of the autograph. In a large volume
of his correspondence, containing letters from Campbell, Wordsworth, Byron, and all the distinguished
characters of the age, I saw Campbell's "Battle of the Baltic" in his own hand. I was highly
interested and gratified with the whole visit; the more so, as Mr. Lockhart had invited me
voluntarily, without previous acquaintance. I have since heard him spoken of in the highest
terms of esteem.

I went one Sunday to the Church of St. Stephen, to hear Croly, the poet. The service, read
by a drowsy clerk, was long and monotonous; I sat in a side-aisle, looking up at the dome,
and listening to the rain which dashed in torrents against the windowpanes. At last, a tall,
gray-haired man came down the passage. He bowed with a sad smile, so full of benevolence and
resignation, that it went into my heart at once, and I gave him an involuntary tribute of sympathy.
He has a heavy affliction to bear--the death of his gallant son, one of the officers who were
slain in the late battle of Ferozeshaw. His whole manner betrays the tokens of subdued but
constant grief.

His sermon was peculiarly finished and appropriate; the language was clear and forcible, without
that splendor of thought and dazzling vividness of imagery which mark "Salathiel." Yet I could
not help noticing that he delighted to dwell on the spiritualities of religion, rather than
its outward observances, which he seemed inclined to hurry over as lightly as possible. His
mild, gray eye and lofty forehead are more like the benevolent divine than the poet. I thought
of Salathiel, and looked at the dignified, sorrowful man before me. The picture of the accursed
Judean vanished, and his own solemn lines rang on my ear:

             "The mighty grave
              Wraps lord and slave,
    Nor pride, nor poverty dares come
    Within that prison-house, that tomb!"

Whenever I hear them, or think of them again, I shall see, in memory, Croly's calm, pale countenance.

    "The chimes, the chimes of Mother-land,
       Of England, green and old;
    That out from thane and ivied tower
       A thousand years have tolled!"

I often thought of Coxe's beautiful ballad, when, after a day spent in Waterloo Place, I have
listened, on my way homeward, to the chimes of Mary-le-bone Chapel, sounding sweetly and clearly
above all the din of the Strand. There is something in their silvery vibration, which is far
more expressive than the ordinary tones of a bell. The ear becomes weary of a continued toll--the
sound of some bells seems to have nothing more in it than the ordinary clang of metal--but
these simple notes, following one another so melodiously, fall on the ear, stunned by the ceaseless
roar of carriages or the mingled cries of the mob, as gently and gratefully as drops of dew.
Whether it be morning, and they ring out louder and deeper through the mist, or midnight, when
the vast ocean of being beneath them surges less noisily than its wont, they are alike full
of melody and poetry. I have often paused, deep in the night, to hear those clear tones, dropping
down from the darkness, thrilling, with their full, tremulous sweetness, the still air of the
lighted Strand, and winding away through dark, silent lanes and solitary courts, till the ear
of the care-worn watcher is scarcely stirred with their dying vibrations. They seemed like
those spirit-voices, which, at such times, speak almost audibly to the heart. How delicious
it must be, to those who dwell within the limits of their sound, to wake from some happy dream
and hear those chimes blending in with their midnight fancies, like the musical echo of the
promised bliss. I love these eloquent bells, and I think there must be many, living out a life
of misery and suffering, to whom their tones come with an almost human consolation. The natures
of the very cockneys, who never go without the horizon of their vibrations, is, to my mind,
invested with one hue of poetry!

A few days ago, an American friend invited me to accompany him to Greenwich Fair. We took a
penny steamer from Hungerford Market to London Bridge, and jumped into the cars, which go every
live minutes. Twelve minutes' ride above the chimneys of London and the vegetable-fields of
Rotherhithe and Deptford brought us to Greenwich, we followed the stream of people which was
flowing from all parts of the city into the Park.

Here began the merriment. We heard on every side the noise of the "scratchers," or, as the
venders of these articles denominated them--"the fun of the fair." By this is meant a little
notched wheel, with a piece of wood fastened on it, like a miniature watchman's rattle. The
"fun" consists in drawing them down the back of any one you pass, when they make a sound precisely
like that of ripping cloth. The women take great delight in this, and as it is only deemed
politeness to return the compliment, we soon had enough to do. Nobody seemed to take the diversion
amiss, but it was so irresistibly droll to see a large crowd engaged in this singular amusement,
that we both burst into hearty laughter.

As we began ascending Greenwich Hill, we were assailed with another kind of game. The ground
was covered with smashed oranges, with which the people above and below were stoutly pelting
each other. Half a dozen heavy ones whizzed uncomfortably near my head as I went up, and I
saw several persons get the full benefit of a shot on their backs and breasts. The young country
lads and lasses amused themselves by running at full spend down the steep side of a hill. This
was, however, a feat attended with some risk; for I saw one luckless girl describe an arc of
a circle, of which her feet was the centre and her body the radius. All was noise and nonsense.
They ran to and fro under the long, hoary bough of the venerable oaks that crest the summit,
and clattered down the magnificent forest-avenues, whose budding foliage gave them little shelter
from the passing April showers.

The view from the top is splendid. The stately Thames curves through the plain below, which
loses itself afar off in the mist; Greenwich, with its massive hospital, lies just at one's
feet, and in a clear day the domes of London skirt the horizon. The wood of the Park is entirely
oak--the majestic, dignified, English oak--which covers, in picturesque clumps, the sides and
summits of the two billowy hills. It must be a sweet place in summer, when the dark, massive
foliage is heavy on every mossy arm, and the smooth and curving sward shines with thousands
of field-flowers.

Owing to the showers, the streets were coated with mud, of a consistence as soft and yielding
as the most fleecy Persian carpet. Near the gate, boys were holding scores of donkeys, which
they offered us at threepence for a ride of two miles. We walked down towards the river, and
came at last to a group of tumblers, who with muddy hands and feet were throwing somersets
in the open street. I recognized them as old acquaintances of the Rue St. Antoine and the Champs
Elysées; but the little boy who cried before, because he did not want to bend his head and
foot into a ring, like a hoop-snake, had learned his part better by this time, so that he went
through it all without whimpering and came off with only a fiery red face. The exercises of
the young gentlemen were of course very graceful and classic, and the effect of their poses
of strength was very much heightened by the muddy foot-marks which they left on each other's
orange-colored skins.

The avenue of booths was still more diverting. Here under sheets of leaky awning, were exposed
for sale rows of gilded gingerbread kings and queens, and I cannot remember how many men and
women held me fast by the arms, determined to force me into buying a pound of them. We paused
at the sign: "SIGNOR URBANI'S GRAND MAGICAL DISPLAY." The title was attractive, so we paid
the penny admission, and walked behind the dark, mysterious curtain. Two bare brick walls,
three benches and a little boy appeared to us. A sheet hung before us upon which quivered the
shadow of some terrible head. At my friend's command, the boy (also a spectator) put out the
light, when the awful and grinning face of a black woman became visible. While we were admiring
this striking production, thus mysteriously revealed, Signor Urbani came in, and seeing no
hope of any more spectators, went behind the curtain and startled our sensitive nerves with
six or seven skeleton and devil apparitions, winding up the wonderful entertainment with the
same black head. We signified our entire approbation by due applause and then went out to seek
further novelties.

The centre of the square was occupied by swings, where some eight or ten boat-loads of persons
were flying topsy-turvy into the air, making one giddy to look at them, and constant fearful
shrieks arose from the lady swingers, at finding themselves in a horizontal or inverted position,
high above the ground. One of the machines was like a great wheel, with four cars attached,
which mounted and descended with their motley freight. We got into the boat by way of experiment.
The starting motion was pleasant, but very soon it flew with a swiftness and to a height rather
alarming. I began to repent having chosen such a mode of amusement, but held on as well as
I could, in my uneasy place. Presently we mounted till the long beam of our boat was horizontal;
at one instant, I saw three young ladies below me, with their heads downward, like a shadow
in the water--the next I was turned heels up, looking at thorn as a shadow does at its original.
I was fast becoming sea-sick, when, after a few minutes of such giddy soaring, the ropes were
slackened and we all got out, looking somewhat pale, and feeling nervous, if nothing else.

There were also many great tents, hung with boughs and lighted with innumerable colored lamps,
where the people danced their country dances in a choking cloud of dry saw-dust. Conjurors
and gymnastic performers were showing off on conspicuous platforms, and a continual sound of
drums, cymbals and shrill trumpets called the attention of the crowd to some "Wonderful Exhibition"--some
infant phenomenon, giant, or three-headed pig. A great part of the crowd belonged evidently
to the very worst part of society, but the watchfulness of the police prevented any open disorder.
We came away early and in a quarter of an hour were in busy London, leaving far behind us the
revel and debauch, which was prolonged through the whole night.

London has the advantage of one of the most gloomy atmospheres in the world. During this opening
spring weather, no light and scarcely any warmth can penetrate the dull, yellowish-gray mist,
which incessantly hangs over the city. Sometimes at noon we have for an hour or two a sickly
gleam of sunshine, but it is soon swallowed up by the smoke and drizzling fog. The people carry
umbrellas at all times, for the rain seems to drop spontaneously out of the very air, without
wailing for the usual preparation of a gathering cloud. Professor Espy's rules would be of
little avail here.

A few days ago we had a real fog--a specimen of November weather, as the people said. If November
wears such a mantle, London, during that sober month, must furnish a good idea of the gloom
of Hades. The streets wore wrapped in a veil of dense mist, of a dirty yellow color, as if
the air had suddenly grown thick and mouldy. The houses on the opposite sides of the street
were invisible, and the gas lamps, lighted in the shops, burned with a white and ghastly flame.
Carriages ran together in the streets, and I was kept constantly on the look-out, lest some
one should come suddenly out of the cloud around me, and we should meet with a shock like that
of two knights at a tournament. As I stood in the centre of Trafalgar Square, with every object
invisible around me, it reminded me, (hoping the comparison will not be accepted in every particular)
of Satan resting in the middle of Chaos. The weather sometimes continues thus for whole days
together.

April 26.--An hour and a half of land are still allowed us, and then we shall set foot on the
back of the oak-ribbed leviathan, which will be our home until a thousand leagues of blue ocean
are crossed. I shall hear the old Aldgate clock strike for the last time--I shall take a last
walk through the Minories and past the Tower yard, and as we glide down the Thames, St. Pauls,
half-hidden in mist and coal-smoke, will probably be my last glimpse of London.

CHAPTER XLVIII.

HOMEWARD BOUND----CONCLUSION.

We slid out of St. Katharine's Dock at noon on the appointed day, and with a pair of sooty
steamboats hitched to our vessel, moved slowly down the Thames in mist and drizzling rain.
I stayed on the wet deck all afternoon, that I might more forcibly and joyously feel we were
again in motion on the waters and homeward bound! My attention was divided between the dreary
views of Blackwall, Greenwich and Woolwich, and the motley throng of passengers who were to
form our ocean society. An English family, going out to settle in Canada, were gathered together
in great distress and anxiety, for the father had gone ashore in London at a late hour, and
was left behind. When we anchored for the night at Gravesend, their fears were quieted by his
arrival in a skiff from the shore, as he had immediately followed us by railroad.

My cousin and B---- had hastened on from Paris to join me, and a day before the sailing of
the "Victoria," we took berths in the second cabin, for twelve pounds ten shillings each, which
in the London line of packets, includes coarse but substantial fare for the whole voyage. Our
funds were insufficient to pay even this; but Captain Morgan, less mistrustful than my Norman
landlord, generously agreed that the remainder of the fare should be paid in America. B----
and I, with two young Englishmen, took possession of a State-room of rough boards, lighted
by a bull's-eye, which in stormy weather leaked so much that our trunks swam in water. A narrow
mattrass and blanket, with a knapsack for a pillow, formed a passable bed. A long entry between
the rooms, lighted by a feeble swinging lamp, was filled with a board table, around which the
thirty-two second cabin passengers met to discuss politics and salt pork, favorable winds and
hard sea-biscuit.

We lay becalmed opposite Sheerness the whole of the second day. At dusk a sudden squall came
up, which drove us foaming towards the North Foreland. When I went on deck in the morning,
we had passed Dover and Brighton, and the Isle of Wight was rising dim ahead of us. The low
English coast on our right was bordered by long reaches of dazzling chalky sand, which glittered
along the calm blue water.

Gliding into the Bay of Portsmouth, we dropped anchor opposite the romantic town of Ryde, built
on the sloping shore of the green Isle of Wight. Eight or nine vessels of the Experimental
Squadron were anchored near us, and over the houses of Portsmouth, I saw the masts of the Victory--the
flag-ship in the battle of Trafalgar, on board of which Nelson was killed. The wind was not
strong enough to permit the passage of the Needles, so at midnight we succeeded in wearing
back again into the channel, around the Isle of Wight. A head wind forced us to tack away towards
the shore of France. We were twice in sight of the rocky coast of Brittany, near Cherbourg,
but the misty promontory of Land's End was our last glimpse of the old world.

On one of our first days at sea, I caught a curlew, which came flying on weary wings towards
us, and alighted on one of the boats. Two of his brethren, too much exhausted or too timid
to do likewise, dropped flat on the waves and resigned themselves to their fate without a struggle.
I slipped up and caught his long, lank legs, while he was resting with flagging wings and half-shut
eyes. We fed him, though it was difficult to get anything down his reed-shaped bill; but he
took kindly to our force-work, and when we let him loose on the deck, walked about with an
air quite tame and familiar. He died, however, two days afterwards. A French pigeon, which
was caught in the rigging, lived and throve during the whole of the passage.

A few days afterwards, a heavy storm came on, and we were all sleepless and sea-sick, as long
as it lasted. Thanks, however, to a beautiful law of memory, the recollection of that dismal
period soon lost its unpleasantness, while the grand forms of beauty the vexed ocean presented,
will remain forever, as distinct and abiding images. I kept on deck as long as I could stand,
watching the giant waves over which our vessel took her course. They rolled up towards us,
thirty or forty feet in height--dark gray masses, changing to a beautiful vitriol tint, wherever
the light struck through their countless and changing crests. It was a glorious thing to see
our good ship mount slowly up the side of one of these watery lulls, till her prow was lifted
high in air, then, rocking over its brow, plunge with a slight quiver downward, and plough
up a briny cataract, as she struck the vale. I never before realized the terrible sublimity
of the sea. And yet it was a pride to see how man--strong in his godlike will--could bid defiance
to those whelming surges, and bravo their wrath unharmed.

We swung up and down on the billows, till we scarcely knew which way to stand. The most grave
and sober personages suddenly found themselves reeling in a very undignified manner, and not
a few measured their lengths on the slippery decks. Boxes and barrels were affected in like
manner; everything danced around us. Trunks ran out from under the berths; packages leaped
down from the shelves; chairs skipped across the rooms, and at table, knives, forks and mugs
engaged in a general waltz and break down. One incident of this kind was rather laughable.
One night, about midnight, the gale, which had been blowing violently, suddenly lulled, "as
if," to use a sailor's phrase, "it had been chopped off!" Instantly the ship gave a tremendous
lurch, which was the signal for a general breaking loose. Two or three others followed, so
violent, that for a moment I imagined the vessel had been thrown on her beam ends. Trunks,
crockery and barrels went banging down from one end of the ship to the other. The women in
the steerage set up an awful scream, and the German emigrants, thinking we were in terrible
danger, commenced praying with might and main. In the passage near our room stood several barrels,
filled with broken dishes, which at every lurch went banging from side to side, jarring the
board partition and making a horrible din. I shall not soon forget the Babel which kept our
eyes open that night.

The 19th of May a calm came on. Our white wings flapped idly on the mast, and only the top-gallant
sails were bent enough occasionally to lug us along at a mile an hour. A barque from Ceylon,
making the most of the wind, with every rag of canvass set, passed us slowly on the way eastward.
The sun went down unclouded, and a glorious starry night brooded over us. Its clearness and
brightness were to me indications of America. I longed to be on shore. The forests about home
were then clothed in the delicate green of their first leaves, and that bland weather embraced
the sweet earth like a blessing of heaven. The gentle breath from out the west seemed made
for the odor of violets, and as it came to me over the slightly-ruflled deep, I thought how
much sweeter it were to feel it, while "wasting in wood-paths the voluptuous hours."

Soon afterwards a fresh wind sprung up, which increased rapidly, till every sail was bent to
the full. Our vessel parted the brine with an arrowy glide, the ease and grace of which it
is impossible to describe. The breeze held on steadily for two or three days, which brought
us to the southern extremity of the Banks. Here the air felt so sharp and chilling, that I
was afraid we might be under the lee of an iceberg, but in the evening the dull gray mass of
clouds lifted themselves from the horizon, and the sun set in clear, American beauty away beyond
Labrador. The next morning we were enveloped in a dense fog, and the wind which bore us onward
was of a piercing coldness. A sharp look-out was kept on the bow, but as we could see but a
short distance, it might have been dangerous had we met one of the Arctic squadron. At noon
it cleared away again, and the bank of fog was visible a long time astern, piled along the
horizon, reminding me of the Alps, as seen from the plains of Piedmont.

On the 31st, the fortunate wind which carried us from the Banks, failed us about thirty-five
miles from Sandy Hook. We lay in the midst of the mackerel fishery, with small schooners anchored
all around us. Fog, dense and impenetrable, weighed on the moveless ocean, like an atmosphere
of wool. The only incident to break the horrid monotony of the day, was the arrival of a pilot,
with one or two newspapers, detailing the account of the Mexican War. We heard in the afternoon
the booming of the surf along the low beach of Long Island--hollow and faint, like the murmur
of a shell. When the mist lifted a little, we saw the faint line of breakers along the shore.
The Germans gathered on deck to sing their old, familiar songs, and their voices blended beautifully
together in the stillness.

Next morning at sunrise we saw Sandy Hook; at nine o'clock we were telegraphed in New York
by the station at Coney Island; at eleven the steamer "Hercules" met us outside the Hook; and
at noon we were gliding up the Narrows, with the whole ship's company of four hundred persons
on deck, gazing on the beautiful shores of Staten Island and agreeing almost universally, that
it was the most delightful scene they had ever looked upon.

And now I close the story of my long wandering, as I began it--with a lay written on the deep.

    HOMEWARD BOUND.

    Farewell to Europe! Days have come and gone
    Since misty England set behind the sea.
    Our ship climbs onward o'er the lifted waves,
    That gather up in ridges, mountain-high,
    And like a sea-god, conscious in his power,
    Buffets the surges. Storm-arousing winds
    That sweep, unchecked, from frozen Labrador,
    Make wintry music through the creaking shrouds.
    Th' horizon's ring, that clasps the dreary view,
    Lays mistily upon the gray Atlantic's breast.
    Shut out, at times, by bulk of sparry blue,
    That, rolling near us, heaves the swaying prow
    High on its shoulders, to descend again
    Ploughing a thousand cascades, and around
    Spreading the frothy foam. These watery gulfs,
    With storm, and winds far-sweeping, hem us in,
    Alone upon the waters!

                               Days must pass--
    Many and weary--between sea and sky.
    Our eyes, that long e'en now for the fresh green
    Of sprouting forests, and the far blue stretch
    Of regal mountains piled along the sky,
    Must see, for many an eve, the level sun
    Sheathe, with his latest gold, the heaving brine,
    By thousand ripples shivered, or Night's pomp
    Brooding in silence, ebon and profound,
    Upon the murmuring darkness of the deep,
    Broken by flashings, that the parted wave
    Sends white and star-like throujch its bursting foam.
    Yet not more dear the opening dawn of heaven
    Poured on the earth in an Italian May,
    When souls take wings upon the scented air
    Of starry meadows, and the yearning heart
    Pains with deep sweetness in the balmy time,
    Than these gray morns, and days of misty blue,
    And surges, never-ceasing;--for our prow
    Points to the sunset like a morning ray,
    And o'er the waves, and through the sweeping storms,
    Through day and darkness, rushes ever on,
    Westward and westward still! What joy can send
    The spirit thrilling onward with the wind,
    In untamed exultation, like the thought
    That fills the Homeward Bound?

                              Country and home!
    Ah! not the charm of silver-tongued romance,
    Born of the feudal time, nor whatsoe'er
    Of dying glory fills the golden realms
    Of perished song, where heaven-descended Art
    Still boasts her later triumphs, can compare
    With that one thought of liberty inherited--
    Of free life giv'n by fathers who were free,
    And to be left to children freer still!
    That pride and consciousness of manhood, caught
    From boyish musings on the holy graves
    Of hero-martyrs, and from every form
    Which virgin Nature, mighty and unchained,
    Takes in an empire not less proudly so--
    Inspired in mountain airs, untainted yet
    By thousand generations' breathing--felt
    Like a near presence in the awful depths
    Of unhewn forests, and upon the steep
    Where giant rivers take their maddening plunge--
    Has grown impatient of the stifling damps
    Which hover close on Europe's shackled soil.
    Content to tread awhile the holy steps
    Of Art and Genius, sacred through all time,
    The spirit breathed that dull, oppressive air--
    Which, freighted with its tyrant-clouds, o'erweighs
    The upward throb of many a nation's soul--
    Amid those olden memories, felt the thrall.
    But kept the birth-right of its freer home,
    Here, on the world's blue highway, comes again
    The voice of Freedom, heard amid the roar
    Of sundered billows, while above the wave
    Rise visions of the forest and the stream.
    Like trailing robes the morning mists uproll,
    Torn by the mountain pines; the flashing rills
    Shout downward through the hollows of the vales;
    Down the great river's bosom shining sails
    Glide with a gradual motion, while from all--
    Hamlet, and bowered homestead, and proud town--
    Voices of joy ring up into heaven!

    Yet louder, winds! Urge on our keel, ye waves,
    Swift as the spirit's yearnings! We would ride
    With a loud stormy motion o'er your crests,
    With tempests shouting like a sudden joy--
    Interpreting our triumph! 'Tis your voice,
    Ye unchained elements, alone can speak
    The sympathetic feeling of the free--
    The arrowy impulse of the Homeward Bound!

       *       *       *       *       *

Although the narrative of my journey, "with knapsack and staff," is now strictly finished,
a few more words of explanation seem necessary, to describe more fully the method of traveling
which we adopted. I add them the more willingly, as it is my belief that many, whose circumstances
are similar to mine, desire to undertake the same romantic journey. Some matter-of-fact statements
may be to them useful as well as interesting.

We found the pedestrian style not only by far the best way to become acquainted with the people
and sceneryof a country, but the pleasantest mode of traveling. To be sure, the knapsack was,
at first, rather heavy, our feet were often sore and our limbs weary, but a few days walking
made a great difference, and after we had traveled two weeks, this disappeared altogether. We
are told that there is now a Napoleon Buonaparte at the head of the government of France. It
is not, indeed, asserted that he is the very original Napoleon Buonaparte himself. The death
of that personage, and the transportation of his genuine bones to France, had been too widely
proclaimed to allow of his reappearance in his own proper person. But "uno avulso, non deficit
alter." Like the Thibetian worshippers of the Dalai Lama, (who never dies; only his soul transmigrates
into a fresh body), the French are so resolved, we are told, to be under a Buonaparte—whether
that be (see note to p. 56) a man or "a system"—that they have found,
it seems, a kind of new incarnation of this their Grand Lama, in a
person said to be the nephew of the original one.

 We found everywhere great curiosity respecting
America, and we were always glad to tell them all they wished to know. In Germany, we were
generally taken for Germans from some part of the country where the dialect was a little different,
or, if they remarked our foreign peculiarities, they supposed we were either Poles, Russians,
or Swiss. The greatest ignorance in relation to America, prevails among the common people.
They imagine we are a savage race, without intelligence and almost without law. Persons of
education, who had some slight knowledge of our history, showed a curiosity to know something
of our political condition. They are taught by the German newspapers (which are under a strict
censorship in this respect) to look only at the evil in our country, and they almost invariably
began by adverting to Slavery and Repudiation. While we admitted, often with shame and mortification,
the existence of things so inconsistent with true republicanism, we endeavored to make them
comprehend the advantages enjoyed by the free citizen--the complete equality of birth--which
places America, despite her sins, far above any other nation on earth. I could plainly see,
by the kindling eye and half-suppressed sigh, that they appreciated a freedom so immeasurably
greater than that which they enjoyed.

In large cities we always preferred to take the second or third-rate hotels, which are generally
visited by merchants and persons who travel on business; for, with the same comforts as the
first rank, they are nearly twice as cheap. A traveler, with a guide-book and a good pair of
eyes, can also dispense with the services of a courier, whose duty it is to conduct strangers
about the city, from one lion to another. We chose rather to find out and view the "sights"
at our leisure. In small villages, where we were often obliged to stop, we chose the best hotels,
which, particularly in Northern Germany and in Italy, are none too good. But if it was a post,
that is, a town where the post-chaise stops to change horses, we usually avoided the post-hotel,
where one must pay high for having curtains before his windows and a more elegant cover on
his bed. In the less splendid country inns, we always found neat, comfortable lodging, and
a pleasant, friendly reception from the people. They saluted us on entering, with "Be you welcome,"
and on leaving, wished us a pleasant journey and good fortune. The host, when he brought us
supper or breakfast, lifted his cap, and wished us a good appetite--and when he lighted us
to our chambers, left us with "May you sleep well!" We generally found honest, friendly people;
they delighted in telling us about the country around; what ruins there were in the neighborhood--and
what strange legends were connected with them. The only part of Europe where it is unpleasant
to travel in this manner, is Bohemia. We could rarely find a comfortable inn; the people all
spoke an unknown language, and were not particularly celebrated for their honesty. Beside this,
travelers rarely go on foot in those regions; we were frequently taken for traveling handworker,
and subjected to imposition.

With regard to passports, although they were vexatious and often expensive, we found little
difficulty when we had acquainted ourselves with the regulations concerning them. In France
and Germany they are comparatively little trouble; in Italy they are the traveler's greatest
annoyance. Americans are treated with less strictness, in this respect, than citizens of other
nations, and, owing to the absence of rank among us, we also enjoy greater advantages of acquaintance
and intercourse.

The expenses of traveling in England, although much greater than in our own country, may, as
we learned by experience, be brought, through economy, within the same compass. Indeed, it
is my belief, from observation, that, with few exceptions, throughout Europe, where a traveler
enjoys the same comfort and abundance as in America, he must pay the same prices. In the midst of
all, if some bold sceptic ventures to hint a doubt as to the existence of this giant, all are ready
to join against him, and tear him to pieces." This looks almost like
a prophetic allegory relating to the gigantic Napoleon. I have given, at times, through
the foregoing chapters, the cost of travel and residence in Europe, yet a connected estimate
will better show the minimum expense of a two years' pilgrimage:

    Voyage to Liverpool, in the second cabin . . . . . . . . . . .  $24.00
    Three weeks' travel in Ireland and Scotland  . . . . . . . . .   25.00
    A week in London, at three shillings a day . . . . . . . . . .    4.50
    From London to Heidelberg  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15.00
    A month at Heidelberg, and trip to Frankfort . . . . . . . . .   20.00
    Seven months in Frankfort, at $10 per month  . . . . . . . . .   70.00
    Fuel, passports, excursions and other expenses . . . . . . . .   30.00
    Tour through Cassel, the Hartz, Saxony, Austria, Bavaria, etc.   40.00
    A month in Frankfort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10.00
    From Frankfort through Switzerland, and over the Alps
       to Milan  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15.00
    From Milan to Genoa  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      60
    Expenses from Genoa to Florence  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14.00
    Four months in Florence  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   50.00
    Eight day's journey from Florence to Rome, two weeks in
       Rome, voyage to Marseilles and journey to Paris . . . . . .   40.00
    Five weeks in Paris  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15.00
    From Paris to London . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    8.00
    Six weeks in London, at three shillings a day  . . . . . . . .   31.00
    Passage home . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   60.00
                                                                    ------
                                                                   $472.00

The cost for places of amusement, guides' fees, and other small expenses, not included in this
list, increase the sum total to $500, for which the tour may be made. Now, having, I hope,
established this to the reader's satisfaction, I respectfully take leave of him.

THE END.