At first we had no "wet" canteen where beer could be procured. The inns in the villages around
became sources of great attraction to the men, and the publicans did their best to make what
they could out of the well-paid Canadian troops. The maintenance of discipline under such circumstances
was difficult. We were a civilian army, and our men had come over to do a gigantic task. Everyone
knew that, when the hour for performance came, they would be ready, but till that hour came
they were intolerant of restraint.

The English people did not understand us, and many of our men certainly gave them good reason
to be doubtful. Rumour had it at one time that we were going to be taken out of the mud and
quartered in Exeter. Then the rumour was that the Exeter people said, "If the Canadians are
sent here, we'll all leave the town." I did not mind, I told the men I would make my billet
in the Bishop's Palace.

The C.O. of one of the battalions was tempted to do what David did with such disastrous results,
namely number the people. He called the roll of his battalion and found that four hundred and
fifty men were absent without leave. But as I have said, we all knew that when the moment for
big things came, every man would be at his post and would do his bit.

Just before Christmas the 3rd Brigade were moved into huts at Lark Hill. They were certainly
an improvement upon the tents, but they  (p. 032) were draughty and leaky. From my window I
could see, on the few occasions when the weather permitted it, the weird and ancient circles
of Stonehenge.

The calm repose of those huge stones, which had watched unmoved the passing of human epochs,
brought peace to the mind.

In order to give Christmas its religious significance, I asked permission of the Rector of
Amesbury to use his church for a midnight Eucharist on Christmas Eve. He gladly gave his consent
and notice of the service was sent round to the units of the Brigade. In the thick fog the
men gathered and marched down the road to the village, where the church windows threw a soft
light into the mist that hung over the ancient burial ground. The church inside was bright
and beautiful. The old arches and pillars and the little side chapels told of days gone by,
when the worship of the holy nuns, who had their convent there, rose up to God day by day.
The altar was vested in white and the candles shone out bright and fair. The organist had kindly
consented to play the Christmas hymns, in which the men joined heartily. It was a service never
to be forgotten, and as I told the men, in the short address I gave them, never before perhaps,
in the history of that venerable fane, had it witnessed a more striking assembly. From a distance
of nearly seven thousand miles some of them had come, and this was to be our last Christmas
before we entered the life and death struggle of the nations. Row after row of men knelt to
receive the Bread of Life, and it was a rare privilege to administer it to them. The fog was
heavier on our return and some of us had great difficulty in finding our lines.

It seemed sometimes as if we had been forgotten by the War Office, but this was not the case.
We had visits from the King, Lord Roberts and other high officials. All these were impressed
with the physique and high spirits of our men.

The conditions under which we lived were certainly atrocious, and an outbreak of meningitis
cast a gloom over the camp. It was met bravely and skilfully by our medical men, of whose self-sacrifice
and devotion no praise is too high. The same is true of their conduct all through the war.

Our life on the Plain was certainly a puzzle to us. Why were we    (p. 033) kept there? When
were we going to leave? Were we not wanted in France? These were the questions we asked one
another. I met an Imperial officer one day, who had just returned from the front. I asked him
when we were going to train for the trenches. "Why" he said, "what better training could you
have than you are getting here? If you can stand the life here, you can stand the life in France."
I think he was right. That strange experience was just what we needed to inure us to hardship,
and it left a stamp of resolution and efficiency on the First Division which it never lost.

CHAPTER IV.                                                        (p. 034)

OFF TO FRANCE.

January To March, 1915.

Towards the end of January, rumors became more frequent that our departure was close at hand,
and we could see signs of the coming movement in many quarters. The disposition of the chaplains
was still a matter of uncertainty. At last we were informed that only five chaplains were to
proceed with the troops to France. This was the original number which the War Office had told
us to bring from Canada. The news fell like a thunderbolt upon us, and we at once determined
to get the order changed. The Senior Roman Catholic Chaplain and myself, by permission of the
General, made a special journey to the War Office. The Chaplain-General received us, if not
coldly, at least austerely. We told him that we had come from Canada to be with the men and
did not want to leave them. He replied by saying that the Canadians had been ordered by Lord
Kitchener to bring only five chaplains with them, and they had brought thirty-one. He said,
looking at me, "That is not military discipline; we must obey orders." I explained to him that
since the Canadian Government was paying the chaplains the people thought it did not matter
how many we had. Even this did not seem to convince him. "Besides", he said, "they tell me
that of all the troops in England the Canadians are the most disorderly and undisciplined,
and they have got thirty-one chaplains." "But", I replied, "you ought to see what they would
have been like, if we had brought only five." We succeeded in our mission in so far that he
promised to speak to Lord Kitchener that afternoon and see if the wild Canadians could not
take more chaplains with them to France than were allotted to British Divisions. The result
was that eleven of our chaplains were to be sent.

Early in February we were told that our Division was to go in a few days. In spite of the mud
and discomfort we had taken root in Salisbury Plain. I remember looking with affection one
night at the Cathedral bathed in moonlight, and at the quaint streets of the dear old town,
over which hung the shadow of war. Could it be possible that England was about to be crushed
under the heel of a foreign tyrant? If     (p. 035) such were to be her fate, death on the
battlefield would be easy to bear. What Briton could endure to live under the yoke or by the
permission of a vulgar German autocrat?

On entering the mess one evening I was horrified to read in the orders that Canon Scott was
to report immediately for duty to No. 2 General Hospital. It was a great blow to be torn from
the men of the fighting forces. I at once began to think out a plan of campaign. I went over
to the G.O.C. of my brigade, and told him that I was to report to No. 2 General Hospital. I
said, with perfect truth, that I did not know where No. 2 General Hospital was, but I had determined
to begin the hunt for it in France. I asked him if he would take me across with the Headquarters
Staff, so that I might begin my search at the front. He had a twinkle in his eye as he told
me that if I could get on board the transport, he would make no objection. I was delighted
with the prospect of going over with the men.

When the time came to pack up, I was overwhelmed by the number of things that I had accumulated
during the winter. I disposed of a lot of useless camp furniture, such as folding tables and
collapsible chairs, and my faithful friend the oil stove. With a well-filled Wolseley kit-bag
and a number of haversacks bursting with their contents, I was ready for the journey. On February
11th, on a lovely afternoon, I started off with the Headquarters Staff. We arrived at Avonmouth
and made our way to the docks. It was delightful to think that I was going with the men. I
had no batman and no real standing with the unit with which I was travelling. However, I did
not let this worry me. I got a friend to carry my kit-bag, and then covering myself with haversacks,
till I looked, as the men said, like a Christmas tree, I made my way to the ship with a broad
grin of satisfaction on my face. As I went up the gangway so attired and looking exceedingly
pleased with myself, my appearance excited the suspicion of the officer in command of the ship,
who was watching the troops come on board. Mistaking the cause of my good spirits, he called
a captain to him and said, "There is an officer coming on board who is drunk; go and ask him
who he is." The captain accordingly came over and greeting me pleasantly said, "How do you
do, Sir?" "Very well, thank you," I replied, smiling all the more. I was afraid he had come
up to send me back. Having been a teetotaler for twenty-two years, I knew nothing of the horrible
suspicion under   (p. 036) which I lay at the moment. The captain then said, "Who are you,
Sir?" and I, thinking of my happy escape from army red tape, answered quite innocently, with
a still broader grin, "I'm No. 2, General Hospital." This, of course confirmed the captain's
worst suspicions. He went back to the O.C. of the ship. "Who does he say he is?" said the Colonel.
"He says he is No. 2 General Hospital," the Captain replied. "Let him come on board" said the
Colonel. He thought I was safer on board the ship than left behind in that condition on the
wharf. With great delight I found all dangers had been passed and I was actually about to sail
for France.

The boat which took us and the 3rd Artillery Brigade, was a small vessel called "The City of
Chester." We were horribly crowded, so my bed had to be made on the table in the saloon. A
doctor lay on the sofa at the side and several young officers slept on the floor. We had not
been out many hours before a terrific gale blew up from the West, and we had to point our bow
towards Canada. I told the men there was some satisfaction in that. We were exceedingly uncomfortable.
My bed one night slid off the table on to the sleeping doctor and nearly crushed him. I squeezed
out some wonderfully religious expressions from him in his state of partial unconsciousness.
I replaced myself on the table, and then slid off on to the chairs on the other side. I finally
found a happy and safe haven on the floor. On some of the other transports they fared even
worse. My son, with a lot of other privates, was lying on the floor of the lowest deck in his
boat, when a voice shouted down the gangway, "Lookout boys, there's a horse coming down." They
cleared away just in time for a horse to land safely in the hold, having performed one of those
miraculous feats which horses so often do without damage to themselves.

On the 15th of February we arrived off the west coast of France and disembarked at St. Nazaire.
Our life now took on fresh interest. Everything about us was new and strange. As a Quebecer
I felt quite at home in a French town. A good sleep in a comfortable hotel was a great refreshment
after the voyage. In the afternoon of the following day we entrained for the front. I spread
out my Wolesley sleeping bag on the straw in a box car in which there were several other officers.
Our progress was slow, but it was a great thing to feel that we were   (p. 037) travelling
through France, that country of romance and chivalry. Our journey took more than two days,
and we arrived at Hazebrouck one week after leaving Salisbury Plain. The town has since been
badly wrecked, but then it was undamaged. The Brigadier lent me a horse and I rode with his
staff over to Caestre where the brigade was to be billeted. In the same town were the 15th
and 16th Battalions and the 3rd Field Ambulance. I had a room that night in the Château, a
rather rambling modern house. The next morning I went out to find a billet for myself. I called
on the Mayor and Mayoress, a nice old couple who not only gave me a comfortable room in their
house, but insisted upon my accepting it free of charge. They also gave me breakfast in the
kitchen downstairs. I was delighted to be so well housed and was going on my way rejoicing
when I met an officer who told me that the Brigade Major wanted to see me in a hurry. I went
over to his office and was addressed by him in a very military manner. He wanted to know why
I was there and asked what unit I was attached to. I told him No. 2 General Hospital. He said,
"Where is it?" "I don't know", I replied, "I came over to France to look for it." He said,
"It is at Lavington on Salisbury Plain," and added, "You will have to report to General Alderson
and get some attachment till the hospital comes over." His manner was so cold and businesslike
that it was quite unnerving and I began to realize more than ever that I was in the Army. Accordingly
that afternoon I walked over to the General's Headquarters, at Strazeele, some five miles away,
and he attached me to the Brigade until my unit should come to France. I never knew when it
did come to France, for I never asked. "Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof" was my
motto. I held on to my job at the front. But the threat which the Brigadier held over me, that
if I went into the trenches or anywhere out of his immediate ken I should be sent back to No.
2 General Hospital, was something which weighed upon my spirits very heavily at times, and
caused me to acquire great adroitness in the art of dodging. In fact, I made up my mind that
three things had to be avoided if I wished to live through the campaign--sentries, cesspools,
and generals. They were all sources of special danger, as everyone who has been at the front
can testify. Over and over again on my rambles in the dark, nothing has saved me from being
stuck by a sentry but the white gleam of my clerical    (p. 038) collar, which on this account
I had frequently thought of painting with luminous paint. One night I stepped into a cesspool
and had to sit on a chair while my batman pumped water over me almost as ill-savoured as the
pool itself. On another occasion, when, against orders, I was going into the trenches in Ploegsteert,
I saw the General and his staff coming down the road. Quick as thought, I cantered my horse
into an orchard behind a farm house, where there was a battery of Imperials. The men were surprised,
not to say alarmed, at the sudden appearance of a chaplain in their midst. When I told them,
however, that I was dodging a general, they received me with the utmost kindness and sympathy.
They had often done the same themselves, and offered me some light refreshments.

On the following Sunday we had our first church parade in the war zone. We were delighted during
the service to hear in the distance the sound of guns and shells. As the war went on we preferred
church parades when we could not hear guns and shells.

After a brief stay in Caestre the whole brigade marched off to Armentieres. Near Flêtre, the
Army Commander, General Smith-Dorrien, stood by the roadside and took the salute as we passed.
I went with the 15th Battalion, and, as I told the men, being a Canon, marched with the machine
gun section. We went by the delightful old town of Bailleul. The fields were green. The hedges
were beginning to show signs of spring life. The little villages were quaint and picturesque,
but the pavé road was rough and tiring. Bailleul made a delightful break in the journey. The
old Spanish town hall, with its tower, the fine old church and spire and the houses around
the Grande Place, will always live in one's memory. The place is all a ruin now, but then it
formed a pleasant home and meeting place for friends from many parts. We skirted the borders
of Belgium and arrived at Armentieres in the afternoon. The place had been shelled and was
partly deserted, but was still a populous town. I made my home with the Brigade transport in
a large school. In the courtyard our horses and mules were picketed. I had never heard mules
bray before and I had a good sample next morning of what they can do, for with the buildings
around them the sound had an added force. The streets of Armentieres were well laid out and
some of the private residences were very fine. It is astonishing how our camp life at Salisbury
had made us love cities. Armentieres has    (p. 039) since been destroyed and its church ruined.
Many of us have pleasant memories of the town, and the cemetery there is the resting place
of numbers of brave Canadians.

I ran across an imperial Chaplain there, whom I had met in England. He told me he had a sad
duty to perform that night. It was to prepare for death three men who were to be shot at daybreak.
He felt it very keenly, and I afterwards found from experience how bitter the duty was.

We were brought to Armentieres in order to be put into the trenches with some of the British
units for instruction. On Wednesday evening, February the 24th, the men were marched off to
the trenches for the first time and I went with a company of the 15th Battalion, who were to
be attached to the Durham Light Infantry. I was warned to keep myself in the background as
it was said that the chaplains were not allowed in the front line. The trenches were at Houplines
to the east of Armentieres. We marched down the streets till we came to the edge of the town
and there a guide met us and we went in single file across the field. We could see the German
flare-lights and could hear the crack of rifles. It was intensely interesting, and the mystery
of the war seemed to clear as we came nearer to the scene of action. The men went down into
the narrow trench and I followed. I was welcomed by a very nice young captain whom I never
heard of again till I saw the cross that marked his grave in the Salient. The trenches in those
days were not what they afterwards became. Double rows of sandbags built like a wall were considered
an adequate protection. I do not think there was any real parados. The dugouts were on a level
with the trench and were roofed with pieces of corrugated iron covered with two layers of sandbags.
They were a strange contrast to the dugouts thirty feet deep, lined with wood, which we afterwards
made for our trench homes.

I was immensely pleased at having at last got into the front line. Even if I were sent out
I had at least seen the trenches. The captain brought me to his tiny dugout and told me that
he and I could squeeze in there together for the night. He then asked me if I should like to
see the trench, and took me with him on his rounds. By this time it was dark and rainy and
very muddy. As we were going along the trench a tall officer, followed by another met us and
exchanged a word with the captain. They then came up to me and the first one peered at me in
(p. 040) the darkness and said in abrupt military fashion, "Who are you?" I thought my last
hour had come, or at least I was going to be sent back. I told him I was a chaplain with the
Canadians. "Did you come over with the men?" "Yes", I said. "Capital", he replied, "Won't you
come and have lunch with me tomorrow?" "Where do you live?" I said. The other officer came
up to my rescue at this moment and said, "The General's Headquarters are in such and such a
place in Armentieres," "Good Heavens", I whispered in a low tone to the officer, "Is he a general?"
"Yes" he said. "I hope my deportment was all that it ought to have been in the presence of
a general," I replied. "It was excellent, Padré," he said, with a laugh. So I arranged to go
and have luncheon with him two days afterwards, for I was to spend forty-eight hours in the
trenches. The first officer turned out to be General Congreve, V.C., a most gallant man. He
told me at luncheon that if he could press a button and blow the whole German nation into the
air he would do it. I felt a little bit shocked then, because I did not know the Germans as
I afterwards did. I spent nearly four years at the front hunting for that button.

The captain and I had very little room to move about in his dugout. I was very much impressed
with the unostentatious way in which he said, "If you want to say your prayers, Padré, you
can kneel over in that corner first, because there is only room for one at a time. I will say
mine afterwards"--and he did. He was a Roman Catholic, and had lived in India, and was a very
fine type of man. When I read the words two years afterwards on a cross in a cemetery near
Poperinghe, "Of your charity pray for the soul of Major Harter, M.C.," I did it gladly and
devoutly.

I had brought with me in a small pyx, the Blessed Sacrament, and the next morning I gave Communion
to a number of the men. One young officer, a boy of eighteen, who had just left school to come
to the front, asked me to have the service in his dugout. The men came in three or four at
a time and knelt on the muddy floor. Every now and then we could hear the crack of a bullet
overhead striking the sandbags. The officer was afterwards killed, and the great promise of
his life was not fulfilled in this world.

There was a great deal of rifle fire in the trenches in those days. The captain told me the
Canadians were adepts in getting rid of    (p. 041) their ammunition and kept firing all night
long. Further down the line were the "Queen's Own Westminsters." They were a splendid body
of young men and received us very kindly. On my way over to them the next morning, I found
in a lonely part of a trench a man who had taken off his shirt and was examining the seams
of it with interest. I knew he was hunting for one of those insects which afterwards played
no small part in the general discomfort of the Great War, and I thought it would be a good
opportunity to learn privately what they looked like. So I took a magnifying glass out of my
pocket and said, "Well, my boy, let me have a look for I too am interested in botany." He pointed
to a seam in his shirt and said, "There, Sir, there is one." I was just going to examine it
under the glass when, crack! a bullet hit the sandbags near-by, and he told me the trench was
enfiladed. I said, "My dear boy, I think I will postpone this scientific research until we
get to safer quarters, for if I am knocked out, the first question my congregation will ask
will be, "What was our beloved pastor doing when he was hit?" If they hear that I was hunting
in a man's shirt for one of these insects, they will not think it a worthy ending to my life."
He grinned, put on his shirt, and moved down the trench.

That afternoon a good many shells passed over our heads and of course the novelty of the thing
made it most interesting. After a war experience of nearly four years, one is almost ashamed
to look back upon those early days which were like war in a nursery. The hideous thing was
then only in its infancy. Poison gas, liquid fire, trench mortars, hand grenades, machine guns,
(except a very few) and tanks were then unknown. The human mind had not then made, as it afterward
did, the sole object of its energy the destruction of human life. Yet with a deepening knowledge
of the instruments of death has come, I trust, a more revolting sense of the horrors and futility
of war. The romance and chivalry of the profession of arms has gone forever. Let us hope that
in the years to come the human mind will bend all its energies to right the wrongs and avert
the contentions that result in bloodshed.

On the following Sunday, we had a church parade in the square in Armentieres. Two or three
men watched the sky with field glasses lest an enemy plane should come up. We had now finished
our instruction in trench warfare and were going to take over part of the front line. (p. 042)
We were marched off one afternoon to the village of Bac St. Maur, where we rested for the night.
I had dinner with the officers of the 15th Battalion, and went out afterwards to a big factory
at the end of the straggling brick village to see my son, whose battalion was quartered there.
On returning I found the night was very dark, and every door and window in the long rows of
houses was tightly closed. No lights were allowed in the town. Once more my faculty for losing
my way asserted itself, and I could not tell which was the house where I had dined. It was
to be my billet for the night. The whole place was silent, and I wandered up and down the long
street. I met a few soldiers and when I asked if they could tell me where I had had dinner
they naturally began to eye me with suspicion. At the same time it was no laughing matter.
I had had a long walk in the afternoon and had the prospect of another on the following day.
I was separated from my kit-bag and my safety razor, which always, at the front, constituted
my home, and the night was beginning to get cold. Besides it was more or less damaging to one's
character as a chaplain to be found wandering aimlessly about the streets at night asking where
you had dined. My habits were not as well known to the men then as they were after a few years
of war. In despair I went down the road behind the village, and there to my joy I saw a friendly
light emerging from the door of a coach house. I went up to it and entered and found to my
relief the guard of the 16th Battalion. They had a big fire in the chimney-place, and were
smoking and making tea. It was then about one o'clock, and they were both surprised and amused
at my plight, but gave me a very glad welcome and offered me a bed and blankets on the floor.
I was just going to accept them when I asked if the blankets were "crummy". The men burst out
laughing. "You bet your life they are, Sir," they cried. "Well, boys," I said, "I think that
I prefer to spend the night walking about the village and trying to compose a poem." Once more
I made my way down the dark street, examining closely every door and window. At last I found
a crack of light which came from one of the houses. I knocked at the door and it was opened
by an officer from Quebec, who had been engaged with some others in a quiet game of cards.
He was amused at my homeless condition and kindly took me in and gave me a comfortable bed
in his own room. On the next   (p. 043) morning of course I was "ragged" tremendously on my
disappearance during the night.

The next day we marched off to the village of Sailly-sur-Lys, which was to become our rear
headquarters during our occupation of the trenches. The little place had been damaged by shells,
but every available house was occupied. Our battalion moved up the country road and was dispersed
among the farm houses and barns in the neighbourhood.

I made my home with some officers in a small and dirty farm house. The novelty of the situation,
however, gave it a certain charm for the time. We were crowded into two or three little rooms
and lay on piles of straw. We were short of rations, but each officer contributed something
from his private store. I had a few articles of tinned food with me and they proved to be of
use. From that moment I determined never to be without a tin of bully beef in my haversack,
and I formed the bully beef habit in the trenches which lasted till the end and always amused
the men. The general cesspool and manure heap of the farm was, as usual, in the midst of the
buildings, and was particularly unsavoury. A cow waded through it and the family hens fattened
on it. Opposite our window in one of the buildings dwelt an enormous sow with a large litter
of young ones. When any of the ladies of the family went to throw refuse on the manure heap,
the old sow, driven by the pangs of hunger, would stand on her hind legs and poke her huge
face out over the half door of her prison appealing in pig language for some of the discarded
dainties. Often nothing would stop her squeals but a smart slap on her fat cheeks by the lady's
tender hand. In the hayloft of the barn the men were quartered. Their candles made the place
an exceedingly dangerous abode. There was only one small hole down which they could escape
in case of fire. It is a wonder we did not have more fires in our billets than we did.

The trenches assigned to our Brigade were to the right of Fleurbaix. They were poorly constructed,
but as the time went on were greatly improved by the labours of our men. The Brigadier assigned
to me for my personal use a tiny mud-plastered cottage with thatched roof and a little garden
in front. It was in the Rue du Bois, a road which ran parallel with the trenches about 800
yards behind them. I was very proud to have a home all to myself, and chalked on the door the
word "Chaplain". In one room two piles of straw not only gave me a bed  (p. 044) for myself
but enabled me to give hospitality to any officer who needed a billet. Another room I fitted
up as a chapel. An old box covered with the silk Union Jack and white cloth and adorned with
two candles and cross served as an altar. There were no chairs to be had, but the plain white
walls were not unsuited to the purpose to which the room was dedicated.

In this chapel I held several services. It was a fine sight to see a group of tall and stalwart
young Highlanders present. Their heads almost reached to the low ceiling, and when they sang,
the little building trembled with the sound.

Every night when there were any men to be buried, I used to receive notice from the front line,
and after dark I would set out preceded by my batman, Murdoch MacDonald, a proper young Highlander,
carrying a rifle with fixed bayonet on his shoulder. It made one feel very proud to go off
down the dark road so attended. When we got to the place of burial I would hold a short service
over the open graves in which the bodies were laid to rest. Our casualties were light then,
but in those days we had not become accustomed to the loss of comrades and so we felt the toll
of death very bitterly.

It made a great difference to me to have a house of my own. Previously I had found it most
difficult to get any place in which to lay my head. On one occasion, I had obtained permission
from a kind-hearted farmer's wife to rent one corner of the kitchen in her two-roomed house.
It was on a Saturday night and when the family had retired to their room I spread my sleeping
bag in the corner and went to bed. I got up when the family had gone to Mass in the morning.
All through the day the kitchen was crowded, and I saw that if I went to bed that night I should
not have the opportunity of getting up again until the family went to Mass on the following
Sunday. So I paid the woman five francs for my lodging and started out in pursuit of another.
I managed to find a room in another little farmhouse, somewhat larger and cleaner. My room
was a small one and had an earth floor. The ceiling was so low that I could touch the beams
with my head when I stood on my toes. But in it were two enormous double beds, a table and
a chair. What more could one want? A large cupboard full of straw furnished a billet for Murdoch
and he was allowed to do my simple cooking on the family stove.

Small as my billet was, I was able on one occasion to take in and  (p. 045) house three officers
of the Leicesters, who arrived one night in preparation for the battle of Neuve Chapelle. I
also stowed away a sergeant in the cupboard with Murdoch. My three guests were very hungry
and very tired and enjoyed a good sleep in the ponderous beds. I saw a photo of one of the
lads afterwards in the Roll of Honour page of the "Graphic," and I remembered the delightful
talk I had had with him during his visit.

At that time we were all very much interested in a large fifteen-inch howitzer, which had been
placed behind a farmhouse, fast crumbling into ruins. It was distant two fields from my abode.
To our simple minds, it seemed that the war would soon come to an end when the Germans heard
that such weapons were being turned against them. We were informed too, that three other guns
of the same make and calibre were being brought to France. The gun was the invention of a retired
admiral who lived in a farmhouse nearby and who, when it was loaded, fired it off by pressing
an electric button. The officer in charge of the gun was very pleasant and several times took
me in his car to interesting places. I went with him to Laventie on the day of the battle of
Neuve Chapelle, and saw for the first time the effects of an attack and the wounded being brought
back in ambulances.

There was one large barn not far off full of beautiful yellow straw which held several hundred
men. I had a service in it one night. The atmosphere was smoky and mysterious, and the hundreds
of little candles propped up on mess-tins over the straw, looked like a special illumination.
A large heap of straw at the end of the barn served as a platform, and in lieu of an organ
I had a mandolin player to start the hymns. The service went very well, the men joining in
heartily.

The night before the battle of Neuve Chapelle, I went over to see the captain in charge of
the big gun, and he showed me the orders for the next day, issued by the British General. He
told me that at seven o'clock it would be "Hell let loose", all down the line. Next morning
I woke up before seven, and blocked up my ears so that I should not be deafened by the noise
of artillery. But for some reason or other the plans had been changed and I was quite disappointed
that the Germans did not get the hammering it was intended to give them. We were on the left
of the British line during the battle of Neuve Chapelle, and were not really in the fight.
The British suffered very heavily    (p. 046) and did not meet with the success which they
had hoped for.

My son was wounded in this engagement and was sent out with the loss of an eye. On returning
from seeing him put into a hospital train at Merville, I was held up for some hours in the
darkness by the British Cavalry streaming past in a long line. I was delighted to see them
for I thought we had broken through. On the next day to our great disappointment we saw them
going back again.

Near Canadian Headquarters at Sailly there was a large steam laundry which was used as a bath
for our men. It was a godsend to them, for the scarcity of water made cleanliness difficult.
The laundry during bath hours was a curious spectacle. Scores of large cauldrons of steaming
water covered the floor. In each sat a man with only his head and shoulders showing, looking
as if he were being boiled to death. In the mists of the heated atmosphere and in the dim light
of candles, one was reminded of Doré's illustrations of Dante's Inferno. In one of them he
represents a certain type of sinner as being tormented forever in boiling water.

