The wounded had been taken to the city, where they were kindly cared for by the surgeons of
the corps, who had seized the town for hospital purposes. Churches and private dwellings swarmed
with the unfortunate men, whose mangled forms told of the fearful work of the day. Surgeons
were hard at work ministering relief to the suffering, binding up the wounds or removing the
mangled limbs which offered no hope of recovery; while nurses administered food and coffee,
and prepared beds, such as could be extemporized from blankets spread upon the floors. More
than three thousand wounded were brought into the city before nightfall.

Upon the very heels of the brilliant success of the corps commenced disaster. An order from
General Hooker had directed General Sedgwick to advance toward Chancellorsville, and form a
junction with the main army. So the corps which had so nobly won the heights pressed on for
further achievements. The heights were left behind. Brooks' division, which now took the lead,
had advanced as far as Salem Church, on the Chancellorsville pike, when, instead of meeting
any portion of Hooker's army, a few shells from rebel guns warned the division of the presence
of the enemy.

A dense thicket was in front, and Bartlett's brigade, which had the advance, was deployed to
skirmish and ascertain the position of the concealed foe. Presently, having fallen upon a strong
line of skirmishers, the brigade was formed in line of battle; the Twenty-seventh New York
on the right, then the Fifth Maine, then the One Hundred and Twenty-first New York, and on
the left the Ninety-sixth Pennsylvania; the Sixteenth New York holding the skirmish line in
front. General Bartlett advanced his line to the thicket, the Sixteenth driving the rebel skirmishers,
the brigade following closely. At the edge of the thicket General Bartlett halted the line,
but being ordered by General Brooks to advance rapidly, he pushed on again.

Advancing through the thicket about thirty rods, the brigade suddenly found itself face to
face with a rebel line. The confederates were lying down in a road which traversed the thicket;
and, when the Union line was within twenty yards, they suddenly discharged a volley, which,
had it been well aimed, must have almost annihilated the brigade; but the fire was returned
with effect, and presently, the confederates were glad to leave the road, which was almost
filled with their dead and wounded, and seek shelter behind rifle pits. The rifle pits were
but a few yards in rear of the road, and here a very strong force was posted. The Union forces
occupied the road, and directed their fire against the works; but the rebel fire cut down their
unprotected ranks like grass before the scythe. For fifteen minutes the gallant regiments endured
this murderous fire, and then fell back in good order, having lost, within twenty minutes,
nearly seven hundred men; of whom two hundred and seventy-three were from the One Hundred and
Twenty-first New York.

The New Jersey brigade, and the whole division, had by this time been brought into action,
and great slaughter was made in almost every regiment. Newton's division was also fiercely
engaged on the right, Wheaton's brigade holding its position only by the most stubborn fighting.
The enemy having forced the First division to retire, advanced against our line; but the batteries
under Williston, Rigby and Parsons, by splendid practice, repulsed the onset. The Second division,
forming the rear of the column, had not been brought into the engagement.

Darkness came to the relief of the corps, and the men slept soundly on their arms after the
arduous duties of the day; but there were many misgivings among officers in regard to what
to-morrow might bring forth.

While we rested, the enemy was bringing up reinforcements from the direction of Richmond. Very
early in the morning the siege guns on Stafford Heights, opposite the town, sent some shells
screaming across the valley to the heights of Marye's Hill, giving the alarm to those in the
town and to those who had so recently left it. Lines of rebels were seen all along the outskirts
of the town and on the crests above. Fifteen thousand confederate troops were between the Sixth
corps and Fredericksburgh Heights. The surgeons immediately prepared to send the wounded across
the river, but, supposing that to accomplish the whole before the rebels should take possession
of the town would be impossible, made every preparation for being themselves taken prisoners.
A small detachment of Gibbon's division still guarded the town, but nearly all his troops had
recrossed the river and were on Stafford Heights. But the small force in the town seemed sufficient
to convey to the rebels the impression that it was well guarded, for they made no attempt to
seize the immense amount of hospital stores which was at their mercy, or to molest the wounded
or the surgeons.

The Sixth corps was now in a critical position; its communications entirely cut off, and surrounded
by hosts of the enemy. The corps was sandwiched between the rebels on the heights and Lee's
whole army; while on its left was a strong force, and on its right an impassable river. Dispositions
were at once made to meet the emergency.

Brooks' division was drawn back, and Howe's, still in the rear, changed front and quickly extended
the line of battle to the river, so as to include Banks' Ford, six miles above the city, over
which communications were at once established.

The whole of Early's rebel division occupied the crest of Marye's and Cemetery Hills; the divisions
of Anderson and McLaws were on our flank; and the brigades of Hays, Hoke and Lawton, supported
by Lee's whole army, were in our rear. We were in the vicinity of Salem Church, and our only
line of retreat was upon the road leading to Banks' Ford.

The first demonstration of the rebels, on the morning of the 4th, was against the position
held by Neill's brigade. A company from the Seventh Maine, and two companies from the Forty-ninth
New York, in conjunction with a part of Martin's battery, and supported by the remaining companies
of the Forty-ninth, gallantly repulsed and routed a whole brigade of rebels, capturing two
hundred prisoners, and the colors of the Fifty-eighth Virginia regiment; which last trophy
was borne off by the men of the Forty-ninth, and was the second stand of colors taken by that
gallant brigade in this engagement, the Seventy-seventh having captured the other.

The day wore away with little fighting till five o'clock. General Howe had so disposed his
troops as to occupy two positions.

In front was the Third brigade, holding a crest which overlooked a ravine through which the
rebels must pass. Behind the brigade was another ravine, in which was a thin skirt of woods.
In rear of this second ravine, and behind a swell of ground, the Vermont brigade was strongly
posted, forming the second line of battle. There were in each of these two brigades about three
thousand men.

Now came the most fearful struggle of the campaign. At five o'clock the rebel hordes came,
with deafening yells, upon the division. The divisions of Early, Anderson and McLaws rushed
upon the single brigade of less than three thousand men, massing their troops in the ravine,
and charging with impetuous fury. But the noble regiments heroically withstood the shock, the
Germans of the Twentieth only going to the rear in confusion. The stubborn resistance of the
brigade prevented the rebels from piercing our lines, and cutting off our retreat, and thus,
by its gallantry, enabled the corps to cross at Banks' Ford. But one thousand men--more than
one-third of the brigade--fell on that crest. Colonel Van Houghton, of the Twenty-first New
Jersey, was mortally wounded, and many other choice spirits were among the fallen. General
Neill was injured by the fall of his horse, which was shot. General Howe now ordered the brigade
to fall back, and the decimated regiments left the front line, and fell behind the strong position
held by the Vermonters. The rebels, thinking this a retreat, followed with yells of exultation,
but were met by the second line of battle, which, from its position behind the swell of ground,
was concealed, with a murderous fire, which sent them reeling back to the cover of the first
ravine. Their charge had inflicted little damage upon the Union line. It was now nearly dark,
and the reception which the rebels had received had so completely routed and broken them, that
they made no further attempt upon our lines.

About nine o'clock, the division was ordered to fall back to Banks' Ford, now two miles distant
from us. We fell back quietly, and found that the other divisions had preceded us, and were
snugly behind rifle pits. They had fallen back as soon as it was dark, leaving the Second division
to cover the retreat.

Meantime, comparatively little fighting had been done by the other divisions, though a constant
skirmish was kept up, and in the evening the confederates managed to get in the rear of a part
of the picket of the Light division, capturing a large number of prisoners from the Forty-third
and Thirty-first New York, and Sixty-first Pennsylvania.

The position at Banks' Ford might have been held until reinforcements could have reached the
corps from Hooker; but, unfortunately, that general, receiving from General Sedgwick first,
intelligence that he could not safely hold the position, then that he could, ordered the corps
to be withdrawn, and afterward countermanded the order; but the last order was only received
when the movement had been accomplished.

Toward morning the corps recrossed the Rappahannock on pontoon bridges; not without the utmost
difficulty; one bridge being destroyed by rebel artillery, and the other barely saved from
destruction long enough to allow the troops hurriedly to pass over.

The corps had passed through a fearful ordeal, and had shown itself to be made of heroic material.
No two more brilliant feats had been performed during the war, than the storming of the heights
of Fredericksburgh, and the splendid resistance when surrounded and attacked by overwhelming
forces. The men came out of the fight, not demoralized, but as ready to scale those terrible
heights again, if called upon, as they had been on the 3d of May.

General Sedgwick had manifested during the fights, those masterly qualities which made him
one of the greatest soldiers of the age. His conduct on the retreat was cool and unimpassioned.
Personally examining every part of the ground in front and rear, riding from one end of the
line to the other, now ordering a battery placed at some commanding point, and now looking
out a new position to which his troops might fall back in case of necessity, he was everywhere
present, full of energy, as determined to save as he had been to win.

Throughout the land the glorious deeds of the Sixth corps became household words; but its glory
had been dearly purchased. Five thousand of the heroes who crossed the Rappahannock on the
2d of May, were either dead or wounded. Colonel Van Houghton, one of New Jersey's bravest sons,
had received a mortal wound, from which he died in the hands of the enemy. Captain Luther M.
Wheeler, of the Seventy-seventh, was shot while we halted at the foot of Marye's Hill. It was
a sad loss to his regiment, and the corps. Few more gifted young men could be found in the
army. He was one of our bravest and most efficient officers. Gentle in his relations with his
fellows, cool and daring in battle; his youthful face beaming with fortitude, was a continual
joy to his men in time of danger. He died as he had lived, a hero.

The Forty-third had lost Captain Knickerbocker and Lieutenant Koonz. Two young men of brilliant
promise, greatly loved and respected in their regiment and in their native city, Albany.

The wounded men in the hospitals exhibited the same heroic fortitude in their sufferings that
they had manifested in the charge and in the retreat. A few instances are given as illustrations
of many: Erskine Branch of Company D, Seventy-seventh New York, when his leg was torn to shreds
by a shell, hobbled off on the sound one and his gun, singing "The Star Spangled Banner." Corporal
Henry West was shot through the thigh, and he was brought to the rear. "I guess," said he "that
old Joe West's son has lost a leg." The corporal died soon after. While in the hospital, suffering
from extreme anguish, a wounded man at his side lamented that he had come to the war. "I am
not sorry that I came," instantly responded the brave corporal.

Let us now turn back and glance hastily at the maneuvers of the main army at Chancellorsville.
We, of the Sixth corps, could only see by the balloon which, like some huge bird, hovered over
the army, where it held its position, and the unceasing roar of artillery told us of a severe
struggle with its foe; while rumor brought, now reports of brilliant success, and anon tales
of sad defeat. We knew little of the true state of affairs at the right, and it was only when
we mingled with our comrades of the other corps that we learned the details of the battle of
Chancellorsville. We now repeat it as it was given to us. On the day that the army broke up
its winter camp, General Hooker led the Fifth, Eleventh, Twelfth and Second corps, except Gibbon's
division of the latter, up the river, until he reached Kelley's Ford, about twenty miles above
Fredericksburgh. Here he crossed his whole force, and pushing southward and eastward, uncovered
the United States Ford eight miles below, which was guarded by a brigade of rebels, and struck
the intersection of the Gordonsville plank road with the Orange county turnpike, about five
miles from United States Ford; having by great exertions crossed two rivers and marched twenty
miles. At the crossing of the two roads, west of the turnpike, and south of the plank road,
stood a single large mansion, the Chancellor house. Here General Hooker made his head-quarters,
and from this point he disposed the corps of the army so as to form a line of battle, which
should face south and east, with a single corps to guard against an advance from the west.
The Third and First corps soon joined Hooker's forces, and the corps were posted as follows:
The Eleventh corps, under General Howard, was on the right of the line, three miles southwest
of Chancellorsville, facing westward; next, to the left of Howard, but far to the south, and
holding the turnpike five miles in front of Chancellorsville, was Sickles with his Third corps;
back almost to the plank road, and left of the turnpike, was Slocum with the Twelfth corps;
and still to the right, and behind the plank road, the Fifth corps, under General Meade, faced
toward the southwest; behind Meade and Slocum, the Second corps was posted, one division guarding
the approach to the bridge. The country was densely wooded. Except an open space about the
house, it was a tangled wilderness. The ground was low and marshy, and nearly level. Earthworks
were thrown up in front of all the corps, and everything seemed in readiness for the enemy,
for whom General Hooker now waited, hoping, that by fruitless assaults upon what seemed an
impregnable position, the enemy would be so exhausted that he might turn upon him with fresh
divisions, and rout the retreating forces. His programme was to secure a position in the rear
of the rebel positions at the fords, while that portion of the army left at Fredericksburgh
was to divert attention from the principal movement. Stoneman, with the cavalry, was to make
a grand raid on the communications of the rebel army, burning the bridges and tearing up railroads.
The main body of the army having secured its position, and accomplished its work, the Sixth
corps was to press forward and harass them in their retreat toward Richmond.

Saturday afternoon, almost at dark, the First corps, Reynolds', which had that morning parted
company with the Sixth corps, crossed the river and took position near the ford, four miles
in rear of Howard.

The rebel army had been on the southeast of ours. Sickles, on the afternoon of Saturday, discovered
a train of wagons and ambulances moving across the pike far in his front. He sent a force to
cut it in two, and was successful in taking a large number of prisoners and in creating a panic
in the train. He advanced, and was met by a strong force of the enemy. He now sent to General
Howard for reinforcements. General Howard led a brigade to his assistance in person, and then
at full speed galloped back to his corps. He was just in time. Bursting shells on the right
of his line told of the presence of the enemy. "Stonewall" Jackson, with an immense force,
had passed round our army, and now came like an avalanche upon the right division of the Eleventh
corps, General Devins. The men were cooking their coffee, when suddenly the whizzing of innumerable
bullets aroused them from their culinary engagements. The hosts of Jackson, with yells and
shouts, fell like a thunderbolt upon the astonished division, and it melted away like a snowflake
in summer. The next division, Shurz, tried to maintain the ground, and did what men could do,
but could not withstand the shock of fifty thousand men. General Hooker, fearing that the flying
Germans would stampede the whole army, directed the cavalry which was with him, to charge upon
the fugitives and arrest their flight; but no power could halt them. The commanding general
at once directed General Sickles to attack the enemy on the flank, and, if possible, check
his farther advance.

General Howard, with great presence of mind and perseverance, succeeded in stopping the rout
at a stone wall, behind which he posted his line. Forty pieces of artillery were also, by General
Hooker's order, concentrated to oppose the confederates, who again rushed forward with mad
desperation, and were met with terrific fire from this long line of guns. They staggered back,
but soon rallied, and again charged, and again met with a terrible repulse. The conflict now
ceased for the night. Hooker drew in his lines, making them more compact, changed the disposition
of some of the corps: throwing the Eleventh corps from the right to the left of the line, and
bringing Meade, with the Fifth corps, to the right. Sickles and Slocum, with the Third and
Twelfth corps, were near the Chancellor house. Artillery was massed to command the approaches
to the turnpike, and earthworks went up in the night as if by magic. At daylight, Sunday morning,
Jackson, with all his forces, advanced on the turnpike, against the Chancellor place, not with
the thin line of battle, but in solid mass. His men poured from the woods like a torrent, their
shouts and yells making a pandemonium of the wilderness. Suddenly, from the mouths of forty
cannon was hurled against them a cruel storm of grape and canister, which ploughed through
the advancing column, carrying death and destruction in its course, while the infantry from
the Third corps poured into the faces of the desperate foe a terrible hail storm of bullets
which almost decimated the heavy column. With the desperation of madness, the rebels rushed
against this terrible fire, almost reaching the muzzles of the guns, only to be hurled back
again by the fearful tornado in front. The Third corps seemed hardly able to hold its position,
but now General Hooker sent two divisions of the Second corps to attack the enemy in the flank.
These, with the Fifth corps, came with great force upon the left of the column. It reeled,
the huge mass wavered to and fro, and then fell back in flight. The troops at the house, however,
had been forced back, and General Hooker again shortened his lines, making his forces still
more compact.

Again, in the afternoon, the rebels came on exultingly, but not with the desperation that marked
the attack of the morning. Hour after hour they strove to drive back or break in two the Union
line, but it was immovable. Artillery poured into the ranks of the assailants the most deadly
fire, until they fell back, long before nightfall, disheartened and defeated. Hooker had at
length succeeded in accomplishing a part of his object. He had allowed his enemy to fight him
until his army was exhausted and dispirited, while he himself had half his army fresh and ready
to charge upon the weakened foe. Now came the time for action. If he now succeeded in putting
the enemy to flight, the rebel cause was destroyed; if, on the contrary, he suffered a repulse,
what would be the result? The river was swelling rapidly; the pontoons could even now with
difficulty be held together. If, haply, they were to be swept away, all means of retreat would
be cut off, and a repulse would amount to annihilation. Sedgwick and the Sixth corps were driven
back, and Stoneman, who had gone with his cavalry toward Richmond, was not heard from. In the
midst of these doubts, he called a council of corps commanders, who agreed, not unanimously,
that it was advisable to recross the river. So the army, on Wednesday, was withdrawn across
the river, when victory seemed ready to rest on our banners.[3] Without doubt, had the general
known of the panic created by the cavalry in the rear, or had he been sure that his communications
would remain intact, the result would have been far different.

    [3] The author makes no attempt to discuss the merits of the
    controversy, which grew out of this battle, between two of the
    best soldiers of our army. The reader will find, in the Report
    on the Conduct of the War, 1865, all the facts and arguments on
    both sides, by those most competent to give them--Generals
    Hooker and Sedgwick.

The loss to the whole army, in this campaign, was over seventeen thousand in killed and wounded.[4]
Very many of these were left in the hands of the enemy.

The army now turned back to its old position, encamping in line nearly as before, only all
the troops which had encamped on our left, between the Sixth corps and Belle Plain, were placed
far to the right, leaving the Sixth corps on the left of the army, instead of being nearly
in its center. The corps occupied a line nearly a mile in rear of the old camp, where the ground
had been unoccupied, and where a growth of young pines, and, in places, considerable groves
of oak timber, afforded far more attractive surroundings than the old quarters.

The wounded were taken to an immense field hospital at Potomac creek, where hospital tents
sufficient to accommodate eight thousand wounded men were erected in a locality where cool
breezes could play freely among the encampments, and where pure water could be obtained. On
the 9th, many of our wounded were brought to the side of the river at Fredericksburgh and sent
over to us by the enemy, in pontoon boats, under flags of truce. On the morning of the 10th,
the surgeon of the Seventy-seventh was ordered to proceed at once to Banks' Ford to receive
wounded officers who were to be removed from the enemy's lines. The doctor was soon at the
ford, where he found a boat and a flag of truce at his disposal. He crossed the river and met
the officer in command, who received him courteously, but declared that he knew nothing of
any officers to come there. The surgeon addressed a note to General Wilcox, commanding the
brigade at Banks' Ford, but he knew as little about it as the officer at the river. "There
are plenty of federal officers here," said he, "and we shall be glad to send them across to
your lines at any time when General Hooker shall apply to General Lee for them; but I know
of no arrangement of the kind now." Believing that some arrangements had been made for the
transfer of the wounded officers, but that the order had not yet reached General Wilcox, the
surgeon spent the day among the rebels, conversing with their officers, while his boatmen,
having with them a canteen of brandy, soon made themselves very popular with the crowd of rebel
soldiers who gathered about, dressed in motley colors, buff, blue, gray, butternut, and colors
indescribable. They were all in good humor and lively, and the hours passed pleasantly, as
the men from the two opposing armies chatted in the shade of some oak trees. Finding little
prospect of executing his peaceful mission, the surgeon obtained permission from General Wilcox
to get the remains of Colonel Van Houghten, of the Twenty-first New Jersey regiment, who was
shot at Salem Church, and died from his wound next day. Doctor McNiel, of the Twenty-first,
with a party of men, proceeded to the place where the colonel was buried, a mile and a half
from the ford, and brought the remains to the river and across to our own lines. On reporting
at General Hooker's head-quarters, the surgeon found that no agreement had been concluded until
late in the day for the delivery of the wounded officers; so he had spent the day in rebeldom
to little effect, except the restoration of the body of the colonel to his friends, and leaving
a company of nurses to assist our surgeons who were already in attendance upon our prisoners.

Nearly all our wounded were at length returned to us, and were sent to Potomac Creek, or to
Washington. At Potomac Creek, the coöperation of the Sanitary Commission was of great assistance
to the surgeons; and many comforts and luxuries, the gifts of our friends at home, cheered
the hearts of the wounded and suffering heroes. Sheets, pillow cases, handkerchiefs, with jellies
and canned fruits, were distributed in profusion. Here was the place for manifesting the overflowing
interest and noble generosity of the people of the north, and thousands blessed them for their
munificence.

A mistaken idea prevailed among friends at home, that the agents of the Sanitary Commission
resorted to the battle-field, ministering to the wants of the wounded, dressing the wounds,
bringing the crippled from the field, and feeding the hungry. Our illustrated papers were filled
with fine engravings, representing these acts of mercy on the battle-field. These were pictures
of the imagination. Nothing of the sort was done. No Sanitary or Christian Commission agents
frequented the battle-field. All wounded were brought from the field by soldiers, placed in
ambulances of the government and taken to the field hospitals, where all the wounds were dressed
by surgeons or their nurses, and where all were fed by officers selected for this special duty.
The Sanitary and Christian Commissions had a great mission. They were the representatives of
the lively interest felt by the people of the north, for the army it had sent forth to maintain
the institutions of their country. They found abundant opportunity for accomplishing their
mission at the large hospitals after the roar of battles had passed away; but they had nothing
to do with the care of the wounded on the battle-field.

Just before leaving camp for the campaign just closed, General Hooker had issued an order assigning
to each corps and division its badge, which was to be worn by every officer and soldier connected
with either of the corps. The men of the Sixth corps now regarded their cross with greater
pride than had ever ancient knight looked upon the heraldry which emblazoned his arms. It had
been baptized in blood, and amid wonderful achievements of heroism. Every member of the noble
corps felt an exulting pride in his relation to it, and regarded his badge as a mark of great
honor.

The introduction of these badges became of great service to the army. Every man could easily
recognize the corps and division of any other one in the army; and each corps learned to feel
a pride in its own badge.

We had seven corps in the army; First, Second, Third, Fifth, Sixth, Eleventh and Twelfth. The
badge of the First corps was a lozenge, that of the Second a shamrock, of the Third a diamond,
of the Fifth a Maltese cross, of the Sixth a Greek cross, the Eleventh a lunette, and of the
Twelfth a star. The badge of the First division of each corps was red, that of the Second white,
and of the Third blue. All wagons and ambulances were marked with their appropriate badge,
and the sick soldier who fell to the rear with a pass to the ambulances, had no difficulty
in finding his own train; and quartermasters and others connected with the trains were greatly
assisted in their duties by this ingenious device.

The camps of all the regiments of our divisions were pleasantly located, and great pains were
taken in laying them out and in decorating them. When regiments were not sheltered in groves,
pines were transplanted in the company streets in great profusion; and arches and bowers of
the most elaborate and elegant designs, formed of the boughs of the red cedar and pine, exquisitely
entwined with the bright green holly, formed a most attractive and beautiful feature of our
second camp at White Oak Church. At division head-quarters, General Howe had caused to be erected
a most elegant hall of these rural materials, which was a wonder of architectural beauty as
well as exquisite taste and ingenuity. Its alcoves, its vestibules and its arches, were marvels
of elegance. Here came officers, high in command, and brilliant dames, and passed a night in
the service of Terpsichore, while bands discoursed stirring music.

In the camp of the Seventy-seventh, the adornments were profuse and beautiful. At head-quarters,
a palace of green arose among the trees near our tents. For days, mule teams hauled huge loads
of cedar boughs, which were woven into massive pillars or elegantly turned arches, and the
structure rose like one of those fair bowers we read of in fairy tales. Our surgeon and quartermaster
were preparing the elegant structure for the reception of their wives. It was almost complete,
needing only a few finishing touches, and the anxiously awaited guests were expected on the
following day; when, alas for the expectations of men, an order came to be ready to march at
daylight next morning! The ladies, although too late to enjoy this rustic palace, arrived in
time to find the corps in line of battle, and witness fierce artillery duels between the opposing
armies. In their eagerness to watch the flight of the shells, they sometimes manifested greater
bravery than their companions, whose experience had taught them to regard with suspicion the
shrieking missiles.

We had passed a pleasant month at this camp, and the men were eager, notwithstanding their
comfortable quarters, for active campaigning. The health and spirits of the soldiers of the
corps had never been better, and in spite of the failure at Chancellorsville, they felt a great
deal of confidence. So the order to move was received with pleasure, and we turned away from
our pleasant camps willingly.

We left camp on the morning of June 5th, one of the loveliest of days, and, taking the road
we had already trod on two occasions, halted in the valley of the Rappahannock, on the very
spot where we had rested at the first and second battles of Fredericksburgh, and prepared,
for a third time within six months, to cross the river. A correspondent of one of the daily
journals, writing from head-quarters of the army, says: "Howe's splendid division of the fighting
Sixth corps was selected for the work of crossing, and the point for laying the bridges was
just below the mouth of Deep Run, at the identical spot where we had crossed twice before."

Pontoons and batteries of artillery formed long lines behind the little ridge which runs parallel
with the river, and the infantry marched and countermarched to get in right positions. Here,
behind the little ridge, we rested, until about five o'clock in the afternoon, our men mounting
the ridge, and gazing across the river, where the enemy had turned the rifle pits thrown up
by our First division, to their own use; and, in return, the rebels raised their heads above
the breastworks, or ventured to the river side, wondering what could be the intention of the
army, so recently driven from these grounds, in making such preparations for another crossing.
There seemed but a small force opposed to us; a strong picket on the bank, and the reserve
posted behind the breastworks, were all that could be seen, though we well knew that the heights
beyond swarmed with opposing hosts, as they had twice before. At length the engineers drew
the pontoons to the edge of the river, the Seventy-seventh being detailed to assist in unloading.
The rebels betook themselves to the rifle pits, and opened a brisk fire; but presently they
were glad to draw their heads behind the earthworks, for five of our batteries, Williston's,
McCartney's, Cowen's, Haines' and McCarthey's, were run out upon the plain, and opened a fierce
fire, whole batteries firing by volleys, until the whole plain, on the further side, was a
sheet of flame from the bursting shells, and huge clouds of dust, plowed up by the shrieking
missiles, rose so as to obscure the heights. The rebels could only load, and thrust their guns
above the earthworks, firing at random, for no man could raise his head without coming in the
way of the fiery messengers of death, which filled the air. Still their fire, although at random,
was annoying, and it was evident that the safest method was to cross men in boats, enough to
drive the rebels from their pits, or capture them, and then build the bridge without opposition.

The Twenty-sixth New Jersey and Fifth Vermont regiments leaped into the boats, quickly crossed,
and, rushing from the bank, charged upon the pits. The rebels were now, for the first time
offered an opportunity for flight; for while the artillery was filling the whole plain with
bursting shells, there remained no alternative but to hug the earth behind the rifle pits;
now that the artillery ceased, they scattered across the plain in hot haste, before the rapid
charge of our boys. The two regiments pursued the fugitives, and many of them threw down their
arms; we captured about seventy-five prisoners; of these, thirty-six were captured by Captain
Davenport, who, with eighteen of his men, was marching up the ravine through which passes the
Deep Run, when they came upon the rebels, whom they obliged to surrender, their captain delivering
his sword to Captain Davenport. Five or six men of the engineers were killed, and some wounded.
The Vermonters and New Jerseymen, also, had a few men wounded.

The Seventy-seventh had one man killed. Sergeant Rex Haines was shot through the head. He was
a brave man, and one of the best soldiers in the regiment. He had, until that very day, been
confined to the hospital with severe illness. A few of our men, also, received slight wounds.

The engineers proceeded at once to lay the bridges, and on the following morning the whole
division crossed. Our picket reserve made their rendezvous at the ruins of the fine mansion
which we had used for our Second division hospital at the first battle. Now nothing but the
bare walls and heaps of rubbish marked the place where the beautiful residence had stood. A
regiment of Mississippians had occupied the place, and had ruthlessly and willfully burned
it. Yet the fine chestnuts and broad-spreading oaks afforded as luxurious a shade as in the
palmy days when the old bachelor proprietor lounged beneath their shadow.

The picket line extended nearly to the railroad, and, as before, formed a semi-circle, radiating
from the pontoon bridge. The enemy had also formed a strong picket to oppose us, and the two
lines of skirmishers were within a few yards of each other.

It was a beautiful Sabbath, and all day long the troops lay upon the plain, wondering what
was to be done. There were the frowning batteries of the enemy on the hills in front, apparently
able to blow the whole division into the air, and we could, with our glasses, discover great
numbers of infantry at the base of the hills, half hidden by the low growth of pines. The main
body of our army still remained in camp; only our Sixth corps had moved. Evidently the enemy
concluded that the advance was rather one of observation than attack, and quietly awaited our
movements. Some firing was for a time kept up on the skirmish line, and now and then a shell
would come crashing through some of the houses at the right, where our pickets were concealed;
but at length, by mutual consent, the pickets of each army watched the movements of their opponents
without molesting them. During this quasi-truce, a spirit of sociability manifested itself,
and our boys soon struck up an acquaintance with their dangerous neighbors. At length an exchange
of papers was proposed, and upon mutual agreement of temporary amity, a Yankee and a Johnnie
would step into the open space between the two lines, shake hands, inquire each other's regiment,
trade papers and retire.

There came at this time, to each company of one regiment, a copy of the New York Observer,
Independent, Christian Examiner, Evangelist and other papers, and Mr. Alvord, the agent of
the Tract Society, had just been among the men, distributing copies of the American Messenger.
These were soon collected and carried over to be exchanged for copies of the Richmond Enquirer,
Sentinel, and Examiner. The trade was not kept wholly within the limits of literary exchange,
but sugar and coffee passed into the rebels' hands in return for plugs of tobacco. At length
an order came from division head-quarters, stopping this illicit practice. Our boys declared
that they were acting the part of colporteurs to the barbarian rebels, and, if they had been
allowed to continue the distribution of religious papers among them, they would soon be convinced
of the error of their ways, and desist from further fighting.

During the night of the 8th, our division was withdrawn to the north side of the river, our
place being taken by the Third division. We retired to Stafford Heights and bivouacked. Our
bivouac became our encampment for a week. There we lay, wondering what was next to be done,
while the artillery on either side exchanged shots. The 32-pounders on our hills sending their
huge shot across to the opposite heights, and the rebel guns replying, sometimes with shells
of most improved pattern, and at other times throwing over huge pieces of railroad iron.

An incident of much interest to Neill's brigade occurred while we were here. A lieutenant,
belonging to the Twenty-first New Jersey regiment, had been tried by a court-martial, and convicted
of cowardice at the battle on May 3d. The whole brigade was brought out at the hour for evening
parade, and formed in a hollow square. To the center of the inclosure the culprit was brought.
His sentence was then read to him, which was that he be dismissed the service in disgrace.
The adjutant-general of the brigade then proceeded to execute the details of the sentence.
The sword of the cowardly officer was taken from him and broken over his head; his shoulder-straps
and buttons were then cut off, and his pistol broken and thrown away. The sentence, and the
manner of its execution, were ordered to be published in the newspapers of the county where
the regiment was raised. A similar sentence was executed in the Seventy-seventh regiment on
the same evening. Lewis Burke, of Company F, was convicted of cowardice at the same battle.
He was brought before the regiment, which stood in line; his sentence read, his buttons and
the blue cord on his coat cut off, and a placard marked "Coward" hung to his back. A guard,
with fixed bayonets pointing at his back, then marched him off, the band playing "The Rogues'
March." Burke went to serve out his time at the Dry Tortugas at hard labor, without pay or
allowance.

As we looked upon the execution of these humiliating sentences, we could not help feeling how
much better it would have been to have fallen nobly on that field of battle, honored and lamented,
than to live to be thus degraded and despised. It had never been so forcibly impressed upon
our minds, how much better it was to die nobly than to live in disgrace. When we thought of
the noble Wheeler and his brave companions, who had given their lives for their country on
yonder heights, and then turned to the sickening scene before us, we could but exclaim, "How
are the dead to be envied!"

At length, on Saturday night, June 13th, we withdrew from Fredericksburgh, and commenced the
memorable Pennsylvania campaign. There had been, for several days, indications that General
Lee was throwing his army to our right, and was crossing the Rappahannock in the vicinity of
Culpepper. At length this had become a certainty; and the whole army was quickly moved to come
up with him. All day long the hurrying of trains, the movements of troops, the intense activity
at the railroad station, where everything was being hastily thrown into cars, had indicated
a sudden leave-taking.

At length the trains were off, and the whole army in motion. Our own corps being rear-guard,
started at ten o'clock at night. The darkness was intense, and a thunder shower prevailed.
Our route for a long time lay through a thick woods, where the branches of the trees, meeting
over our heads, shut out the little light that might have penetrated the thunder clouds, and
the column was shut in perfect darkness. The road was terribly muddy, and the batteries which
were trying to pass over the same route, were frequently stuck in the mire. Our men stumbled
over stones and fallen trees, often falling beneath the feet of the horses. Men fell over logs
and stones, breaking their legs and arms. Thus we continued the hasty and difficult march,
while the rain poured in torrents upon us. Later in the night the road became more open, and
the rain ceased. The darkness was not so black, still it was difficult to see the road. We
were passing over corduroy; some of the logs were a foot, and others a foot and a half through.
They were slippery from the rain, and the men, heavily laden with knapsacks, guns and cartridges,
tumbled headlong, many of them going off at the side, and rolling far down the steep embankments.
A laugh from the comrades of the luckless ones, while some one would call out, "Have you a
pass to go down there?" was the only notice taken of such accidents; and the dark column hurried
on, until at three o'clock in the morning, we halted at Potomac creek, where we slept soundly
upon the ground until morning.

The following day was Sunday. Our corps did not march until evening; we lay resting from the
fatigues of the night before, and watching the immense army trains hurrying by, the horses
and mules lashed to their full speed, or viewing the destruction of the great hospitals which
had been established here.

There were here immense quantities of stores; bedding, glass and earthenware, instruments and
medicines, with cooking and other utensils which could not, in the haste of breaking up, be
transported; so they were thrown in great heaps and burned.

All day long the trains crowded by, four and five wagons abreast; the drivers shouting and
lashing their beasts to their greatest speed. No one who has not seen the train of an army
in motion, can form any just conception of its magnitude, and of the difficulties attending
its movements. It was said that the train of the Army of the Potomac, including artillery,
at the time of which we speak, if placed in a single line, the teams at the distance necessary
for the march, would extend over seventy miles.

At Fairfax Court House, soon after this, the trains were greatly reduced, and again at Fairfax
Station; and after General Meade took command of the army they were still further reduced.
Yet, notwithstanding all these curtailments, our trains were said to be between thirty and
forty miles long.

How little did the impatient people, who clamored at all times, in winter as well as summer,
for an immediate "advance" of the army, consider that this immense body must always advance
with the army; that it must always be protected; that the army on every march and at every
halt must be so disposed as to prevent the enemy from reaching it from front, flank or rear;
and that when an advance was commenced, if the trains were to become blocked up, or stuck fast
in mud, the whole army must wait for them, no matter whether it had reached a favorable position
for a halt or not. It was no small undertaking to move an army with such a train; yet there
were many at home who thought the army could move from one place to another with the greatest ease.

It is true that the enemy got along with smaller trains than ours, and it is true that the
rebel army on that account was more easily moved than our own. It was one of the disadvantages
of too liberal a government that our movements for two years were weighed down with these cumbersome
trains; and even after so long an experience of their evil it was with strong feelings of opposition
that the reduction was acquiesced in.

A captain or lieutenant of the line was allowed a small valise, in which to carry his company
books and his clothing; and a staff officer was but little better off. Must this little be
reduced? Surely the ammunition and the commissary trains could suffer no diminution. The amount
of hospital supplies carried in the wagons was already limited; could it be reduced? The people
were clamoring to have wagons of the Sanitary and Christian Commissions admitted to the hospital
trains, to carry articles which, although they were gratefully received by the soldiers, yet
were not absolutely necessary. The ambulance train was surely not too large, and we could spare
no artillery.

Yet the train was reduced. Small as was the valise of the line officers, it must be still smaller;
little as was the baggage of the staff officer, it must be less; and inconveniently contracted
as was the size of the mess chests, they must be still further reduced.

Thus, through the day, we watched the hurrying trains as they swept by with immense clatter
and tumult; and the files of troops, guards to the trains, pressing forward, amid the clouds
of dust and the rattle and noise of the wagons. As the sun sunk in the west, we gathered about
a green knoll, in the shade of a pine grove, and sung old familiar hymns; then the chaplain
made a prayer; thus was offered the evening sacrifice for the Sabbath.

At length, at nine o'clock at night, we took the road, and, joining the mighty column, marched
rapidly forward. The night was dark, and the roads uneven, yet the men pressed forward with
wonderful spirit. They had heard during the day that Lee with his army, avoiding us on the
right, and moving with secrecy, had already eluded us, and was rapidly making his way into
Maryland, taking his route through the Shenandoah Valley. This was enough to stimulate men
whose greatest desire was to meet their opponents in open fight, even on rebel ground. But
now the rebels were invading northern soil; Maryland, Pennsylvania, and even New York, were
threatened, and the men knew no limit to their enthusiasm. "We can whip them on our own soil,"
said they. "There is no man who cannot fight the better when it is for his own home." Such
expressions passed from lip to lip as the dark column pushed on during the whole night. At
times there would be a halt; not for rest, for the men, expecting momentarily to move on, would
stand in the ranks; then, on again. Here and there were the camps of troops who had occupied
the extreme right of the army. Fine arbors and avenues had been erected from the cedar boughs;
these were set on fire, and the whole heavens were aglow with the flames. Morning dawned, the
march was becoming tedious. The men were faint, and wanted rest and coffee; but there was no halt.

Faint and weary, yet with determination, the masses of men toiled along. At length, as the
morning advanced, the heat of the sun was almost intolerable, and the dust suffocating. Not
a leaf stirred on the trees. Vegetation drooped under the scorching rays, and the clouds of
dust was so dense, that one could not see half the length of a regiment.

The men at length began to fall from exhaustion. One after another, with faces burning with
a glow of crimson, and panting for breath, would turn to the surgeons of their regiments, and
receive passes to the ambulances and a draught from the surgeon's flask; but at length no more
passes could be given; the ambulances were crowded, and so many were falling on every side,
that it became useless to require or attempt to give passes, or even for the surgeons to attempt
to relieve the sufferers.

In every corner of the rail fences, and under every tree and bush, groups of men, with faces
glowing with redness, some with streams of perspiration rolling down their cheeks, and others
with their red faces dry and feverish, strewed the wayside and lined the hedges. Here the color-bearer
of a regiment, his color lying beside him, lay gasping for breath; there a colonel, his horse
tied to the fence, strove to fan the air into a little life with his broad-brimmed hat. Under
one little clump of cedars might be seen an exhausted group of line officers, captains and
lieutenants, and under the next, a number of enlisted men who could no longer keep the road.
The spectacle along the roadside became appalling. Regiments became like companies, and companies
lost their identity; men were dying with sunstroke; and still the march was continued. This
could not last much longer, for the brave men who still held out were fast losing strength,
and soon there would be no troops able to move. At length, at nearly three o'clock, we came
in sight of the little, old, depopulated town of Dumfries. Here, to the joy of all, we saw
men filing into the fields for a halt. There was no cheer, no expression of gladness; for the
tired men, with feet blistered and raw, worn out by seventeen hours' constant march, almost
melted and smothered, cared little for demonstrations. Throwing themselves upon the ground,
they rested for half an hour, and then, rousing long enough to cook their coffee, they refreshed
themselves with their hard tack, pork and coffee, and were ready to sleep. Here the Vermont
brigade was drawn up in line, and some half a dozen men, skulkers, principally from the Twenty-sixth
New Jersey, were drummed out of camp, the bands of the brigade playing "The Rogues' March."
All who were participants of that day's work, remember it as the most trying march of the Army
of the Potomac. Very grateful to the weary army was sleep that night, but, at two o'clock in
the morning, the shout passed along the line, "fall in! fall in!" And so, without coffee, we
rolled our blankets and fell into line. But, as often happens, when the whole army is to move,
some parts must wait long before the others are out of the way. So we of the Sixth corps waited
until four o'clock, and got our coffee finally before the rest of the column had made way for
us. It was another hot, dusty day, but not so intolerable as the day before, and about two
or three o'clock we arrived at Occoquan creek, crossing at Wolf Run Shoals. Here we had two
or three hours' rest. The men had no sooner halted than they plunged into the stream, and the
wide creek was soon alive with swarms of men splashing and diving in the cooling element.

It was a novel sight. An army bathing. A brigade of nine months Vermont troops, had been stationed
here during the winter. They were full regiments, never thinned by exhausting labors, hard
campaigns or the trying ordeal of battle. They now bade farewell to their comfortable quarters
and picket duty, and joined the Grand Army on a real campaign. Although we had already made
a long march, at four o'clock we were again on the road, and before dark we reached Fairfax
Station, six miles from Wolf Run Shoals. This was a more cheerful march than the others. The
men, refreshed by their bath, and strengthened by a good dinner and two hours' rest, now went
shouting, singing and laughing, as though marching was but play.

This day we heard that some part of Lee's army was in Pennsylvania! The men were as anxious
to go forward as were their commanders. The corps bivouacked in groves on the turnpike, which
led from Fairfax to Manassas, resting for the night and the following day. Here our train underwent
a process of purging. Needless articles, and many useful ones, which could be disposed of,
were sent to the rear. The trains were to go with smaller loads, and many teams were to be
taken from them.

We had marched, since setting out from before Fredericksburgh, through a country, well enough
by nature, but neglected, barren and depopulated. How large a portion of this great State was
in this sad condition? Its naturally rich fields were grown up to scrub pines, mugworts and
wormwood. Its fair valleys desolate of inhabitants, or inhabited by low white trash, as idle
as ignorant. The groves and fields where we now rested were pleasant for a bivouac, but the
fields were waste land, and the oak timber was all that seemed of any value, as far as we could
see. Yet we were now within a few miles of Washington, where articles of food brought fabulous
prices, and wood could scarcely be procured. Why were these fine lands desolate? Was it because
agriculture was unprofitable? Surely, with Washington and Alexandria so near, and Baltimore
at a short distance farther, there should be a good market for produce. Was it because the
war had put a stop to agricultural pursuits? The scrub pines and dwarf oaks growing upon deserted
tobacco fields, where the ridges were still plainly visible, showed that before the war indolence
prevailed.

At five o'clock on the morning of June 19th, we were again on the march, reaching Fairfax Court
House before noon. Again our train was overhauled, baggage reduced, and teams sent to the rear.
By this time the train began to assume more reasonable dimensions. "I mean just exactly what I say,"
said the fellow, quite coolly; and, thinkin he saw in me some show o' a spirit o' resistance, whilk
there really was, he touched me wi' a bit thing like a wean's whistle, and winked to his neebor
to come to his assistance, which the latter immediately did, and catched me by the ither breast o' my coat.

"Come
along," said baith, now beginnin to drag me wi' them.

"No a fit," said I, resistin, "till I ken what for I'm used this way."

"Oh! ye don't know, Mr. Innocence!" said the fellow wha first took hand o' me; "not you--you're
amazed, an't you? You can't suppose there's such a thing as fugæ warrants out against you! And
you can't believe I should have such a thing in my pocket," added
the scoonril, takin' a piece o' paper oot o' his pouch, and haudin't
up before my een, but oot o' my reach.

"There, my lad, are you satisfied now? That's the thing I walks by."

Then, havin replaced the paper in his pouch, he went on, but now, apparently, more for the information
of the bystanders (of whom there was, by this time, a considerable number gathered together),
than for mine.

"You're apprehended, Mr. Smith, by virtue of a fugæ warrant, obtained at the instance of Messrs.
Hodgson, Brothers, & Co., on the evidence of two credible witnesses--namely, Robert Smart
and Henry Allan--who have deponed that you were going beyond seas; you being indebted to the
said Hodgson, Brothers, & Co., in the sum of £74. 15s. 9d. sterling
money.

There's cause and ground for yer apprehension, Mr. Smith," continued the fellow; "so, no more
about it, but come along quietly, and at once, or it may be worse for you."

"I'll see you shot first," said I. "I ken naething aboot your Hodgson, Brothers--never heard o'
them before. I owe them nae money, nor onybody else, but what I can pay; and I haena, nor
ever had, ony intention whatever o' leavin my ain country."

"A' quite natural statement'; these, Mr. Smith," said the man wha first took haud o' me; "but
ye'll observe we're no bound to believe them. All that we have to do, is to execute our duty.
If you are wronged, you may have your redress by legal process. In the meantime, ye go with
us." And again the two commenced draggin me oot o' the office.

"May I be hanged if I do, then!" said I, passionately; for my blood was noo gettin up. It wad
hae been far better for me, in the end, if I had taen things calmly--for I could easily hae
proven my identity, and, of course, the messengers' error in apprehendin me; but my prudence
and patience baith gave way before the strong feelin o' resentment, which a sense o' the injustice
I was sufferin had excited.

"May I be hanged if I do, then!" said I; and wi' that I hit ane o' the fellows a wap on the
face that sent him staggerin to the other side o' the office.

Havin done this, I turned roun', quick as thocht, and collared the ane that still held by me,
a proceedin which was immediately followed by a wrestle o' the most ferocious and determined
character.

I was the stouter man o' the twa, however, and wad sune hae laid
my antagonist on the breadth o' his back, but for his neebor, who,
now rendered furious by the blow which I had gien him, sprang on me
like a tiger; and, between them I was borne to the groun', the twa
fa'in on the tap o' me.

Here, again, however, the battle was renewed. I continued to kick and box richt and left, wi'
a vigour that made me still formidable to my enemies; while they, to do them justice, lent me
kicks and blows in return, that nearly ca'ed the life out o' me. There, then, were we a' three
rowin on the floor, sometimes ane uppermost an' sometimes anither, wi' oor faces streamin
o' blude, and oor coats a' torn in the most ruinous manner. It was an awfu' scene, and such
a ane as hadna been seen often in that office before, I dare say. As micht be expected, we
had a numerous audience, too The office was filled wi' folk, the
door was choked up wi' them, and there was an immense crowd in the
street, and clusters at the window, a' tryin to get a sicht or a knowledge
o' what was proceedin within.

Baith the commotion and the concourse, in fact, was tremendous--just appallin to look at.
But this was a state o' matters that couldna last lang. My assailants havin ca'ed in the assistance
o' a couple o' great, big, stout fallows o' porters, I was finally pinned to the floor, whan my hauns
bein secured by a pair o' handcuffs, I was raised to my feet, again collared by the twa officers,
and a cry havin been made to clear the road, I was led oot o' the office in procession; a messenger
on each side o' me, the twa porters ahint, and ane before, openin a passage through the crowd,
whose remarks, as I gaed alang, were highly flatterin to me:--

"What an awfu'-like ruffian!" said ane. "What a murderous-lookin scoonril!" said anither.

"What's he been doin?" inquired a third.

"Robbin the mail-coach," answered a fourth; "and they say he has murdered the guard an' twa passengers."

"Oh!
the monster!" exclaimed an auld wife, whom this piece of accurate information had reached; "the
savage, bloody monster! Was ever the like heard tell o'! The gallows is owre guid for him."

In short, I heard mysel, as I was led alang, charged wi' every crime that human wickedness
is capable o', although I perceived that the robbery o' the mail, and the murders o' the guard
and passengers, was the favourite and prevailing notion; a notion which, I presumed, had arisen
frae the circumstance o' the row's havin had its origin in a coach office. Some reports hae
been waur founded. As to the reflections on my appearance, I couldna reasonably quarrel wi' them:
for, really, it was far frae bein prepossessin; and o' this I was quite sensible. My coat was
hingin in tatters aboot me; my hat was crushed oot o' a' shape; and
my face was hideously disfigured wi' blude, and wi' unnatural swellins
frae the blows I had gotten.

Wi' the reflections on my appearance, then, as I hae said, greatly improved as it was by the display
o' my handcuffs, I couldna justly fin' faut. By-and-by, however, we reached the jail; and
into ane o' its strongest and best secured apartments was I immediately
conducted.

Havin seen me fairly lodged here, my captors took their leave o' me; ane o' them sayin, as he
quitted the cell, and shakin his head as he spoke--

"If ye don't rue this job, friend, my name's not what it is--that's all."

The door bein noo closed on me, an' a fine opportunity bein thus presented me for indulgin in
a little reflection on my present circumstances an' situation, I
accordingly began to do so; but I fand it by nae means a very agreeable
employment.

Amang ither things, it struck me that I had exposed mysel' sadly, and very unnecessarily, since
I could easily, as I believe I hae before remarked, hae shown that they had put the saddle
on the wrong horse; but I had allowed my passion to get the better o' me, an' instead o' takin
the richt and prudent course o' establishin this by a quiet procedure, had resisted, an' foucht
like a thief taen in the fact. However, the business was noo hoo to mend the matter, an' it
was some time before I could discover precisely hoo this was to be done--at least wi' a' that expedition
I wad hae liked. At last it struck me that I couldna do better than intimate my situation to
Mr. Drysdale, an' request o' him to come an' see me. This, then, I immediately did--the jailor furnishin
me wi' paper, pen, an' ink, an' undertakin to have my letter delivered as directed, which was
faithfully executed; for, in less than half-an-hour, Mr. Drysdale, laughin' like to split his
sides, entered my cell.

"What's this, Mr. Smith?--what's this has happened ye, man?" said he, when the laughing would let
him speak. "Ye see what it is to hae a bad name. I tell't ye there was mair than me mistaen
aboot this affair. It's a most unlucky name yours."

"Confound the name, sir!" said I. "It's like to be baith the ruin an' the death o' me. But what
can I do? I canna get quit o't, an' maun just fecht oot wi't the
best way I can."

I wasna at first a'thegither in such a laughin humour as my visitor, yet I couldna help joinin
him in the lang run, whan we took twa or three guid roun's o't, an' then proceeded to business.
Mr. Drysdale said he wad bail me to ony amount, if that were necessary to my immediate liberation;
but proposed that he should, in the first place, call on Hodgson, Brothers, whom he knew intimately,
an' state the case to them. This he accordingly did; an', in aboot a quarter o' an hour, returned
to me in the jail, wi' ane o' thae gentlemen alang wi' him. Mr. Hodgson expressed the utmost
concern for what had happened, an' offered me ony reasonable recompense I might name for the
injury an' detention to which I had been subjected. This, however, I declined, but expressed
a wish that the messengers wha had apprehended me micht be keel-hauled a bit for the rashness
o' their proceedins.

"As to that, Mr. Smith," said Mr. Hodgson, smilin, "I think you had as well 'let a-be for let a-be'
there. They have been sadly mauled by you, I understand, and it strikes me to be a drawn battle
between you."

"Weel, weel," said I, laughin, "e'en let it be sae, then; but the scoonrils ocht to be mair
carefu' wha they lay their hands on."

"They ought, no doubt," said Mr. Hodgson; "but, in this case there was really some excuse for
them. Our debtor, whom I dare say you know very well, is a young man of the name of William Smith--a
grocer in your own town, who began business there some months ago. Now, he has failed, as I dare
say you know, also--has shut shop--swindled his creditors--and fled the country. This was the
fellow we wanted to catch; and, you being from the same place, of the same name, and of, as
I take it, about the same age, it is really no great wonder that the men were deceived."

I allowed that it was not; but said it was rather hard that the sins o' a' the Willie Smiths in
the country should be visited on my shouthers. "There's no a piece o' villany done by, nor
a misfortune happens to a Willie Smith," said I, "but it's fastened on me. It's really hard."

My twa visitors laughingly admitted the hardship o' the case, but
advised me to be as patient under't as I could--a wishy-washy aneuch
sort o' advice; but it was a', I dare say, they had to offer.

I need hardly say that the jail doors were noo instantly thrown open to me, nor that I lost nae time
in availin mysel' o' the liberty to which they invited. The first thing I did on gettin oot
was to provide mysel wi' a new coat and hat; for, until this was done, I wasna in a fit state
to be seen, an' couldna think o' walkin the streets in the torn-down and blackguard lookin
condition in which my captors had left me. Havin, however, improved my outward man a little, and
brushed up my face a bit--but on which, notwithstandin a' I could do, there continued to remain
some ugly traces o' my late adventure--I thocht I couldna do better, as I had noo a lang idle
evenin before me, than ca' on twa or three auld and intimate acquaintances
o' our family that resided in Glasgow.

In pursuance o' this resolution, I began wi' some decent folks o' the name o' Robertson, distant
relations o' our ain, and from whom I had, on the occasion o' former visits, o' which I had
made twa or three, met wi' the most kind an' cordial welcome; and o' this I naturally expected
a repetition in the present instance. What was my surprise and mortification, then, whan I fand
it quite the reverse--most markedly sae!

"Oh, William, is that you!" said Mrs. Robertson, drily, and wi' a degree o' stiffness and cauldness
in her manner which I couldna understan'. "Will ye stap in a bit?" she added, hesitatingly and evidently
wi' reluctance. Weel, she used to fling her arms aboot me, and pu' me in. But it was noo, "Will
ye step in?" I did, but sune saw there was something wrang; but what it was I couldna conjecture.
I overheard her husband and dochters refusin Mrs. Robertson's request
to them to come ben and see me.

They used to a' rush aboot me, like a torrent. In short, I perceived that I was a very unwelcome
visitor, and that a speedy retreat on my part wad be highly approved of. Amongst other hints
o' this, was Mrs. Robertson's scarcely speakin three words to me a' the time I sat wi' her, and
no makin ony offer o' the sma'est refreshment. Her behaviour to me was a'thegither exceedinly
strange and mysterious; but what struck me as maist singular, was her aye speakin o' my faither
wi' a compassionatin air. "Puir, puir man!" she wad say; "Gude help us! it's a weary warl'
this! Ane canna tell what their weans are to come to. Muckle grief and sorrow, I'm sure, do they
bring to parents' hearts." These truths bein obvious and general, I couldna deny them, although
I was greatly at a loss to see ony particular occasion for advertin
to them at the time.

Wearied oot at length wi' Mrs. Robertson's truisms, and disgusted wi' her incivility and uncourteous
manner to me, I took up my hat, and decamped, wi' as little ceremony as I had been received.
I was, in truth, baith provoked and perplexed by her extraordinary
treatment o' me, and couldna at a' conjecture to what it could be
owin.

But let the reader fancy, if he can, what was my surprise when
I fand mysel' treated in almost precisely the same way in every ither
hoose at which I ca'ed subsequently to this. There was, in every instance,
the same astonishment expressed at seein me, the same cauldness exhibited,
and the same mysterious silence maintained durin my visit. I was perfectly
confounded at it; but couldna, of course, ask ony explanation, as
there was naething sae palpably oot o' joint as to admit o't. Havin
made my roun' o' ca's wi' the success and comfort I hae mentioned,
I returned to my quarters, and, orderin a tumbler o' toddy, sat down
amongst a heap o' newspapers, to amuse mysel' the best way I could
till bedtime. The first paper I took up was a Glasgow one, published
that day. I skimmed it ower till I cam to a paragraph wi' the followin
takin title--"Desperate Ruffian." This catched my e'e at ance; for
I was aye fond o' readin aboot desperate ruffians, and horrible accidents,
and atrocious murders, &c. &c. "So," says I to mysel', "here's a feast."
And I threw up my legs on the firm on which I was seated, drew the
candle nearer me, took a mouthfu' oot o' my tumbler, and made every
preparation, in short, for a quiet, deliberate, comfortable read;
and this I got, to my heart's content. The paragraph, which began
wi' "Desperate Ruffian," went on thus:--

"This morning, a scene,
at once one of the most disgraceful and ludicrous which we have witnessed
for some time, took place in one of the coach-offices of this city.
A fellow of the name of William Smith, a young man of about twenty-three
or twenty-four years of age, from ----, who is charged with various
acts of swindling, and is well known as a person of infamous character,
was apprehended on a fugæ warrant, by our two active criminal officers,
Messrs. Rob and Ramage, in the ---- coach-office, just as he was about
to take out a ticket for Greenock, whither he intended to proceed
for the purpose of embarking for America with his ill-got gains.

The Sixth corps was now upon the extreme right, marching toward Manchester; next, on our left,
was the Twelfth corps, at Taneytown, a little hamlet named in honor of the chief justice of
the United States, whose residence was there. At a point a dozen miles north and west of us,
was the head-quarters of the army, and the Second and Third Corps. Further to the left, at
Emmitsburgh, were the First, Fifth and Eleventh corps. Upon either flank of this line, extending
twenty miles, was cavalry. Thus the army was guarding a great extent of country, at the same
time that the different corps were within supporting distance of each other.

The rebel army under General Lee, one hundred thousand strong, occupied an equally extended
line to the north and west of us, stretching from Harrisburgh through Chambersburgh and Cashtown.

At five o'clock, Monday morning, 28th, the corps marched again, passing through Monroville,
New Market, Ridgeville and Mount Airy Station, halting for the night at Sam's creek. As the
corps passed through Westminster on the following day, the people welcomed us with demonstrations
of joy, which were all the more earnest, as the rebel cavalry had, but two hours before, taken
a hasty leave of them. At night we were at Manchester, at least twenty miles from the left
of the army, and between the line of march of the enemy and Baltimore. We rested here until
evening of the next day. The plot was thickening, and the hostile forces were moving cautiously,
each watching the movements of the other, and each ready to seize any opportunity for rushing
upon its enemy to destroy it. Thus far our marches had been of most fatiguing character. We
had, in the last four days, passed over one hundred miles of road. It is to be remembered that
these marches were made under burning suns, and that each soldier carried with him his gun,
knapsack, haversack, containing five days' provisions, and forty rounds of cartridges. The
men had kept up wonderfully during this trying campaign, but the great march of all, in which
this magnificent corps was to outdo all that was ever recorded of wonderful marches, was yet
in store for it.

We waited at Manchester until evening. The inhabitants were well supplied with rye whisky,
and it must be confessed that soldiers have a way of finding out the existence of that luxury,
and of supplying themselves with it; and as the men of the old Sixth corps were in no respect
behind their comrades of the other corps, many of our brave fellows became, long before dark,
considerably inebriated.

At nine o'clock in the evening of the 1st of July, we were on the road, but it was eleven before
we were fairly under headway. Those who during the day had indulged so freely in the rye whisky
of the farmers, as to disable them from marching or even standing in line, were quietly thrown
into the clumps of bushes by the roadside, and left to be gathered up by cavalry squads that
were scouring the country for stragglers. Those that were left by our own provost-guards were
picked up by rebel scouts.

The column now pushed rapidly on; all night the weary march was kept up. A halt of ten minutes
for breakfast, and then on again. Now we heard that a part of the army, the First corps, had
already engaged the enemy at Gettysburgh, with doubtful issue, and that its commander, General
Reynolds, was killed.

New ardor was now kindled in the breasts of the men of the Sixth corps at these tidings, and
they pressed forward at a pace unusual, even for them. The day was bright, the sun pouring
scalding rays from a cloudless sky. The men strove hard to keep in the ranks, for few in that
corps were willing to be left behind in a fight.

Yet some gave out from exhaustion, but even these, at a slower pace, followed the rapidly moving
column.

At the houses on the roadsides, the citizens, their wives and daughters, were bringing water,
from which the soldiers filled their canteens as they passed. At Littletown we saw citizens
bringing the wounded from the field in their carriages, and many wounded soldiers who could
walk were making their way to the village. The marching was more rapid. Our friends were waiting
for us. Soon we saw above the valley that lay before us, clouds of smoke and the white puffs
of bursting shells. As yet we could distinguish little of the sound of battle, but those small
fleecy clouds which appeared so suddenly, flashing forked lightning, told us of work ahead.
It was five o'clock when the Sixth corps arrived on the battle-field, having made an unprecedented
march of thirty-four miles! We halted in reserve, not to rest, but to wait a few moments until
our place should be assigned us in front. We had more marching to do! Four miles more of marching
and countermarching that night, made thirty-eight miles in a single day. Such marching as had
been done by the Sixth corps since leaving Bristow Station, is unparalleled in the history
of armies.

The roar of battle was terrific. On our left, where rose a hill covered with timber on the
top and side, a fearful struggle seemed in progress, and the roll of musketry and the rapid
discharge of artillery was almost deafening.

Let us now turn back and review the operations of the First and the Eleventh corps since yesterday
morning. We give it as it was related to us by members of the First and Eleventh corps. General
Buford, commanding the cavalry on the left flank of the army, had advanced north of the town
of Gettysburgh, and had fallen in with large bodies of cavalry, supported by infantry. He became
hotly engaged with this force, and at once reported the information to General Meade that he
had found the enemy in large force. General Reynolds, who, with the First corps had by this
time reached Marsh creek, within easy striking distance of Gettysburgh, was directed to urge
his troops forward to Gettysburgh as rapidly as possible. The corps pushed on, and reaching
Gettysburgh, filed through the town, leaving it to the rear. General Buford was found fiercely
struggling to maintain his position against the infantry of the enemy. At once, General Reynolds
proceeded to select a position for his line of battle. Without a moment's hesitation, the corps
was deployed; the division of Wadsworth, leading the van, was in position; a battery which
had been brought to the front was slowly forced back, but the gallant Wadsworth, bringing more
infantry into line, arrested the retreat, and in turn forced back the hostile forces, who were
now found to be in large numbers. It was at this time that General Reynolds, riding forward
with a few members of his staff, to inspect the field with the view of bringing the rest of
his troops into favorable position, was shot through the neck, the enemy having, at the moment,
opened a full volley of musketry. The noble commander, feeling the wound, turned to his soldiers
and shouted, "Forward men! for God's sake, forward!" and fell, dying, into the arms of one
of his companions.

This sad loss only fired the hearts of the soldiers to more desperate determination, and they
rushed into line upon the run, burning to avenge their beloved leader. General Doubleday, of
the Second division of the corps, was next in rank, and took command. The encounter was sharp,
and the rebels were giving way. Three hundred prisoners were brought in, and the corps was
put into position to hold its ground. The force of the enemy now engaged, proved to be the
corps of General A. P. Hill, and the prisoners declared that the rest of the confederate army
was close at hand. A column of the enemy now moved toward the left of our line, debouching
from a piece of woods, and occupying a close proximity to our forces. Volley after volley was
poured into the advancing column, without avail, except to stretch many of its men upon the
ground, wounded and dying.

At length the brigades of Doubleday's own division were ordered to charge upon the obstinate
line. They obeyed with alacrity, their cheers and shouts ringing above the roar of musketry.
The rebels gave way before this impetuous charge, and several hundred more prisoners were brought
in.

Thus far the First corps was victorious, but its ranks were becoming terribly thinned.

In the meantime, General Howard, with the Eleventh corps, was hastening to the assistance of
the First. Just before receiving his fatal wound, General Reynolds had sent a messenger to
Howard, who, with his corps, was ten miles behind, to hasten forward as rapidly as possible.

The men of that corps were burning to wipe out the unfortunate record of Chancellorsville,
and the roar of artillery before them, inspired vigor in their movements and urged them forward;
but the noise of the battle was heard by others.

Ewell, with his confederates, was but three miles off; and while the Unionists looked for the
coming of help, a fresh corps reinforced the rebels. But the opposing forces were, for the
time, willing to allow a lull in the battle. So, from ten o'clock until half-past two the First
corps held the enemy at bay. By this time a division of the Eleventh corps was on the ground
and another on the other side of Gettysburgh. General Howard took command. The Union reinforcements
were just arriving; those of the rebels had already taken their position, and were ready for
a desperate charge.

Suddenly, rushing from the cover of the woods in which they had debouched from the York road,
the old corps of Stonewall Jackson, now under Ewell, charged, with yells, down upon the Eleventh.
The Germans, this time stood their ground, returning with spirit, the volleys of their old
antagonists.

On the left, Hill was also charging fiercely upon the First corps, and the sturdy divisions
of Wadsworth and Cutler were almost destroyed.

The rebel line now overlapped that of the Union forces on either flank, and the two corps under
Howard were in danger of being surrounded by the greater numbers of their adversaries. The
lines began to waver under the fearful storm of lead and iron, and the order was given to fall
back. The lines retired in good order until they reached the town. There, in passing through
the streets, the Germans became confused and alarmed, and the retreat of the corps became a
rout. Twelve hundred were taken prisoners in the streets. The First corps maintained its line
of battle and held its foe at a distance in spite of the deadly fire which was decimating its
ranks. The heroic Wadsworth cheered and encouraged his men by his own noble example, while
the messengers of death shrieked thickly about him. On the right of the corps, Hill had already
forced back the line, and now the Eleventh corps having left him, both flanks of his division
were exposed. It was useless to protract the hopeless struggle, and these sturdy troops also
fell back, retiring slowly and firmly, while the rebels, flushed with victory, were pouring
into front and flank the most deadly fire. It was a moment of vital importance to our army
and our cause. A rout of these two corps, while the remaining two-thirds of the army was separated
in columns far distant from each other, must insure the destruction of each column in detail,
and give to the rebels undisputed sway throughout the north. But the christian hero, whose
empty sleeve testified of hard fought fields before, was still sufficient for the crisis. Halting
the retreating divisions as they reached the line of hills upon the south side of the town,
and selecting a ridge called Cemetery Hill for his second line of battle, he reformed his disordered
ranks, and planting batteries so as to sweep the declivity in front and on right and left,
awaited the onset of the victorious hosts. On they came, until half through the town, when,
from the whole line of guns on the crest, burst a murderous fire, from which the assailants
staggered in consternation.

The tide was turned; for now a part of Hancock's Second corps was coming up, and in half an
hour the rebels retired, and the one-armed general was master of the situation. But the day
had been a fearful one for the two corps.

The First corps had lost its general, loved and admired for his bravery. Hundreds from the
ranks of the corps, lay beyond the village stretched in death. Of those who went into the fight
in the morning, but one-half remained.

The havoc was almost as fearful in the Eleventh corps. Hundreds had been killed and a greater
number captured. Yet there was no faltering among those veterans, and when, toward evening,
the Third and Twelfth corps arrived upon the field, their confidence and hope rose, and all
now believed that our army was yet destined to achieve a grand victory.

No further demonstrations were made on either side that night. Each party was gathering its
strength for the grand conflict. Late in the evening General Meade arrived on the field, and
with General Howard proceeded to inspect the ground, and make arrangements for posting the
troops of the army.

The Eleventh corps was still to occupy Cemetery Hill, just opposite the town. Upon a knoll
to the right of the Eleventh corps was the First corps, and still farther, and forming the
extreme right of the army, was the Twelfth corps, General Slocum. On the left of Cemetery Hill,
occupying the extension of the ridge and a prominent hill, Round Top, the Third corps, General
Sickles, was posted, and the Second corps, General Hancock. The Fifth corps was to be held
in reserve until the arrival of the Sixth corps. Thus through the night, the two armies lay
upon their arms, each watching the other, to wake to a contest more fearful than the last.

At daylight Thursday morning, July 2d, the rebel skirmishers opened fire upon parts of our
lines of pickets, but there was little betokening any general engagement. Occasionally a few
of the skirmishers of the enemy, would make a charge upon parts of our line forcing back the
pickets, but a gun from some one of our batteries would hastily send them to the rear again.
Doubtless it was for the purpose of disclosing the positions of our batteries, that their dashes
were made. Thus the day wore on until four o'clock.

General Sickles, with the Third corps, had moved out beyond the general line of battle nearly
a mile, and had come upon the advance of the enemy, where Longstreet, with one-third of the
rebel army, was concentrating his forces against the left flank, with the hope of turning it
and seizing the ridge.

The battle opened at once. Seven batteries of artillery opened upon front and flank of the
exposed corps, and large bodies of infantry in column by division. The corps withstood the
shock heroically, and was soon strengthened by troops from the Second corps. Our artillery
now opened upon the rebels from the ridge, and hurled destruction upon them. The valley was
filled with bursting missiles, and the smoke rolled up in huge columns. It was at this stage
of the great battle that the Sixth corps arrived on the ground, after its unparalleled march,
and the Fifth corps was at once ordered into the fight. For an hour the Sixth corps was the
reserve of the army, but even this reserve was soon called into action.

The writer, while our corps waited for orders, rode along the front, from where the Second
and Third corps were engaged in their deadly struggle with the enemy, across Cemetery Ridge
and to the hill where, on the right of the line, Slocum had established his head-quarters,
and he will attempt to describe the field as he saw it.

To form a correct idea of the position of the armies, one should imagine two ranges of hills,
between which was the valley and the village of Gettysburgh.

These ridges are nearly parallel, and are from a mile to a mile and a half asunder. Their course
is not a direct line but curving. The ridge on which our forces are posted, bend outward and
backward, so that the line is in the form of a half circle, fronting from the center, while
the rebels were forced to occupy an exterior line facing towards the center.

At Gettysburgh several roads converge, first, on the right is the Baltimore turnpike, next
is the road to Taneytown, and further to the left is the Emmitsburgh road. These all meet at
Cemetery Hill, which is the key to the whole situation.

Cemetery Hill is in the center of a range of hills running south and west from Gettysburgh,
and considerably in front of the others. Standing upon its summit, the spectator looks down
upon the village, a little to his right and upon the long declivity stretching between the
crest and the town.

The crest of this ridge is bristling with batteries, which are so arranged as to sweep the
declivity, the valley below, and the opposite range of hills. Here, by the side of the Baltimore
pike, General Howard has his head-quarters, and just in front lie long lines of infantry, who
wear the crescent badge, which distinguishes the Eleventh corps.

Stretching to the left and rear, Cemetery Ridge gradually diminishes in elevation, until it
reaches an abrupt peak which rises considerably above the other hills of the range. This is
Round Top. It is covered with timber at its summit, its sides are rugged, and, toward the enemy,
quite steep. On the north slope of Round Top, the Second and Third corps are maintaining the
unequal struggle with one-third of the rebel army. The roar of musketry is awful beyond description,
and the whole valley trembles with the thunder of the artillery. On the right of Cemetery Ridge
is another elevation, Slocum's Hill, where the commander of the Twelfth corps sits among the
huge fragments of rock, watching his own and the enemy's line in his front, and where is another
battery, which from time to time is sending its screaming messengers to the hills beyond or
across a little stream which winds along the right of his position.

In rear of Slocum's Hill is a little whitewashed cottage, surrounded by a picket fence. There
are two or three wall tents in the yard, and many horses are tied to the fence. This is the
head-quarters of the army. From this point General Meade is directing all the movements of
the Union forces.

It will be seen that our troops could be sent from one point to another of the line, easily
and quickly, while the rebels, who occupied the exterior of the circle, must make long circuits
in order to reinforce one part of the field with troops from another. For the first time since
Malvern Hill, our forces had the advantage of position.

The rebel lines which had so fiercely attacked the Third corps, steadily advanced, pouring
destruction before them, while the two corps, unable to resist the weight of the advancing
columns, steadily fell back. At the moment that the Sixth corps reached the field, the Fifth
were rushing to the assistance of the wavering lines on Round Top.

It was a glorious spectacle, as the veteran wearers of the St. Andrew's cross rushed along
the rear of the peak and among the rocks, at double-quick, and then suddenly moving by the
flank, formed in line of battle. Through the woods and down the slope they rush, fall upon
the advancing columns, and check their progress. The Union line now advance upon the rebels,
who fall back more. Shot and shells pour in a fearful storm from the rebel batteries, sweeping
the slope of Round Top and the crest of Cemetery Hill. Here, near Howard's quarters, a train
of ambulances and army wagons attract the fire of the enemy, and the bursting shells soon send
them hurrying through the narrow defile in the rocks through which the road passes, panic stricken.
For more than two hours the desperate battle rages on the left, while the right, except that
on either side artillery belches forth its thunders, is quiet. The Sixth corps, the only reserve
of the army, is also put into the line on the left; only one brigade, Neill's, is sent to the
right to reinforce Slocum, who has also sent a great portion of his corps to the left, and
against whom the rebels are now charging. The doubtful contest ceases as darkness gathers over
the battle-field, leaving the rebels still in possession of some of the ground occupied by
Sickles' corps at four o'clock.

Both armies again lay upon their arms, waiting for daylight, by which to renew the contest.
The losses in the Second and Third corps had been fearful, and scarcely less were those of
the Fifth. From our own Sixth corps, there were many killed and wounded, but compared with
these others, the loss was slight. General Sickles had been wounded early in the fight, and
suffered amputation of a leg. The morning of July 3d dawned brightly, and at once the rattle
of musketry told of the renewal of strife. On the right, where Slocum with a single division
of his own troops and our Third brigade of Howe's division, Sixth corps, held the long line,
an attempt was made to retake the rifle pits which the rebels had captured yesterday. The rebels
in turn charged furiously. They had possession of some of our pits, and now they hoped to turn
our flank and rout the army; but the small force replied to the desperate charge of the whole
of Ewell's corps with the most stubborn resistance. Charge after charge was made, but to no
avail. At length Neill's brigade passed far to the right of the rebel line, and poured an enfilading
volley into the gray-coats. They, supposing that a heavy force had got on their flank withdrew,
when our forces charging in turn, drove them with great loss from the rifle pits, which were
held during the remainder of the engagement in spite of repeated efforts to dislodge our forces.
By noon quiet prevailed along the whole line, except that now and then a shot from some of
our batteries screamed across the valley, but eliciting no reply. The rebel lines could be
seen moving here and there as if preparing for a desperate struggle. The men at our batteries
declared that so completely had they got the range of the other crests that the rebels dare
not open a piece. Little did they imagine that more than a hundred guns were concentrating
just behind the little strip of woods below them.

This unwonted silence continued until about one o'clock, when suddenly, as though pandemonium
had broken loose, the air was filled with the shrieks, screams, howls and clangor of bursting
shells. The sky was filled with smoke, amid which flames darted in every direction, and the
valley and hills quaked with the thunders of artillery. Never on this continent had been heard
such cannonading as this. For two hours this storm of shell and shot raged in all its fury.
At the first opening of the storm, parts of our line were forced back, but they quickly advanced
again. Horses and men fell together, mangled and torn by the screaming missiles. In some of
our batteries every horse was destroyed, and the men drew back the pieces by hand to save them
from capture. One hundred and twenty-five guns were concentrated against our left center, which
continued for two hours to belch forth death and destruction. At length, when it was supposed
that our guns were silenced, and our infantry confused by the fearful cannonade, came the expected
charge of infantry. Longstreet's corps, massed, with Picket's division in front, rushed forward
with the well known yells, which rang above the clangor of musketry and artillery, and threw
themselves with utmost fury upon the Union lines. Our men had waited the onset with unflinching
courage, and now poured into the assailants a most murderous fire, which hurled them back and
strewed the ground with their dead and dying. Again, with the fierceness of desperation, they
rush forward, and again are met with the same deadly reception. Hundreds from the attacking
columns, in order to escape the certain doom, threw down their arms and came in as prisoners.
The tide of battle lulled for a time.

Again artillery did its work alone, until about four o'clock, when the last desperate charge
was made, the grand effort which was to sweep the Union lines in confusion, or result in the
total defeat of the rebel army.

The heavy masses swept up as before, with the desperation of madness. They advanced until they
were fairly on our lines, and, at some points, actually pushed them back. Then they were met
with enfilading fires, from which the carnage exceeded all that had been before. Nearly the
whole of Picket's division, finding itself unable to retreat through the fiery storm, was captured,
and the remaining divisions reeled back in confusion, leaving the ground literally covered
with dead.

This decided the fate of the battle. The enemy had staked all upon this last desperate charge,
and had been hurled back in confusion and with enormous losses.

No pursuit was attempted, but, although the rebels were not at once driven from their position,
they had suffered a terrible defeat, and they must retreat with all speed to their defenses
in Virginia, or submit to the destruction of their army. Our wounded were collected in great
numbers in and about the field hospitals, which were composed chiefly of hospital tents, some
farm house with its large barns, serving as a nucleus for each. To these, thousands of our
brave comrades were brought with mangled limbs, torn bodies or bleeding heads, yet, notwithstanding
their terrible wounds, exhibiting their accustomed heroism. Long trains of ambulances were
bringing in crowds of poor fellows with arms or legs torn to shreds, yet who never uttered
a word of complaint, and who, indeed, appeared cheerful, and some even gay.

In this respect there was the greatest contrast between the wounded of the Union and the rebel
armies. A Union soldier, if so severely wounded that he could by no possibility assume a cheerful
countenance, would shut his teeth close together and say nothing. While a rebel, if he could
boast of only a flesh wound, would whine and cry like a sick child. One unaccustomed to such
scenes as can only be witnessed about a field hospital in time of battle, would be filled with
astonishment at the stoical bravery manifested by the northern troops. If one had passed along
where our men were lying in rows, he would only now and then have heard a groan escape from
some poor fellow who had received a bullet through the abdomen or some such fatal and painful
wound. But let a group of wounded rebels be placed in some part of the hospital, and their
groans were heart-rending. This contrast is not overdrawn. Every surgeon who has had opportunities
to observe the difference in the bearing of wounded men of the two armies, can testify to the
greater heroism of the northern soldier at such times.

The battle was over and the invading army which had suffered such a crushing defeat, had only
to gather up its shattered remnants and hastily retrace its steps southward. We were in no
condition to renew immediate hostilities. Every man and every gun had been brought into service.
Never before had all of our army been fought at once. At Gettysburgh, every man of the infantry
reserve, and every gun of the reserve artillery had been brought into action. The men were
exhausted by their tedious marches and hard fighting, while our ammunition was well nigh spent.

During the night of the 4th of July, Lee's army retreated, and on the morning of the 5th, our
Sixth corps, Sedgwick's cavalry as the corps was called, was sent in pursuit on the Fairfield
road. The battle-field was horrible. Dead men were thickly strewed over the fields with their
faces blackened, and eyes starting from their sockets; and upturned, swollen horses lay, sometimes
in groups of six or eight, showing where some battery had suffered fearfully. As we passed
the scene of the conflict on the left, at the foot of Round Top, was a scene more than usually
hideous. Blackened ruins marked the spot where, on the morning of the third, stood a large
barn. It had been used as a hospital. It had taken fire from the shells of the hostile batteries,
and had quickly burned to the ground. Those of the wounded not able to help themselves were
destroyed by the flames, which in a moment spread through the straw and dry material of the
building. The crisped and blackened limbs, heads and other portions of bodies lying half consumed
among the heaps of ruins and ashes, made up one of the most ghastly pictures ever witnessed,
even on the field of battle. But we passed these direful scenes to meet with others of less
shocking but still sad character. Every house and barn from Gettysburgh to Fairfield was a
hospital; and about most of the large barns, numbers of dilapidated hospital tents served to
increase the accommodations for the wounded.

All of the worst cases were left in these hospitals, the number being estimated, by the rebel
surgeons in charge, at no less than fifteen thousand. Never had we witnessed such sad scenes
as we were passing through to-day. The confederate surgeons were doing what they could for
their wounded, but they were destitute of medicines and surgical appliances, and even food
sufficient to supply those in their charge. At one of these barns some of our officers stopped,
and as they passed among the gray-clad sufferers who were lying in rows upon the barn floors,
one, a boy apparently not more than sixteen years of age, attracted the notice of one of the
company, a surgeon. The lad looked more like a delicate girl than a soldier; his hair fell
from his fair forehead in long flaxen curls upon his pillow of straw, some of them matted with
blood; his cheek was rosy, and his soft white hand told of a youth spent amid more tender scenes
than those of the camp. A piece of linen laid across his face covered a ghastly wound where
a ball had passed through his face, and had torn both his eyes from their sockets.

The surgeon spoke a kind word to the youth, who stretched out his hand, saying, "Come near
me, I want to touch you." The doctor stooped over him, and the boy, pressing his hand in his
own, said, "You are a friend, are you not?" "Yes, I am a friend to all the unfortunate." "But
are you not a confederate?" "No." The boy clung to the hand of the surgeon in silence for a
moment, and then said slowly, "I did not think a federal would speak so kindly to me; your
voice sounds like that of a friend, and your hand feels like one; will you not stay with me?"
When the other told him that he must follow his command, he replied: "Oh! I shall never hear
any one speak so kindly to me again; my mother lives in North Carolina, but she will not see
me. Can you not stay?" The doctor was far from being a rebel sympathizer, yet he turned away
from the poor boy, with a sad face and a deep drawn sigh, to join the moving column.

Early next morning we passed through the somewhat dilapidated village of Fairfield. Our advance
threw a few shells down the street, scattering a body of cavalry, which had been left in town,
and killing some of the horses attached to their battery. A mile beyond the town the South
Mountain range rose in our front, the road running through a narrow pass. Here the rear guard
of the rebel army was strongly posted. Neill's and the Jersey brigade advanced against the
rebel skirmishers, but after losing some six or eight men they were ordered to halt. General
Sedgwick deeming the position too strong to assault with his corps from the front, reported
to General Meade that the pass was very strong, and one in which a small force of the enemy
could hold in check for a considerable time, a force much larger than its own. The main body
of the army, therefore, was moved around their flank by way of Frederick; while Neill's brigade,
with Colonel McIntosh's brigade of cavalry and two light batteries, all under command of General
Neill, were made to form a flying division to harass the enemy in the rear.

Our march over the mountain that day was by a wild, romantic route, than which none more charming
could be asked by tourist in search of nature's wildest moods. Before each little log house
by the roadside would stand a wondering group, astonished at seeing such multitudes of men
in those secluded regions, where scarcely a dozen travelers usually passed in a week. At one
place, as the column was passing a cottage half hidden by sunflowers and flowering beans, those
at the head of the column were heard cheering heartily; and, as we advanced, other voices took
up the cheer, exciting the curiosity of those behind. In the midst of the noise, sounded a
shrill voice; and as we approached, we saw, sitting upon the fence in front of the cottage,
a little boy, about four years old, his face flushed with excitement, his flaxen hair flying
in the wind, as he was waving his little hat, and with childlike indistinctness shouting in
his shrill tones, "Hurrah for 'e Union! Hurrah for 'e Union!"

Soon those in the rear of the line heard those ahead shouting again, and another shrill voice
was heard between the cheers of the men. There by the roadside stood an old man, over whom
more than eighty years had passed, with voice indistinct with the tremor of age, all excited
as the little boy had been, his hair tossed about by the breeze, as with hat swinging he too
was shouting, "Hurrah for the Union! Hurrah for the Union!" And the cheers of the multitude
again rang in response to the old man's shout. We could but note the similarity and the disparity.
One vaguely dreamed of those blessings which the other had fully realized, and for which he
had struggled; and the same shout was lifted up by those two children--the one of four, and
the other of fourscore--the one with the flaxen curls of childhood, and the other with the
white locks of age--the one voice with the shrill treble of infancy, and the other with the
high-keyed tones of decrepitude. Those people, who had seen the rebel army pass a few hours
before, now felt the value of the Union.

On the summit of the mountain we passed Monterey Springs, a charming summer retreat, where
the Pennsylvanians resort to indulge in the sports of trout-fishing and deer-hunting. Passing
down the western slope of the mountain, the handiwork of Kilpatrick was strewed along the roadside
for miles. As the battle of Gettysburgh drew to a close, and General Meade knew that Lee must
retreat toward Virginia, he had sent the dashing Kilpatrick with his brigade of cavalry to
harass the rebels in their flight. Reaching these mountains, the cavalry had come upon a long
rebel train of wagons and ambulances, hastening with all speed, with their lading of stolen
goods and provisions and their wounded men, towards the Potomac. With shouts and cheers the
horsemen dashed from the cover of the woods, upon the flying train, shot the leading horses
and mules, captured the drivers and remaining animals, appropriated the stolen goods to their
own use, and burned the wagons. Now, as we marched down the forest road, the wildness of the
scene was heightened by the remains of the ruined wagons which lined the wayside, some burned,
some with the wheels disabled by cutting the spokes, others tumbled off the steep embankment.
For more than three miles, these remnants of the rebel trains met our view.

It was near the middle of the afternoon when the column, the army under General Neill, descended
into the beautiful Cumberland valley, and arrived at the village of Waynesboro. The people
gave our little army a joyous reception, and we encamped at a little distance from the village.
One regiment, the Seventy-seventh, was sent on picket on the banks of the Antietam creek, and
so pleasant was the duty that the regiment petitioned to be allowed to remain until the army
moved, to which request General Neill very graciously assented. Our picketing on the Antietam
became one of the bright sports in the history of our campaigning. We were a mile in advance
of the other troops, and the picket line was two miles long, so that we were not at all crowded.
The weather was fine, the country delightful, and the people kind and hospitable. The most
friendly relations sprang up at once between the people and the soldiers, the inhabitants supplying
the boys with luxuries, and taking them into their houses as welcome guests, the soldiers on
their part guarding the people against the depredations of stragglers and militia.

The grain was ripe for the harvest, and the farmers were short of help; but the boys laid aside
their guns, and swung the cradle and the scythe with a zest that showed that they worked with
a good will. Day after day the boys of the Seventy-seventh reaped and bound in the fields,
while the good ladies worked day and night to make bread and cakes for the veterans, who had
so long been accustomed to diet on pork and hard tack. Soft bread, milk, poultry and the staple
luxury of Pennsylvania, apple butter, was a glorious improvement on the usual bill of camp
fare, and kind sympathizing Union people were much better calculated to render our stay among
them agreeable, than the bitter rebels among whom we had so long been.

The left wing of our extended picket line was under command of Major Babcock, who, with the
line officers of his part of the picket, established head-quarters at the house of a miller,
whose comfortable rooms and well filled larder afforded substantial inducements to our friends;
but the great attractions at the miller's house were doubtless the three charming daughters,
whose merry faces and bewitching eyes rejoiced the hearts of our gay major and his associates.
Word came to the right of the line that our friends on the left were in the enjoyment of far
more than the usual allowance of pleasure for men on picket, and thither started the colonel
and the doctor, and our friend, Colonel Connor, of the Seventh Maine, to investigate the matter.
Riding through a lovely region, now rising to the summit of some gentle eminence, from whence
they could look away upon the surrounding country, its rich fields of grain ready for the harvest,
its charming groves of oak, and its neat farm houses, making up a most delightful landscape,
now descending into some green valley where babbling brooks danced over pebbly beds, and now
reining up to listen to the complaint of some cottagers, who said that "the militia were robbing
them of their pigs and their poultry, and but for the old soldiers, who were perfect gentlemen,
they would be stripped of everything they had;" now fording the bright waters of the Antietam,
and anon halting to converse with some group of men who were reclining beneath the shadow of
some clump of chestnuts or oaks, doing picket duty as amateurs, the party at length arrived
at the miller's house, nestled in a pleasant grove by the side of the beautiful river. Here
was the major, and here were the happy line officers, and here was the main reserve of the
left wing of the picket, all exhibiting the most abundant good humor. Here, also, they found
our chaplain, and Chaplain Osborn, of the Forty-third New York. It was evident, at a glance,
that the reports of gay soldiering which had reached the right of the line were in no way exaggerated.
The miller took the horses, and the party was ushered into the house, when the good lady and
her merry daughters welcomed them heartily. The miller brought out his best wines and his biggest
apples. The ladies were smiling, the wines were good, and the apples delicious, and the hearts
of the soldiers were gladdened. The ladies retired, leaving the gentlemen in possession of
the airy sitting-room. They sung Old Hundred, and Coronation, and Lenox, and Cambridge. Now
our friend, Colonel Connor, would lead off in a rollicking soldiers' song; then our chaplain
would follow with "Benny Havens, Oh!" and all would join in the chorus. Chaplain Osborn, of
the Forty-third, could tell a good story, and relish a glass of wine; and so they passed a
happy hour, singing and chatting, till called to dinner, where the long table was loaded from
the abundance of the miller's stores. Dinner over, the company strolled among the fruit trees
and along the banks of the river; but at length, as an end must come to all pleasures, our
party, who had left the right of the line in the morning, galloped back to their quarters,
satisfied that picket duty was not necessarily the most vexatious in the service.

The Forty-ninth was provost guard for the town, and a merry time the men had of it. Here in
the principal hotel, General Neill established his head-quarters, and in regal style amid flowers
and fruits he received the homage of the citizens and soldiers. The remaining regiments of
the brigade were stationed in a lovely grove half way between the town and the picket line.
They lounged in the shade of their beautiful camp, or strolled to the village or to the picket
line on the Antietam. They purchased from the people fruit and bread, apple butter and other
luxuries, enjoying a pleasant respite from labors, while the Forty-ninth guarded the town and
the Seventy-seventh the river. But notwithstanding all the pleasures of this bright episode
in our campaign, the boys were not without a source of annoyance.

Soon after our arrival at Waynesboro, we were joined by a large division of New York and Pennsylvania
militia, under our old commander General W. F. Smith, who still held a prominent place in the
affections of the boys. The militia was composed mostly of young gentlemen who had left their
places behind the counter or at the desk, for the double purpose of lending their aid to their
country in its hour of need, and of enjoying a month of what they hoped would be amateur soldiering.

On the evening of their arrival, they were all complaining bitterly of the terrible marches
they had endured, and swore they would shoot the general if they ever got into a fight. They
had marched all the way from Harrisburgh, to which point they had been brought in cars, at
the rate of from eight to fifteen miles a day! In addition to the severe marches, they had
been subjected to great privations; many of them had not tasted any butter for more than a
week, and nearly all declared that they had absolutely nothing to eat for several days. The
writer, who listened to these grievous complaints from some who had been his friends in civil
life, pointed to their trains of wagons loaded with boxes of hard bread. "What," replied the
militia-men, "You don't expect us to eat that hard tack do you?"

These regiments of militia were undisciplined and unaccustomed to the hard fare of the soldier's
life, and the majority of the men took to plundering the inhabitants of the neighboring country,
and perpetrating other depredations equally dishonorable in the eyes of the old soldiers. As
the veterans constituted the picket and the guard of the town, and were intrusted to guard
many of the houses of the citizens outside of the village, they found great annoyance in attempting
to resist the incursions of the militia, and rather frequent collisions resulted, in which
the old soldiers usually got the best of the encounter.

The citizens very soon learned to look upon the veterans as their friends and their protectors,
while they regarded with dread any squad of soldiers that might approach, if they were clad
in new uniforms.

But, on the 11th of July, we drew in our picket line, the brigade assembled, and at dark the
troops, veterans and militia, were fording the Antietam, the water nearly to their waists.
We marched rapidly all night, halting at a place called Leytirsburgh. At daylight next morning,
we were again marching. The day was extremely hot, and large numbers of the men fell by the
wayside from sun-stroke. At Smithville we fell in with the First corps, which was moving towards
Hagerstown, and the hearts of the men were gladdened by the sight of the old familiar flags
of the Army of the Potomac. We had been absent from the main body of the army for a week, and
it seemed now as though we had fallen in with old friends from whom we had been long separated.
Falling in the rear of the First corps, we marched toward Hagerstown. At 2 o'clock a most terrific
thunder-storm arose, such as had never overtaken our army, even in Virginia. Huge black clouds
rose from the north and from the west and south, and meeting overhead poured down great volumes
of water, until the road through which we were marching, and which was bordered by high banks
on either side, was filled with a mad torrent which reached to the knees, and in places to
the waists of the men. At sunset we reached Funkstown, where the main body of our corps was
in line of battle, having yesterday met the rebels and driven them more than a mile. Our friends
of the Vermont brigade had, as usual, given a good account of themselves; and the head-boards
of pine, here and there among the trees, showed that the victory had not been gained without
a struggle.

In marching from Boonsboro towards Funkstown, the Vermont brigade in advance of the corps,
the little stream, Beaver Creek, was passed, and General Howe found Buford's cavalry in his
advance holding a strong position against the skirmishers of the rebel infantry. At General
Buford's request, General Howe sought and obtained permission to send the Vermont brigade to
relieve the cavalry. Colonel Lewis with his Fifth Vermont and part of the Second, and Colonel
Barney with the Sixth regiment, at once deployed as skirmishers, forming their line two miles
long. The Third and Fourth regiments were supporting a battery, and the balance of the Second
was held in reserve. They saw the rebel infantry approach a strip of woods in front, and at
once advanced and occupied it themselves. Against this long thin line of skirmishers, the rebels
opened a severe fire of artillery and musketry, and advanced to drive the skirmishers from
their position; but the brave mountaineers never dreaming that a Sixth corps skirmish line
could not hold a rebel line of battle, resolutely refused to leave and sent the presumptious
rebel line of battle to the rear in confusion; not, however, until Colonel Stoughton with the
Fourth and Colonel Seaver with the Third, came forward to the support of the Fifth and Sixth.
Again, the rebels, disgusted at being repulsed by a skirmish line, came up in several lines
of battle and charged upon the Vermonters and they again went to the rear in confusion. A third
charge was made against the obstinate skirmish line, and a third time the attack was broken.
Meanwhile a strong force attempting to cross the Antietam and come in on the flank, was repelled
by the Second Vermont.

The gallant brigade had repelled Anderson's brigade, of seven large regiments, from its front,
and another from its flank.

An instance of a skirmish line, a mile and a half from any support, resisting repeated attacks
of troops in line of battle, is rarely found in the history of armies.

The men used from sixty to eighty rounds of cartridge, and when the first supply was exhausted,
a fresh one was brought to the front on stretchers.

The victory cost the brigade a loss of nine men killed and fifty-nine wounded, while the enemy
lost more than two hundred men.

The men of Neill's brigade were rejoiced to find themselves once more with the glorious old
corps, and when their brigade flag, bearing the insignia of the Greek cross, was once more
thrown to the breeze, it was greeted with vociferous cheers. Brisk skirmishing was going on
along the line, and frequent charges were made by our Union pickets upon the rebel line, which
usually resulted in the capture of a greater or less number of the enemy's pickets. All things
indicated a great battle on the morrow. The two armies were facing each other in a line in
front of Hagerstown, near a hamlet called Funkstown, the line of battle extending several miles.
The rebels had occupied the higher grounds, and had thrown up strong earthworks to dispute
our progress. Night came on with rain, and all expected to be roused early by the sound of
battle. But morning came and passed, and the day wore on with little activity on our part.
Here and there skirmishers kept up a rattle of musketry, but no general engagement came on.
Much as the veterans, who knew too well the risks of battle, usually dreaded a general engagement,
this time there seemed a universal desire, on the part of the men, now to strike a blow which
should destroy their adversaries before they should be able to cross the river again.

Deserters and prisoners from the rebel army represented it in a deplorable condition; and the
men of the ranks in our army believed that this was the grand opportunity for striking a final
blow. And notwithstanding the assertion of general officers that the Potomac was so swollen
as to prevent the crossing of the rebel army, there were few privates in our ranks who were
not ready to declare that, unless we gave battle at once, the prey would surely escape. Thus,
as the day wore on, great dissatisfaction was expressed all along the ranks--men openly and
freely cursing the hesitancy which held them back, as they believed, from a certain victory.
So, when they arose on the morning of the 14th, to find that there was no enemy in our front,
they were more incensed than surprised. There was certainly a very general ill-feeling pervading
our army at this easy escape of the rebel army, which even the glorious news of Vicksburg and
Port Hudson failed to pacify.

Brisk firing in the vicinity of the Potomac, however, warned us that there were still rebels
enough left on the north side of the river to offer some resistance. We learned, late in the
day, that the firing was caused by a brilliant charge of Kilpatrick's cavalry upon the rear
guard of the rebels at Falling Waters, where they captured several hundreds of prisoners; thus
adding one more brilliant success to their many daring achievements during this campaign. Marching
until nightfall, we reached Williamsport, and encamped very near the spot that had been our
resting-place on a former occasion, nearly a year before.

Why General Lee and his army were allowed to cross the Potomac unmolested, we do not attempt
to explain; nor do we condemn the determination of General Meade not to give battle. When men
of such well-known military ability and bravery as General Sedgwick advise against a movement,
it may be well to hesitate; yet it will doubtless be the verdict of history, that the hesitancy
of General Meade at this time was his great mistake.

A hard march on the 15th brought the Sixth corps to Boonsboro, where our Second division encamped
on precisely the same ground that we had occupied on the 31st of October last. Neill's brigade
made the march at a breakneck pace, leaving the Vermonters far to the rear, who declared that
the recent associations of the former with the cavalry had transformed them into a flying brigade.
While resting here, a large body of rebel prisoners was marched past. They were mostly those
who had been captured by Kilpatrick's men at Falling Waters. The rebels were hungry and destitute
of rations. Our men at once divided their rations of hard bread and coffee with them, who,
officers and all, declared that it was the best meal they had enjoyed for several days, and
expressed themselves greatly pleased with the generosity of their guardians.

Notwithstanding our glorious success at Gettysburgh, and the good news from the west, we were
now hearing news that made our hearts sick, and caused the cheeks of the New York soldiers
to burn for the disgrace of their native State. It was a source of the deepest mortification
to the brave New Yorkers, to feel that their own State and the great metropolis had been outraged
by the most disgraceful riot that had ever stained the annals of any State or city in the Union,
all for the purpose of overawing the government in its efforts to subdue the rebellion. Our
companions from other States, with the generosity that characterizes soldiers, never derided
us with this disgrace, but alluded to the riot as an uprising of foreigners, who had for the
moment overpowered the native element. Even the fact that the governor of that great State
had, in the midst of these terrible scenes, addressed the miscreants as his "friends," was
alluded to with a delicacy that won our hearts.

It was one of the pleasant indications of a union of hearts as well as of States, that the
soldiers of our sister States looked upon these riots in the light of a general calamity, rather
than a disgrace to a particular State.

Crossing the South Mountain range, from Boonsboro to Middletown, the Sixth corps reached Petersville,
three or four miles north of Berlin, where the army was to cross the Potomac. Here, nearly
the whole army was crowded into a space of not more than three miles, all waiting for the orders
to cross. The men were universally eager to push forward, and the necessary delay caused by
crossing the men and material of so large an army seemed to them a wearisome expenditure of
time. While waiting here, the Second division was honored by the presence of several ladies,
wives of officers of different regiments, who had been waiting in Washington an opportunity
of visiting their husbands, and had met them here. As a memento of this brief visit, the Seventy-seventh
New York received from the wife of the surgeon the gift of a pair of beautiful guidons, which
the regiment boasted were unequaled in the army. The design was a white cross, the badge of
our division, upon a ground of deep blue silk. In the center of the cross were wrought the
figures "77." These beautiful guidons were carried by the regiment until its final discharge
from the service, when, with the old banner, the tattered national flag, and the magnificent
new flag which was presented afterward by the ladies of Saratoga, they were presented to the
State of New York, on the Fourth of July, 1865, in the presence of General Grant and a great
concourse of illustrious men.

On Sunday, the 19th, the Sixth corps crossed the pontoon bridge to Virginia, the bands playing
"O carry me back." As usual, while the corps was crossing a bridge or passing a difficult place,
General Sedgwick stood at the farther end of the bridge preventing confusion and hurrying up
teams which might obstruct the way. We climbed the rocky defile, and, at four o'clock, found
ourselves well on the Virginia side of the Potomac. On our march we passed through the little
village of Lovettsville, and, much to the surprise of all, the doors and windows of the dwellings
were filled with ladies, whose hair and dresses were decked with ribbons of red, white and
blue, and scores of Union flags waved a welcome to our soldiers. Such a sight had not greeted
us before in Dixie, and it was most refreshing to witness such a demonstration of loyalty in
Virginia.

The corps encamped about ten miles from the river, near a beautiful clear stream of water,
which was very soon filled with bathers. Here orders came for each regiment in the army to
send, to the State in which the regiment was raised, a certain number of commissioned officers
and enlisted men for recruiting duty.

The march on the 20th was slow and through groves and pleasant meadows. Twelve miles were made,
and we halted for the night and the next day. Wednesday we passed through Union town and Snickersville,
reaching the base of Cobbler's mountain, a high spur from the Blue Ridge, not far from Ashby's
Gap. Thursday the Sixth corps proceeded to Ashby's Gap, and, halting there for a few hours
in a most delightful valley, again started southward. Vines of the trailing blackberry covered
the ground, and the delicious fruit grew in such profusion that the men enjoyed a continual
feast. Never had we, in our wanderings in the south, found such an abundance of fruit, and
the effect upon the health of the men was marvelous. By the time that we reached Warrenton
the occupation of the surgeons was almost gone. At no time, perhaps, in the history of the
Army of the Potomac, did the medical reports exhibit a more general state of health than during
our stay in the vicinity of Warrenton.

Thus, marching along at the foot of Blue Ridge, now turning aside to enter some mountain pass,
and again proceeding on the general course, the army, on the 25th of July, reached the vicinity
of Warrenton, our Sixth corps occupying a line from Warrenton to Waterloo, the scene of some
of the early engagements of General Pope's army at the first rebel invasion. The First division
was stationed in and about Warrenton; the Jersey brigade being provost guard of the town, where
the gentlemanly conduct of the men, and the strict order preserved in the town, won for them
the good opinions of the town's people, as well as of army officers. The Third division was
in the rear of the other two divisions, and guarding the flank. The Second division encamped
about an old Baptist church, which, inclosed by a thick growth of trees, large and small, had
been, before the war, the only house of worship for miles around. No paint had ever stained
its seats or casings, and no steeple from its roof had ever pointed toward heaven. The pulpit,
the white folks' seats and the black folks' seats, were all in ruins now. The Rappahannock
river was but a half a mile distant, and the Seventy-seventh and Fifth Vermont were sent to
perform picket duty along its banks. On the following day the camps of the two regiments were
moved to the vicinity of the river, in front of the remainder of the division, and we were
ordered to perform picket duty while the division remained in its present camp. The camp of
the Fifth Vermont was established a fourth of a mile from that of the Seventy-seventh, its
lines joining ours on the left. On the bank of the river just below our camp, was the residence
of Mr. Hart and a grist-mill; hence the place was called "Hart's Mills."

The camp at Hart's Mills was truly a pleasant one. It was situated in the midst of a most delightful
oak grove, on a projecting hill, around whose base the Rappahannock coursed in a beautiful
curve. Along its banks was our picket line. Westward the view extended over a charming valley
to the Blue Ridge, some ten miles away; and at evening, when the sun sank behind those fine
hills, tinging them and the clouds with gorgeous colors, the prospect was truly delightful.
The village of Warrenton was some four miles distant, and the celebrated Warrenton Sulphur
Springs about three miles down the river.

Under the direction of Chaplain Fox, a place in the grove was selected, a speaker's stand was
erected, surrounded by rows of log seats, and here services were held on the Sabbath; and on
other days of the week there were other regimental gatherings, which the men greatly enjoyed.
At evening, the place would be lighted by Chinese lanterns of various colors, hung among the
boughs of the oak trees, giving to the grove a most romantic appearance.

On one evening the regiment, with many invited guests from the division, assembled in this
lovely spot and listened to speeches from several gentlemen of eloquence, the brigade band
lending the aid of fine music to the evening's entertainment.

Thus pleasantly passed the time of the two regiments--the Seventy-seventh and Fifth Vermont--in
doing picket duty for the Second division, along the banks of the Rappahannock. Our friends
of the Fifth Vermont were, in addition to the pleasant location of their camp and their easy
picket duty, favored with the presence of the wives of some of their officers. A ride to the
Sulphur Springs was always a pleasant pastime; and we recall with pleasure one of these excursions.
A small party, including one of these ladies, enjoying a morning's drive, turned their horses'
heads towards the Springs. A merry gallop across three miles of delightful country, through
pleasant groves and over rolling meadows, fording clear sparkling streams and leaping fences,
brought the party to the former Saratoga of the south.

The morning had been cool and cloudy, but as our friends reached the little settlement the
clouds were breaking away, and the sun began to pour blazing rays upon them. They secured their
horses and walked into the grounds, in the midst of which General Birney, commanding a division
of the Third corps, had established his head-quarters; and as it was then the dinner hour,
the general and his staff were gathered around the board under the shade of the chestnut trees,
while a band discoursed sweet music for the benefit of those at table.

Oak, chestnut and ailanthus trees form a rich and grateful shade for the grounds, which dip
so as to form a kind of basin, in the center of which rises the cupola which covers the spring.
As we step down into the inclosure of the cupola, indeed as we approach it at a distance, a
strong sulphurous odor is perceived; but there is a delightful coolness as we sit down upon
the benches which are placed around the area of the cupola. Several Vermont officers greeted
our friends as they approached, offering the odorous drink to the lady. There are two springs
or vats within the cupola, each inclosed by marble sides; and the water stands so high that
we may dip it ourselves, thus dispensing with the necessity of the "dippers," such as take
our dimes at Saratoga.

A glass of the sparkling fluid was presented to our lady friend, who raised it to her lips,
and then turning her face away, with an expression of infinite disgust, and saying, with a
good deal of energy, "I don't want any," handed back the glass. The gentlemen endeavored to
convince her that the water was good; but even after adding a little fine brandy, she could
not be induced to quaff the liquid, which she declared carried with it such powerful suggestions
of unserviceable eggs.

Our friends lingered about the grounds for some hours, enjoying the cool shade and examining
the old buildings, the principal one of which was originally a fine structure, but it had been
burned the year before by our soldiers. The massive columns and high walls were still suggestive
of the hilarious old times when the chivalry used to congregate here in all its glory. Encircling
the grounds was a row of long one and two story buildings, most of them painted yellow. These
were divided into small apartments which had been used as lodging rooms. There were a dozen
or more of these buildings, all dilapidated by age rather than suffering from the ruthless
usage of war. They inclosed the grove which occupied ten or twelve acres of land.

Except the circle of buildings immediately surrounding the grove and springs, there were but
very few dwellings in the neighborhood, those evidently intended for the purpose of receiving
summer boarders. It was said that about five hundred boarders used to spend the summer here
every year, and double that number of visitors took rooms at Warrenton, a mile and a half distant,
from which place they rode to the springs morning and evening to quaff the odorous fluid, or
to stroll about the groves. The new White Sulphur Springs in the Shenandoah Valley had, for
some years past, diverted the patronage from the Warrenton springs, and thither, at the foot
of the Blue Ridge mountains, great numbers of fashionable southerners had resorted.

It was evidently a blessing that this resort had been despoiled by war. It sadly needed renovating
and modernizing, and so long as the old buildings stood, no southerner had the enterprise to
pull them down and replace them with better ones. A few thousands of dollars in the hands of
an enterprising Yankee would soon make this one of the most delightful resorts in the southern
states.

One of the characteristic features of our picket duty on the Rappahannock, was the great number
of contrabands who came through our lines.

Squads of gray-headed old negroes, young negro women and children, carrying in bundles all
their worldly store, constantly applied for permission to enter the lines on their way to the
north. The cavalry who scouted in front on the south side of the river, returned with wagons
loaded with little darkies, whose mothers and elder sisters and grandsires trudged along on
foot. All wagons going to Warrenton without other lading were filled with these refugees from
slavery, old and young, some black, some olive and some white; some with black curly wool,
some with wavy black hair, and some with brown ringlets.

Our northern soldiers had, by this time, begun to look upon slavery in its true light. They
had also learned that the negroes were their friends. It required a long schooling to teach
them this lesson, but it was thoroughly learned at last. We heard now no jeering and hooting
when a negro or wagon load of negroes went by. The soldiers treated them with the greatest
kindness, and aided them in every way to get off to the north.

While our boys did not hesitate long to take from the white inhabitants any articles that they
thought they were in need of, it was considered an act of outrageous meanness to take a chicken
or any other property from the negro people.

While passing through Orleans, on our way to the present camp, a great many slave children
were standing along the streets watching us. Many of these children were nearly white. The
attention of one our captains, who was one of the last relics among us of that class of men
who were loyal to their country but despised the negro, was fixed upon a beautiful child of
olive complexion and wavy hair, who stood gazing in innocent wonder at the passing column.
The child was indeed a picture of unadorned beauty, in her long coarse garment of "negro cloth."
The captain turned to a staff officer and as a tear stole down his rough cheek at the thought
of the degradation of the beautiful child, he exclaimed, "Isn't it horrible."

It is hardly necessary to say that the captain's sentiments from that moment underwent a radical
change, and ever after there were none more ready to afford assistance to the needy refugees,
than our generous but hitherto prejudiced captain.

Many of these colored refugees had the greatest faith in what they deemed the promises of the
Bible. There was an almost universal faith in the ultimate overthrow of the south by the north,
and this belief was founded in most cases upon their supposed Bible promises.

One of these people, a gray-haired negro, bent with age and leaning heavily upon his staff,
who hoped to spend the evening of his life in freedom, said to the writer: "Our massas tell
us dat dey goin to whip de Yankees and dat Jeff. Davis will rule de norf. But we knowd it warnt
so cause de Bible don't say so. De Bible says that de souf shall prevail for a time and den
de norf shall rise up and obertrow dem."

Where the old man found this strange prophecy he did not say, but many of the slaves declared
this to be Bible truth and all asserted it in the same way.[5]

    [5] Since the above paragraph was in print, a friend has called
    my attention to the passage in Daniel, chap. xi, verses 13-15,
    as the probable origin of this belief among the negroes. He
    further assures me that he is informed that the negroes in North
    Carolina entertained the same belief.

Among those who were thus fleeing from bondage, were two fine boys, each about twelve years
of age and from the same plantation. Each gave his name as John, and as they were both remarkably
bright little fellows, they were at once adopted into our head-quarters family. Their sprightly
manners, their ready wit and their kindly good nature soon brought them into general favor.
We were very early one morning startled by an extraordinary commotion in front of head-quarters,
where the two Johns stood swinging their hats, leaping and dancing in most fantastic manner,
and screaming at the top of their voices the wildest exclamations of delight. Looking in the
direction to which their attention was turned, we saw a group of eight or ten negro women and
small children accompanied by an aged colored patriarch. One of the Johns suddenly forgetting
his ecstacy of delight, rolling up the whites of his eyes and holding his hands above his head,
exclaimed with impressive gravity, "Oh my Lor a massa! What'l ole missus do now?"

The party consisted of the mothers and younger brothers and sisters of the two boys with their
grandfather. Forgetting for a moment their joy at the escape of their friends from slavery,
the boys were overpowered with the vision of "ole missus" left desolate, without a slave to
minister to her many wants.

On the morning of the 6th of August, we were astonished to find the camp of our neighbors of
the Fifth Vermont deserted, and their picket line occupied by a regiment from the Third division.
The surprise was still greater when we learned that the whole of the Second brigade had been
ordered to New York city to guard against any resistance which might be offered to the enforcement
of the draft. The order had reached the brigade after midnight, and at three o'clock it was
on its way to the north. Thus the Third brigade was now all that was left of the Second division
of the Sixth corps. Up to this time General Howe had kept the division, except the two regiments
on picket, hard at work at division drills. It is safe to say that no division in the army
performed more labor in drills than Howe's during the time that it was under command of that
officer. The whole division was encamped in one of those charming localities which make this
part of Virginia more beautiful than almost any other, and aside from the continual round of
drills, the time passed most agreeably. The Jersey boys here spent the time in pleasant alternation
of guard duties and social enjoyments; a part of the time being devoted to military affairs,
and a much greater part spent in agreeable attentions to the winning young ladies of Warrenton.

But, like every other brief respite for the army of the Potomac, this was destined to come
to an end. On the 15th of September the army moved toward Culpepper, which was reached on the
16th; the Sixth corps taking position at a place called Stonehouse Mountain, three miles west
of Culpepper.

Here we remained three weeks; the camps were by no means so delightful as those about Warrenton
and Waterloo, and the weather was becoming quite cold, so that our three weeks stay at Stonehouse
Mountain had little about it to make us desire to make it longer. Some pleasing incidents,
however, relieved the monotony of our stay at this place, the presentation of an elegant sword
to Colonel French, by the line officers of the Seventy-seventh, was the first. The presentation
was followed by festivity and merriment, and in the evening our friends of the Seventh Maine,
forming a torchlight procession, marched to the camp of the Seventy-seventh to congratulate
the colonel and line officers upon the mutual trust and confidence existing between them. The
next was the return of the Vermont brigade from New York. The Third brigade was drawn up in
line to receive our returning comrades, and with much ceremony welcomed them back to the division.
It must be acknowledged that both brigades would have been better pleased with the unrestrained
welcome which would have been expressed in cheers than by the formal military salute.

On Monday, October 5th, the Sixth corps marched to Cedar Mountain on the Rapidan, the scene
of General Banks' conflict with Jackson. The First corps was already stationed in the vicinity
of Raccoon Ford, and the two corps now occupied a line of five or six miles along the bend
of the river, holding the roads to Culpepper and Stevensburgh. The two corps were thus thrown
out ten miles in front of the main army, having little communication with the rear. Few wagons
were allowed to follow us, and those were ordered to the rear under a strong escort. On Friday,
the 11th, the signal officers stationed on the summit of Cedar Mountain, while watching the
rebel signals, read the message sent by their flags: "I am at James City. J. E. B. S." Thus
it was known that Stuart was making for our rear, and as long trains of wagons had also been
discovered moving in the direction of James City, it became evident that Lee was endeavoring
to throw his whole army in the rear of our own. General Meade determined to draw the rebel
army back if possible; accordingly the Sixth and First corps were ordered to build extensive
fires and be in readiness to march at a moment's notice. On the following morning, Buford,
with a division of cavalry, appeared at Germania Ford, some twelve miles below us, while our
infantry advanced as though about to cross at Raccoon Ford and the fords in front of the Sixth
corps. The ruse of threatening to cross the river by the two corps, succeeded in calling the
rebel infantry back to check our advance; and at night, after building large fires, the two
corps hastily withdrew toward Culpepper, which we reached at daylight, after a severe march.
After a brief halt for breakfast, the corps, with the whole of the infantry, was on its way
toward Brandy Station, leaving the cavalry force under Pleasanton to cover the retreat. A rapid
march, in which the army moved in several parallel columns, brought the infantry all safe across
the Rappahannock at Rappahannock Station. But the cavalry were not allowed to retreat without
some hard fighting. Their guns could be heard by us during the afternoon, and toward evening
the firing became more rapid and nearer. Indeed, the rebels advanced almost to the banks of
the river.

Gregg, with a brigade of cavalry, was overtaken by a considerable force of the enemy, near
Jefferson, early in the day, and after a severe engagement of two hours, fell back, crossing
the river at Sulphur Springs.

Kilpatrick with his brigade, following the trail of the infantry, and designing to form a union
with Gregg, found, on passing Brandy Station, that his way was blocked by a whole division
of rebel cavalry, which had slipped in between him and the rear of the infantry. Halting for
a moment to take a single glance at the situation of affairs, the dashing general shouted to
his men, "Boys, there are the cusses!" Then, springing to the head of the column, he led his
men to such a charge as has rarely been witnessed even in our cavalry service.

The road was strongly guarded by three regiments of cavalry in solid column, flanked on either
side by a regiment in line. Directly upon this strongly posted force, the gallant general and
his brave fellows rushed with shouts and oaths, and sabre thrusts, trampling down everything
in their way. Unable to withstand this impetuous and unexpected onset, the rebels gave way,
allowing the Union brigade to pass between their broken ranks. Dead men and horses lay thickly
scattered upon the ground when the victorious brigade left the field to join the infantry at
the river.

Thus, hotly pursued, General Meade determined to offer battle to the pursuing army, making
the Rappahannock his immediate base of operations. Accordingly, early the following morning,
a large portion of the infantry and artillery was countermarched across the river, where, within
a mile of the stream, the line of battle was formed, and we waited the onset of the enemy until
past noon. Then, Buford's cavalry having engaged the enemy in front, three corps, the Second,
Fifth and Sixth, commenced to advance in line of battle. It was a grand spectacle. During two
years of service we had not seen its like. Our line of battle stretched across the vast plain,
nearly three miles in length, straight as the flight of an arrow. At each flank were several
battalions in echelon. In the rear of the center of each wing of the line, was a heavy reserve
in solid square, and, following in the rear of each square, a large column, stretching back
to the river and across the pontoon bridges to the farther side of the stream.

Thus the line of battle moved forward across the plain, never for a moment losing its perfect
form. Brisk cannonading and musketry were kept up by the cavalry in front, and the army earnestly
hoped that General Lee might accept our challenge to an open field fight, but the rebel general
was too wary to accept battle on such equal terms, and pushed on toward Sulphur Springs, hoping
to reach Centreville before us.

Our line of battle halted at dark, at Brandy Station. But there was no time to be lost; resting
there until eleven o'clock, we were ordered to retrace our steps to the river; this time not
in line of battle, but in all haste. The night was dark, and the troops had already made long
marches; so when they reached and crossed the river at daylight, they were fairly worn out.
An hour for sleep and breakfast was allowed, the railroad bridge was blown up, and again we
were on a grand race northward.

It was a great medley; baggage wagons, pontoons, ambulances, artillery and troops, all thrown
together in splendid confusion. Drivers cursing, cannon rattling, soldiers singing and shouting,
horses racing, and all that sublime confusion which can never be seen except in a hasty but
well directed retreat of a vast army.

We passed Warrenton Junction and Bealton Station, and at eight o'clock halted near Kettle Run,
having marched more than thirty miles within twenty-four hours.

We had not long to rest, for at daylight, October 14th, we were again on the road, making quick
time. We passed our old camp at Bristoe, and the familiar scenes at Manassas Junction, and
crossed Bull Run at Blackman's Ford. We reached Centreville at three P.M. The booming of cannon
in the rear, the huge clouds of smoke, and the heavy rattle of musketry, told us there was
hot work on the ground we had lately passed over; and as we formed in line of battle in front
of Centreville, the soldiers said, "Here is the third Bull Run, but this time the run will
be on the other side."

To the Second corps had been assigned the duty of guarding the rear of the army. About twelve
o'clock, as the rear of that corps was crossing Broad Run, a wide and muddy stream at Bristoe
Station, the rebel corps of A. P. Hill suddenly appeared from the cover of the woods in the
vicinity, and, running out a battery, opened a severe fire of artillery and musketry upon the
column, which was in a degree of confusion, owing to the difficult crossing of the stream.

In a moment order was restored, and the troops so placed as to defy the advance of the enemy.

The rebels, finding that their attack upon the advance was fruitless, now turned their attention
to the rear division, which was advancing toward the run. Opening upon the column a fierce
cannonade and a storm of bullets, they hoped to throw the division into confusion, but again
they were disappointed. After a severe fight, the rebels were forced to flee across the run
in great disorder, leaving in the hands of the Second corps five pieces of artillery, two stands
of colors, and four hundred and fifty prisoners. Such was the battle of Bristoe Station.

At dark that evening the Sixth corps moved to Chantilly, where we rested for the night. Next
morning we took a new and stronger position, where we waited, listening to the roar of cannon
where the cavalry was contending with the advance of the enemy, and wondering how soon our
own turn would come. Suddenly, at three o'clock, the doubts seemed to be removed. An officer
came dashing along the line, with the order to "Strip for the fray! the enemy are coming down
upon us!" The men stood to arms, and again we waited for the attack, but none was made: our
cavalry had arrested the advance of the enemy. At night the firing died away, and we pitched
our tents and slept undisturbed.

In the afternoon of the 16th, the Seventy-seventh being on picket, a horseman suddenly rushed
in front of the head-quarter tents, saying that the left of our picket line was attacked. It
proved that a body of rebel cavalry had discovered some wagons outside the picket line, and
had made a dash upon them. Our boys drove them back in haste, but the line was strengthened
in the expectation of a more important demonstration. This, however, was the last we saw of
the rebels on our part of the line.

Lee, finding himself too late to occupy the works around Centreville before us, and hopeless
of the success of any flank movement, turned his army again towards the Rappahannock.

On the following morning, October 17th, our army started in pursuit, the rain falling upon
us in torrents, rendering the mud deep and the marching hard. We halted that night at Gainesville,
marched the next day through New Baltimore, and reached Warrenton at night. On our march we
had passed the bodies of many of our cavalrymen, who had been killed in the constant skirmishes
which had been going on since our advance. Near New Baltimore, where Kilpatrick's brigade had
been forced back, the bodies of his men lay scattered along the roadside, nearly all of them
stripped of their clothing by the rebels.

The army encamped in the vicinity of Warrenton; the Sixth corps occupying a pleasant ridge
just in front of the town. Here we remained a fortnight.

Our first week at Warrenton was anything but agreeable. The cold northwest winds swept through
our camps, carrying chilly discomfort everywhere. The men shivered over their log fires; but
while the fitful wind drove the smoke and fire into their faces, it froze their backs. At our
head-quarters, as we drew closely about our fire, dreading equally the chilly winds and the
provoking clouds of smoke, one of the party, perhaps reading for the amusement of the others
from a volume of Saxe's poems, a stranger, had one chanced to drop in among us, would have
imagined that Saxe must have written most grievous tales of woe, and that our hearts and eyes
were all melted by the sad stories. At length, having suffered these disagreeable exposures
for a week, the men of the corps fell to work to erect comfortable quarters, and thinking that
the present camp might possibly become winter quarters, they made for themselves much more
comfortable huts than had served them in their winter's camp at White Oak Church. Generals
Neill and Grant reviewed their brigades, and then Generals Howe and Wright reviewed their divisions,
and last of all, General Sedgwick had a grand review of the whole corps, which was a very splendid
affair.

The weather became again mild and agreeable. Pontoons were arriving and there were many indications
that we must soon leave our comfortable quarters. At length, at ten o'clock at night, November
6th, came the order, "Reveille at half-past four; move at daylight." So good-bye, fine quarters
and comfortable fire-places, we must be off.

We were in line and commenced moving from camp at daylight, November 7th. We marched rapidly,
taking the road to Rappahannock Station. The Sixth and Fifth corps only had taken this road,
the remaining corps were, however, either on the move or under orders to move, the Third corps
having taken the road to Ely's Ford, and the others following. General Sedgwick was placed
in command of the Fifth and Sixth corps, while General Meade accompanied the left wing.

At noon we halted within a mile of the Station, and the corps was immediately thrown into line
of battle. The men were allowed to rest on their arms for an hour or two, wondering what was
to come.

In front of us was a line of low hills, stretching parallel with our line of battle, and on
the slope toward us, and within pistol shot of us, were rebel cavalry pickets, sitting upon
their horses and facing us with the coolest impudence; but not a shot was fired at them. We
had not rested here long before we heard the booming of cannon on our left, where, three miles
down the river, the Third corps had already engaged the enemy. At length the order came to
move forward. The Second division, under General Howe, held the right, the Third brigade constituting
its front line, the Vermont brigade its second, the Forty-third New York as skirmishers. On
the left, was the First division, the Sixth Maine on the skirmish line, the Second and Third
brigades in the advance, the New Jersey brigade in the reserve; and in the center the Third
division, under General Terry.

In this order the corps pushed forward up the hills, the rebel horsemen whirling and flying
before our advance. As our skirmishers gained the summit of the hills, the rebel infantry delivered
their fire upon them, but the brave boys of the Forty-third and of the Sixth Maine pushed on,
never halting or wavering for a moment, driving the enemy before them until they had pushed
the rebel skirmishers close upon their line of battle.

The First division at once became hotly engaged, the rebels disputing the advance with unavailing
obstinacy. That noble division bore the brunt of the battle. While the Second and Third divisions
behaved with great gallantry, doing all that was required of them, and doing it with that fighting
joy so characteristic of the whole corps, the First division, from its position, was called
upon to perform unusual feats of valor. As General Sedgwick was that day in command of the
right wing of the army, General Wright, of the First division, commanded the corps, and General
Russell, the brave, unassuming and beloved commander of the Third brigade, commanded the division.

The skirmishers of our Second division, the Forty-third New York, pushed gallantly forward,
their brave Colonel Baker riding rapidly from one end of the line to the other, his white horse
making a prominent mark for the rebels. The line of battle of the whole corps followed closely
upon the skirmishers. As we reached the summit of the hills, a grand panorama of the battle
opened before us. The whole battle-field could be seen at a single glance; a rare occurrence.
On one side were the eminences occupied by our own line of battle, and on the other, a line
of hills of equal elevation, covered with swarms of rebels. Between the two ranges of hills,
stretched a plain one-fourth of a mile wide and from one to two miles long, which was occupied
by the skirmishers of the opposing forces.

The rebels were posted in strong positions behind extensive earthworks, forts, redoubts and
rifle pits; and their artillery was posted so as to sweep the plain and the sloping grounds
confronting them. Their gray lines of infantry were pouring out from behind the earthworks
to meet us at the edge of the plain.

As our line of battle appeared on the crest of the hills, the rebel batteries opened a terrific
fire upon us. The air was filled with the shriekings of these fearful projectiles, which exploded
with startling frequency above our heads and just behind us; but, fortunately, the rebels aimed
high, and many of the shells ploughed the ground in our rear or burst about our hospitals.
The First division was pressing toward the rebel works at double quick, under a terrible fire
of musketry and artillery, the boys with the red crosses pushing everything before them. They
neared the rebel works, and the skirmishers along the whole line threw themselves upon the
ground waiting for the line of battle to come up. The rebel skirmishers did the same. Each
moment the scene became more exciting. Rebel infantry crowded the opposite side of the plain,
the slopes of the hills and the rifle pits. The whole line was ablaze with the fire of musketry,
and the roar of battle constantly increased.

At length, toward evening, the rebels having been driven back to the cover of their rifle pits,
the Third brigade of the First division, consisting of the Sixth Maine, the Fifth Wisconsin,
the Forty-ninth and One Hundred and Nineteenth Pennsylvania, regiments whose fame already stood
high in the army, was ordered forward.

First the Maine and Wisconsin regiments rushed forward, the intrepid Russell riding at the
very front. At his order to "charge," the two regiments quickened their pace to a run, and,
with bayonets fixed, without ever stopping to fire a gun, the gallant fellows ran forward.
They seized the fort, but the rebels rallied and drove them out. Again they charged; a hand
to hand encounter followed. The boys leaped over into the fort, using their muskets for clubs,
and, when the work was too close for that, dropping their guns and pommeling their adversaries
with their fists. The general had sent back for the remaining regiments of the brigade, but,
in the ten minutes that elapsed before the Pennsylvanians could come up on a run, half the
men of the Sixth Maine, and nearly as many of the Wisconsin regiment, had fallen. The whole
brigade leaped over the embankments, capturing hundreds of the rebels.

Not less gallant was the charge of the Second brigade, led by the young, ambitious Colonel
Upton. His regiments were the One Hundred and Twenty-first New York, his own, the Fifth Maine,
and the Ninety-fifth and Ninety-sixth Pennsylvania. The brigade occupied the left of the Sixth
corps, joining the Fifth corps. Under cover of the growing darkness, the courageous Upton led
the One Hundred and Twenty-first New York and Fifth Maine within a few yards of the rebel rifle
pits, when the order to charge was given. Instantly the rifle pits were ablaze, and a destructive
volley was poured into the two regiments. Another moment and the Union boys were leaping into
the rifle pits, sweeping everything before them. All this while not a shot had been fired by
Upton's men, but, charging with the bayonet, they carried all before them.

The confederates took to their heels, and attempted to flee to the other side of the river,
but their pontoon bridge was in possession of our troops, and hundreds of panic-stricken rebels
leaped into the rapid stream and attempted to swim across. Some succeeded, but many were drowned
in the attempt. Sixteen hundred prisoners, eight pieces of artillery, four battle-flags, and
more than two thousand stand of small arms, were the trophies of this splendid victory.

The credit of this brilliant success belongs mainly to the First division; yet the Second and
Third divisions, while less actively engaged, performed their part with alacrity and bravery,
and the many dead and wounded from these two divisions attested the severity of the fight along
their portions of the line. The loss to the corps, in killed and wounded, was about three hundred,
among whom were many choice spirits. The commander of the Fifth Wisconsin, Captain Walker,
was killed. Captain Ordway succeeded to the command. He leaped upon the parapet, and fell dead
inside the rebel fort.

All this time the Third corps was actively engaged at Kelly's Ford, three miles to our left.
It had found the rebels strongly posted on the opposite side of the river, well protected by
forts and rifle pits. The artillery of the corps was taken to the river side and brought to
bear upon the rebel works. At length a storming party was selected and massed on the banks.
At the word, the brave fellows plunged into the stream, and rushing across, charged the strong
works of the rebels with great fury. The occupants were obliged to flee, but five hundred of
them were left as prisoners.

Owing to the depth and force of the stream between the works the Sixth corps had taken, and
those still occupied by the rebels on the other side, it was impossible to push our victory
further that night. The confederates, finding our troops in possession of their pontoon bridge,
had set it on fire at the end still held by them; thus all pursuit was for the time cut off.
But on the following morning the rebels had retreated, leaving us to rebuild the bridge and
cross at our leisure.

Without further delay we pushed on toward Brandy Station, which we reached toward evening,
the cavalry having preceded us.

The whole of Lee's army, except the forces stationed at Rappahannock Station and Kelly's Ford,
had been encamped in the vicinity of Brandy Station, and their recently deserted camps, where
they had erected comfortable huts and made many other preparations for a winter's stay, showed
that their hasty leave was entirely unexpected to them. In many instances officers had forgotten
to take their valises and trunks with them, and Union soldiers strutted about in the garb of
rebel brigadiers and colonels.

It was said, by the rebel prisoners taken by the cavalry, that while the fights were in progress
on the Rappahannock, General Lee was holding a grand review of his army, when suddenly the
information reached him that the Yankees were coming. The review was broken off, and there
was hurrying of regiments to their respective camps, each regiment, independently of its division
or brigade, making hot haste for its own quarters. Baggage was quickly thrown into wagons,
and a general stampede toward the Rapidan commenced at once.

The Sixth corps went into camp on the right of the army, two miles from Brandy Station. We
occupied land belonging to John Minor Botts. Mr. Botts boasted that he owned six hundred miles
of fence when we came upon his possessions. He could not say that when we had been there a
week! His fences were burned, and his forests cut down; and it was generally known that our
chief quarter-master was paying him immense sums of money for the wood used by our army.

At the end of a week it became pretty evident that our stay at Brandy Station might be of considerable
duration, possibly for the winter. Accordingly, the men proceeded once more to build houses
for the winter; and never, since we had been in service, had they constructed so comfortable
quarters as they now built. All about us were the rebel camps, in which they had vainly hoped
to spend the winter; and these furnished timbers already hewn, fine stones ready for use in
making chimneys, and hewn saplings ready prepared for bunks. The Sixth corps was encamped in
a fine forest, which should have furnished not only great abundance of timber for use about
the quarters, but for fuel for the winter; but owing to the wasteful manner in which the wood
was at first used in building log fires in the open air, the forest melted away before the
men had fairly concluded that there was any necessity for using it economically.

Preparations were hurried forward for another advance. The railroad, which had been destroyed
by the rebels at the time of the raid to Centreville, from the Rappahannock to Bristoe Station,
was to be rebuilt, and the bridge across the Rappahannock, which we had ourselves destroyed,
was to be replaced, before the army could safely undertake another advance. It is one of the
mysteries which people who have never been connected with a great army have greatest difficulty
in comprehending, that an army advancing into such a country as we were now threatening, must
have ample and easy communications with its base of supplies. Could such people for a moment
realize the vast amount of material consumed by such an army as ours, the mystery might be
solved. To attempt to advance into a desert country without first either providing a supply
for many days, or opening ready communications with our base of supplies, would have been suicidal.
General Sherman might lead his army through a fertile country, where the ravages of war had
not appeared, and, by sweeping across a territory forty miles wide, collect abundant supplies
for his men; but our army was now to march into a wilderness where even a regiment could not
find subsistence. The newspapers at the north that condemned the delay at Brandy Station, and
sneered at the idea that the army needed a base of supplies, simply exhibited their profound
ignorance of the first principles of campaigning.

By the 25th the road was completed as far as Brandy Station, the bridge rebuilt, and a large
amount of supplies brought up; and the army was ordered to move at an early hour on the 26th.

The hour for moving was assigned each corps, and the order in which it was to march, that no
delay or confusion might occur. The Third corps was to start as soon as daylight, and the Sixth
was to follow it.

Our Sixth corps was moving at sunrise, the hour designated, toward Brandy Station. Presently
the head of the column halted in the midst of the camps of the Third corps, which were yet
undisturbed. According to the order for marching, the Third corps was to precede the Sixth,
and should have been out of camp before we arrived, but as yet not a tent was struck nor a
wagon loaded, and most of the men were asleep in their quarters. The Sixth corps was obliged
to halt and stand in the mud for hours, waiting for the delinquent corps to get out of the
way. Here was the first blunder of the new campaign.

At length at eleven o'clock we moved again, taking the road to the Rapidan. Our march was slow
and tedious, and instead of reaching the river at noon as was expected, and as General Meade's
orders contemplated, the head of the Third corps only reached the river at Jacobs' Ford long
after dark, and here again a delay was occasioned by a mistake of the engineers, who had not
brought a sufficient number of boats to this point to complete the pontoon bridge; a part of
the bridge had therefore to be extemporized out of poles.

The road for several miles was merely a narrow passage cut through the forest; a dense growth
of stunted pines and tangled bushes, filling up the space between the trees of larger growth.
Our corps moved along very slowly, halting for a moment, then advancing one or two rods, then
standing still again for perhaps several minutes, and again moving forward for a few steps.
This became very tedious. The men were faint and weary, and withal discouraged. They were neither
advancing nor resting.

From one end of the column of the Sixth corps to the other, through the miles of forest the
shout, coffee! coffee! passed from one regiment to another, until there could be heard nothing
but the vociferous demand for coffee. At eleven o'clock at night the order "ten minutes rest
for coffee," passed down the line and was received with shouts of approval. Instantly the roadside
was illuminated with thousands of little fires, over which the soldiers were cooking their
favorite beverage.

We crossed the Rapidan at Jacobs' Ford at midnight, leaving Upton's brigade on the north side
as rear-guard, and in another hour the men had thrown themselves upon the ground without waiting
to erect shelter tents, and were sleeping soundly notwithstanding the severity of the cold.
The Fifth and First corps had crossed at Culpepper Ford and the Second corps at Germania Ford
about noon, and were in the positions assigned them.

The position assigned to the Third and Sixth corps was not reached. These corps were ordered
to proceed to Robertson's Tavern, a point some seven miles beyond the ford, but the night was
far advanced, the men exhausted and the country little known, so these two corps did not seize
this very important point as directed. Of course the responsibility for this delay was not
with the Sixth corps or its commander, who was directed to follow the Third.

Next morning the Third corps commenced the advance, and we of the Sixth were drawn out in line
of march to follow; but it became evident that the advance was not unobstructed. Sharp picket
firing and the occasional booming of cannon revealed to us the fact that that corps had fallen
in with the enemy. Thus the day passed; the Sixth corps resting quietly, while the Third was
skirmishing with the enemy in front, until about three o'clock, when the firing increased and
there was evidently a severe engagement in front.

The First and Second divisions of the Sixth corps were now hurried along the narrow and winding
path to the support of the Third corps--our Third division being left near the river to cover
the bridges and trains. That corps was now fiercely engaged. The sulphurous smoke filled the
woods, and the roar of musketry became so general, and the forest echoed and reëchoed the sound,
so that it lost the rattling usually heard, and became a smooth, uniform roll. Our corps at
once took its position in line of battle, so as to support the Third corps and protect the
interval between the Third and Second corps, with Ellmaker's brigade on the right, and Neill's
and Upton's on the left, while the Vermonters and Torbert's Jersey brigade were held in reserve;
but the corps was not called into action. The dense growth of young timber completely obscured
all view of the operations at a little distance, and, indeed, rebel scouting parties were able
to hang close upon our flanks, and even penetrate our lines, protected from view and from pursuit
by the tangled forest.

On our right, the Second corps also encountered a force of the enemy, and became engaged in
the vicinity of Robertson's Tavern. They succeeded in driving the rebel force, which was small,
back to the cover of the wilderness. Gregg, also, with his cavalry, became engaged, but drove
the rebels back.

It now appeared that the fight of the Third corps was brought on by a blunder. General French,
in attempting to lead his corps to Robertson's Tavern, had mistaken the road, and, by bearing
too far to the west, had encountered Ewell's corps, which was hastening to intercept our progress.
The rebels made repeated charges upon the corps, but were each time repulsed, and under cover
of the night they fell back, leaving their dead on the ground. The loss to the Third corps
was between three and four hundred; that of the rebels, judging from the dead left upon the
ground, must have been greater.

While the fight was in progress, General Sedgwick and his staff dismounted and were reclining
about a large tree, when the attention of all was directed to two soldiers who were approaching,
bearing between them a stretcher on which lay a wounded man. As the men approached within a
few rods of the place where the general and his staff were, a solid cannon shot came shrieking
along, striking both of the stretcher bearers. Both fell to the ground--the one behind fatally
wounded, the other dead. But the man upon the stretcher leaped up and ran away as fast as his
legs could carry him, never stopping to look behind at his unfortunate companions. Shocking
as was the occurrence, neither the general nor the members of his staff could suppress a laugh
at the speedy restoration of the man who was being borne disabled from the field.

The two corps moved during the night to Robertson's Tavern, the destination which they should
have reached twenty-four hours before.

The unexpected encounter with the rebels in the Wilderness had hindered the two corps thus
long, and as might have been expected the time was not left unimproved by General Lee. On moving
in the morning on the road to Orange Court House, Lee's whole army was found strongly posted
along the banks of a muddy stream called Mine Run. Our army was brought into position on the
north side of the stream, and arrangements commenced for a general assault. Sharp picket firing
and the occasional roar of artillery, warned us that we were on the eve of a great battle.
A cold storm of rain rendered the situation cheerless and uncomfortable, but the excitement
of getting into position, regiments and brigades marching from one part of the line to another,
now approaching where the bullets of the rebel skirmishers whistled about them, and then withdrawing
a little to the rear, kept up the spirits of the men notwithstanding the tedious storm.

The greater part of the lines of both armies were in the midst of forests. Between the two
lines and in the midst of a deep valley, was the little stream Mine Run, bordered on each side
by marshes in which were luxuriant growths of reed grasses. The marshes and slopes on either
side were thickly set with low pines and scrub oaks, offering concealment to both parties.

Darkness closed over the two armies, neither of which was yet prepared for battle. The night
was spent by both parties in throwing up earthworks, and the morning revealed several strong
lines of rifle pits on the rebel side of the stream, one commanding another so that in case
they should be driven from one the next would afford an equally strong or even stronger position.

Thus the two armies remained during Sunday. General Meade still waiting to perfect his arrangements.

During the day the disposition of the line was completed. General Warren with his Second corps
occupied the extreme left of the line. His position fronted a very strong position of the enemy,
where the hills rose abruptly to the rear. This being considered by far the strongest portion
of the enemy's line. Warren was supported by the Fifth corps, two divisions of the Third corps,
and the Third division of the Sixth corps, under General Terry. In the center was the First
and Fifth corps, and, forming the right, were the two remaining divisions of the Sixth corps
and what was left of the Third. Our Second division constituted the extreme right of the line;
the Third brigade the right of the division; and the Seventy-seventh New York the right of
the brigade.

At two A.M., the Sixth corps and the division of the Third, covered by the woods, moved about
two miles to a position on the left flank of the enemy. The dense thicket and a gentle eminence
concealed the corps from the view of the rebels, who were but a few yards distant; and in order
to insure secresy, orders were issued that the men should avoid all noise, as far as possible,
and refrain from lighting fires.

It was arranged that the grand attack should be made on Monday; and early in the evening the
commanders of corps were summoned to General Meade's head-quarters, where the plan of the battle
was laid before them.

At a given signal, very early in the morning, General Warren with his strong force was to press
forward on the right of the rebel line. At the same time forces in the center were to open
a fierce fire upon the enemy, while the Sixth corps, at the same moment, was to rush from its
concealed position and turn the left flank of Lee's army.

The commanders of the divisions of the Sixth corps summoned the commanders of brigades and
regiments, and communicated to them also the plan of the battle, and assigned to each his part.

The night was bitter cold, and the men of our corps were without fires. It was vain to attempt
to sleep, and the men spent the night in leaping and running in efforts to keep warm.

No one doubted that the morning was to bring on one of the most terrific struggles in the history
of warfare. No man knew what was to be his own fate, but each seemed braced for the conflict.
It was a glorious moonlight, and the stars looked down in beauty from the cold skies upon the
strange scene. Thus all waited for the day.

The morning dawned; and soon after daylight the signal gun for the grand attack was heard near
the center of the line, and an active cannonade commenced there.

In a short time the order came for the commencement of the movement on the right. The men were
ordered to fall in; they were faced to the right, to move a little farther in that direction
before making the direct assault; they stood, with their muskets on their shoulders, their
hearts beating violently in anticipation of the onset to be made in another moment, when an
aide rode hastily to General Howe with directions to suspend the movement!

Warren, on advancing his line of skirmishers, and viewing the strong works thrown up by the
enemy during the night, had sent word that he could not carry the position before him. And
General Meade had ordered the whole movement to be discontinued for the time.

Never before, in the history of our army, had such elaborate preparations been made for an
attack. Every commander and every man knew exactly the part he was expected to take in the
great encounter, and each had prepared himself for it. At the hospitals everything was in a
state of perfect readiness. Hospital tents were all up, beds for the wounded prepared, operating
tables were in readiness, basins and pails stood filled with water, lint and dressings were
laid out upon the tables, and surgical instruments spread out ready for the grasp of the surgeon.

All day the men remained suffering with cold, their hunger but partially satisfied with hard
bread without coffee. It was a day of discomfort and suffering long to be remembered. It chanced
that the hard bread issued to our division was old and very wormy. It was, in some cases, difficult
for a man to know whether his diet was to be considered principally animal or vegetable. Our
General, Neill, sat with his staff munching some of these crackers of doubtful character, when
he was handed one unusually animated. The general broke the cracker, examined it for a moment,
and, handing it back to the servant, said, "Jim, give us one that hasn't so many worms in it."
Many of the men who were on the picket line that day and the night before, were found, when
the relief came around, dead at their posts, frozen.

During the night of December 1st and 2d, the army withdrew from Mine Run. The pickets were
directed to build fires and keep up a show of force. Our Seventy-seventh being that night on
the picket line, formed the rear of the rear-guard of the army on its retreat. It was three
o'clock in the morning of December 2d when the picket line was silently withdrawn. After a
rapid march, it crossed the pontoon bridge at Germania Ford at ten o'clock. Scarcely had the
troops crossed the bridge, when the cavalry of the enemy made its appearance on the south side
of the river. The Seventy-seventh New York, the Third Vermont and a battery of artillery were
directed to remain and guard the ford, while the remainder of the army continued the march
to the old camps. Next morning the two regiments and the battery started for Brandy Station,
and that night slept in their old quarters.

It was now evident that we were in permanent winter quarters. It is not our purpose to discuss
the merits of this fruitless campaign, but it may not be out of place to recall some of the
facts relating to it. The orders for marching on the 26th, were issued to all the corps commanders
on the evening previous, indicating the time for leaving camp. The Sixth corps was to follow
the Third, yet when the Sixth corps reached the camp of that corps, there were no signs of
moving. Several hours were thus lost on the start. General French declared that the order to
move did not reach him on the previous evening, yet he knew that the movement was expected
that day. As the result of this and other delays, two corps did not reach the position assigned
them on the 26th.

When, on the morning of the 27th, General French moved his corps again, he took the wrong road,
and thus brought on a premature engagement, which caused another delay of twenty-four hours. A
mill of this kind could be made much more perfect by an expenditure of two or three thousands
dollars more. I have instanced it to show what can be done with gradual reduction in a very small
way.

In mills of from three hundred to five hundred barrels capacity and still larger, the programme
differs considerably from that I have sketched, the middlings being graded and handled with little,
if any, returning, and are sized down on the smooth rolls, a much larger percentage of the work
of flouring being done on millstones. For a three hundred barrel roller mill, the following
plant is requisite: five double corrugated roller mills, five double smooth roller mills,
three pairs of four foot burrs sixteen purifiers, four wire scalping
reels, six feet long, one reel for the fifth break, one reel for low
grade flour, eight chop reels, seven reels for flour from smooth rolls,
three reels for the stone flour, two grading reels, three flour packers,
and necessary cleaning machinery.

The reels are eighteen feet thirty-two inches. The programme is necessarily more complicated.

When
it comes to the machinery to be employed in making the reductions or breaks, the miller has
several styles from which to choose. Which is best comes under the head of what I don't know, and
moreover, of that which I have found no one else who does know. Each machine has its good points,
and the mill owner must make his own decision as to which is best suited to his purpose. The
main principles involved are to abrade the bran as little as possible while cleaning it thoroughly,
and to make as little break flour, and as many middlings as possible,
the latter to be made in such shape as to be the most easily purified.

Regarding the difference between spring and winter wheat for gradual reduction milling, it may
be stated something after this manner: Spring wheat has a thinner
and more tender bran, makes more middlings because it is harder, and
for the same reason the flour is more inclined to be coarse and granular.

In milling with winter wheat, especially the better varieties, there will be more break flour made,
the middlings will be finer with fewer bran specks, and the bran more easily cleaned, because
it will stand harsher treatment. Winter wheat, moreover, requires more careful handling in
making the breaks, not because of the bran, but to avoid breaking down the middlings, and making
too much and too fine and soft break flour. In order to keep the flour sharp and granular, coarser
cloths are used in bolting, and because the middlings are finer the bolting is not so free and
a larger bolting surface is required. In milling either spring or winter wheat there should
be ample purifying capacity, it being very unwise to limit the number of machines, so that any
of them will be overtaxed. The day has gone by when one purifier will take care of all the middlings
in the mill.

There is one point which is of much interest to mill owners who wish to change their mills over to
the gradual reduction process, that is, how far they can utilize
their present plan of milling machinery in making the change.

Of course the cleaning machinery is the same In both cases, so are the elevators, conveyors, bolting chests,
etc. But to use the millstone is a debatable question. After carefully considering the matter I
have come to the conclusion that it has its place, and an important one at that, under the
new regime, viz., that of reducing the finer purified middlings to flour. The reason for this
lies in the peculiar construction of the wheat berry. If the interior of the berry were one solid
mass of flour, needing only to be broken up to the requisite fineness,
it could be done as well on the rolls.

But instead of this, as is well known, the flour part of the berry is made up of a large number of
granules or cells, the walls of which are cellular tissue, different from the bran in that it
is soft and white instead of hard and dark colored. It is also fibrous to a certain extent, and
when the fine middlings are passed between the rolls instead of breaking down and becoming finer,
it has a tendency to cake up and flatten out, rendering the flour soft and flaky. It does not
hurt the color, but it does hurt the strength. When the millstone is used in place of the roll
the flour is of equally good color, and more round and granular. I know that in this the advocates
of smooth rolls will differ from my conclusions, but I believe that the final outcome will be
the use of millstones on the finer middlings, and in fact on all the middlings that are thoroughly
freed from the germ.

It has been said that that which a man gives the most freely and receives with the worst grace
is advice. I will, however, close with a little of the article which may not be wholly put
of place. If you have a mill do not imagine that the addition of a few pairs of rolls, a purifier
or two, and a little overhauling of bolting-chests, is going to make it a full-fledged Hungarian
roller mill.
 Never had such general good health prevailed among our camps, and never were the
men so well contented or in so good spirits.

Many pleasant recollections cluster around the old camp at Brandy Station, which will never
be effaced from the memory of the soldiers of the Army of the Potomac.

But at length preparations were commenced for opening the spring campaign, and one of the first
orders, looking toward the breaking up of our camps, was one directing that our lady friends
should take their departure, then another to send all superfluous camp equipage to the rear.

Our army had been reorganized, its five corps being consolidated into three. The three divisions
of the First corps were transferred to the Fifth, retaining their corps badges. Two divisions
of the Third were assigned to the Second, preserving their badges, while the Third division,
Third corps, was transferred permanently to the Sixth corps, and became the Third division
of that corps. Our old Third division was broken up, the brigades of Wheaton and Eustis being
transferred to the Second division, and Shaler's brigade to the First. Our corps, as reorganized,
consisted of three divisions, comprising eleven brigades.[6]

    [6] The corps, as reorganized, was commanded as follows:

    Major-General John Sedgwick commanding the corps.

    First division, Brigadier-General H. G. Wright, commanding.
    First brigade, Colonel W. H. Penrose; Second brigade, Colonel E.
    Upton; Third brigade, Brigadier-General D. A. Russell; Fourth
    brigade, Brigadier-General A. Shaler.

    Second division, Brigadier-General George W. Getty, commanding.
    First brigade, Brigadier-General Frank Wheaton; Second brigade,
    Colonel L. A. Grant; Third brigade, Brigadier-General Thomas H.
    Neill; Fourth brigade, Brigadier-General L. A. Eustis.

    Third division, Brigadier-General James B. Ricketts, commanding.
    First brigade, Brigadier-General W. H. Morris; Second brigade,
    Brigadier-General Truman Seymour; Third brigade, Colonel
    Keiffer.

During the winter, congress, recognizing the great ability of General Grant, had conferred
upon that officer the rank of Lieutenant-General, giving him, under the President, command
of all the armies of the United States. General Grant at once proceeded to adopt a plan for
harmonious movements of all the armies. General Sherman, in the west, was directed to push
vigorously southward, penetrating the enemy's country as far as possible, and prevent reinforcements
being sent to Lee's army in the east. General Butler, on the Peninsula, was to advance on Richmond,
taking Petersburgh, and, if possible, Richmond itself, while the Army of the Potomac was to
attack Lee's army in the front, and force it back upon Richmond or destroy it.

These coöperative movements having been all arranged, each commander of an army or department
informed not only of the part which he was expected to perform himself, but what all were expected
to do, the Army of the Potomac was ready to move. General Grant had established his head-quarters
with that army.

At length the order for moving came. On the morning of the 4th of May, reveille was sounded
at half-past two o'clock, and at half-past four the Sixth corps moved, taking the road to Germania
Ford.

It was a lovely day, and all nature seemed rejoicing at the advent of spring. Flowers strewed
the wayside, and the warble of the blue bird, and the lively song of the sparrow, were heard
in the groves and hedges.

The distance from our camps to Germania Ford was sixteen miles. This distance we marched rapidly,
and long before sunset we had crossed the ford on pontoon bridges and marched to a point three
miles south of the river, where we bivouacked for the night.

The Second corps, at an earlier hour, had crossed at Ely's Ford, and had reached a position
near the old Chancellorsville battle-field, and the Fifth corps had led the way across Germania
Ford.

The infantry had been preceded by the cavalry divisions of Gregg and Wilson, under Sheridan.
They had fallen in with a small picket force which, after exchanging a few shots, had beat
a hasty retreat.

Before night the army and the greater part of our trains had effected a crossing without opposition;
and, doubtless, much to the surprise and chagrin of General Lee, we were holding strong positions,
from which it would hardly be possible to force us.

Except slight skirmishes in front of Hancock's Second corps, there was no fighting on the fourth
of May. At seven o'clock on the morning of the fifth, the Sixth corps moved southward about
two miles on the Wilderness plank road. Here the corps rested until eleven o'clock, while artillery
and cavalry passed along the road in a continuous column. At eleven o'clock the corps faced
to the front, and advanced into the woods which skirted the road.

The Sixth corps now occupied the extreme right of the line, General Warren's Fifth corps the
center, and Hancock's Second corps was on the left, near Chancellorsville. Between Warren and
Hancock was an unoccupied space--a point of vital importance to our line. Thither General Getty,
with the First, Second and Fourth brigades of our Second division, was sent to hold the ground
till Hancock, who was ordered to come up, should arrive. Our Third brigade being all that was
left of the Second division, it was assigned to the First division. General Meade's head-quarters
were just in rear of the Fifth corps. The wood through which our line was now moving was a
thick growth of oak and walnut, densely filled with a smaller growth of pines and other brushwood;
and in many places so thickly was this undergrowth interwoven among the large trees, that one
could not see five yards in front of the line. Yet, as we pushed on, with as good a line as
possible, the thick tangle in a measure disappeared, and the woods were more open. Still, in
the most favorable places, the thicket was so close as to make it impossible to manage artillery
or cavalry, and, indeed, infantry found great difficulty in advancing, and at length we were
again in the midst of the thick undergrowth.

Warren's corps, on our left, was already fighting, and forcing the enemy to retire from his
front, when our own corps struck the rebel skirmishers, who steadily fell back, disputing the
ground. As our line advanced, it would suddenly come upon a line of gray-coated rebels, lying
upon the ground, covered with dried leaves, and concealed by the chapparal, when the rebels
would rise, deliver a murderous fire, and retire.

We thus advanced through this interminable forest more than a mile and a half, driving the
rebel skirmishers before us, when we came upon their line of battle, which refused to retire.

Neill's brigade and the New Jersey brigade were in the first line of battle, at the foot of
a slope, and in the rear of these two brigades were Russell's, Upton's and Shaler's. On the
left of the First division were Seymour's and Keiffer's brigades, General Morris with his brigade
remaining on the right.

The enemy now charged upon our lines, making a desperate effort to turn our right flank, but
without avail. Again and again the rebels in columns rushed with the greatest fury upon the
two brigades in front, without being able to move them from their position. At half-past three
o'clock our sufferings had been so great that General Sedgwick sent a messenger to General
Burnside, who had now crossed his corps at Germania Ford, with a request that he would send
a division to our assistance.

The assistance was promised, but an order from General Grant made other disposition of the
division, and what remained of the noble old Sixth corps was left to hold its position alone.
At four, or a little later, the rebels retired, leaving many of their dead upon the ground,
whom they were unable to remove. In these encounters the Seventh Maine and Sixty-first Pennsylvania
regiments of Neill's brigade, who were on the right flank, received the heaviest onsets, and
suffered most severely. At one time the Maine regiment found itself flanked by a brigade of
rebels. Changing front the gallant regiment charged to the rear and scattered its opponents
in confusion. The opposing lines were upon the two slopes of a ravine, through which ran a
strip of level marshy ground, densely wooded like the rest of the wilderness. The confederates
now commenced to strengthen the position on their side of the ravine, felling timber and covering
it with earth. The woods resounded with the strokes of their axes, as the busy workmen plied
their labor within three hundred yards, and in some places less than one hundred yards of our
line, yet so dense was the thicket that they were entirely concealed from our view.

Meanwhile the battle had raged furiously along the whole line. The rattle of musketry would
swell into a full continuous roar as the simultaneous discharge of ten thousand guns mingled
in one grand concert, and then after a few minutes, become more interrupted, resembling the
crash of some huge king of the forest when felled by the stroke of the woodman's axe. Then
would be heard the wild yells which always told of a rebel charge, and again the volleys would
become more terrible and the broken, crashing tones would swell into one continuous roll of
sound, which presently would be interrupted by the vigorous manly cheers of the northern soldiers,
so different from the shrill yell of the rebels, and which indicated a repulse of their enemies.
Now and then the monotony of the muskets was broken by a few discharges of artillery, which
seemed to come in as a double bass in this concert of death, but so impenetrable was the forest
that little use was made of artillery, and the work of destruction was carried on with the rifles.

Warren's corps, first engaged, had nobly withstood the fierce assaults upon the center of the
line, and had even advanced considerably. Hancock's command was also hotly engaged. In the
commencement of the battle, three brigades of the Second division, the First, Second and Fourth,
with our commander, General Getty, were taken from the Sixth corps and sent to the right of
Warren's corps, to seize and hold the intersection of the Brock road and the Orange county
turnpike, a point of vital importance, and which, as Hancock's corps was still far to the left
near Chancellorsville, was entirely exposed. Toward this point Hill was hastening his rebel
corps down the turnpike, with the design of interposing between Hancock and the main army.
No sooner had the division reached the crossing of the two roads than the First brigade, General
Wheaton's, became hotly engaged with Hill's corps, which was coming down the road driving some
of our cavalry before it. The Vermont brigade quickly formed on the left of the plank road,
and the Fourth brigade on the right of the First. The engagement became general at once, and
each brigade was suffering heavy losses. The men hugged the ground closely, firing as rapidly
as possible.

Hancock's corps was advancing from the left, but thus far the division was holding the ground
alone. An attack by the three brigades was ordered, and the line was considerably advanced.
Again the men hugged the ground, the rebels doing the same.

Thus, holding the ground against vastly superior numbers, the division sustained the weight
of the rebel attacks until long after noon, when some of Hancock's regiments came to its support.
With the heroic valor for which the division was so well known throughout the army, it withstood
the force of the rebels until its lines were terribly thinned. The First brigade had held the
ground with desperate valor, and our friends, the Vermonters, fought with that gallantry which
always characterized the sons of the Green Mountain State. Their noblest men were falling thickly,
yet they held the road.

As Hancock joined his corps on the left of Getty's division, he ordered a charge along the
whole line, and again the carnage became fearful. For two hours the struggle continued, and
when the sounds of battle became less, and as darkness finally came over the wilderness, it
brought a season of respite to the hard fought divisions.

A thousand brave men of the Vermont brigade, and nearly as many of Wheaton's brigade, with
hundreds from the Fourth brigade, had fallen upon that bloody field.

In the evening the contest was renewed, especially along the line of the Sixth corps, and the
dark woods were lighted with the flame from the mouths of tens of thousands of muskets.

Charges and counter-charges followed each other in quick succession, and the rebel yell and
northern cheer were heard alternately, but no decided advantage was gained by either party.
At two o'clock at night the battle died away, but there was no rest for the weary soldiers
after the fatiguing duties of the day. Each man sat with musket in hand during the wearisome
hours of the night, prepared for an onset of the enemy. Skirmishing was kept up during the
entire night, and at times the musketry would break out in full volleys, which rolled along
the opposing lines until they seemed vast sheets of flame.

The position of the two armies on the morning of the 6th was substantially that of the day
before; the Sixth corps on the right, its rear on Wilderness Run near the old Wilderness Tavern,
the Fifth corps next on its left, and the Second corps with three brigades of the Second division
Sixth corps, on the left; the line extending about five miles. Besides these corps, General
Burnside was bringing his troops into the line.

Between the two armies lay hundreds of dead and dying men whom neither army could remove, and
over whose bodies the fight must be renewed.

The battle was opened at daylight by a fierce charge of the enemy on the Sixth corps, and soon
it raged along the whole line. The volleys of musketry echoed and reëchoed through the forests
like peals of thunder, and the battle surged to and fro, now one party charging, and now the
other, the interval between the two armies being fought over in many places as many as five
times, leaving the ground covered with dead and wounded. Those of the wounded able to crawl,
reached one or the other line, but the groans of others, who could not move, lent an additional
horror to the terrible scene whenever there was a lull in the battle. At ten o'clock the roar
of battle ceased, and from that time until five P.M., it was comparatively quiet in front of
the Sixth corps, but from the left where Hancock's corps and Getty's braves were nobly battling,
the war of musketry was incessant. There, Hancock had formed his troops in several lines of
battle, and advanced them upon the plank road. Getty's troops, their ranks having been so terribly
shattered the day before, were allowed to form in the rear. The attack was commenced, but presently
the enemy came down in terrible fury upon Hancock's lines. One after another was swept away,
leaving no Union troops in front of Getty. Now the exulting rebels came with stunning force
against the Sixth corps men. They had prepared breastworks of logs and decayed wood, and against
these light defenses the rebels charged, but only to meet with a deadly repulse. Again and
again the charge was renewed, and as often the brave men who had seen nearly three thousand
of their comrades fall on the day before, sent the confederates back from the road. At length,
the divisions on the right and left of Getty having fallen back to the Brock road, the division
was forced to fall back to the road also, but only after exhibiting a steadiness and valor
rarely equaled by any troops.

The road was held, in spite of every effort of the enemy to take it; but the noble soldier
and patriotic gentleman, General Wadsworth, lost his life while striving to rally his division
to hold the ground against the confederates.

Although the storm of battle had abated in our front, the rebels had stationed sharpshooters
in the trees and other advantageous positions, who kept up an incessant and annoying fire,
and now and then a shell from a rebel battery would drop into our ranks. By these, the corps
lost many men.

Until the evening of the 6th, our Third brigade of the Second division, and the New Jersey
brigade of the First division of the Sixth corps, had occupied the right of the line of battle
along the base of our slope of the ravine. Other portions of the First division, and the Third
division, occupying a position in our rear, on the summit of the slope, had been engaged during
the day in throwing up earthworks. At 5 P.M., the two advance brigades received orders to fall
back to the cover of these breastworks.

For thirty hours the Sixth corps, stripped of three brigades of its veteran troops, weary from
fighting and fasting, had been patiently waiting for the relief promised it long ago, and steadily
holding its ground until half of the advance brigades and almost half of the corps was destroyed.

Thirty hours before, General Sedgwick had sent word that the rebels were trying to turn our
flank, and begged that support might be sent; but no support had come. These breastworks had
been prepared to give the exhausted corps a little protection, that they might, by falling
back to their cover, occupy a stronger and less exposed position.

Soon after five o'clock, the brigades commenced falling back to these works. The rebels discovered
the movement, and thought it was a retreat. They were evidently already prepared for a desperate
assault upon our flank; and now that there seemed a retreat, there was no longer any hesitation.
Cheer after cheer arose from the rebel ranks, and, in fifteen minutes after, their yells were
mingled with terrific volleys of musketry, as they poured in overwhelming numbers upon our flanks.

A brief description of the position will explain the nature of the movement, which lost to
the Sixth corps the position it had held for a day and a half.

When the brigades which had occupied the base of the slope fell back to the breastworks, the
line of battle was arranged thus: on the extreme right was the Third division--a division but
a few days before joined to the corps--a division composed mostly of new troops who had never
before faced an enemy, and none of them had ever had any connection with the already historic
fame of that glorious corps. Next on the left was the First division, and joining this division
on the left was our own Third brigade of the Second division.

The assault of the rebels fell upon the green troops of the Third division, who, seized with
consternation, fled in confusion without attempting resistance. General Seymour whose gallant
conduct up to this time had won for him the admiration of all, made desperate attempts to rally
his panic-stricken brigade and refused to go to the rear with them. While thus striving vainly
to restore order to his shattered command, rushing to the front and attempting by his own manner
to inspire courage in his men, he was surrounded by the enemy and captured. He had but just
returned from the rebel prisons where he had been since the unfortunate battle of Olustee.

The hasty flight of the Third division opened the flank and rear of the First division to the
charge of the rebels, who now rushed on with redoubled fury and with demoniac yells, carrying
everything before them. The First division fell back, but not in the disorder and confusion
of the other. General Shaler, with a large part of his brigade, which held that part of the
line joining the Third division, was captured while vainly striving to resist the onset of
the rebel forces.

The regiments of our Third brigade were forced from the rifle pits, leaving the Seventy-seventh
regiment and a part of the Forty-third alone contending the ground, exposed to a galling fire
on front, flank and rear. The gallant regiments remained in the breastworks, pouring their
fire into the enemy's ranks until ordered to withdraw, to save themselves from capture.

The right wing, if not the whole army, was now in danger. It was at such times that the great
spirit of the noble Sedgwick rose to the control of events. It seemed to require adversity
to bring out all the grand qualities of his nature. We had witnessed his imperturbable bravery
and determination on the retreat to Banks' Ford, his unsurpassed heroism at Antietam, when
he kept the field after he was thrice wounded, was familiar to the nation, and now we were
to see another manifestation of his indomitable courage.

Rushing here and there, regardless of personal safety, he faced the disordered mass of fugitives
of the Third division, and with threats and entreaties prevailed upon them to halt; then turning
to the veterans of the First division, he shouted to them to remember the honor of the old
Sixth corps. That was an irresistible appeal, and the ranks of the First division and of our
Third brigade were formed along the turnpike, which was at right angles to our former position.
The corps now charged upon the exultant foe, and forced them back until our breastworks were
recaptured; but our flank was too much exposed, and again the enemy charged upon our front
and flank, forcing the corps to wheel back to the turnpike, where it had first rallied.

General Sedgwick now ordered another charge, and bravely the men rushed forward, ready to obey
any order from the revered lips of "Uncle John." The enemy was again forced back, and again
the corps occupied the breastworks. It was now dark, but the roar of musketry mingled with
the deep toned artillery shook the ground, and the dense forest was lighted by the scores of
thousands of flashing rifles which sent death to unseen foes.

The corps had not recovered its line of works without sacrifice, for the ground in our rear
was covered with our fallen comrades, while many more had been captured by the enemy. But we
were now able to hold the ground. The temporary disorder had arisen, and had been mostly confined
to the new troops, and even these, when rallied from their momentary confusion, had fought
with heroic valor. Although, for a time, forced back by the surprise of the rebel onset, the
old troops of the corps had shown no want of courage. The Sixth corps proper had not lost its
pristine glory. Something of a panic had been created among the teamsters in the rear, and
before dark the trains were hurrying toward Chancellorsville.

Leaving the excitement of the battle, let us now turn where the results of this carnage are
seen in their sober reality. While we stand in line of battle we see little of the frightful
havoc of war. The wounded drop about us, but, except those left on disputed ground and unable
to crawl away, they are carried instantly to the rear. The groans and cries of the wounded
and dying, of which we so often read as filling up the grand discord of sounds on the battle-field,
are things scarcely known in actual war. Rarely, as in the present battles, wounded men, unable
to get away, are left between the lines in such numbers that, when the musketry dies away,
their groans become heart-rending. But this is not usual.

But at the field hospitals, the work of destruction is seen in all its horrors. There, wounded
men by thousands are brought together, filling the tents and stretched upon every available
spot of ground for many rods around. Surgeons, with never tiring energy, are ministering to
their wants, giving them food, dressing their wounds or standing at the operating table removing
the shattered fragments of limbs. Men wounded in every conceivable way, men with mutilated
bodies, with shattered limbs and broken heads, men enduring their injuries with heroic patience,
and men giving way to violent grief, men stoically indifferent, and men bravely rejoicing that
it is only a leg. The building is four stories high, including basement, and thirty-two feet
square. It would be some better to have it larger, but it is made this small to show how small
a space a mill of this size can be made to occupy. No story is less
than twelve feet high. He
has learned to do what he can. Contenting himself with working day and night without respite,
and often without food, until, by unremitting but quiet toil, the wants of all are relieved.
No class of men in the army perform so great labors with so little credit as the surgeons.

Lest the author should be accused of undue partiality for his own staff, he will quote the
words of an unprejudiced witness, who, in speaking of the labor, the anxiety and the responsibility
imposed upon the surgeons after a great battle, says:

"The devotion, the solicitude, the unceasing efforts to remedy the defects of the situation,
the untiring attentions to the wounded, upon their part, were so marked as to be apparent to
all who visited the hospitals. It must be remembered that these same officers had endured the
privations and fatigues of the long forced marches with the rest of the army; they had shared
its dangers, for one medical officer from each regiment follows it into battle, and is liable
to the accidents of war, as has been repeatedly and fatally the case; that its field hospitals
are often, from the changes of the line of battle, brought under fire of the enemy, and that
while in this situation these surgeons are called upon to exercise the calmest judgment, to
perform the most critical and serious operations, and this quickly and continuously. The battle
ceasing, their labors continue. While other officers are sleeping, renewing their strength
for further efforts, the medical are still toiling. They have to improvise hospitals from the
rudest materials, are obliged to 'make bricks without straw,' to surmount seeming impossibilities.
The work is unending both by day and night, the anxiety is constant, and the strain upon both
the physical and mental faculties unceasing. Thus, after this battle, operators had to be held
up while performing the operations, and fainted from exhaustion the operation finished. One
completed his labors to be seized with partial paralysis, the penalty of his over exertion.

"While his duties are as arduous, his exposure as great, and the mortality from disease and
injury as large as among other staff officers of similar rank, the surgeon has no prospect
of promotion, of a brevet or an honorable mention, to stimulate him. His duties are performed
quietly, unostentatiously. He does his duty for his country's sake, for the sake of humanity."[7]

    [7] J. H. Douglass, Assistant Secretary Sanitary Commission. 

That'll be the end o't. I'll change't, if I leeve to get hame--I'll change't, let what like be
the consequence, or I'll hae an alias added till't, before waur comes o't; for this'll never do."

In such reflections as thae did I expend the impatient feelin that the loss o' the coach, an'
the recollection o' certain ither sma' incidents, with which the reader is acquainted, had
gien rise to. But little guid they did me; an' this I at length fand oot. Sae I just gied a
bit smile to mysel, an' made up my mind to wait patiently for the
next coach, which started the same nicht, though at a pretty late
hour. Late as that hour was, however, it cam roun, an', whan it did,
it fand me, withoot havin met wi' ony ither misfortune in the interim,
mounted again on the tap o' a coach. The hospitals
of the Fifth corps were also within a short distance, on the left.

At the hospital of our Second division, the scene was one of activity and sadness. Never had
so many of our choice spirits been brought to the rear, and never had the division been bereft
of so many of its brightest ornaments by death.

All the hospital tents belonging to the division were filled to overflowing with the unfortunate
victims of the battle. There, all the space between the different rows of tents, and for many
yards in front and rear, was covered with others, for whom there was no room under the canvas,
and, finally, long rows of them were laid upon the ground at a little distance from the hospitals
as close as they could lie, covering many rods of ground.

In the operating tents, the surgeons assigned to the duty of performing operations plied their
work without rest from the time the battle commenced until its close, day and night, while
dressers, and those whose duty it was to supply the wounded with food, were untiring in their zeal.

At midnight of the 6th, the operators were directed to cease their work. Ambulances and army
wagons in great numbers were loaded with the wounded, and the whole train, accompanied by the
surgeons, moved toward Chancellorsville, taking the turnpike along the rear of the army. But,
with all the ambulances and army wagons at command, hundreds of these unfortunate heroes were
left behind; and as it was known that our line of battle was to fall back within a few hours,
preparations were made for their care when they should fall into the hands of the enemy. Four
assistant surgeons from each division, a number of hospital tents, a supply of hard bread and
beef, with dressings and instruments, were left behind; and with sad hearts, their companions
bade them farewell. Like preparations were made by the other corps, for those of the wounded
who must be left to their fate. The long train bearing the wounded reached the left of the
old battle-field of Chancellorsville toward morning, and at once the labor of reëstablishing
the hospitals commenced. Tents were erected, the ambulances unloaded, and the surgeons, already
worn out by forty hours of incessant toil, resumed their work.

When the Sixth corps reoccupied the breastworks at dark on the 6th, it was desirable that the
right flank should be protected by old and reliable troops. Neill's Third brigade was assigned
to that position, the Seventy-seventh being upon the extreme right, the Sixty-first Pennsylvania
thrown out at right angles to protect the rear. On the left of the Seventy-seventh was the
Forty-ninth New York, the Seventh Maine was next, then the One Hundred and Twenty-second, and
the Forty-third New York was on the left of the brigade.

All was now quiet. No sound was heard except now and then the suppressed tones of officers
in command. The stars shone through the openings among the trees upon a long line of dusky
forms lying close behind the sheltering breastworks, as silent as death but ready at an instant
to pour out a storm of destruction. A row of bayonets projected over the breastworks; an abattis
of steel awaiting the momentarily expected onset of the enemy.

At ten o'clock the low tones of command of the rebel officers were heard as they urged their
men against our rear and flank. Colonel Smith of the Sixty-first Pennsylvania, ordered his
men to lie down, for they had no breastworks, and to reserve their fire. Nearer and nearer
came the dark line, until within twenty feet of the recumbent Pennsylvanians, but not a sound
from them. Not distant from the mansion-house of the present proprietor, the ruins of the old castellated
residence of the Cockburns may be seen; and, in the deserted burying-ground that surrounded the
chapel, there is the broken tombstone, recording the deaths of the last members of the family,
in the simple terms we have already mentioned. These are the appearances presented now; but,
in the beginning of the sixteenth century, Henderland was a close
retreat, surrounded by wood and water. Twenty minutes after this repulse they advanced silently but in stronger
force, directly in front of our breastworks. They advanced slowly and in silence until within
a few feet of the Union line, when with wild yells they leaped forward, some even mounting
the breastworks. But a sheet of flame instantly flashed along the whole line of our works;
the astonished rebels wavered for a moment and then beat a hasty retreat, relinquishing with
this last desperate effort the attempt to drive back the old Sixth corps.

Scarcely a man of the Union force was injured by this charge, but the dead and wounded from
the rebel ranks literally covered the ground. There was no help for them. Our men were unable
even to take care of their own wounded which lay scattered through the woods in the rear. So
the rebel wounded lay between the two armies, making the night hideous with their groans.

The battle of the 6th was now at an end, neither party having gained any decided advantage.

