DEAR LAD, - If there was any more praise in what you wrote, I think  [the editor] has done
us both a service; some of it stops my  throat.  What, it would not have been the same if Dumas
or Musset  had done it, would it not?  Well, no, I do not think it would, do  you know, now;
I am really of opinion it would not; and a dam good  job too.  Why, think what Musset would
have made of Otto!  Think  how gallantly Dumas would have carried his crowd through!  And 
whatever you do, don't quarrel with -.  It gives me much pleasure  to see your work there;
I think you do yourself great justice in  that field; and I would let no annoyance, petty or
justifiable,  debar me from such a market.  I think you do good there.  Whether  (considering
our intimate relations) you would not do better to  refrain from reviewing me, I will leave
to yourself:  were it all  on my side, you could foresee my answer; but there is your side
also, where you must be the judge.

As for the SATURDAY.  Otto is no 'fool,' the reader is left in no  doubt as to whether or not
Seraphina was a Messalina (though much  it would matter, if you come to that); and therefore
on both these  points the reviewer has been unjust.  Secondly, the romance lies  precisely
in the freeing of two spirits from these court intrigues;  and here I think the reviewer showed
himself dull.  Lastly, if  Otto's speech is offensive to him, he is one of the large class
of  unmanly and ungenerous dogs who arrogate and defile the name of  manly.  As for the passages
quoted, I do confess that some of them  reek Gongorically; they are excessive, but they are
not inelegant  after all.  However, had he attacked me only there, he would have  scored.

Your criticism on Gondremark is, I fancy, right.  I thought all  your criticisms were indeed;
only your praise - chokes me. - Yours  ever,

R. L. S.

Letter:  TO WILLIAM ARCHER

SKERRYVORE, BOURNEMOUTH, OCTOBER 28, 1885.

DEAR MR. ARCHER, - I have read your paper with my customary  admiration; it is very witty,
very adroit; it contains a great deal  that is excellently true (particularly the parts about
my stories  and the description of me as an artist in life); but you will not  be surprised
if I do not think it altogether just.  It seems to me,  in particular, that you have wilfully
read all my works in terms of  my earliest; my aim, even in style, has quite changed in the
last  six or seven years; and this I should have thought you would have  noticed.  Again, your
first remark upon the affectation of the  italic names; a practice only followed in my two
affected little  books of travel, where a typographical MINAUDERIE of the sort  appeared to
me in character; and what you say of it, then, is quite  just.  But why should you forget yourself
and use these same  italics as an index to my theology some pages further on?  This is  lightness
of touch indeed; may I say, it is almost sharpness of  practice?

Excuse these remarks.  I have been on the whole much interested,  and sometimes amused.  Are
you aware that the praiser of this  'brave gymnasium' has not seen a canoe nor taken a long
walk since  '79? that he is rarely out of the house nowadays, and carries his  arm in a sling?
Can you imagine that he is a backslidden  communist, and is sure he will go to hell (if there
be such an  excellent institution) for the luxury in which he lives?  And can  you believe
that, though it is gaily expressed, the thought is hag  and skeleton in every moment of vacuity
or depression?  Can you  conceive how profoundly I am irritated by the opposite affectation
to my own, when I see strong men and rich men bleating about their  sorrows and the burthen
of life, in a world full of 'cancerous  paupers,' and poor sick children, and the fatally bereaved,
ay, and  down even to such happy creatures as myself, who has yet been  obliged to strip himself,
one after another, of all the pleasures  that he had chosen except smoking (and the days of
that I know in  my heart ought to be over), I forgot eating, which I still enjoy,  and who
sees the circle of impotence closing very slowly but quite  steadily around him?  In my view,
one dank, dispirited word is  harmful, a crime of LESE- HUMANITE, a piece of acquired evil;
every  gay, every bright word or picture, like every pleasant air of  music, is a piece of
pleasure set afloat; the reader catches it,  and, if he be healthy, goes on his way rejoicing;
and it is the  business of art so to send him, as often as possible.

For what you say, so kindly, so prettily, so precisely, of my  style, I must in particular
thank you; though even here, I am vexed  you should not have remarked on my attempted change
of manner:   seemingly this attempt is still quite unsuccessful!  Well, we shall  fight it
out on this line if it takes all summer.

And now for my last word:  Mrs. Stevenson is very anxious that you  should see me, and that
she should see you, in the flesh.  If you  at all share in these views, I am a fixture.  Write
or telegraph  (giving us time, however, to telegraph in reply, lest the day be  impossible),
and come down here to a bed and a dinner.  What do you  say, my dear critic?  I shall be truly
pleased to see you; and to  explain at greater length what I meant by saying narrative was
the  most characteristic mood of literature, on which point I have great  hopes I shall persuade
you. - Yours truly,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

P.S. - My opinion about Thoreau, and the passage in THE WEEK, is  perhaps a fad, but it is
sincere and stable.  I am still of the  same mind five years later; did you observe that I
had said  'modern' authors? and will you observe again that this passage  touches the very
joint of our division?  It is one that appeals to  me, deals with that part of life that I
think the most important,  and you, if I gather rightly, so much less so?  You believe in the
extreme moment of the facts that humanity has acquired and is  acquiring; I think them of moment,
but still or much less than  those inherent or inherited brute principles and laws that sit
upon  us (in the character of conscience) as heavy as a shirt of mail,  and that (in the character
of the affections and the airy spirit of  pleasure) make all the light of our lives.  The house
is, indeed, a  great thing, and should be rearranged on sanitary principles; but  my heart
and all my interest are with the dweller, that ancient of  days and day-old infant man.

R. L. S.

An excellent touch is p. 584.  'By instinct or design he eschews  what demands constructive
patience.'  I believe it is both; my  theory is that literature must always be most at home
in treating  movement and change; hence I look for them.

Letter:  TO THOMAS STEVENSON

[SKERRYVORE, BOURNEMOUTH,] OCTOBER 28, 1885.

MY DEAREST FATHER, - Get the November number of TIME, and you will  see a review of me by a
very clever fellow, who is quite furious at  bottom because I am too orthodox, just as Purcell
was savage  because I am not orthodox enough.  I fall between two stools.  It  is odd, too,
to see how this man thinks me a full-blooded fox- hunter, and tells me my philosophy would
fail if I lost my health  or had to give up exercise!

An illustrated TREASURE ISLAND will be out next month.  I have had  an early copy, and the
French pictures are admirable.  The artist  has got his types up in Hogarth; he is full of
fire and spirit, can  draw and can compose, and has understood the book as I meant it,  all
but one or two little accidents, such as making the HISPANIOLA  a brig.  I would send you my
copy, BUT I CANNOT; it is my new toy,  and I cannot divorce myself from this enjoyment.

I am keeping really better, and have been out about every second  day, though the weather is
cold and very wild.

I was delighted to hear you were keeping better; you and Archer  would agree, more shame to
you!  (Archer is my pessimist critic.)   Good-bye to all of you, with my best love.  We had
a dreadful  overhauling of my conduct as a son the other night; and my wife  stripped me of
my illusions and made me admit I had been a  detestable bad one.  Of one thing in particular
she convicted me in  my own eyes:  I mean, a most unkind reticence, which hung on me  then,
and I confess still hangs on me now, when I try to assure you  that I do love you. - Ever your
bad son,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

Letter:  TO HENRY JAMES

SKERRYVORE, BOURNEMOUTH, OCTOBER 28, 1885.

MY DEAR HENRY JAMES, - At last, my wife being at a concert, and a  story being done, I am at
some liberty to write and give you of my  views.  And first, many thanks for the works that
came to my  sickbed.  And second, and more important, as to the PRINCESS.   Well, I think you
are going to do it this time; I cannot, of  course, foresee, but these two first numbers seem
to me picturesque  and sound and full of lineament, and very much a new departure.  As  for
your young lady, she is all there; yes, sir, you can do low  life, I believe.  The prison was
excellent; it was of that nature  of touch that I sometimes achingly miss from your former
work; with  some of the grime, that is, and some of the emphasis of skeleton  there is in nature.
I pray you to take grime in a good sense; it  need not be ignoble:  dirt may have dignity;
in nature it usually  has; and your prison was imposing.

And now to the main point:  why do we not see you?  Do not fail us.   Make an alarming sacrifice,
and let us see 'Henry James's chair'  properly occupied.  I never sit in it myself (though
it was my  grandfather's); it has been consecrated to guests by your approval,  and now stands
at my elbow gaping.  We have a new room, too, to  introduce to you - our last baby, the drawing-room;
it never cries,  and has cut its teeth.  Likewise, there is a cat now.  It promises  to be
a monster of laziness and self-sufficiency.

Pray see, in the November TIME (a dread name for a magazine of  light reading), a very clever
fellow, W. Archer, stating his views  of me; the rosy-gilled 'athletico-aesthete'; and warning
me, in a  fatherly manner, that a rheumatic fever would try my philosophy (as  indeed it would),
and that my gospel would not do for 'those who  are shut out from the exercise of any manly
virtue save  renunciation.'  To those who know that rickety and cloistered  spectre, the real
R. L. S., the paper, besides being clever in  itself, presents rare elements of sport.  The
critical parts are in  particular very bright and neat, and often excellently true.  Get  it
by all manner of means.

I hear on all sides I am to be attacked as an immoral writer; this  is painful.  Have I at
last got, like you, to the pitch of being  attacked?  'Tis the consecration I lack - and could
do without.   Not that Archer's paper is an attack, or what either he or I, I  believe, would
call one; 'tis the attacks on my morality (which I  had thought a gem of the first water) I
referred to.

Now, my dear James, come - come - come.  The spirit (that is me)  says, Come; and the bride
(and that is my wife) says, Come; and the  best thing you can do for us and yourself and your
work is to get  up and do so right away, - Yours affectionately,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

Letter:  TO WILLIAM ARCHER

[SKERRYVORE, BOURNEMOUTH,] OCTOBER 30, 1885.

DEAR MR. ARCHER. - It is possible my father may be soon down with  me; he is an old man and
in bad health and spirits; and I could  neither leave him alone, nor could we talk freely before
him. Standing before the glass, the banker was seized with a repetition of the sickening fear
that had oppressed him at Corrigan's words upon his entrance.

It seemed to him that there was a sinister significance behind Corrigan's present silence. A tension
came between them, portentous of evil. Braman shivered, but the silence held. The banker tried
to think of something to say--his thoughts were rioting in chaos,
a dumb, paralyzing terror had seized him, his lips stuck together,
the facial muscles refusing their office.

  I used
myself to rage  when I saw sick folk going by in their Bath-chairs; since I have  been sick
myself (and always when I was sick myself), I found life,  even in its rough places, to have
a property of easiness.  That  which we suffer ourselves has no longer the same air of monstrous
injustice and wanton cruelty that suffering wears when we see it in  the case of others.  So
we begin gradually to see that things are  not black, but have their strange compensations;
and when they draw  towards their worst, the idea of death is like a bed to lie on.  I  should
bear false witness if I did not declare life happy.  And  your wonderful statement that happiness
tends to die out and misery  to continue, which was what put me on the track of your frame
of  mind, is diagnostic of the happy man raging over the misery of  others; it could never
be written by the man who had tried what  unhappiness was like.  And at any rate, it was a
slip of the pen:   the ugliest word that science has to declare is a reserved  indifference
to happiness and misery in the individual; it declares  no leaning toward the black, no iniquity
on the large scale in  fate's doings, rather a marble equality, dread not cruel, giving  and
taking away and reconciling.

Why have I not written my TIMON?  Well, here is my worst quarrel  with you.  You take my young
books as my last word.  The tendency  to try to say more has passed unperceived (my fault,
that).  And  you make no allowance for the slowness with which a man finds and  tries to learn
his tools.  I began with a neat brisk little style,  and a sharp little knack of partial observation;
I have tried to  expand my means, but still I can only utter a part of what I wish  to say,
and am bound to feel; and much of it will die unspoken.   But if I had the pen of Shakespeare,
I have no TIMON to give forth.   I feel kindly to the powers that be; I marvel they should
use me so  well; and when I think of the case of others, I wonder too, but in  another vein,
whether they may not, whether they must not, be like  me, still with some compensation, some
delight.  To have suffered,  nay, to suffer, sets a keen edge on what remains of the agreeable.
This is a great truth, and has to be learned in the fire. - Yours  very truly,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

We expect you, remember that.

Letter:  TO WILLIAM ARCHER

SKERRYVORE, BOURNEMOUTH, NOVEMBER 1, 1885.

DEAR MR. ARCHER, - You will see that I had already had a sight of  your article and what were
my thoughts.

One thing in your letter puzzles me.  Are you, too, not in the  witness-box?  And if you are,
why take a wilfully false hypothesis?   If you knew I was a chronic invalid, why say that my
philosophy was  unsuitable to such a case?  My call for facts is not so general as  yours,
but an essential fact should not be put the other way about.

