 "Canst let me in, lad, without
making a noise?"

Without more ado I lifted the sash gradually, for it was heavy and creaked, and I feared to
rouse the household. When it was high enough for Joe's bulky form to pass through he clambered
over the sill, and stood in my room.

"How did you get up, Joe?" I asked in a whisper.

"Got a ladder from the rick yard, lad. I bin tapping for nigh half an hour, I reckon. You be
one of the seven sleepers, for sure."

"But what do you want, Joe? You can't stay here, you know."

"Nor don't want to. I be come to tell you, lad, I be going away."

"Going away, Joe?"

"Yes. No one knows it but you, and I wouldn't ha' telled you only the old mother will be in
a rare taking when she finds me gone, and I want you to tell her as I've come to no harm."

"But why, Joe?"

"Vetch--that's why. 'Tis no place for me now, lad. He bin cursing and swearing he'll send me
to the plantations for that business with the barrel, and he'll keep his word. And so I be
going to run for it."

"But where, Joe? And what about your 'dentures?"

"That's where it is: my 'dentures must go too. If I be catched, there's a flogging and prison
for that. But I don't mean to be catched. Before the sun's up I'll be on my way to Bristowe."

"That's ever so far."

"So 'tis, but not further than a pair of legs can walk."

"And will you get a place with a cooper there?"

"No, no; no more coopering for me; I be done with barrels for good and all. I be going to sea."

"To sea! What ever made you think of such a thing?"

"One thing and another. And I won't be the first, not even from such an upland place as Shrewsbury.
Why, haven't we heard Mistress Hind tell time and again how her brother John Benbow ran away
to sea nigh upon thirty years ago?"

"True, and so did Sam Blevins, and hasn't been heard of since, Joe."

"Well, if Vetch ships me to the plantations you may be sure no more will be heard of Joe Punchard,
so 'tis as broad as 'tis long."

"'Tis all my fault, Joe. If I hadn't run into the shop this wouldn't have happened, and you'd
have worked out your 'dentures, and maybe risen to be a partner with Mr. Mark. I wish I had
let them catch me, Joe, I do."

"Now don't you take on, Master Humphrey. As for partners, I be sick of making barrels for other
folks' beer, that's the truth, and by what I've heard there's riches to be picked up in the
Indies, and many a sea captain is a deal better off than Matthew Mark. And I'm set on trying
it, lad, the more so as, by long and short, I dursn't stay in Shrewsbury no longer. So you'll
be so good as go and see the old mother tomorrow, and tell her I be gone to sea, and I'll send
her home silks, and satins, and diamonds, too, maybe, and I'll come home some day rich as creases,
as I heard parson say once."

"I hope you will, Joe. Will you write to me and tell me how you are getting on?"

"Bless your life, I can do no more than make my mark. But maybe I'll light on some scholard
who'll write down out of my mouth, and I'll make him limn a barrel on the paper, and then you'll
know for sure 'tis me."

This conversation had proceeded in whispers, but Joe's whisper was sonorous, and I was in some
fear lest Mistress Pennyquick, whose room was hard by, should hear the rumble and take alarm.
Yet I could not refrain from keeping him while I told of the matter so near my heart--the offer
of Captain Galsworthy to take me as a pupil. Joe listened very sympathetically.

"'Tis an ill wind blows no one good," he said. "That there barrel makes a sailor of me; maybe
'tis to make a sojer of you."

"And what of Cyrus Vetch?" I could not help saying.

"Ah! Cyrus Vetch!" muttered Joe, looking troubled. "I be afeared 'twill make him a downright
enemy to you, lad. But you'll grow, and captain will learn you how to ply your fists, and when
it comes to a fight, mind of my fighting name, and punch hard."

Then, having promised to see his mother and do what I could to console her, I wrung his hand
and wished him well, and he climbed out again by the window, and in the starlight I watched
him carry the ladder across the yard; and then with a final wave of the hand he vanished into
the night.

Chapter 3: I Meet The Mohocks.

At breakfast I said nothing of Joe's midnight visit, reckoning that it would not be long before
the news of his flight got abroad. It was indeed the subject of a great buzz of talk among
my schoolfellows, who flocked about me as I walked down Castle Street, demanding to hear the
full story from my own lips. I could tell them nothing that they did not know, save only my
leave-taking with Joe Punchard, which, of course, I had resolved to keep very close. I learned
from them that Cyrus was abed, and like to stay there, said Mr. Pinhorn, for a week or more.
His father was in a desperate rage, and had sent horsemen along all the roads in pursuit of
the runaway, and I had some fear that my good friend would be caught and brought back to receive
his punishment.

However, nothing had been heard of him by the time school was over, so that I had great hopes
that he had got himself clean away. I went to see his mother as I had promised, and said what
I could to comfort her; but the good woman was mightily upset, and declared in a passion of
weeping that she was sure she would never see her Joe again.

That evening at supper my father was even more quiet than his wont. Mistress Pennyquick told
me afterwards that he had been to see his sister Lady Cludde and her husband at Cludde Court,
and given them a piece of his mind. What passed between them I know not, but I do know that
my father never set foot in Cludde Court again, nor did his sister come any more to the farm,
even when her brother lay a-dying. His visit had this good effect, however, that I suffered
no more bullying at the hands of Dick Cludde or Cyrus Vetch. Dick eyed me with a malignant
scowl whenever he met me, and as for Cyrus, who did not come back to school for a good ten
days, he looked over my head as though I did not exist, which gave me no discomfort, you may
be sure. At the end of that year they were both taken from school, Cludde going to Cambridge,
and Vetch to assist his father, who was a grain merchant in a substantial way, as all Shrewsbury
supposed.

It would be a tedious matter were I to tell all the little happenings of the next few years.
Whether it was due to my constant exercise under Captain Galsworthy's tuition, I know not,
but certainly, from that very summer, I grew at an amazing rate, shooting up until I was as
tall as boys three or four years older, yet hardening at the same time. Twice a week regularly
I betook myself to the captain's little cottage on the Wem road, and spent an hour with him
in mastering the principles and practice of what he called the noble arts of self defense.
He was pleased to say that I was quick of eye and nimble of body, and, being on my side very
eager to learn, I was speedily in his good books, and he seemed to take a special pleasure
in teaching me.

At first I found our bouts at fisticuffs a severe tax. The captain, though well on in years,
was still hale and active, and, being tall and spare, he had a great advantage of me. With
the long reach of his arms he could pummel me without giving me the least chance of reprisal,
and many's the day I crawled home after our encounters bruised and sore, provoking indignant
remonstrances from Mistress Pennyquick. But I refused to let her coddle me, and as my appetite
never failed, and I throve amazingly, the good woman at last ceased to lament, and, as I discovered,
was wont behind my back to vaunt my growing manliness.

By the time I was fifteen I was as tall as the captain himself, and then my share of bruises
ceased to be so disproportionate. In skill, whether with the fists or the foils, he was always
vastly my superior; indeed, to this day I have never met his equal. But I had youth on my side,
and sometimes the old man at the end of a particularly arduous bout would sigh, and wish he
were younger by a score of years.

No one could have been more generous in encouragement and praise. It would have amused an onlooker,
I am sure, to see him, when I had had the good fortune to tap claret, mopping the injured feature
and all the time maintaining a flow of complimentary remarks.

"Capital, my lad!"--after fifty years I can hear him still--"on my life, a neat one, Humphrey;
I shall make something of you yet, my boy."

And then we fall to it again, and, being somewhat overconfident, perhaps, after my success,
I fail a little in my guard, and the captain sees his opportunity and lands me such a series
of staggerers that I see a thousand stars, and there am I dabbing my nose while he cries again:
"Capital, my lad! A Roland for an Oliver! And now we'll wash away the sanguinary traces of
our combat and allay our noble rage with a mug of cider."

And thus, giving and receiving hard knocks, we continued to be the best of friends.

These years brought changes in their train. One day Joshua Vetch, Cyrus' father, died suddenly
of an apoplectic fit, brought on, folk said, by disappointment at Mr. Adderton the draper being
elected mayor over his head. And then it was found that, so far from being wealthy as was supposed,
he had been for years living beyond his means, being ably assisted in his expenditure by Cyrus.
His affairs were in great disorder; Cyrus himself was totally unprovided for, and but for his
uncle, John Vetch, a reputable attorney of our town, who took pity on him, and gave him articles,
God knows what would have become of him.

At this change of fortune I could not but remember how, years before, he had sneered at me
as a "charity brat." I fancy he remembered it too, for when I met him face to face one day,
as I returned from school, coming out of his uncle's office, he flushed deeply and then gave
me such a look of hatred that I felt uneasy for days after.

Cyrus had never borne a good name in Shrewsbury, and after his father's death he seemed to
grow reckless. Dick Cludde was still at college, though I never heard that he did any good
there, and in the vacations he and Cyrus consorted much together, and became in fact the ringleaders
of a wild set whose doings were a scandal in Shrewsbury for many a day. Cludde, it seemed,
had made a jaunt to London with other young bloods at the end of the term in the December of
this year 1694, to see the great pageant of Queen Mary's funeral.

The adventure did him no good, for when he returned to Shrewsbury he formed, with Vetch and
others of his kidney, a gang in imitation of the Mohocks, as they were called--the band of
dissolute young ruffians who then infested London, wrenching off knockers, molesting women
in the streets, pinking sober citizens, and tumbling the old watchmen into the gutters. Our
streets at night became the scene of riotous exploits of this kind, and our watch, being old
and feeble men, were quite unable to cope with the rioters, so that decent folk began to be
afraid to stir abroad after dark. Though they disguised themselves for these forays, it was
shrewdly suspected who they were; but they escaped actual detection, and indeed, they were
held in such terror by the townsfolk that no one durst move against them openly, for fear of
what might come of it.

Things grew to such a height that one Saturday the mayor, with half a dozen aldermen, walked
out to the little cottage on the Wem Road, and besought Captain Galsworthy's aid. The captain
and I chanced to be in the thick of an encounter with the foils, and neither of us heard the
rap on the door which announced the visitors. A gust of air when the door was opened apprised
us that we had onlookers at our sport; but the captain's eyes never left mine until with a
dexterous turn of the wrist, which I had long envied and sought in vain to copy, he sent my
foil flying to the end of the room.

"Capital, capital!" cried he, removing his mask and wiping his heated brow.

"Good morning, Mr. Mayor," he added; "we have kept you waiting, I fear; but we were just approaching
the critical moment: the issue was doubtful, and there is little satisfaction in a drawn battle.

"Your looks are portentous, gentlemen: is this a visit of state, may I ask?"

Whereupon the mayor, an honest little draper, made a speech which I am sure he had diligently
conned over beforehand. He passed from a recital of the woes under which Shrewsbury suffered
to a most flattering eulogium of the captain's prowess, to which my good friend listened with
an air of approval that amused me mightily. And then the mayor came to the point, and in the
name of the corporation and all decent citizens of Shrewsbury besought the captain to suppress
the disturbers of their peace.

"Hum! ha!" said the captain, rubbing his nose reflectively. "I am an old man, Mr. Mayor: methinks
this is work for younger blood than mine."

"No, no!" cried the company in chorus.

"We seed tha knock the steel from the hand of Master Bold there as 'twere a knitting needle,"
says the mayor, whose speech was as broad as his figure.

"Well, well," says the captain, "I'll think of it, my friends. You do me great honor, and I
thank you for your visit."

The captain and I talked over the matter between ourselves, and the upshot of our consultation
was that we got together a little band of his former pupils, and for several nights in succession
we perambulated the streets of Shrewsbury from the English to the Welsh Bridge and from the
Castle to the Quarry, with naked swords and a martial air. But we had our exercise for nothing.
The town was as quiet as a graveyard, and the only disturber of the peace that engaged our
attention was poor Tom Jessopp, the drayman, who, one night, having drunk more old October
than was good for him, encountered us as he was staggering home down Shoplatch, and invited
us, first to wet our whistles, and, on our declining, to fight him for a pint. We escorted
him home and put him to bed, not without some difficulties and inconveniences, and that was
the first and last of our adventures, the captain declaring that to deal with topers was no
work for a man of honor.

The very night after our company was thus dissolved the mayor was knocked down at the foot
of Swan Hill by the Town Wall, gagged and trussed, and laid upon his own doorstep, where he
was found by the maidservant in the morning, having wrought himself to the verge of apoplexy
by his struggles to rid himself of his bonds. He besought the captain with tears of outraged
dignity to resume his guardianship of the town; but the old warrior merely rubbed his nose
and spoke of rheumatism.

The outrages occurred only at intervals, and ceased altogether during the college terms, when
Dick Cludde was absent, so that we were not far wrong in our inference that he was the fount
and origin of the deeds of lawlessness. The townsfolk, you may be sure, did not love him; nor
did the high and mighty airs Sir Richard and my lady chose to assume in their dealings with
the citizens win them many friends; so that when it became known, about the time when Dick
left Cambridge finally, without a degree, that his father had suffered serious reverses of
fortune in his adventures in oversea trade, there were few who felt anything but satisfaction.

At this time I was midway in my seventeenth year--a big strapping fellow standing five feet
ten, having quite outgrown the delicacy of my childhood. I was high up in the school, on good
terms with the masters, though my Latin and Greek was never considerable: on better terms with
the boys, for, I must own, my inclinations were rather towards baseball and quoits than towards
the nice discrimination of longs and shorts. I had developed in particular an amazing strength
of arm, which stood me in good stead in wrestling bouts, and led to my being counted two in
our tugs of war. It was this same strength, I fancy, that made my schoolfellows chary of provoking
me to wrath, for which I was somewhat sorry, having always loved a fight.

During these years no tidings came to us of Joe Punchard. His poor mother, who earned a living
by washing for some of our Shrewsbury folk, feared the worst from his long silence. But Mistress
Nelly Hind, who kept a coffee shop in Raven Street, called Mistress Punchard a croaker and
bade her be of good cheer, for she had neither seen nor directly heard from her brother John
Benbow for twenty years; yet he was alive and well, and captain of a king's ship, if rumor
were not a false, lying jade.

"Not that your Joe will ever rise to such a height," she added.

"Sure he's a better boy than ever your John was," said Mistress Punchard, up in arms for her
offspring.

"John's legs are as straight as the bed post," retorted his sister, and then the two women
began a war of words, in the midst of which, having drunk my dish of coffee, I slipped away.

I rarely speculated on my future, and my father never spoke of it. We took it for granted that
I should succeed him in his little property, and during the school holidays I sometimes accompanied
him to market, and learned to handle samples of grain and to discuss the points of his fat cattle.

It was when I was approaching the end of my seventeenth year that I began to think of the future
more nearly. My father had suffered long--though Mistress Pennyquick and I had known nothing
of it, he being so reticent--from a disease which nowadays physicians call angina pectoris,
a disease that grips a man by the chest, as 'twere his breastbones are ground together, with
breathlessness and exquisite pain. As he grew older, the attacks recurred more frequently and
with greater violence, and after one of them, the first I had seen with my own eyes, he sent
for Mr. Vetch, the attorney, and was closeted with him a great while in his room. Mistress
Pennyquick's face was very grave when she spoke to me about it afterwards.

"'Tis a bad sign when a man sends for his lawyer, Humphrey," she said. "I can't abide 'un,
for they always make me think of my latter end. Your father have made his will, I'll be bound,
and I wish he spoke more free of things. But there, 'tis always the way; empty barrels make
the most noise, as the saying is, and I will groan with the toothache while the poor master
will suffer his agonies without a word."

One night as we were sitting reading, my father had an attack which terrified us. All at once,
without a moment's warning, he dropped his book, and stood up, bending forward, his face blue,
his eyes almost starting from his head. We hastened to him, but he motioned us away, and then
Mistress Pennyquick bade me ride for Mr. Pinhorn. I snatched my cap, and, knowing that with
my long legs I could reach the town by the fields more quickly than on horseback by the road,
I did not stay to saddle Jerry, but set off at full speed across five-acre, vaulted the gate
into the spinney, and so on till I gained the bridge, by which time I was blowing like a furnace.

