
  None than th' Epistle goes more humbly drest,
  Tho neat 'twou'd be, and decent as the best.
  Such as th' ingenious Censor may invite     }
  Oft to return with eager Appetite;          }
  So HORACE wrote, and so I'd wish to write.  }
  Nor creeps it always, but can mount and rise,                170
  And with bold Pinions sail along the Skies.
  The self-same Work of different Style admits,
  Now soft, now loud, as best the Matter fits:
  So Father THAMES from unexhausted Veins,
  Moves clean and equable along the Plains;
  Yet still of different Depth and Breadth is found,
  And humours still the Nature of the Ground.
                                                  [Sidenote: Reading.]
    READING will mend your Style and raise it higher,
  And Matter find to feed th' Immortal Fire:
  But if you would the Vulgar Herd excel,                          180
  And justly gain the Palm of Writing well,
  Wast not your Lamp in scanning Vulgar Lines,
  Where groveling all, or One in twenty shines;
  With Prudence first among the Antients chuse,
  The noblest only, and the best peruse;
  Such HOMER is, such VIRGIL's sacred Page,
  Which Death defie, nor yield to Time or Age;
  New Beauties still their Vigorous Works display,
  Their Fruit still mellows, but can ne'er decay.
  The Modern Pens not altogether slight,                           190
  Be Master of your Language e'er you write!
  Immortal TILLOTSON with Judgment scan,
  "That Man of Praise, that something more than Man!"
  Ev'n those who hate his Ashes this advise,         }
  As from black Shades resplendent Lightning flies,    }
  Unwilling Truths break through a Cloud of Lies.  }
  He Words and Things for mutual Aid design'd,
  Before at Variance, in just Numbers join'd;
  He always soars, but never's out of sight,
  He taught us how to Speak, and Think, and Write.             200
    If English Verse you'd in Perfection see,
  ROSCOMMON read, and Noble NORMANDY:
  We borrow all from their exhaustless Store,
  Or little say they have not said before.
  Poor Insects of a Day, we toil and strive
  To creep from Dust to Dust, and think we live;
  These weak imperfect Beings scarce enjoy
  E'er Death's rude Hand our blooming Hopes destroy:
  With Lynx's Eyes each others Faults we find,
  But to our own how few who are not blind?                      210
  How long is Art, how short, alas! our Time!   }
  How few who can above the Vulgar climb,           }
  Whose stronger Genius reach the True Sublime!   }
  With tedious Rules which we our selves transgress,
  We make the Trouble more who strive to make it less.
    But meanly why do you your Fate deplore,
  Yet still write on?--Why do a Thousand more,
  Who for their own or some Forefathers Crime
  Are doom'd to wear their Days in beating Rhime?
  But this a Noble Patron will redress,                            220
  And make you better write, tho you write less:
  Whate'er a discontented Mind pretends,
  Distinguish'd Worth can rarely miss of Friends:
  Do but excel, and he'll at last arise
  Who from the Dust may lift thee to the Skies;
  For his own Sake will his Protection grant;
  What Horace e'er did yet Mecænas want?
  Or if the World its Favours should refuse,
  With barren Smiles alone reward thy Muse;
  Be thy own Patron, thou no more wilt need,                       230
  For all will court thee if thy Works succeed;
  At least the few Good Judges will commend,
  And secret growing Praise thy Steps attend.
  Who shew'd Columbus where the Indies lay?
  True to thy self, charge through, and force to Fame the way!
  If Envy snarl, indulge it no Reply,
  Write better still, and let it burst and die!
  Rest pleas'd if you can please the Wiser Few,
  Since to please all is more than Heav'n it self can do.
  There are who can whate'er they will believe,                  240
  That Bail's too hard for Beady, Three are Five:
  That Nature, Justice, Reason, Truth must fall,
  With Clear Idea's they'll confound 'em all:
  That Parallels may travel till they meet;
  Faith they can find in L----, no Sense in STILLINGFLEET.
  Disturb 'em not, but let 'em still enjoy
  Th' unenvy'd Charms of their Eternal Moi.
    If to the craggy Top of Fame you rise,
  Those who are lab'ring after ne'er despise.
  Nor those above on Honours dazling Seat      }                 250
  Tho disoblig'd, with sawcy Rudeness treat,   }
  Revenge not always is below the Great.       }
  Their Stronger Genius may o'er thine prevail:
  Wit, Power and Anger join'd but rarely fail.
  Tho Eagles would not chuse to hawk at Flies       }
  They'd snap 'em, should their buzzing Swarms arise  }
  Importunate, and hurt their Sun bright Eyes.          }
  Nor should the Muses Birds at random fly,
  And strike at all, lest if they strike they die.
    Why should we still be lazily content                          260
  With thredbare Schemes, and nothing new invent?
  All Arts besides improve, Sea, Air and Land  }
  Are every day with nicer Judgment scan'd,        }
  And why should this alone be at a stand?       }
  Or Nature largely to the Ancients gave
  And little did for younger Children save;
  Or rather we impartial Nature blame
  To hide our Sloth, and cover o'er our Shame;
  As Sinners, when their Reason's drown'd in Sense,
  Fall out with Heav'n, and quarrel Providence.                  270
    Yet should you our Galenic Way despise,
  And some new Colbatch of the Muses rise;
  No Quarter from the College hope, who sit
  Infallible at Will's and judg of Sense and Wit:
  Keep fair with these, or Fame you court in vain,
  A strict Neutrality at least maintain!
  Speak, like the wise Italian, well of all;
  Who knows into what Hands he's doom'd to fall?
    Write oft and much, at first, if you'd write well,
  For he who ne'er attempts will ne'er excel;                    280
  Practice will file your Verse, your Thoughts refine,
  And Beauty give, and Grace to every Line:
  The Gnat to fam'd Æneis led the way,
  And our Immortal COWLEY once did play.
  Let not the Sun of Life in vain decline,
  Or Time run waste; No Day without a Line.
  Yet learn by me, my Friend, from Errors past;
  O never write, or never Print in Haste!
  The worst Excuse Ill Authors e'er advance,
  Which does, like Lies, a single Guilt enhance.                 290
  Lay by your Work, and leave it on the Loom,
  Which if at mod'rate distance you resume,
  A Father's Fondness you'll with Ease look through,
  And Objects in a proper Medium view.
  'Tis Time alone can Strength and Ripeness give;
  A Hasty Birth can ne'er expect to live.
    Fly, low at first, you'll with Advantage rise;
  This pleases all, as that will all surprize.
                                              [Sidenote: The Subject.]
    No Work attempt but where your Strength you know,
  Be Master of your Subject, Thoughts will flow:               300
  The newer 'tis, the choicer Fruit 'twill yield,
  More Room you have to work if large your Field;
  The Sponge you oftner than the Pen will want,
  And rather Reason see to prune than plant;
  Yet where the Thoughts are barren, weak and thin,
  New Cyons should be neatly grafted in.
                                                  [Sidenote: A Judge.]
    If you with Friend or Enemy are blest,
  Your Fancy's Offspring ne'er can want a Test,
  Tho Both, perhaps may overshoot the Mark:
  First Spite with Envy charges in the Dark;                   310
  Unread they damn, and into Passion fall,
  'Tis Stuff, 'tis Blasphemy 'tis Nonsense all;
  They sleep (when doz'd before) at every Line,       }
  While your more dang'rous Friend exclaims,--'Tis fine,  }
  'Tis furiously Delightful, 'tis Divine;               }
  Th' inspiring God's in ev'ry Page confess'd;
  A COWLEY or a DRYDEN at the least! Before
  he attained the age of eighteen years, he had
  acquired a knowledge of geometry, &c., without
  a master. When he was asked by the Duke of Argyle how he had gained
  this knowledge, he replied, "I first learned to read; and
  the masons being at work on your house, I saw
  that the architect used a rule and compasses,
  and that he made calculations. This, my
  lord, is what I have done; and it seems to me
  that we may learn anything when we know
  the twenty-four letters of the alphabet."
  Divest your self of self whate'er you can,
  And think the Author now some other Man.
  A thousand trivial Lumber-Thoughts will come,                    330
  A thousand Fagot-Lines will crowd for room;
  Reform your Troops, and no Exemption grant,
  You'll gain in Strength, what you in Numbers want.
  Nor yet Infallibility pretend;
  He still errs on who thinks he ne'er can mend:
  Reject that hasty, that presumptuous Thought!
  None e'er but VIRGIL wrote without a Fault;
  (Or none he has, or none that I can find,
  Who, dazzled with his Beauties, to his Moles am blind.)
  Who has the least is happiest, he the best,                  340
  Who owns and mends where he has once transgrest.
  Nor will good Writers smaller Blots despise,
  Lest those neglected should to Crimes arise;
  Such Venial Sins indulg'd will mortal prove,
  At least they from Perfection far remove.
  Nor Critical Exactness here deride,
  It looks like Sloth or Ignorance, or Pride;
  Good Sense is spoild in Words unapt exprest,
  And Beauty pleases more when 'tis well drest.
                                                   [Sidenote: Method.]
    Forget not METHOD if the Prize you'd gain,                     350
  'Twill cost you Thought, but richly pays the Pain;
  What first, what second, or what last to place,
  What here will shine, and there the Work disgrace.
    Before you build, your MODEL justly lay,
  And ev'ry Part in Miniature survey;
  Where airy Terraces shall threat the Skies,
  Where Columns tow'r, or neat Pilasters rise;
  Where cool Cascades come roaring down the Hill,
  Or where the Crystal Nymph a mossie Bason fill:
  What Statues are to grace the Front design'd,                  360
  And how to throw the meaner Rooms behind.
  Draw the Main Strokes at first, 'twill shew your Skill,
  Life-Touches you may add whene'er you will.
  Ev'n Chance will sometimes all our Art excel,
  The angry Foam we ne'er can hit so well.
  A sudden Thought, all beautiful and bright,
  Shoots in and stunns us with amazing Light;
  Secure the happy Moment e'er 'tis past,
  Not Time more swift, or Lightning flies so fast.
    All must be free and easie, or in vain                       370
  You whip and spur, and the wing'd Courser strain:
  When foggy Clouds hang bellying in the Skies,
  Or fleety Boreas through th' Horizon flies;
  He then, whose Muse produces ought that's fine,
  His Head must have a stronger Turn than mine:
  Like Sybils Leaves the Train of Thoughts are rang'd,
  Which by rude Winds disturb'd, are nothing if they're chang'd.
  Or are there too in Writing softer Hours?
  Or is't that Matter nobler Mind o'erpow'rs,
  Which boasts her native Liberty in vain,                         380
  In Mortal Fetters and a Slavish Chain?
  Death only can the Gordian Knot divide,      }
  Tho by what secret wondrous Bands 'tis ty'd,   }
  Ev'n Reason's self must own she can't decide:  }
  For as the rapid Tides of Matter turn           }
  We're fann'd with Pleasure or with Anger burn,  }
  We Love and Hate again, we Joy and Mourn.   }
  Now the swift Torrent high and headstrong grows,
  Shoots through the Dykes, and all the Banks o'erflows;
  Strait the capricious Waters backward fly,
  The Pebbles rake and leave the Bottom dry;                     390
  Watch the kind Hour and seize the rising Flood,
  Else will your dreggy Poem taste of Mud.
  Hence old and batter'd Hackneys of the Stage,
  By long Experience render'd Wise and Sage,
  With pow'rful Juices restive Nature urge,
  Or else with Bays of old, they bleed and purge;
  Thence, as the Priestess from her Cave inspir'd,
  When to his Cell the rancid God retir'd,
  Double Entendres their fond Audience blind,
  Their boasted Oracles abuse Mankind:                             400
  False Joys around their Hearts in Slumbers play,
  And the warm tingling Blood steals fast away;
  The Soul grows dizzy, lost in Senses Night,
  And melts in pleasing Pain and vain Delight.
    Not that the sowrest Critick can reprove
  The soft the moving Scenes of Virtuous Love:
  Life's Sunny Morn, which wears, alas! too fast;
  Pity it e'er should hurt, or should not always last!
  Has Bankrupt Nature then no more to give,
  Or by a Trick persuades Mankind to live?                       410
  No--when with Prudence join'd 'tis still the same  }
  Or ripens into Friendship's nobler Name,         }
  The Matter pure, immortal is the Flame.            }
  No Fool, no Debauchee could ever prove
  The honest Luxury of Virtuous Love;
  Then curs'd are those who that fair Name abuse,
  And holy Hymen's sacred Fillets loose;
  Who poison Fountains, and infect the Air,
  Ruine the Witty, and debauch the Fair;
  With nauseous Images their Scenes debase                       420
  At once their Country's Ruine and Disgrace.
  Weigh well each Thought if all be Just and Right,
  For those must clearly think who clearly write.
  Nothing obscure, equivocal, or mean,
  Much less what is or impious or obscene:
  Altho the tempting Serpent play his part,
  And wind in glitt'ring Folds around thy Heart;
  Reject the trait'rous Charmer, tear him thence,
  And keep thy Vertue and thy Innocence.
                             [Sidenote: The Manchinel, or Eves Apple.]
    In wild America's rank Champaign grows                       430
  A Tree which Europe oft too dearly knows;
  It rises high in cool inchanting Groves,
  Whose green broad Leaves the fainting Trav'ler loves;
  Fair is the treach'rous Fruit, and charms your Eye,
  But ah! beware! for if you taste you die.
  Too well alas! it thrives when planted here,
  Its deadly Branches shade our Theatre.
    Of Mesures, Numbers, Pauses next I sing,
  And rest the breathless Muse with cautious Wing:
  Of Embryo Thoughts, unripen'd yet by Time,                       440
  The Rules of Verse, of Quantity and Rhime:
  With trembling Steps through Shades unknown I stray,
  And mark a rugged and a dubious way;
  Yet some small glimm'ring Light will hence be show'd,
  And future Trav'lers may enlarge the Road.
                                                  [Sidenote: Measure.]
    Of CHAUCER'S Verse we scarce the Measures know,
  So rough the Lines, and so unequal flow;
  Whether by Injury of Time defac'd,
  Or careless at the first, and writ in haste;
  Or coursly, like old Ennius, he design'd                     450
  What After-days have polish'd and refin'd.
  SPENCER more smooth and neat, and none than He
  Could better skill of English Quantity;
  Tho by his Stanza cramp'd, his Rhimes less chast,
  And antique Words affected all disgrac'd;
  Yet vast his Genius, noble were his Thoughts,
  Whence equal Readers wink at lesser Faults.
    From France their Alexandrins we receive
  Which more of Liberty and Compass give;
  Hence by our dull Translators were they us'd,                      460
  Nor CHAPMAN nor old STERNHOLD these refus'd;
  They borrow from Hexameters their Feet,
  Which with Asclepiads and Iambicks meet;
  Yet in the midst we still a Weakness see,
  Their Music gives us no Variety.
  More num'rous the Pentameter and strong,
  Which to our Saxon Fathers did belong.
  In this their antient Edda[1] seems to write,
  Mysterious Rhimes, and horrid to the sight:
  Their Runic Staves in this on Rocks engrav'd,                  470
  Which long th' Assaults of Time it self have brav'd.
  In this our antient British Bards delight;  }
  And, if I measure his rough Numbers right,  }
  In this old Taliessin us'd to Write[2].     }
  This still Possession keeps, few else we read,
  And Right as well as Fact may justly plead;
  Altho the French Intruders oft pursue
  Their baffled Title, and their Claim renew;
  Too oft Impressions on our Armies make,
  Cut off our Straglers and our Out-Guards take,                 480
  Which lazily our Authors now admit,
  And call th' Excursions of Luxuriant Wit;
  With Badger-Feet the two-top'd Mount we climb,
  And stalk from Peak to Peak on Stilts of Rime.
    Sweet WALLER'S Dimeter we most approve
  For cheerful Songs and moving Tales of Love,
  Which for Heroic Subjects wants of Strength,
  Too short, as Alexandrins err in Length.
    Our Ear's the Judge of Cadence; nicely weigh
  What Consonants; rebel, and what obey;                           490
  What Vowels mixt compose a pleasing Sound,
  And what the tender Organs grate and wound.
  Nor at thy Reader's Mercy chuse to lie,
  Nor let his Judgment want of thine supply:
  So easie let thy Verse so smoothly fall,
  They must be read aright if read at all.
                                                  [Sidenote: Numbers.]
  Nor equal Numbers will for all suffice,
  The Sock creeps low, the Tragic Bushkins rife;
  None knew this Art so well, so well did use
  As did the Mantuan Shepherd's Heav'nly Muse:                     500
  He marry'd Sound and Sense, at odds before,
  We hear his Scylla bark, Charybdis roar;
  And when in Fields his Fiery Coursers meet
  The hollow Ground shakes underneath their feet:
  Yet nicer Ears can taste a Diff'rence when
  Of Flocks and Fields he sings or Arms and Men.
  If I our English Numbers taste aright,
  We in the grave Iambic most delight:
  Each second Syllable the Voice should rest,
  Spondees may serve, but still th' Iambic's best:               510
  Th' unpleasing Trochee always makes a Blot,
  And lames the Numbers; or, if this forgot,
  A strong Spondaic should the next succeed,
  The feeble Wall will a good Buttress need:
  Long Writing, Observation, Art and Pain
  Must here unite if you the Prize would gain.
                                                   [Sidenote: Pauses.]
    Pause is the Rest of Voice, the poor Remains
  Of antient Song that still our Verse retains:
  The second Foot or third's our usual Rest,
  Tho more of Art's in varying oft exprest.                      520
  At ev'ry Word the Pause is sometimes[3] made,
  And wond'rous Beauty every where displaid:
  --But here we guess, and wander in the dark;
  How should a hoodwink'd Archer hit the Mark?
  The little Glimpse that DRYDEN gives, is more
  Than all our careless Writers knew before;
  A few Chance Lines may smooth and roundly fly,
  But still no Thanks to us, we know not why.
  He finds Examples, we the Rule must make,
  Tho who without a Guide may not mistake?
  If we that famous Riddle can unty,
  Their brightest Beauties in the Pauses lie,
  To Admiration vary'd; next to these
  The Numbers justly order'd charm and please:
  Each Word, each happy Sound is big with Sense,
  They all deface who take one Letter thence.
                                                 [Sidenote: Quantity.]
    But little more of Quantity we know
  Than what our Accent does, and Custom show:                    540
  The Latin Fountains often we forsake,
  As they the Greek; nay diff'rent Ages take
  A diff'rent Path; Perfùme and Envy now
  We say, which Ages past would scarce allow:
  If no Position make our Accent strong
  Most Syllables are either short or long.
                                                    [Sidenote: Rhime.]
    Primitive Verse was grac'd with pleasing Rhimes,
  The Blank a lazy Fault of After-times;
  Nor need we other proof of this to plead
  With those the sacred [5] Hebrew Hymns can read:               550
  If this to lucky Chance alone be due,
  Why Rhime they not in Greek and Latin too?
  [6] PINDAR at first his ancient Copy trac'd,
  And sometimes equal Sounds his Numbers grac'd;
  Till with the more than human Labour tir'd,
  He drop'd his Rhime, and own'd him uninspir'd.
  ORPHEUS and HOMER too, who first did dream
  Of num'rous Gods, and left the One Supreme,
  Religion both and Poetry did wrong,
  Apostatiz'd from Rhime, and lost the Soul of Song.           560
  Yet still some weak and glimm'ring Sparks remain'd,
  And still our Great Forefathers this retain'd;
  Nor Inundations of Barbarian Rome,
  Our ancient Rhime could wholly overcome.
                                               [Sidenote: Vide p. 13.]
    Ne'er cramp thy Reason for some paltry Chime,
  Nor sacrifice Good Sense to Numbers and to Rhime:
  Both may be sav'd and made good Friends; and here
  The Poets Art and Happiness appear:
  But when some stubborn Word denies to draw
  In Numbers, and defies the Muses Law,                          570
  Reject it strait, unworthy such a Grace,
  Another yoke which better fills the Place:
  Much Reading will thy Poverty amend
  And Taggs without the help of Crambo lend.
    The Double Rhime is antiquated grown,
  Or us'd in Satyr or Burlesque alone;
  Nor loves our stronger Tongue that tinkling Chime,
  The Darling of the French, a Female Rhime.
    Now, daring Muse! attempt a stronger Flight,
  Beyond a Vulgar Verser's cautious Height,                        580
  Beyond thy self, and consecrate to Fame   }
  Those who a Title to the Laurel claim,  }
  And may to after-times embalm thy Name;   }
  Commend the Good, to all but Vice be kind,
  And cast the smaller Faults in shades behind;
  Who first, who next; the Balance justly hold,
  As that which shines above, and flames with Heav'nly Gold. *
    * * * *
  
  WHITE PEPPER.
  
  The relative value of black and white pepper is
  but imperfectly understood. The former is
  decidedly the best. After being gathered,
  it is spread on mats in the sun, when
  it loses its red colour, and becomes black
  and shrivelled as we see it. White pepper
  is of two sorts, common and genuine. The former is
  made by blanching the grains of the common black pepper, by steeping
  them for a while in water, and then gently rubbing them,
               so as to remove the dark outer coat. It is milder than the other,
and much prized by the Chinese, but very little is imported into England.
Genuine white pepper is merely the blighted or imperfect grains picked
from among the heaps of black pepper. 148 O Azure Vaults, &c.]
    The next in Dignity, if not the same,
  Is Deathless Dorsot's lov'd and noble Name:
  How did he sing, (listen'd the Heav'nly Quire;)
  The Wond'rous Notes of DAVID's Royal Lyre!
  Ah! Why no more must we for ever long
  And vainly languish for so sweet a Song?
    The next is Tityrus, who not disdains
  To read his Name among the tuneful Swains;
  Unweary'd in his Prince's glorious Cause,                    610
  As he of Faith, Defender of the Laws;
  Easie to all but to himself, he shares
  His Monarch's Favours, and his Monarch's Cares:
  His flowing Language cloaths his massie Sense,  }
  Nor makes with pompous Words a vain pretence,     }
  Sound without Soul, to Wit and Eloquence.   }
  Tho Great, he's still the same he was before:
  --I sue for nothing, and I'll say no more.
    Montague left the Muses peaceful Seat,
  And bore the Cares and Honours of the Great:                 620
  The Pollio he of our Augustan days,
  Who Wit rewards with more than hungry Praise;
  True Worth his Patronage can never miss,
  He has his Prince's Smiles and that has his.
    Nor should he pass unprais'd whom all admire,
  Who, mixt with Seraphs, rules the Western Quire;
  Flowing and pure his unexhausted Vein,
  As Silver Thames, which, rolling down the Plain,
  Salutes his Sacred Dome.----
  But those profane who meanly thus commend,                     630
  Th' Immortal Cowley's and the Muses Friend.
    Of matchless DRYDEN only Dryden's Skill
  Could justly say enough,--of Good or Ill.
  Envy must own he has our Tongue refin'd,
  And manly Sense with tend'rest Softness join'd:
  His Verse would Stones and Trees with Soul inspire,
  As did the Theban and the Thracian Lyre:
  His youthful Fire within, like Etna, glows,
  Tho Venerable Age around his Temples snows:
  If from the modern or the antient Store                        640
  He borrows ought, he always pays 'em more:
  So much improv'd, each Thought, so fine appears,
  WALLER or OVID scarce durst own 'em theirs.
  The Learned Goth has scowr'd all Europe's Plains,  }
  France, Spain, and fruitful Italy he drains,     }
  From every Realm and every Language gains:           }
  His Gains a Conquest are, and not a Theft;
  He wishes still new Worlds of Wit were left:
  Thus haughty Rome, when, all the Firm surpass'd,
  Her Eagles found our moated World at last;                     650
  Touching upon th' unhospitable Coast,
  Good Laws bestow'd for our wild Freedom lost;
  With Arts of Peace our stubborn Soil manur'd,
  And naked Limbs from Frost and Sun secur'd:
  --But ah' how dear the Price of all we gain!       }
  What Shoals of Vices with 'em cross'd the Main?      }
  What Pride, what Luxury, a foul, an odious Train?  }
  Who weighs, like Galcacus, the Good with Ill,
  Would wish they'd let us been Barbarians still:
  Such thankless Pains Ignatian Firebrands take                    660
  An honest Pagan spoil, and a bad Christian make.
    Blest be kind Heav'n, which wrap'd me in a Gown,
  And drew me early from the fatal Town!
  And blest Her Name, to endless Ages blest,
  Who gave my weary Muse this calm Retreat and Rest.
  True to my God, my Country, and my Friend,              }
  Here, may I Life, not wholly useless, spend,          }
  Steal through the World, and smiling meet my End! }
  I envy not Great Dryden's loftier Strain           }
  Of Arms and Men design'd to entertain,           }             670
  Princes and Courts, so I but please the Plain: }
  Nor would I barter Profit for Delight,
  Nor would have writ like him, like him to write.
  If there's Hereafter, and a last Great Day,
  What Fire's enough to purge his Stains away?
  How will he wish each lewd applauded Line      }
  Which makes Vice pleasing, and Damnation shine,  }
  Had been as dull as honest Quarles or mine!    }
  With sixty Years of Lewdness rest content!
  It mayn't be yet too late, O yet Repent!                       680
  Ev'n Thee our injur'd Altar will receive;
  While yet there's Hopes fly to its Arms and live!
  So shall for Thee their Harps the Angels string,
  And the Returning Prodigal shall sing;
  New Joys through all the Heav'nly Host be shown
  In Numbers only sweeter than thy own.
    CONGREVE from Ireland wond'ring we receive,      }
  Would he the Town's loose way of Writing leave,    }
  More Worth than all their Forfeit Lands will give:   }
  Justness of Thought, a Courtly Style, and clear,             690
  And well-wrought Passions in his Works appear:
  None knows with finer Strokes our Souls to move,
  And as he please we smile, or weep, or love.
  When Dryden goes, 'tis he must fill the Chair,
  With Congreve only Congreve can compare.
  Yet, tho he natural is as untaught Loves,
  His Style as smooth as Cytherea's Doves,
  When e'er unbyass'd Judges read him o'er,
  He sometimes nodds, as Homer did before:
  Some Lines his most Admirers scarce would please,                700
  Nor B----'s Verse alone could raise Disease.[7]
    For smooth and well turn'd Lines we T---- admire,
  Who has in Justness what he wants in Fire:
  Each Rhime, each Syllable well-weigh'd and fair,
  His Life and Manners scarce more regular.
    With Strength and Flame prodigious D----s writes
  Of Loves lost Wars, and cruel martial Fights:
  Scarce LEE himself strove with a mightier Load,
  Or labour'd more beneath th' Incumbent God:
  Whate'er of old to Rome or Athens known,                       710
  What France or We have glean'd, 'tis all his own.
    How few can equal Praise with C----ch obtain,
  Who made Lucretius smooth, and chast, and plain?
  Courted by Fame he could her Charms despise,  }
  Still woo'd by that false Fair he still denies, }
  And press'd, for Refuge to the Altar flies;   }
  Like votive Tablets offers up his Bays,
  "And leaves to our lewd Town the Drudgery of Plays."
    In lofty Raptures, born on Angels Wings       }
  Above the Clouds, above Castalian Springs,    }                720
  N---- inspir'd, of God and Nature sings;        }
  And if one Glance on this poor World he throw,
  If e'er he mind the Croud and Buzz below;
  Pities our fruitless Pains for Fame and Praise,
  And wonders why we drudge for Crowns and Bays.
    Could B---- be sober, many he'd excel,
  Few know the Antients, or could use so well;
  But ah! his Genius with his Virtue's fled,
  Condemn'd to Want of Grace and Want of Bread. Neither
    of the parties having experienced the least symptom of the epidemic
  during the next twenty-four hours, the
  seconds declared that the two adversaries
  had satisfied the laws of honour, and the affair was consequently
settled.--SWAINE.
  His Courage and his Vertue's only more:
  More various Scenes of Death his Fights display
  Then Aghrim's Field or London's fatal Day:
  Let beauteous Elda's Tears and Passion prove
  His Soul is not unknowing how to love:
  Disrob'd of Clouds he view'd the Stagyrite
  As Nature he, confess'd to Human sight:
  His Rules surveys, and traces to their Springs,  }             740
  Where the blind Bard of flaming Ilium sings;     }
  Thence with the Mantuan Swan in narrower Rings,    }
  Tho more exact, he, stooping from his height,
  Reviews the same fierce Wars and Gods and Heroes fight:
  That beauteous antient Palace he surveys         }
  Which Maro's Hands had only Strength to raise,   }
  Models from thence, and copies every Grace:  }
  Each Page is big with Virgil's Manly Thought,
  To follow him too near's a glorious Fault.
  He dar'd be virtuous in the World's Despite,                   750
  While D----n lives he dar'd a Modest Poem write.
    Who can th' ingenious S----y's Praise refuse,
  Who serves a grateful Prince, and grateful Muse?
  Or P----r read unmov'd, whose every Page
  So just a Standard to the opening Age?
    Neat S----n's courtly Vein's correct and clear,
  Nor shall he miss his Praise and Station here:
  Nor should the rest whom I unnam'd must leave,
  (Tho such Omission they'll with ease forgive:)                 760
  Unknown to me, let each his Works commend,
  Since Virtue, Praise, as Shame does Vice attend.
  Poets, like Leaves and Words, their Periods know,
  Now fresh and green, now sear and wither'd grow;
  Or burnt by Autumn's Heat, and Winter's Cold,
  Or a new hasty Birth shoves off the old.
  Happy are those, and such are some of ours,            }
  Who blest by bounteous Heav'n's indulgent Show'rs    }
  Bear wholsome Fruit, and not gay pois'nous Flow'rs:  }
  Who would not ev'n a Lawreat's self commence                     770
  Or at their Virtue's or their Faith's Expence:
  Renounce their Creed to save a wretched Play,   }
  And for a crowded House and full Third Day      }
  At one bold Stroke throw all their Heav'n away.