No soldier was more beloved by the army or honored by the country than this noble general.
His corps regarded him as a father, and his great military abilities made his judgment, in
all critical emergencies, sought after by his superior as well as his fellows. The command
of the Sixth corps now devolved upon General Wright, who had long been well known in the corps
as the commander of our First division, and who held the command of the corps from this time
until it was disbanded in the autumn of 1865.

Monday night passed quietly. An occasional volley on the picket line would rouse us to arms,
but there was no general assault, and the tired soldiers would throw themselves again upon
the ground to catch a few moments more of rest.

Our position on Tuesday morning, May 10th, was the same as it had been the day previous. During
the lull of battle on the 9th, both armies had gathered their strength and perfected their
plans for a renewal of the contest, on a scale of magnificence seldom if ever witnessed by
any army before. This was destined to be a day of most fearful carnage, and desperate attempts
on the part of each antagonist to crush the other by the weight of its terrible charges.

Active skirmishing commenced along different portions of the line early in the morning, and
continued to grow more and more general until the rattle of the skirmishers' rifles grew into
the reverberating roll of battle. From one end of the long line to the other the tide of battle
surged, the musketry continually increasing in volume, until it seemed one continuous peal
of thunder. During all the battles in the Wilderness, artillery had been useless, except when
here and there a section could be brought in to command the roadway; but now all the artillery
on both sides was brought into the work. It was the terrible cannonading of Malvern Hill with
the fierce musketry of Gaines' Mills combined, that seemed fairly to shake the earth and skies.
Never during the war had the two armies made such gigantic struggles for the destruction of
each other.

At first the heavy assaults were made against the right wing--Hancock's and Warren's corps
sustaining the principal shock of the enemy's repeated charges. Massing their forces against
particular points of the line held by these two corps, the rebel generals would hurl their
gray legions like an avalanche against our breastworks, hoping by the very momentum of the
charge to break through our lines; but a most withering storm of leaden and iron hail would
set the mass wavering, and finally send it back to the cover of the woods and earthworks in
confusion, leaving the ground covered at each time with an additional layer of their dead.
In turn, the men of the Fifth and Second corps would charge upon their adversaries, and in
turn they too would be forced to seek shelter behind their rifle pits. Thus the tide of battle
along the right of the line rolled to and fro, while the horrid din of musketry and artillery
rose and swelled as the storm grew fiercer.

Meanwhile the Sixth and Ninth corps were quietly awaiting events, and it was not until six
o'clock in the afternoon that the Sixth corps was called into action. Then it was to make one
of the most notable charges on record.

At five o'clock the men of the corps were ordered to unsling knapsacks and divest themselves
of every incumbrance preparatory to a charge. Colonel Upton commanding the Second brigade of
the First division, was directed to take twelve picked regiments from the corps and lead them
in a charge against the right center of the rebel line. The regiments which shared the dearly
purchased honor of this magnificent charge were, in the first line, the One Hundred and Twenty-first
New York, the Fifth Maine, the Ninety-sixth and One Hundred and Nineteenth Pennsylvania; in
the second line the Seventy-seventh and Forty-third New York, the Fifth Wisconsin, Sixth Maine
and Forty-ninth Pennsylvania; and in the third line, the Second, Fifth and Sixth Vermont. It
was indeed an honor to be selected for this duty, but it was an honor to be paid for at the
cost of fearful peril.

The twelve regiments assembled on the open space in front of our works, then silently entered
the strip of woods which was between our line and that of the rebels. Passing through to the
further edge of the woods, the twelve regiments were formed in columns of three lines, each
line consisting of four regiments.

The regiments of the Second division, not included in the charging column, formed in the rear,
to act as support, but did not advance to the charge.

As the regiments took their places, they threw themselves upon the ground, and all orders were
given in suppressed tones, for the rebels were but a hundred yards distant, in the open field,
and the minies of their skirmishers were whistling among the trees and brushwood.

The other corps of the army were prepared, in case this charging party succeeded in breaking
the enemy's line, to rush in and turn the success into a rout of the rebels. Generals Meade,
Hancock, Warren and Burnside stationed themselves on eminences, from which they could watch
the success of the perilous enterprise.

At six o'clock all things were ready, and the artillery from the eminences in our rear opened
a terrific fire, sending the shells howling and shrieking over the heads of the charging column,
and plunging into the works of the enemy. This was the signal for the attack, and Colonel Upton's
clear voice rang out, "Attention, battalions! Forward, double-quick! Charge!" and in an instant
every man was on his feet, and, with tremendous cheers, which were answered by the wild yells
of the rebels, the column rushed from the cover of the woods. Quick as lightning, a sheet of
flame burst from the rebel line, and the leaden hail swept the ground over which the column
was advancing, while the canister from the artillery came crashing through our ranks at every
step, and scores and hundreds of our brave fellows fell, literally covering the ground. But,
nothing daunted, the noble fellows rushed upon the defenses, leaping over the ditch in front,
and mounting the breastworks. The rebels made a determined resistance, and a hand to hand fight
ensued, until, with their bayonets, our men had filled the rifle pits with bleeding rebels.
About two thousand of the survivors of the struggle surrendered, and were immediately marched
to the rear, under guard.

Without halting for breath, the impetuous column rushed toward the second line of works, which
was equally as strong as the first. The resistance here was less stubborn than at the first
line, yet the gray occupants of the rifle pits refused to fly, until forced back at the point
of the bayonet.

Our ranks were now fearfully thinned, yet the brave fellows passed on to the third line of
defenses which was also captured.

It was but a shattered remnant of that noble column that rushed from the woods against the
hostile works, that reached this advanced point, and now, finding that reënforcements were
reaching the enemy, while our column was every moment melting away, a retreat was ordered.

There was not even time to bring away the six pieces of artillery which we had captured; they
were filled with sods and abandoned.

What remained of the twelve regiments retreated to the cover of our rifle pits, leaving the
dead and most of the wounded in the enemy's hands.

The corps lost, in this charge, some of its ablest men. In the First brigade of the Second
division Lieutenant-Colonel Hamilton, of the Sixty-second New York, was killed. Captain Carpenter,
of the Seventy-seventh, one of its first and best officers, and Lieutenant Lyon, a young officer
of great bravery, were killed in the interior line of works, and many other noble fellows of
that regiment were left on that fatal field. The regiment crossed the Rapidan six days before
with over five hundred men, and now, after this charge, less than ninety men were left, and
this is but an example of the losses to most of the regiments in that division.

The noise of the battle gradually died away as night threw her mantle over the fearful scene
of carnage, and both armies were glad of a respite from their severe labors.

The 11th of May passed in making new arrangements and in sending the thousands of wounded to
Fredericksburgh. Immense trains of ambulances and army wagons freighted with the mangled forms
of wounded men were running day and night to Fredericksburgh, and returning with supplies.

Skirmishing was kept up along the line, but no general engagement was brought on. During the
night the Second corps, General Hancock, silently withdrew from the position it had occupied
on the right of the line, and marching along in the rear of the army occupied a position between
the Sixth and Ninth corps, which was not before occupied. With great caution and silence preparations
were made for a desperate attack upon that part of the enemy's line fronting this position.
This line made here a sharp angle and by seizing this angle, it was hoped to turn the right
flank of Lee's army. Between the position of the Second corps and the rebel works, the ground
was covered with pines and underbrush, and as it neared the defenses ascended abruptly to a
considerable height.

As soon as the gray light of the morning began to streak through the mists, all was in readiness
for the charge, and with strictest orders of silence the corps in mass advanced rapidly across
the field, the thick fog concealing the movement. As the column neared the rifle pits a storm
of bullets met it; but charging impetuously up the hill and over the works, the rebels, surprised
and overpowered, gave way; those who could escaping to the second line in the rear, though
thousands were obliged to surrender on the spot, so complete had been the surprise. The victorious
column now pushed on toward the second line of works, but here, the enemy by this time fully
prepared for the attack, the resistance became more stubborn. The battle now raged with greatest
fury. The Sixth corps was withdrawn from its position, leaving a strong picket line to guard
its front, and marching along the rear of its works joined in the attack with the Second corps.
The works taken by Hancock's corps, were occupied by the men of the Sixth corps, and the enemy
commenced the most desperate efforts to retake them. Forming their troops in heavy columns
they hurled them against our line with tremendous force. Russell's division held the center
of the line of the corps at a point known as "the angle." This was the key to the whole position.
Our forces held the rebel works from the left as far as this "angle," and the rebels still
held the rest of the line. Whoever could hold "the angle" would be the victors; for with the
angle, either party could possess themselves of the whole line of works. Hence the desperate
efforts to drive us from this position. The First division being unable to maintain the position
alone, the Second division was sent to its aid. And now, as the boys of the Second division
took their places in the front, the battle became a hand to hand combat. A breastwork of logs
separated the combatants. Our men would reach over this partition and discharge their muskets
in the face of the enemy, and in return would receive the fire of the rebels at the same close
range. Finally, the men began to use their muskets as clubs and then rails were used. The men
were willing thus to fight from behind the breastworks, but to rise up and attempt a charge
in the face of an enemy so near at hand and so strong in numbers required unusual bravery.
Yet they did charge and they drove the rebels back and held the angle themselves. It was in
one of these charges that the gallant Major Ellis of the Forty-ninth New York, was shot with
a ramrod through the arm and in the side, from the effects of which he afterwards died. The
trees in front of the position held by the Sixth corps during this remarkable struggle, were
literally cut to pieces by bullets. Even trees more than a foot in diameter, were cut off by
the constant action of bullets. A section of one of these was, and doubtless still is, in Washington,
with a card attached stating that the tree was cut down in front of the position of the Second
corps. Our gallant brothers of that corps won undying honors on that glorious day, but it was
the long-continued, fearful musketry battle between the Sixth corps and the enemy which cut
down those trees. We have no desire to detract from the well-deserved honors of the brave men
of the Second corps, but this is a simple matter of justice. The conflict became more and more
bloody, and soon the Fifth corps was also engaged, and at ten o'clock the battle rolled along
the whole line. The terrible fighting continued till eleven o'clock, when there was a lull
in the musketry, but the artillery continued its work of destruction. Thus the second line
of works was taken, but not without fearful loss to both armies. Our corps had fought at close
range for eight hours. Behind the works the rebel dead were lying literally piled one upon
another, and wounded men were groaning under the weight of bodies of their dead companions.
The loss to the rebels in prisoners and guns was also great.

Major-General Edward Johnson with his whole division, General Stewart, a brigade from Early's
division and a whole regiment, including in all between three and four thousand prisoners and
between thirty and forty guns, were the trophies of this glorious but bloody morning's work.
These captures were nearly all made by the Second corps in the first assault in the morning.

The losses to the Sixth corps were great, but far less than on the 12th. The Seventy-seventh
lost one of its finest officers. Captain O. P. Rugg was shot in the breast and died while being
carried to the hospital. The captain was a young man of great promise, of genial and lively
temperament and greatly beloved by his regiment. He had been married but a few months before
his death, and had parted from his bride at Elmira just before the spring campaign opened.

The corps remained near the scene of action during the next day. Reconnoissances were made,
and another attempt was made on the 14th to turn the right flank of the enemy. The Sixth corps,
at three o'clock on the morning of that day, moved off to the left of our line about two miles
and encamped about the Anderson House, but our pickets soon found the enemy in force in our
front, and no attempt was made to bring on an engagement. The time passed quietly along the
line, only occasionally the roar of artillery kept up something of excitement of battle. On
the night of the 17th, the Sixth corps moved back to the scene of the battle of the 12th. At
daylight three corps moved forward to attack the enemy's line. The Second corps forming the
center of the line, the Sixth corps the right, and the Ninth corps the left. The first line
of rifle pits were those which had been abandoned by us on the 12th. These were filled with
rebel skirmishers, who readily gave way, leaving the works in our hands.

Our line of battle advanced till it confronted the second line of the rebel works. This was
a strong line behind a thick impenetrable abattis and held by a powerful force. The three corps
pressed this formidable line, and a sharp engagement ensued, but without advantage to our forces,
and it was concluded that an attempt to dislodge the enemy could only result in a fearful waste
of life. Accordingly the troops were quietly withdrawn, though submitted to a galling fire,
having lost in the morning's work about eight hundred men.

In the afternoon the enemy attacked the Fifth corps on the left, but was driven back. The same
afternoon the Sixth corps returned to the vicinity of the Anderson House, from which it had
started on the evening previous; and orders were issued to be ready to march toward the North Anna.

General Grant, deeming it impracticable to make any further attempt to carry the rebel position
at Spottsylvania by direct assault, had determined upon another flank movement; and his preparations
were made for moving around the left flank of the enemy during the night of the 19th, and seizing
a position on the North Anna. But late in the afternoon of the 19th, Ewell's rebel corps made
a fierce assault upon the right of our line. Our forces gave the rebels a warm reception, and
forced them back to the cover of their earthworks.

On the 20th, Aaron B. Quincy, a young soldier, beloved by all who knew him, was shot through
the breast, and died in a few minutes. His faithful Christian character, his undoubted bravery,
and his ardent patriotism, had endeared him to all.

On the night of the 21st, the flank movement was commenced. Withdrawing in silence, and first
throwing the right corps in rear of the rest of the army and to its left, as at the Wilderness,
the troops marched rapidly all night, halting for a few moments for breath once or twice, and
then pressing forward again. During the next forenoon a halt of some hours occurred at Quincy
Station, near the house where Stonewall Jackson died the year before. Then the march was renewed
and continued till dark.

The Fifth and Sixth corps reached the banks of the North Anna on the evening of the 23d, and
was soon followed by the Second and Ninth corps. Again the enemy, aware of our intentions,
and having the shortest line, confronted us, and disputed the crossing; but, after considerable
artillery practice, the Fifth corps succeeded in throwing their pontoon bridges and obtaining
a position on the south bank. The enemy now attacked the corps with great vigor, but were repulsed
with equal slaughter. The Sixth corps followed at four o'clock in the morning, and a little
later the Second and Ninth corps also joined us. Strong breastworks were thrown up, and parties
were sent to the front to reconnoiter the position.

A further advance of a few miles was made on the 25th, but finding the enemy in a stronger
position than he had occupied either in the Wilderness or at Spottsylvania, General Grant determined
again to withdraw and try his favorite flank movement. Accordingly, on the night of the 26th,
the army was withdrawn to the north bank of the river. The night was very dark, and the mud
deep. Several days' rain had rendered the roads, proverbial for their mud, almost impassable;
but heeding no difficulties, the army followed without hesitation wherever our great leader
directed. The Sixth corps, with two divisions of cavalry under Sheridan, who had now rejoined
the army from his great raid on which he had started from Spottsylvania, took the advance.
On Saturday, the 28th, the corps and the cavalry divisions, after a good deal of hard fighting,
crossed the Pamunkey river, at Hanovertown. The cavalry, at once advancing several miles beyond
the river, encountered a large force of rebel cavalry, which was driven back. The army encamped
at Hanovertown, stretching from the river several miles southward.

Let us turn now from the field of battle to Fredericksburgh, that great depot for wounded men.

It will be recollected that, from Piney Branch church, the trains, with the wounded from the
Wilderness, were sent to Fredericksburgh. Over a rough road, nearly fifteen miles, these unfortunate
men, with shattered or amputated limbs, with shots through the lungs or head or abdomen, suffering
the most excruciating pain from every jar or jolt of the ambulance or wagon, crowded as closely
as they could be packed, were to be transported. Already they had been carted about over many
miles of hard road, most of them having been carried from the old gold mine to Chancellorsville,
and now again loaded and brought to Spottsylvania. They were worn out with fatigue and suffering,
and yet there was much misery in store for them. Slowly the immense train labored over the
rough road, now corduroy, now the remains of a worn out plank road, and anon a series of ruts
and mud holes, until, at three o'clock on the morning of the 9th of May, the head of the train
arrived in Fredericksburgh.

The train had been preceded by some three hundred men who were wounded but able to walk. Mayor
Slaughter and other rebel citizens surrounded these unarmed men, made them prisoners and delivered
them to some rebel cavalry, who took them to Richmond.

The process of unloading the wounded at once commenced; all the churches and other public buildings
were first seized and filled. Negroes who could be found in town were pressed into the work,
yet, with all the help that could be obtained, it was a slow process. All night and all the
next day the work went on. The churches were filled first, then warehouses and stores, and
then private houses, until the town was literally one immense hospital.

The surgeons were too much engaged in transferring the men from the wagons to the houses to
find time that day to dress many wounds, and many an unfortunate soldier whose stump of an
arm or leg had not been dressed since the first day of the fighting, became the victim of gangrene,
which set in as the result of this unavoidable want of care. No sooner were the men removed
from the ambulances than surgeons and nurses addressed themselves with all the strength that
remained to them to relieve the immediate wants of the sufferers. Never before had such herculean
labors been thrown upon so small a body of men, yet nobly did they accomplish the task. All
the buildings in town were full of wounded men, the walks were covered with them, and long
trains of ambulances were filling the streets with more. Yet to relieve the wants of all these
thousands of suffering men not more than forty surgeons had been sent from the field.

It was one grand funeral; men were dropping away on every side. Large numbers of nurses were
detailed as burial parties, and these plied their work day after day with hardly time for their
needed rest.

Surgeons were completely worn out, and many of them, had to be sent to Washington, fairly broken
down with their labors.

The following extract from a letter of a surgeon at Fredericksburgh to his wife, written on
the 11th, may convey something of an idea of the experience of the medical officers during
those terrible days. He says: "We are almost worked to death; my feet are terribly swollen;
yet we cannot rest for there are so many poor fellows who are suffering. All day yesterday
I worked at the operating table. That was the fourth day that I had worked at those terrible
operations since the battle commenced, and I have also worked at the tables two whole nights
and part of another. Oh! it is awful. It does not seem as though I could take a knife in my
hand to-day, yet there are a hundred cases of amputations waiting for me. Poor fellows come
and beg almost on their knees for the first chance to have an arm taken off. It is a scene
of horror such as I never saw. God forbid that I should ever see another."

Again, the same officer writing a day or two later, says, "It is fearful. I see so many grand
men dropping one by one. They are my acquaintances and my friends. They look to me for help,
and I have to turn away heartsick at my want of ability to relieve their sufferings. Captain
Walker of the Seventh Maine is dying to-night. He is a noble good man, and he looks in my face
and pleads for help. Adjutant Hessy and Lieutenant Hooper of the same regiment died last night.
All were my friends, and all thought that I could save them. General Sedgwick is dead, and
General Getty and General Torbert are my patients.... Mrs. Lewis has just come; what a blessing
her presence will be to the colonel, who bears the loss of his arm so bravely. Colonel Barney
of the Sixth Vermont died yesterday, and Major Fryer of the Forty-third is dying. The major
says, 'Doctor, can nothing be done?' Major Dudley lies in the room where I am writing, seriously
wounded.... I have to-day sent sixty officers of the Sixth corps to Washington.... Oh! can
I ever write anything beside these mournful details? Hundreds of ambulances are coming into
town now, and it is almost midnight. So they come every night."

For a time it was almost impossible to obtain sufficient supplies either of food or dressings.
Everything that could be spared from the field had been sent, but in the field they were still
fighting terrible battles, and there was little to spare. Food was obtained in very limited
quantities in town, and men went to the houses of citizens and demanded sheets, which were
torn into bandages.

But large supplies were sent from Washington by the government in a few days, so that all necessary
articles were furnished in abundance, with a profusion of lemons, oranges and canned fruit.
The Sanitary Commission was also on hand with large supplies of delicacies, which were joyfully
received by the wounded heroes, who not only relished the luxuries, but remembered that they
were the gifts of friends at home, who had not forgotten the soldiers.

Many of the people of Fredericksburgh exhibited the most malignant spite against the "Yankee
wounded;" but others, while they claimed no sympathy with our cause, showed themselves friends
of humanity, and rendered us all the assistance in their power. No men, except negroes and
white men unfit for military duty, were left in town, but the women were bitter rebels. Some
of them made fierce opposition to the use of their houses as hospitals, but they were occupied
notwithstanding their remonstrances.

At one fine mansion a surgeon rang the door bell, and in a moment saw the door open just enough
to show the nose and a pair of small twinkling eyes of what was evidently a portly women. "What
do you want?" snarled out the female defender of the premises. "We want to come and see if
we can place a few wounded officers in this house." "You can't come in here!" shouted the woman
slamming the door together. A few knocks induced her again to open the door two or three inches.
"Madam, we must come in here; we shall do you no harm." "You can't come here; I am a lone widow."
"But I assure you no harm is intended you." Again the door was closed, and again at the summons
was opened. "Madam, it will be much better for you to allow us to enter than for me to direct
these men to force the door; but we must enter." The woman now threw the door wide open and
rushing into the yard with as much alacrity as her enormous proportions would admit, threw
her arms out and whirled about like a reversed spinning top shouting for help. She was again
assured that no harm was intended her, but that unless she chose to show us the house we should
be obliged to go alone. Concluding that wisdom was the better part of valor, she proceeded
to show us the rooms.

At another mansion, one of the finest in Fredericksburgh, a red-haired woman thrust her head
out of the side window, in answer to the ring of the door bell:

"What do you want here?"

"We wish to place some wounded officers in this house."

"You can't bring any officers nor anybody else to this house. I'm all alone. I hope you have
more honor than to come and disturb defenseless, unprotected women."

"Have you no husband?"

"Yes, thank God, he's a colonel in the confederate service."

"Well, if your husband was at home, where he ought to be, you would not be a defenseless woman."

The woman refused to unbolt the door, in spite of all persuasion, but while she railed at the
"detestable Yankees," a soldier climbed in at a window in the rear, and unbolted the door.
Her splendid rooms and fine mattresses furnished lodgings for twenty wounded officers. Day
after day, the gloom of death hung over the town. Hundreds of our brave fellows were dying.
Some of the finest officers of our army were daily yielding to the destroyer.

Among the severe losses to the Sixth corps were, Colonel Barney, of the Sixth Vermont, who
had been shot through the head. He died on the 10th. He was one of the noblest of the sons
of Vermont, a pattern of a brave soldier and Christian gentleman, respected for his ability
as a commander, and loved for his social virtues; he was lamented by the whole corps. Major
Fryer, of the Forty-third New York, one of the most promising young officers in the corps,
died on the 12th, from wounds through the left arm and lungs. Captain Walker and Adjutant Hesse,
of the Seventh Maine, and Lieutenants Hooper and Vining, of the same regiment, all died within
a few hours of each other. Lieutenants Follensbee and Cook, of the Thirty-seventh Massachusetts,
and Captain Kirkbride, of the One Hundred and Second Pennsylvania, were also among those who
died. Major Dudley, of the Fifth Vermont, after suffering untold agony for many days, finally
yielded, and died in the embraces of his youthful wife, who had arrived in Fredericksburgh
just in time to be present during his last hours. The major had gone into the fight sick with
a fever, but his determined bravery forbade him to remain quiet. Receiving a severe wound while
thus depressed by disease, he gradually sunk, until his brave spirit took its departure.

These were a few of the sad, sad scenes, which brought sorrow to our hearts day after day,
of the hospitals at Fredericksburgh.

Physicians and nurses from civil life came to our assistance in large numbers. Some were earnest
men, wholly devoted to the object of relieving the distress which they saw on every side. Others
had come for selfish purposes.

Physicians who had never performed an important surgical operation came armed with amputating
cases, and seemed to think that there was but one thing to be done, to operate as they said.

Distressed fathers and brothers wandered about the town, in search of information regarding
some son or friend who had been wounded, or perhaps, as they feared, killed.

The following is but an example of many sad incidents of this kind: H. A. Bowers, of the Seventy-seventh
New York, a young man much beloved and respected in his regiment, was wounded through the chest
on the 5th of May, and with the other wounded brought to Fredericksburgh. His father, who resided
in Albany, received the intelligence that his son was dangerously wounded, and hastened to
Fredericksburgh in search of him. He arrived at that immense hospital, and at once commenced
his inquiries after his soldier boy. Failing to learn anything of him, except the assurance
that he had been placed in the ambulances, he sought out the quartermaster of the Seventy-seventh,
who was with the army train just out of town. The quartermaster readily lent his aid in the
search, and both at once sought the surgeon of that regiment for information, but he, having
the care of a multitude, could tell them nothing of the object of their search. Thousands of
wounded men were here, filling the city, but, thus far, the important duties of relieving their
immediate necessities had occupied the attention of surgeons and attendants to the exclusion
of everything else; and no record or register had been made by which a particular wounded man
might be found. Unless some friend or acquaintance could direct to his place, the search was
often long. The nurses were instructed to afford the anxious father every assistance in finding
his son. Two more long weary days were spent in the fruitless search, when word was sent to
the father that his boy might be found in a certain church. Overjoyed at the thought that at
last his search was to be crowned with success, he hastened to the place. Who shall attempt
to tell the anguish of that father, when, on reaching the hospital, he found that his son had
expired half an hour before!

At length, by the 26th of May, all the wounded men were sent by transports to Washington, and
the hospitals broken up. The surgeons, escorted by a squadron of cavalry, crossed the country
by way of Bowling Green, and, after a three days' journey, rejoined the army at Hanover.

Early on the morning of the 30th, the army was again moving, advancing with heavy skirmishing
toward Hanover Court House. Remaining here some hours the column retraced its steps a short
distance, the rebels meanwhile opening a severe artillery fire upon our hospital trains.

Toward evening the enemy attacked our left vigorously but were repulsed, and an attack was
in turn made by our own troops which resulted in forcing the rebels from a part of their intrenchments.
Except some changes of position and ascertaining that of the enemy, our army lay quietly confronting
the rebels during the 31st, but on the 1st of June we were again on the road marching toward
Coal Harbor. The march was a hard one. The day was sultry, and the dust, ankle deep, raised
in clouds by the column, was almost suffocating. It filled the air and hung upon the leaves
of the trees like snow. Seldom had our men experienced so severe a march. As we neared Coal
Harbor our Sixth corps in advance, we fell in with the column of General Smith's command, the
Eighteenth and Tenth corps. It was a relief to the old soldiers of the Army of the Potomac
to see these full regiments, and they felt that with such large reinforcements our success
must now be insured. It was also a source of much gratification to the old Second division
to meet again our friends Generals Smith and Brooks, whose names were so intimately connected
with the division, and who still held a large place in the affections of the men.

These two corps were a part of General Butler's command, which had advanced up the Peninsula
as far as Bermuda Hundreds, but were unable to make further progress. General Grant had, therefore,
directed General Butler to send them forward by way of transports to White House Landing, to
join the Army of the Potomac. They reached us tired and almost discouraged by their unusual
march of nearly sixteen miles, their trains and baggage being left behind.

In the afternoon we had fallen in with ambulances returning with wounded cavalrymen, and learned
from them that Sheridan had engaged the rebel cavalry at Coal Harbor early in the morning,
and that he was now fighting both infantry and cavalry. Toward that point the troops pushed
on rapidly, reaching the cavalry line at about four o'clock. The men halted a few moments,
and then were ordered to fall in and advance against the enemy. Skirmishers, as usual, had
advanced and prepared the way for the lines of infantry and the artillery. The shots of the
skirmishers had become more and more frequent, till the sharp rattle of musketry told of the
actual presence of the enemy. The artillery of the Sixth corps was at once run out, and a brisk
fire opened upon the rebels, who replied with their guns, but with less vigor than that exhibited
by our own. The commands of Wright and Smith were at once formed in line of battle, our Sixth
corps on the left in line, Rickett's Third division holding the right of the line, Russell's
the center, and Neill's Second division the extreme left of the whole line. On our right was
Smith's command in single line.

In front of our line was an open space two-thirds of a mile in width, beyond which was a strip
of pine woods. In these woods the enemy had intrenched, and was holding the position in strong
force. Lee, again anticipating the design of Grant, had sent Longstreet's corps and other troops
to occupy Coal Harbor, and now, with their rear resting upon the Chickahominy, at this point
a shallow and easily forded stream, the rebels occupied a strong position between our advance
and Richmond.

The order for the charge was given, and these two commands, weary and exhausted, the veterans
of the Sixth corps from many days and nights of most severe labor, and both corps by the tedious
march of the day, dashed impetuously across the ploughed field with shouts and cheers, making
for the rebel works.

The storm of battle seemed suddenly to have broken without the usual warning. It was less than
an hour since the Union troops had arrived on the field, and already a most bloody struggle
was in progress. Volleys rang out upon the evening air, crashing louder and still louder. The
First and Third divisions of the Sixth corps, in heavy columns, rushed across the field, cleared
the abattis, and seized the rebel works, while the Second division, on the left, discovering
a strong force of the enemy planting a battery on our flank, engaged them and forced them back.
Smith's command, also, by a desperate charge, seized nearly the whole line in the front, that
on the extreme right, in front of Brooks' command, alone remaining in the hands of the rebels.
The whole line thundered with the incessant volleys of musketry, and the shot and shell of
the artillery shrieked and howled like spirits of evil. The sun was sinking, red, in the west,
and the clouds of dust and smoke almost obscured the terrible scene. Hundreds of our brave
fellows were falling on every side, and stretcher bearers were actively engaged in removing
the wounded from the field. The First division, after a stubborn resistance of a few minutes,
was forced to give up the line of works it had captured and fall back; only the Third division
held its ground. The others had advanced as far, but the ground was unfavorable, and in spite
of most determined efforts to hold the line, they were forced to swing back.

This was the first experience of Smith's command in a great battle, and well did his men earn
the confidence of the veterans who fought by their side. Their courage and impetuosity were
the subjects of admiration of the boys of the old Sixth corps, who declared that Baldy Smith
could make any troops fight like veterans.

The gallantry shown by our Third division in taking and holding the enemy's works, was acknowledged
with true soldierly generosity by the other divisions of our corps, who thus far had not regarded
the new division as their peer.

As darkness came on, the conflict still raged, and sheets of flame rolled from one end of the
line to the other as the discomfited rebels strove desperately to regain their lost ground.
But as the sound of battle died away at nine o'clock, the advantages gained by us were still
held, and our men set to work to strengthen the works they had captured from the enemy and
to throw up new ones. Again and again the rebels rushed against the Union line hoping to regain
their lost ground, but without success. The battle, although of brief duration, had been a
most sanguinary one. The loss to the Sixth corps was about two hundred killed and nine hundred
and sixty wounded, while the Eighteenth corps lost one hundred and twenty-five killed and six
hundred and fifty wounded.

Meanwhile the Second, Fifth and Ninth corps were holding the position occupied by them the
day before, and against these corps most desperate assaults were repeatedly made by the enemy,
but they were as often repulsed with great slaughter.

The movement at Coal Harbor, while it had not succeeded in forcing the enemy across the Chickahominy,
had secured our communications with White House Landing, which now became, after two years,
for the second time, the base of supplies for the Army of the Potomac. General Grant now determined
to renew the attempt to dislodge the rebels on the following day.

Accordingly, after the fashion of all the movements of the army, the Second corps, which now
occupied the extreme right of the line, withdrew during the night, and falling behind the other
corps, marched rapidly to the left and took position in that flank on the road leading from
Dispatch Station to Coal Harbor. The corps did not secure this position without considerable
fighting, and it was not in condition to take part in the expected advance until the afternoon.
Then a most violent thunder shower set in, putting a stop to all movements for the remainder
of the day.

The men of the Sixth and Eighteenth corps, tired and worn out from marching, fighting, and
the hard night's work in throwing up intrenchments, had spent the early part of the day in
quietly watching the enemy, or lounging behind the breastworks, glad of an opportunity for rest.

Orders were now given for a simultaneous attack along the whole line, to take place at half-past
four on the morning of the 3d. Our line of battle extended from Coal Harbor to Tolopotamy creek,
in the following order, from left to right: Second, Sixth, Eighteenth, Fifth, and Ninth. This
line was nearly parallel with the Chickahominy, and from a mile and a half to two miles north
of it.

The rebels had not left the day unimproved, in concentrating their troops and strengthening
their works. They now held three lines of breastworks, all of great strength; the first occupied
by their skirmish lines, the others by strong lines of battle. Between the two armies the ground
was low and swampy, while the positions occupied by both were sandy plains.

At half-past six on the morning of the 3d, our army was astir; and the skirmishers, leaving
the cover of the rifle pits, were advancing. Presently they fell in with the skirmishers of
the enemy, and the sharp cracking of rifles betokened the storm of battle.

As soon as the skirmishers were engaged, our artillery opened upon the rebel works, and the
conflict now commenced in earnest. Amid the deafening volleys of musketry, the thunders of
the artillery, and the wild yells of battle, our brave fellows pressed rapidly across the space
between the hostile lines of works, and the whole Union force was thrown against the rebel
breastworks almost simultaneously. But the works were too strong, the abattis too troublesome,
and the rebel forces too numerous. Their line could not be taken.

The vigorous and gallant assault made by the Sixth corps, resulted in carrying the first line,
where the rebel skirmishers had been posted, and our troops got within two hundred and fifty
yards of the main works, but Martindale's division of Smith's corps, which advanced with the
Sixth corps, and on our right, found the task before it too great; the troops of that division
became disarranged and were repulsed. Although General Smith, who was always up to the front,
made several attempts to relieve Martindale's division, it failed to take the rifle pits.

The right flank of the Sixth corps, thus exposed, the whole corps was forced to fall back.

Thus this grand assault, in which General Grant hoped to force his enemy across the Chickahominy,
failed with immense loss to us and comparatively little to the confederate army, which as usual
was defended by earthworks, while our men advancing to the charge were unprotected. But our
brave fellows were to have their revenge.

The battle was over, and again the occupants of the opposing lines of defenses watched each
other, the quiet being only disturbed by the occasional shots of sharpshooters. Darkness closed
over the plains of Coal Harbor, and even the sharpshooters desisted from their work. The stars
shed a mild light upon the two armies which had so lately been engaged in fierce conflict,
each now securely resting behind its line of earthworks, and the plain which lay between them,
which the hurricane of battle had so lately swept, was as still as though the noise of war
had never been heard there.

Suddenly, at eight o'clock, the rebels in front of our Sixth corps and of the Second corps,
leaped over their works and rushed with a yell toward our lines. At the same time their artillery
opened upon us. The course of their shells was marked by long curves of fire upon the dark
sky, while the flashes of the guns and bursting missiles made a sublime display of pyrotechnics.

On came the charging column, against the left of the Sixth and the right of the Second corps;
but nothing pleased our brave boys more than to see their enemies come out from the cover of
their works to fight.

It had, during all these long days of battles, been ours to charge well defended earthworks
almost invariably; and whenever the rebels chose to assume the offensive, our men were glad
to show them the difference between being the assailants and the assailed.

Now the rebels came on with determination, but their attack was met by volley after volley
of musketry aimed for effect; and our well directed fire of artillery made great gaps in the
advancing lines. The attack was nobly repulsed, and many grey-coated soldiers who advanced
to the charge, were left by their retreating comrades, dead between the two lines, while others
were ordered in as prisoners. The rebels returned to their place, and again all was still.
From this time we had no more battles at Coal Harbor, yet we daily lost many men by the shots
of the sharpshooters who were perched in trees, and who kept up a fire at every moving thing
which showed itself within our lines.

Never before had our army been in a position where there was such constant danger as at Coal
Harbor. Men in the front line dared not leave the cover of the breastworks except in the darkness
of night, and even then the movement of a company to the rear might bring on a storm of shells.
High breastworks were thrown up at all angles with the main line, and deep trenches were dug,
in which the men might pass to and from the front without being observed. Even with all these
extraordinary precautions, no man was safe in venturing to go to the rear by daylight. If a
soldier collected the canteens of his companions and started to the rear for water, he was
obliged to crawl along the trenches with the utmost secrecy, and even then he was liable to
be shot. Not a day passed, even when there was no battle, in which scores of men were not killed
or brought to the hospitals with severe wounds.

The whole plain occupied by our army was dug over. Far to the rear the men had intrenched themselves.
General officers had their tents erected in deep excavations surrounded by embankments of earth,
and special duty men had each prepared for themselves burrows in the ground, many of which
were creditable specimens of engineering. One was reminded, in riding over the plain, of the
colonies of prairie dogs with their burrows and mounds. Although we had but two days' actual
fighting at Coal Harbor, our losses were more than thirteen thousand men, while the rebels
suffered comparatively small losses.

Thus the army lay upon the burning sands of that arid plain, the greater part of the line without
the friendly shelter of a tree, weary, yet not discouraged; grimy and dirty, and choked with
dust, yet uttering no words of complaint, for twelve days.

Troops commenced moving toward the rear on the morning of the 11th of July, and it became known
that we were to make no more attempts to force the formidable position. General Grant had ordered
another flank movement, this time to the James river. Preparations for withdrawing went on
actively on the 10th and 11th; all the wounded were sent to the White House, and the long trains
of forage, ammunition and commissary supplies which had been allowed to come far toward the
front, began to pass to the rear. On the 12th, Smith's corps was ordered to the White House,
thence to embark to City Point, while the remainder of the army was to cross the Chickahominy
far to the right of the rebel position, and march to the James river.

At three o'clock in the afternoon, the long hospital train of the Sixth corps moved out toward
the left a few miles and halted for the corps, which withdrew from the works after dark, and
marched with great rapidity toward the left. The other corps also withdrew from their positions,
and the whole army moved off down the Chickahominy, the Second corps in advance. The march
was kept up all night, a short halt only being allowed in the morning near Dispatch Station.
Then the column pressed on again, the men almost suffocated with the dust, which hung over
the column like a huge cloud; no halt was made at noon, and the men, deprived of their coffee,
choked with dust, and burned with heat, marched wearily toward night. The sun was sinking in
the west, tinging the clouds with purple, and crowning the distant hills with gold, when we
crossed the historic Chickahominy. Two years before we had crossed the same stream not far
from this very spot. Through how many vicissitudes of army life had we passed since that time.
The stream was not wide, and its banks were well defined where we crossed. Indeed, at this
point, there was nothing in the appearance of the stream that would convey any idea of the
difficulties which it had once presented to the Union army. The corps bivouacked on high grounds
a mile from the river, glad to rest from the toiling march.

We were early astir on the morning of the 14th; taking our line of march through a delightful
section of country where the comfortable farm houses and fine residences presented a striking
contrast with the desolations to which we had become accustomed. As we began to descend from
the high lands toward the plain, on which stands the little cluster of houses called, in southern
fashion, Charles City, we beheld, in the distance, the James river, lying in all its loveliness,
spreading widely between its banks. A magnificent prospect opened before us. The river in the
distance bordered by green fields, one undulating slope four or five miles wide, and twice
as long, presenting a scene of surpassing beauty. There were large fields of grain already
yellow and nearly ripe for the harvest, green meadows lay in the beautiful valleys, the gentle
breeze dallied with the tassels of the long rows of corn, which gave rich promise of an abundant
harvest; fine groves upon the hillside, in the valleys and on the plain, gave a charming diversity
to the scene, and the old mansions, embosomed in vines and trees, and surrounded by colonies
of outhouses, reminded us of the ease and comfort which had reigned here before the ravages
of war had desolated Virginia. To the right was Charles City, almost hidden by trees, a little
town, in prosperous days, the home of a few hundred people, now almost deserted.

In the vicinity of Charles City we halted a little before noon. The Second corps, which was
in the advance, had already reached the James at Wilcox's Landing, and was preparing to cross.
The men of our corps were delighted with the opportunity of once more spreading their tents
over clean grassy turf, and each quickly pitched his shelter tent preparatory to a refreshing rest.

Within two miles of our camp was the residence of the late ex-president, John Tyler, which
was visited by many of our officers. It was a charming spot, with everything about it to please
the eye of a lover of the beautiful. But except the grounds immediately surrounding the house,
everything was in the wildness of nature.

The house was stripped of almost everything. The cabinet was carried off. The large library
had lost many of its choicest volumes, while the remainder, with heaps of letters, lay thrown
in wild confusion about the floor. The pile of sheet music which had been left on the piano
by the family, had been culled over and nearly all taken away. In fact such a sad scene of
destruction was rare, even in the track of a great army.

On the morning of the 15th, the corps moved to the river side, where it remained while other
troops were crossing by ferry and on an immensely long pontoon bridge. The river was full of
shipping, the forests of masts making strange contrasts with the native forests on the river banks.

Near the crossing was a superb old mansion, the residence of a rebel general, surrounded by
its little village of negro cabins. Here many officers of the corps resorted, to spend the
time in walking among the grand old trees, or to stroll through the garden, admiring the elegant
and rare exotics which adorned the grounds. Here was the magnolia grandiflora in full bloom,
its immense cup-like flowers filling the whole place with delightful fragrance, and the American
agave, also loaded with a profusion of elegant flowers; roses of the most rare and superb varieties,
jasmines, honeysuckles, clematis, spice woods, and a great variety of other choice plants,
were also in lavish abundance. There were locust trees of enormous size, and everything that
was inanimate filled us with surprise and delight. But, within the mansion, we were met with
the accustomed bitterness and want of civility. Among the slaves on the premises was a white-haired
negro, who was one hundred and eight years old. His wife, who lived upon a neighboring plantation,
was one hundred and four years of age. When asked his age by the boys, he was accustomed to
answer, "Well, massa, I'se going on two hundred now." The old fellow manifested no sympathy
for the cause of his master, and even he sighed for freedom. When asked of what value freedom
could be to him now, he answered, impatiently, "Well, massa, isn't a hundred and eight years
long enough to be a slave?"

The army, which had thus fought its way at fearful cost from the Rapidan to the James, was
now to change its base, and threaten the rebel capital from the south. Petersburgh was now
the objective point, and this was regarded as the door to Richmond.

Our army had, during the period of a little more than a month, fought the most extraordinary
series of battles, and executed some of the most remarkable movements on record. Never was
heroic valor exhibited on a grander scale than had been manifested by the Army of the Potomac
throughout this long struggle, in which every man's life seemed doomed. The stubborn perseverance
of the general was equaled by the persistent determination of his soldiers. Day after day they
had been called upon to assault earthworks of formidable character, defended by veteran troops;
and it was usually the case that they had seen, as the only fruits of their daring, almost
reckless, charges, the ground in front of the hostile intrenchments strewed with the lifeless
bodies of their comrades, while the enemy still held the coveted line of works.

The battle of the Wilderness was a strange, deadly struggle, which no man could see. A battle
in which both armies were hidden in thickets and forests, impenetrable to vision, each making
gigantic efforts for the overthrow and destruction of the other. It had resulted in no decisive
advantage to either party. Lee was as ready to meet us at Spottsylvania as he had been in the
Wilderness, and Grant was determined in his attack along the Ny, as though he had met with
no repulse on Wilderness Run. The soldiers, too, of each army were as ready at Spottsylvania
to test their relative valor as they had been in the Wilderness.

At Spottsylvania we had lost thousands of our best men, and hundreds of our ablest officers
in futile attempts to drive our enemy from impregnable positions; yet, notwithstanding all
our losses, and our hitherto unsuccessful assaults, our men rushed against the strong defenses
at Coal Harbor with as much resolution and fortitude as though they had met with no reverses.

From the Rapidan to the Chickahominy the advance had been almost a continuous battle, in which
our army fought at a disadvantage. The men had for more than a month engaged the enemy in mortal
combat by day and made fatiguing marches by night only to find themselves again face to face
with the enemy in the morning. Sixty thousand of our comrades were either killed, wounded or
missing. Of these more than thirteen thousand had been lost at Coal Harbor, about thirty-two
thousand in the Wilderness, and nearly fifteen thousand at Spottsylvania and on the North Anna.

It is true that our enemy had suffered great losses, yet not half as many rebels as Union men
had fallen. At Coal Harbor the disproportion was much greater than elsewhere. There the rebel
loss had not been one-tenth as great as our own. Notwithstanding our frequent repulses, and
despite the fact that our road was continually blocked by an army behind powerful defenses,
our march had been straight on toward the goal of our ambition, the rebel capital.

From the crossing of the Rapidan to the halt at Coal Harbor, in all our battles and all our
flank movements, we had not swerved from the direct line to Richmond; and now, with unimpaired
vigor and still relentless determination, the Army of the Potomac, and the imperturbable leader
of the Union armies, were ready to undertake the capture of Richmond, by way of Petersburgh,
fully assured that their illustrious valor and never failing courage must sooner or later meet
with their award.

At sunset on the 16th, the Sixth corps gathered upon the banks of the James river, and while
the First and Third divisions embarked on steamers for City Point, the Second division crossed
on the pontoon bridge. The division marched all night toward Petersburgh, from which direction
we had heard cannonading all day. The column moved rapidly, leaving scores of stragglers, who
quietly rolled themselves in their blankets and lay down behind the hedges to sleep till morning.
The following day was sultry, and the dust was very annoying. The men were weary from want
of sleep, and the march was a severe one; but at sunset the division arrived at our lines before
Petersburgh. General Smith was then reinforced by Hancock's corps, which had just arrived by
land, but no further advance was made that night. This neglect to take advantage of the absence
of any large force of rebels in the works about Petersburgh was severely censured by General
Grant, who could not understand why General Smith, now reinforced by a large corps, had not
at once taken possession of the town. The day that the Second division, Sixth corps, arrived
in front of Petersburgh, the two divisions of that corps which had taken transports up the
river, were ordered to reinforce General Butler at Bermuda Hundreds, where his command had
gained some advantages, which were, however, lost before night. All the corps having got up,
attacks upon the rebel positions were renewed on the 17th and 18th. The attack on the 17th
was made by Smith's command, and resulted in the loss of a few men, when the lines were withdrawn.

Our Second division now relieved Brooks' division of the Eighteenth corps on the front line,
the Seventy-seventh taking possession of a powerful redoubt, the other regiments taking their
places in close proximity. The Vermont brigade was placed in rifle pits, as was also the First
brigade. In order to secure unity of action, General Neill, commanding the division, was directed
to receive orders from General Martindale of the Eighteenth corps.

Standing in the redoubt occupied by the Seventy-seventh, which was upon a high bluff, and commanded
a fine prospect of the surrounding country, we could trace the line of defenses which had already
been captured, and those yet in the hands of the enemy. The defenses of Petersburgh consisted
of a line of strong earthworks, in the form of a semicircle. Immense redoubts, like the one
we now occupied, were placed at frequent intervals, upon commanding positions, and these were
connected by a line of rifle pits and high breastworks. At all advantageous points, also, were
well constructed rifle pits, in front (now in rear) of the main works. Smith's corps had captured
eleven of these forts and redoubts in the first assault, and they were now occupied by our
forces, and the strong works which were intended for the defense of the town now bristled with
cannon pointing toward it.

The line of powerful forts and breastworks commenced about two and a half miles below Petersburgh,
on the Appomattox, and, circling the city, terminated two or three miles above.

Before us stretched the valley of the Appomattox in all its beauty, the level plain between
us and the river clothed in the verdure of summer, the green fields of corn yet untrodden by
the troops of either side. Below the heights, stretching far to the right and left, was the
line of rifle pits now occupied by our men, and beyond these could be traced the outlines of
the new works which the rebels were throwing up. Still beyond all these, the spires of Petersburgh
towered grandly, and by the help of a glass the streets and houses were distinctly visible.

On the 18th, another advance was made by the divisions of Smith's corps, a part of the Second
corps, and our own Second division. Smith's troops advanced spiritedly across the plain, facing
a withering fire of grape and canister, but were unable to come up to the rebel works.

They were ordered to lie down, and at once every man commenced to throw up a little mound of
earth in front of him, using his cup or plate, or even his hands or jack-knife, in place of
a spade.

Under this destructive fire the troops were forced to remain for some time, but they at length
retired, having lost several hundred of their number. Neill's division was on the left of Smith's
troops, and did not advance as far. Our losses were therefore slight.

Owing to some unfortunate misunderstanding, the surgeons of the Eighteenth corps were ordered
to the right of the line to establish field hospitals; consequently, when the wounded of that
corps began to come in, there were none of their surgeons at hand. The surgeons of our own
division, however, quickly proceeded to establish a hospital for them, in which they were all
received and cared for, their wounds dressed, the shattered limbs removed, and all their wants
attended to. The medical officers of the Eighteenth corps expressed their warmest gratitude
for this act of kindness on the part of the Sixth corps surgeons, this being the second time
that we had found an opportunity of assisting them in an emergency.

Our lines were daily drawn more closely around Petersburgh, but no other general action was
brought on for some time. There was constant firing of artillery from both sides, and now and
then the rattle of musketry would pass along the lines.

On the 22d, Colonel Bidwell's brigade occupied the front line of rifle pits. The sun was shining
brightly, and our men, unprotected by shelter, were striving to pass the time with as little
discomfort as possible. A group of men of the Seventy-seventh were behind the breastwork, stretched
out upon the sand, resting upon their elbows and amusing each other with jokes, when a shell
came shrieking into their midst. Its explosion threw them in every direction. One went high
in the air and fell twenty feet from the spot where he was lying when the shell exploded. Strange
to tell, not a man was killed, yet three had each a leg crushed to jelly, and two others were
seriously wounded. The three whose legs were crushed were Sergeant James Barnes, James Lawrence,
and James Allen, all of company A. The poor fellows were taken to the field hospital completely
prostrated from the shock, cold sweat stood upon their pallid brows, and life seemed but to
flicker before going out. The surgeons were making haste to load the wounded and sick into
ambulances to send to City Point, for we were ordered to march at a moment's notice. "You can
do nothing for those men," said the wide awake, enterprising Doctor Hall, who was superintending
the loading of the ambulances, as he saw the surgeon who had charge of the operations prepare
to remove the mangled members. "Better put them into ambulances and let them have a chance
for their lives! There is no time now to wait for operations." "How long will it take you to
load your ambulances, doctor?" "Twenty minutes, at least." "Then I will have the men ready
for you." The surgeon gave to each of the unfortunate ones a glass of brandy, then administered
his chloroform, and in less than thirty minutes had amputated the limbs, dressed the stumps,
and placed the men in ambulances. They were taken at once to City Point, where they were placed
together. Their cases excited great interest among the attendants in the hospital and the visitors,
for each had lost a leg just above the knee, the name of each was James, they were all from
one company, all wounded by a single shell, and all as cheerful as were ever wounded men. They
were afterward removed to Washington and again placed side by side, and here, also, they were
subjects of great interest to visitors. The writer has frequently heard the case of the three
Jameses related by persons in different States, who never mistrusted that they were men of
his own regiment. The boys are each well now, each walks with his artificial limb, and each
is a worthy member of society.

General Grant, finding that his expectation of taking Petersburgh by surprise had failed, prepared
for a systematic investment of the town. Accordingly, the Sixth and Second corps were directed
to proceed to the left of the present line, so as to envelop the town, and also with the view
of striking the Weldon railroad, and thus cutting off an important source of supplies for the
rebel army.

On the 21st of May, the two corps marching in the rear of the rest of the army went into position
on the left flank, the Second corps on the west of the Jerusalem plank road, and the Sixth
to the left and rear of that corps, its line nearly at right angles with that of the Second
corps. The cavalry divisions of Wilson and Kautz were, at the same time, ordered to proceed
still farther to the left, and, cutting the Weldon road, continue the march across the country,
until they should strike the Southside railroad, which they were directed to destroy.

On the morning of the 22d, General Birney, who, during the temporary absence of General Hancock,
was in command of the Second corps, was directed to move his corps forward, so as to press
upon the left flank of the enemy. This he proceeded to do, without giving notice of his intention
to General Wright. The result of the movement was to leave a wide gap between the Second and
Sixth corps.

To the great surprise of the Third division of our corps, which was just getting into position,
the rebels advanced in strong force upon the flank and rear. A sharp skirmish occurred, in
which that division and a part of the Second division lost some prisoners; but the principal
loss fell upon the Second corps, for that corps, having thrown its left far in advance, was
greatly exposed. The principal attack fell upon Barlow's division, which occupied the left.
That division was driven in confusion upon the other divisions of the corps. The whole corps
was forced back, but after some spirited fighting the rebels were forced back, carrying with
them a battery belonging to the Second corps, and more than two thousand prisoners. From our
own corps they had captured about six hundred men and a stand of colors.

The responsibility for this unfortunate surprise rests with the commander of the Second corps;
for General Wright, being entirely ignorant of any design to advance that corps, had, of course,
made no disposition to keep the line intact. The men of the Third division did all that men
could do under the circumstances, and are entitled to much credit for the repulse which they
gave the enemy.

From that day, except that at times the roar of artillery shook the earth for miles about,
we remained quiet until the 29th of June. The light sandy soil soon became reduced to powder,
and the continual passing of mules and army wagons raised huge clouds of dust, which completely
enveloped the army. At sunset this cloud would settle down and become so dense that one could
not see objects twenty yards from him. The heat was almost intolerable, yet the health of the
men was better than usual for the summer months.

The surgeons had their hospitals neatly fitted up, and nurses and attendants took great pride
in adorning the hospital tents with the boughs of the magnolia and other beautiful shrubs and
flowers. The government and the agents of the Sanitary Commission supplied us liberally with
lemons and vegetables, so, notwithstanding the intense heat, and the constant watchfulness
of the men behind the earthworks, there was comparatively little illness.

In the afternoon of the 29th of June orders came for the Sixth corps to march at once to Reams'
Station, far to the left, where the cavalry of Kautz and Wilson, which had been on an extensive
raid, was expected to arrive. At four o'clock we left camp, marched all the remainder of the
day and all night. We found ourselves in the morning at Reams' Station, on the Weldon Railroad.
The men at once commenced tearing up the track and burning the ties. Thus they toiled all the
morning, but no cavalry made its appearance. Late in the day the corps retraced their steps,
and arrived that night within two and a half miles of the position we had left the day before.
We made our bivouac on the Jerusalem plank road, and in the morning rejoined the main army
before Petersburgh and resumed our old position.

The story of the great raid of Kautz and Wilson, which we now learned in detail, was one of
thrilling interest, full of wild adventure, untold hardship and great peril. The two divisions
had penetrated far to the rear of Lee's army, had destroyed miles of the Weldon railroad, and
then, reaching the Southside road, the great artery for the supply of the rebel army, had torn
up the track and burned the ties for dozens of miles. In their return they had fallen in with
the cavalry of the enemy, and, when near Reams' Station, had come upon a strong force of cavalry
and infantry. An engagement ensued, which resulted in the Union cavalry being driven, and hundreds
from the immense throng of colored refugees, which was following the cavalry towards the Union
lines, were ridden down by the rebel cavalry and killed. The cavalry at length succeeded in
reaching our lines by making a circuit farther south, and many of the negroes also succeeded
in escaping from rebeldom.

The Shenandoah Valley, which had been the scene of such varied fortunes to our army during
the war, again became a field of great interest.

Simultaneous with the opening of the spring campaign by the army of the Potomac, General Sigel,
who then commanded in the valley, commenced to move his army. On the 15th of May he met the
enemy at New Market, and was defeated. He withdrew his army to Harper's Ferry, where, by order
of General Grant, who was dissatisfied with his management, he was relieved of his command
by General Hunter.

General Hunter at once resumed offensive operations, moved up the valley and encountered the
enemy at Piedmont and routed him, capturing fifteen hundred prisoners, three pieces of artillery
and three thousand stand of small arms. He then pursued the routed army to Lynchburgh, which
place he invested. To meet this movement of Hunter, Lee had sent General Early with his corps
to the assistance of the rebel garrison. This force arrived just before the Union army came
up. General Hunter, finding that he was confronted by a large force, his ammunition being nearly
exhausted, the difficulties of transporting over so long a march sufficient ordnance stores
being very great, he determined to withdraw without risking a battle. His want of ammunition
forced him to make his retreat by that route which would afford most natural obstacles to pursuit
and attack of the enemy. Accordingly, instead of retiring directly down the Shenandoah, he
drew his forces off through the Kanawha Valley, leaving the Shenandoah open to the rebel army.
The march of Hunter's men through the Kanawha, harassed by the enemy and destitute of food,
was one of great severity. The rebels finding the Shenandoah open to them, at once pushed northward
with a view of ravaging Maryland and Pennsylvania, and, if possible, entering Washington.

Owing to the great difficulties encountered by General Hunter's army, in reaching Harper's
Ferry in time to oppose Early, it became necessary to send other troops to meet the invading
force. Accordingly, about the 1st of July, the Third division of our Sixth corps, under command
of General Ricketts, was sent to Baltimore, and from thence marched toward Frederick, Maryland,
where, on the banks of the Monocacy near the railroad bridge, the enemy was encountered. The
Union forces consisted of the division from the Sixth corps, and a few thousand green troops
collected about Baltimore, all under command of General Wallace. The force of Early greatly
outnumbered those of the Union general, and after a hard fought battle our men were driven
back. Although General Wallace had met with defeat, he had succeeded in arresting the progress
of the invasion for a time, and enabled the remainder of our corps and a division of the Nineteenth
corps to reach Washington in advance of the rebels.

Such was the state of affairs in Maryland, when, on the evening of the 9th July, the First
and Second divisions of the Sixth corps were ordered to march to City Point at once. The order
came at nine o'clock, and without delay the troops were in motion. We had become too much accustomed
to sudden movements, to require long preparations for breaking up camp. The march of fourteen
miles to City Point made during the night, was far more tolerable than it could have been by
day. For although the roads were composed of dry beds of dust, in which the men sank almost
ankle deep at every step, and the cloud which rose as the column moved along filled their throats
and eyes and nostrils, yet they were not forced to endure the misery of a long march under
a burning sun, such as for many days past had scorched these sandy plains.

It was daylight when the Sixth corps reached the James river at City Point, and the process
of embarking commenced at once. Before noon the two divisions, with the horses and baggage,
were on board transports, which were in readiness when we arrived. The staff of Bidwell's brigade,
with the Seventy-seventh and part of the Forty-ninth New York, with the brigade band, where
on board the steamer Escort. We had also on board a hundred horses.

Great satisfaction was felt by all at the prospect of leaving the region whose natural desolation
was heightened by the devastation of war, and going to a country of plenty, with which so many
pleasant remembrances were associated. Each man breathed more freely as the steamer swung out
upon the river, and our brigade band sounded a good-bye to the scenes of our recent labors
and privations.

Our fleet was soon steaming down the river, passing scenes of interest, many of which were
intimately connected with the memories of other campaigns. There was Harrison's Landing, the
camping ground of two years ago, the last one on the Peninsula, where our Union army crowded
together on the banks of the James, sweltering beneath the oppressive heat of a southern sun;
Fort Powhattan, where we had crossed the river on pontoons a month ago; the iron-clad Atlanta,
once a rebel ram, now doing service in the Union cause; the ancient settlement of Jamestown;
the three-turreted monitor Roanoke; Sewell's Point; Hampton, the scene of our earliest Peninsula
experience; the bay at Newport News, made famous by the conflict of the Monitor and Merrimac,
the masts of the Cumberland still towering above the waters of the bay as monuments of the
wonderful contest; the old haunts of the Teaser, which had so unceremoniously introduced herself
to our division; and, as evening came on, we passed Fortress Monroe, where the many lights
of the fleet gave the harbor the appearance of a city in the waves.

The wind was blowing freshly when we rounded Old Point Comfort, and our little steamer ploughed
the white caps bravely. We made good time, and found ourselves the next morning steaming up
the Potomac. Aquia creek was passed, recalling to mind the encampment at White Oak Church;
Mount Vernon claimed its tribute of thought, and at two o'clock we touched the wharf at the
foot of Sixth street, Washington. The rest of the two divisions had already reached the wharves,
and there, too, were some immense sea steamers, crowded with troops of the Nineteenth corps,
fortunately just arrived from New Orleans.

The process of disembarking occupied but little time. President Lincoln stood upon the wharf
chatting familiarly with the veterans, and now and then, as if in compliment to them, biting
at a piece of hard tack which he held in his hand.

The column was formed and we marched up Seventh street, past the Smithsonian Institute, the
Patent Office and the Post Office, meeting on our way many old friends, and hearing the people
who crowded upon the sidewalks exclaiming, "It is the old Sixth corps!" "Those are the men
who took Marye's Heights!" "The danger is over now!" We had never before realized the hold
which the corps had upon the affection of the people. Washington, an hour before was in a panic;
now as the people saw the veterans wearing the badge of the Greek cross marching through their
streets, the excitement subsided and confidence prevailed. 

But gradually, one after another looming shadowily under their hoods, the crucifixes seem to create
a new atmosphere over the whole of the countryside, a darkness, a weight in the air that is so unnaturally
bright and rare with the reflection from the snows above, a darkness hovering just over the
earth. So rare and unearthly the light is, from the mountains, full of strange radiance. Then every
now and again recurs the crucifix, at the turning of an open, grassy
road, holding a shadow and a mystery under its pointed hood.

I was startled into consciousness one evening, going alone over a marshy place at the foot of the
mountains, when the sky was pale and unearthly, invisible, and the hills were nearly black.
At a meeting of the tracks was a crucifix, and between the feet of the Christ a handful of
withered poppies. It was the poppies I saw, then the Christ.

It was an old shrine, the wood-sculpture of a Bavarian peasant. The Christ was a peasant of the
foot of the Alps. He had broad cheekbones and sturdy limbs. His plain, rudimentary face stared fixedly
at the hills, his neck was stiffened, as if in resistance to the fact of the nails and the
cross, which he could not escape. It was a man nailed down in spirit, but set stubbornly against
the bondage and the disgrace.

He was a man of middle age, plain, crude, with some of the meanness of the peasant, but also with a
kind of dogged nobility that does not yield its soul to the circumstance. Plain, almost blank in his
soul, the middle-aged peasant of the crucifix resisted unmoving the misery of his position. He
did not yield. His soul was set, his will was fixed. He was himself, let his circumstances be what
they would, his life fixed down.

Across the marsh was a tiny square of orange-coloured light, from
the farm-house with the low, spreading roof.

I remembered how the man and his wife and the children worked on till dark, silent and intent,
carrying the hay in their arms out of the streaming thunder-rain into the shed, working silent
in the soaking rain.

The body bent forward towards the earth, closing round on itself; the arms clasped full of hay,
clasped round the hay that presses soft and close to the breast and
the body, that pricks heat into the arms and the skin of the breast,
and fills the lungs with the sleepy scent of dried herbs: the rain
that falls heavily and wets the shoulders, so that the shirt clings
to the hot, firm skin and the rain comes with heavy, pleasant coldness
on the active flesh, running in a trickle down towards the loins,
secretly; this is the peasant, this hot welter of physical sensation.

And it is all intoxicating. It is intoxicating almost like a soporific, like a sensuous drug,
to gather the burden to one's body in the rain, to stumble across the living grass to the shed, to
relieve one's arms of the weight, to throw down the hay on to the heap, to feel light and free
in the dry shed, then to return again into the chill, hard rain, to stoop again under the rain,
and rise to return again with the burden.

It is this, this endless heat and rousedness of physical sensation which keeps the body full
and potent, and flushes the mind with a blood heat, a blood sleep.

And this sleep, this heat of physical experience, becomes at length a bondage, at last a crucifixion.
It is the life and the fulfilment of the peasant, this flow of sensuous
experience.

But at last it drives him almost mad, because he cannot escape.

For overhead there is always the strange radiance of the mountains, there is the mystery of the icy
river rushing through its pink shoals into the darkness of the pine-woods, there is always
the faint tang of ice on the air, and the rush of hoarse-sounding water.

And the ice and the upper radiance of snow are brilliant with timeless immunity from the flux
and the warmth of life.

Overhead they transcend all life, all the soft, moist fire of the blood. So that a man must needs
live under the radiance of his own negation.

There is a strange, clear beauty of form about the men of the Bavarian highlands, about both
men and women. They are large and clear and handsome in form, with blue eyes very keen, the pupil
small, tightened, the iris keen, like sharp light shining on blue
ice.

Their large, full-moulded limbs and erect bodies are distinct, separate,
as if they were perfectly chiselled out of the stuff of life, static,
cut off.

Where they are everything is set back, as in a clear frosty air.

Their beauty is almost this, this strange, clean-cut isolation, as if each one of them would
isolate himself still further and for ever from the rest of his fellows.

Yet they are convivial, they are almost the only race with the souls of artists. Still they act
the mystery plays with instinctive fullness of interpretation, they
sing strangely in the mountain fields, they love make-belief and mummery,
their processions and religious festivals are profoundly impressive,
solemn, and rapt.

It is a race that moves on the poles of mystic sensual delight. Every gesture is a gesture from the
blood, every expression is a symbolic utterance.

For learning there is sensuous experience, for thought there is myth and drama and dancing and singing.
Everything is of the blood, of the senses. There is no mind. The mind is a suffusion of physical
heat, it is not separated, it is kept submerged.

At the same time, always, overhead, there is the eternal, negative radiance of the snows. Beneath
is life, the hot jet of the blood playing elaborately.

But above is the radiance of changeless not-being. And life passes away into this changeless
radiance.

Summer and the prolific blue-and-white flowering of the earth goes by, with the labour and the
ecstasy of man, disappears, and is gone into brilliance that hovers overhead, the radiant cold
which waits to receive back again all that which has passed for the moment into being.

The issue is too much revealed. It leaves the peasant no choice. The fate gleams transcendent
above him, the brightness of eternal, unthinkable not-being. And this our life, this admixture
of labour and of warm experience in the flesh, all the time it is steaming up to the changeless
brilliance above, the light of the everlasting snows. This is the eternal issue.

Whether it is singing or dancing or play-acting or physical transport of love, or vengeance or cruelty,
or whether it is work or sorrow or religion, the issue is always the same at last, into the
radiant negation of eternity. Hence the beauty and completeness, the finality of the highland
peasant. His figure, his limbs, his face, his motion, it is all formed in beauty, and it is all completed.
There is no flux nor hope nor becoming, all is, once and for all.

The issue is eternal, timeless, and changeless. All being and all passing away is part of the issue,
which is eternal and changeless. Therefore there is no becoming and no passing away. Everything
is, now and for ever. Hence the strange beauty and finality and isolation of the Bavarian peasant.

It
is plain in the crucifixes. Here is the essence rendered in sculpture
of wood.

The face is blank and stiff, almost expressionless. One realizes with a start how unchanging
and conventionalized is the face of the living man and woman of these parts, handsome, but motionless
as pure form. There is also an underlying meanness, secretive, cruel. It is all part of the
beauty, the pure, plastic beauty. The body also of the Christus is stiff and conventionalized,
yet curiously beautiful in proportion, and in the static tension which makes it unified into one
clear thing. There is no movement, no possible movement. The being is fixed, finally. The whole body
is locked in one knowledge, beautiful, complete.

It is one with the nails. Not that it is languishing or dead. It is stubborn, knowing its own undeniable
being, sure of the absolute reality of the sensuous experience.

Though he is nailed down upon an irrevocable fate, yet, within that fate he has the power
and the delight of all sensuous experience. So he accepts the fate and the mystic delight of the
senses with one will, he is complete and final. His sensuous experience is supreme, a consummation
of life and death at once.

It is the same at all times, whether it is moving with the scythe on the hill-slopes, or hewing the
timber, or steering the raft down the river which is all effervescent with ice; whether it
is drinking in the Gasthaus, or making love, or playing some mummer's part, or hating steadily
and cruelly, or whether it is kneeling in spellbound subjection in the incense-filled church, or
walking in the strange, dark, subject-procession to bless the fields,
or cutting the young birch-trees for the feast of Frohenleichnam,
it is always the same, the dark, powerful mystic, sensuous experience
is the whole of him, he is mindless and bound within the absoluteness
of the issue, the unchangeability of the great icy not-being which
holds good for ever, and is supreme.

Passing further away, towards Austria, travelling up the Isar, till the stream becomes smaller
and whiter and the air is colder, the full glamour of the northern hills, which are so marvellously
luminous and gleaming with flowers, wanes and gives way to a darkness, a sense of ominousness.
Up there I saw another little Christ, who seemed the very soul of the place. The road went beside
the river, that was seething with snowy ice-bubbles, under the rocks and the high, wolf-like pine-trees,
between the pinkish shoals. The air was cold and hard and high, everything was cold and separate.
And in a little glass case beside the road sat a small, hewn Christ, the head resting on the
hand; and he meditates, half-wearily, doggedly, the eyebrows lifted
in strange abstraction, the elbow resting on the knee.

Detached, he sits and dreams and broods, wearing his little golden crown of thorns, and his little
cloak of red flannel that some peasant woman has stitched for him.

No doubt he still sits there, the small, blank-faced Christ in the cloak of red flannel, dreaming,
brooding, enduring, persisting. There is a wistfulness about him, as if he knew that the whole
of things was too much for him.

There was no solution, either, in death. Death did not give the answer to the soul's anxiety.
That which is, is. It does not cease to be when it is cut. Death cannot create nor destroy.
What is, is.

The little brooding Christ knows this. What is he brooding, then? His static patience and endurance
is wistful. What is it that he secretly yearns for, amid all the placidity of fate? 'To be,
or not to be,' this may be the question, but is it not a question for death to answer. It is not
a question of living or not-living. It is a question of being--to be or not to be. To persist
or not to persist, that is not the question; neither is it to endure or not to endure. The
issue, is it eternal not-being? If not, what, then, is being? For overhead the eternal radiance
of the snow gleams unfailing, it receives the efflorescence of all life and is unchanged, the
issue is bright and immortal, the snowy not-being. What, then, is being?

As one draws nearer to the turning-point of the Alps, towards the culmination and the southern slope,
the influence of the educated world is felt once more. Bavaria is remote in spirit, as yet
unattached. Its crucifixes are old and grey and abstract, small like the kernel of the truth.
Further into Austria they become new, they are painted white, they are larger, more obtrusive.
They are the expressions of a later, newer phase, more introspective and self-conscious. But
still they are genuine expressions of the people's soul.

Often one can distinguish the work of a particular artist here and
there in a district.

In the Zemm valley, in the heart of the Tyrol, behind Innsbruck, there are five or six crucifixes
by one sculptor. He is no longer a peasant working out an idea, conveying a dogma. He is an
artist, trained and conscious, probably working in Vienna.

He is consciously trying to convey a feeling, he is no longer striving awkwardly to render a truth,
a religious fact.

The chief of his crucifixes stands deep in the Klamm, in the dank gorge where it is always half-night.
The road runs under the rock and the trees, half-way up the one side of the pass. Below, the stream
rushes ceaselessly, embroiled among great stones, making an endless
loud noise.

The rock face opposite rises high overhead, with the sky far up. So that one is walking in
a half-night, an underworld. And just below the path, where the pack-horses go climbing to the remote,
infolded villages, in the cold gloom of the pass hangs the large, pale Christ. He is larger than
life-size. He has fallen forward, just dead, and the weight of the full-grown, mature body hangs
on the nails of the hands. So the dead, heavy body drops forward, sags, as if it would tear away
and fall under its own weight.

It is the end.

The face is barren with a dead expression of weariness, and brutalized with pain and bitterness.
The rather ugly, passionate mouth is set for ever in the disillusionment of death. Death is
the complete disillusionment, set like a seal over the whole body and being, over the suffering
and weariness and the bodily passion.

The pass is gloomy and damp, the water roars unceasingly, till it is almost like a constant pain.
The driver of the pack-horses, as he comes up the narrow path in
the side of the gorge, cringes his sturdy cheerfulness as if to obliterate
himself, drawing near to the large, pale Christ, and he takes his
hat off as he passes, though he does not look up, but keeps his face
averted from the crucifix. He hurries by in the gloom, climbing the
steep path after his horses, and the large white Christ hangs extended
above.

The driver of the pack-horses is afraid. The fear is always
there in him, in spite of his sturdy, healthy robustness. His soul
is not sturdy. It is blenched and whitened with fear. The mountains
are dark overhead, the water roars in the gloom below. His heart is
ground between the mill-stones of dread. When he passes the extended
body of the dead Christ he takes off his hat to the Lord of Death.
Christ is the Deathly One, He is Death incarnate.

And the driver
of the pack-horses acknowledges this deathly Christ as supreme Lord.
The mountain peasant seems grounded upon fear, the fear of death,
of physical death. Beyond this he knows nothing. His supreme sensation
is in physical pain, and in its culmination. His great climax, his
consummation, is death. Therefore he worships it, bows down before
it, and is fascinated by it all the while. It is his fulfilment, death,
and his approach to fulfilment is through physical pain.

And so these
monuments to physical death are found everywhere in the valleys. By
the same hand that carved the big Christ, a little further on, at
the end of a bridge, was another crucifix, a small one. This Christ
had a fair beard, and was thin, and his body was hanging almost lightly,
whereas the other Christ was large and dark and handsome. But in this,
as well as in the other, was the same neutral triumph of death, complete,
negative death, so complete as to be abstract, beyond cynicism in
its completeness of leaving off. But an order from General Grant, directing General Wright to get back
to Washington at once with the Sixth corps, that the troops might be at once returned to the
Army of the Potomac before Early could reinforce Lee, determined our course, and at night we
were again passing through Snicker's Gap, the infantry and teams crowded together in the narrow
defile to the great inconvenience of the footmen and annoyance of the artillerymen and teamsters.
Marching rapidly all night and the next day, halting only a short time for coffee in the morning
and at noon, we retraced our steps to Leesburgh, then following the turnpike we reached and
passed Drainsville, and halted near Difficult creek. July 23d, the corps marched through Lewinsville
and Langley, passed Camp Griffin, the memory of which was indissolubly connected with our first
winter in the service, crossed Chain bridge and went in camp near Tanleytown, five miles out
from Washington.

Transports were waiting on the Potomac to convey us to City Point, but as matters in the valley
still seemed unsettled, the corps remained at Tanleytown, and on the 25th, it became certain
that Early with his army was again moving down the valley, threatening Maryland and Pennsylvania.
The Sixth corps received orders to move at once toward Harper's Ferry, but by some delay it
was noon of the 26th when it turned back from Tanleytown toward the scene of our future brilliant
operations.

The day on which the corps moved had been hot, and many of the men, weary with long marches,
had been forced to fall out, but, most of all, bad whisky from Washington had demoralized great
numbers, and these, with the sick and weary, made up a great crowd of stragglers. The task,
which was assigned to the rear-guard, the Seventy-seventh New York, of urging these inebriated
and discouraged ones toward their commands, was not an easy or agreeable one. The corps made
all haste in the direction of Frederick, which city it reached on the 28th, crossing the field
of General Wallace's battle with Early.

Without halting at Frederick, except to get our coffee near Monocacy creek, we pushed on to
Jefferson, getting into camp at midnight. The next day we marched through Knoxville, Newton
and Sandy Hook, through that wonderful gorge in the mountains at Harper's Ferry, and arrived
at evening footsore and weary at Halltown, four miles south of Harper's Ferry. Then, next day
we were ordered back again. The whole command poured into the deep valley at Harper's Ferry,
the day was sultry even for that locality, not a breath of air seemed to be stirring, and the
high mountains on every side reflected the heat and kept off the breeze. Into this hot, dusty
inclosure among the hills, the whole army poured, and as there was only a single pontoon bridge
to serve as an outlet, there was of course great delay. Horses stood harnessed to the cannon
or under the saddle, the sweat literally pouring off their sides like rain, while men panted
for breath and seemed almost on the point of suffocation. It was late in the night when our
corps was all over the bridge, and the march was continued without rest during the whole night
and all next day till we arrived again near Frederick City, where we had a night and a day
of rest. We now learned that the cause of our sudden countermarch was the raid of Early's cavalry,
who had burned the city of Chambersburgh, and caused much destruction of property elsewhere.

By this time the Sixth corps was, in army parlance, "about played out." Even our famous marches
on the Gettysburgh campaign were eclipsed by this perpetual series of forced marches for nearly
a month. The men were very much worn from their campaigns before leaving Petersburgh, but now
we had had a month of traveling, night and day.

Hardly were the troops settled in camp for a night of rest, before the bugle called them to
go again. Now when we marched, horses would drop down by dozens along the road, unable to rise
again. Their riders would strip them of their saddles, and leave the worn out steeds to their
fate. If, by chance, one of these deserted horses, after a few hours of rest, could muster
strength to rise to his feet, he was doomed to be seized by some drummer boy, or other wight
of the "bummer" tribe, mounted and rode till his strength again failed. Then the dismounted
bummer would coolly remove his hempen bridle, shoulder his drum, and seek for another steed.
For two or three days past the weather had been excessively hot, and men could be seen lying
all along the roadside, as we marched, suffering from sunstroke.

Wednesday, August 3d, the Sixth corps marched to Buckeystown, a little village on the Monocacy,
about five miles south of Frederick.

The different brigades of the corps were scattered about on the hillsides which bounded the
pleasant valley of the Monocacy, where pure fresh air was in abundance, and the men gladly
availed themselves of the privilege of bathing in the delightfully clear waters of the river.
For a distance of nearly two miles the river was filled with bathers at all hours, except in
the hottest part of the day and in the night, and even then some might be seen enjoying the
luxury of the bath.

At Buckeystown we remained two days, in the enjoyment of a pleasant bivouac; yet, as though
no place was free from evil, an event occurred here afflictive to our brigade and to the corps.

Among the most energetic and brave officers of our Third brigade, was Major Ellis, of the Forty-ninth
New York. He had been wounded at Spottsylvania while leading a charge against the enemy at
the terrible "angle." A ramrod had passed through his left arm, and bruised the chest near
the heart. He was taken to Fredericksburgh, from whence he went to Washington, and thence home.
Returning to his command before he had fully recovered, he was advised by medical officers
not to attempt any severe duty. But being detailed to the staff of General Russell, commanding
the First division, he at once resumed active military duties. On these recent marches, the
major, weary of inaction, had taken command of a body of men who acted as additional provost-guard
to the division.

In this position he had exhibited his usual energy, though it was thought by some he executed
his duties with too great severity. Ever since receiving his wound, he had complained of severe
neuralgic pains in the region of the heart. Except that this pain was slightly more acute than
usual, the major retired to his tent on the night of the 3d, in his accustomed health.

In the morning he sent his servant from the tent for a moment, and when the man returned the
major was dead. An autopsy was made by the writer of these pages, in the presence of about
twenty of his professional brethren. A sharp splinter of bone from one of the ribs was found
with its acute point piercing vital organs.

The funeral display was the most imposing ever witnessed in any corps of the Army of the Potomac.
We had seen military pageants on a large scale, but nothing to compare with this in its solemn
sublimity.

The remains were laid in state in a large tent near General Russell's head-quarters, wrapped
in a silken flag, and the tent itself was draped with the Stars and Stripes. Presently the
major's regiment, the Forty-ninth New York, came as mourners, unarmed, and formed in two ranks
facing each other near the tent. Then the chaplain of the Forty-ninth, led in a short religious
service, very appropriate and very impressive, while the whole of the First division was being
formed in two parallel lines facing each other, and about eighty paces apart. The service over,
a regiment of heavy artillery came to act as escort. The remains, inclosed in a rude coffin,
wrapped in the flag under which he had so often fought, were placed in an ambulance, and the
funeral cortege began its slow march through the long lines of sunbrowned veterans who stood
on either side. First in the procession was the escort, the muskets of the men reversed, preceded
by a band playing a solemn dirge. Then the ambulance with the remains, the major's hat, coat
and sword lying upon the coffin; then his riderless horse, saddled and bridled, and led by
a servant; then the regiment as mourners; and finally General Russell and the staff of the
First division with the division flag, and the staffs of the three brigades of the division,
and our Third brigade, Second division, each with its flag, with a large concourse of officers,
personal friends of him whose remains were thus honored.

As the cortege proceeded with slow steps between the lines of soldiers, they stood with arms
presented, and the colors of the regiments drooped as the procession passed. Thus attended
the remains were conveyed to the railroad station, three miles distant, where they were placed
on board a train for Washington.

Lieutenant-General Grant visited our army on the 5th of August, and, in consultation with General
Hunter, determined upon a course for our future operations. So quietly was this visit of the
Commander-in-Chief of the armies made, that very few in our little army knew of the presence
of General Grant.

Among other things determined upon at this time was a change of commanders. General Hunter,
who had commanded the "Army of the Shenandoah," with credit to himself and honor to our arms,
was to be relieved, and General Philip S. Sheridan, who had, since the commencement of the
spring campaign, commanded the cavalry corps of the Army of the Potomac, was to take command
of all the forces operating against Early. The department of West Virginia, Washington, Susquehanna
and the Middle Department, were to constitute the "Middle Military Division," to be under the
command of General Sheridan. To this middle military division the Sixth corps was temporarily
assigned. This was a new era in the history of that corps. Hitherto it had been, from the beginning,
connected with the noble Army of the Potomac. Its history and its fame were inseparably connected
with the history of that army, and when the corps had come to the rescue of the capital, it
came as a detachment of the Army of the Potomac. Now, for the first time, the corps was to
be identified with another army. But great as was the fame and honor which the corps had, by
noble deeds, won for itself, it was now, by heroic achievements in the new field, to crown
itself with glories even more dazzling than those in its proudest days in the old army.

We were ordered, on the evening of the 5th, to march immediately. The troops of the Sixth corps
proceeded at once to Monocacy Junction, where they took cars for Harper's Ferry. The quartermasters,
and hospital trains followed rapidly by the wagon roads.

Troops and trains reached the heights beyond Harper's Ferry at night, and on the following
morning the line of battle was established at Halltown.

General Sheridan now assumed command. We knew little of him except that he had very successfully
commanded the cavalry of the Army of the Potomac for the last three months, but we were satisfied
that General Grant trusted to his generalship, and we had already learned enough of General
Grant's knowledge of human nature to place confidence in the general of his choice.

One thing pleased us at the start. Our new general was visible to the soldiers of his command;
wherever we went he was with the column, inhaling the dust, leaving the road for the teams,
never a day or two days behind the rest of the army, but always riding by the side of the men.
His watchful care of the details of the march, his interest in the progress of the trains,
and the ready faculty with which he brought order out of confusion when the roads became blockaded,
reminded us of our lamented Sedgwick. Another feature of the new administration pleased us.
When the head-quarter tents of the commander of the Middle Military Division were pitched,
there was one wall tent, one wedge tent and two flies. This modest array of shelter for the
general and his staff was in happy contrast with the good old times in the Army of the Potomac,
when more than eighty six-mule teams were required to haul the baggage for head-quarters of
the army.

At Halltown we remained for a few days, gaining what we so much needed, rest. The air was delightfully
cool and refreshing, and it seemed as though each particular breath was laden with health and
strength.

We were rejoiced to see some of our Army of the Potomac cavalry joining us, and our army began
to assume dimensions which filled us with confidence. We had now the Sixth corps, General Wright,
two divisions of the Nineteenth corps under General Emory, and Hunter's "Army of Virginia,"
usually called the Eighth corps, under command of General Crook. Our cavalry consisted of Averill's
force which had been in the valley, and we were now receiving two divisions from the Army of
the Potomac, one in command of General Torbert, the other of General Wilson. The cavalry force
was soon afterward organized, with General Torbert in command of the whole force, and Generals
Custer, Averill and Merritt, each in command of a division.

On the tenth of the month we commenced our march up the Shenandoah Valley. No sooner had the
sun made its appearance above the Blue Ridge than we found the day to be most intensely hot.
Soldiers were falling along the roadside in great numbers overcome with the heat, and what
added to the hardships of the day's journey was the want of water. The turnpike along which
we marched was parallel with a fine stream of water on either side, but the water was so far
distant as to be useless to the soldiers. Yet there were a few springs and wells at some distance
from the road which supplied those who could leave the column.

We passed through Charlestown, the scene of the trial and execution of John Brown. There was
the court house to which he was brought on his couch to receive his trial for treason, and
there the jail in which he spent his last days, and from which he was led to execution. How
had all things changed! The people who stood about the gallows of John Brown, and gnashed their
teeth in their bitter hatred, were now themselves guilty of treason. The court house was in
ruins, and the jail was but a shell of tottering walls. The town also had suffered fearful
ravages from war, and now a Union army was marching through its streets, every band and every
drum corps playing the stirring but to southern ears hateful air, "John Brown's body lies mouldering
in the grave," and we may anticipate our narrative to say that whenever our army or any part
of it had occasion to pass through this town, the bands always struck up this air, as if to
taunt the inhabitants with the memory of their victim, and played it from one limit of the
town to the other. So John Brown was revenged!

The Shenandoah Valley has been often called the "Garden of Virginia," and truly it is a lovely
valley, yet as we marched along we could see but little cultivation. The groves of oak were
delightful. Teams with wagons might be driven anywhere among them. But the fields were mostly
desolate. Here and there a field of corn promised a medium crop if left to ripen untrodden
by our army, but there was no luxuriance of vegetation. The mountains, the Blue Ridge on one
side and the North mountains on the other, rose abruptly from the valley in parallel lines,
and looked as though a race of Titans had been at war, and had thrown up these long ridges
as breastworks for opposing forces.

A little beyond Charlestown was a lovely meadow, lying between two groves of oak. At the further
end of the meadow was a neat white cottage, where there seemed more comfort than we had seen
elsewhere in the valley. The place was away from the direct line of march, and partly concealed
by the groves.

Those who left the column were furnished by the family with pure sweet water from a well, which
the family asserted was sunk by order of General Braddock. Such places were so rare that our
men and animals suffered from thirst. Few who were on that march will forget a spring which
we passed near the close of that day's march. A large white frame house stood upon an elevation,
surrounded by trees, and at foot of the elevation, a large spring, under the shade of a huge
willow, and surrounded by other trees. The water gushed out from a fissure in the rock, clear
as crystal, and in such volume that a large brook was formed at once. Over the spring was the
usual "spring house." Soldiers filled this building, covered the great rocks, crowded the grove,
and for many yards around a dense mass of men pressed to get near the tempting fountain, all
eager to fill their cups and canteens, and hasten on with the column. No one can know with
what delight the soldiers quaffed the sparkling fluid from their sooty coffee pots, who has
not suffered the torture of extreme thirst.

We halted near Clifton, and resumed our march on the following morning, to suffer, if possible,
more from heat and thirst than ever. At night we bivouacked near Opequan creek. We threw ourselves
upon the grassy sward, with the beautiful canopy of heaven with its mottled clouds and twinkling
stars and flying meteors, for our tent. For many of us, this was the only tent we had slept
under since leaving Petersburgh, and we were satisfied with it. The air was purer and the breeze
fresher than when we were inclosed by canvas.

Again, on the morning of the 12th, we were marching. We passed through the villages of Newtown
and Middletown, and halted at night on the banks of Cedar creek.

We were startled in the morning by the announcement of the death of a good soldier. John Mosher
had marched with the column the day before, but owing to the overpowering heat was obliged
to fall a little behind. Toward evening, finding himself too much exhausted to walk further,
he applied for and obtained permission to ride in an ambulance of the First division. During
the night he was found to be dying. The kind hearted surgeon in charge of the hospital of the
First division, Dr. Crehore, and one of his assistants, spent some hours with him, using every
means to restore him, but without avail. He died before morning. A letter in his pocket told
his name and regiment. We made a grave near Cedar creek, and a few of his comrades stood around
it while he was lowered to his bed of earth, wrapped in his blanket. The chaplain offered a
brief prayer; his fellows in arms fired a parting salute, and we left him to sleep in the valley
where, a few weeks later, some of his companions were to rest by his side.

On the 13th all the troops were across on the south side of Cedar creek. The pickets of our
Second division occupied one end of the village of Strasburgh, while those of the enemy held
the other. We were sure that we must fight here, and we were not unwilling. Our cavalry was
scouting on the flanks, skirmishing with rebel cavalry and searching for a way to outflank
Early's army. The rebels held a position of great strength, and to make a direct assault would
be to run a great risk of a repulse. The walls of the valley, the Blue Ridge and the North
Mountains, came close together here, and, to render the position stronger, Fisher Hill, a commanding
eminence, a prominent object in the landscape, to be seen from one end of the valley to the
other, rose directly in our front and obstructed our passage. Upon the declivities of this
hill the enemy had planted batteries so as to command our approach from any direction.

We remained gazing at this strong position till nightfall, and then recrossed the river, and
made our position strong for defense. 'Those peasants of the mountains,' they said at once, 'they
are people of little education. Rather wild folk.'

And they spoke with good-humoured contempt.

I thought of Paolo, and Il Duro, and the Signor Pietro, our padrone,
and I resented these factory-hands for criticizing them.

So I sat on the edge of the stage whilst they rehearsed their parts. The little thin intelligent
fellow, Giuseppino, was the leader. The others read their parts in the laborious, disjointed fashion
of the peasant, who can only see one word at a time, and has then to put the words together,
afterwards, to make sense. The play was an amateur melodrama, printed in little penny booklets,
for carnival production. This was only the second reading they had given it, and the handsome,
dark fellow, who was roused and displaying himself before the girl, a hard, erect piece of callousness,
laughed and flushed and stumbled, and understood nothing till it
was transferred into him direct through Giuseppino.

The fat, fair, slow man was more conscientious. He laboured through his part. The other two
men were in the background more or less.

The most confidential was the fat, fair, slow man, who was called Alberto. His part was not very
important, so he could sit by me and talk to me.

He said they were all workers in the factory--silk, I think it was--in
the village.

They were a whole colony of Italians, thirty or more families. They had all come at different
times.

Giuseppino had been longest in the village. He had come when he was eleven, with his parents, and
had attended the Swiss school. So he spoke perfect German.

He was a clever man, was married, and had two children.

He himself, Alberto, had been seven years in the valley; the girl, la Maddelena, had been here
ten years; the dark man, Alfredo, who was flushed with excitement
of her, had been in the village about nine years--he alone of all
men was not married.

The others had all married Italian wives, and they lived in the great dwelling whose windows shone
yellow by the rattling factory.

They lived entirely among themselves; none of them could speak German, more than a few words, except
the Giuseppino, who was like a native here.

It was very strange being among these Italians exiled in Switzerland. Alfredo, the dark one,
the unmarried, was in the old tradition. Yet even he was curiously subject to a new purpose,
as if there were some greater new will that included him, sensuous, mindless as he was. He seemed
to give his consent to something beyond himself.

In this he was different from Il Duro, in that he had put himself under the control of the outside
conception.

It was strange to watch them on the stage, the Italians all lambent, soft, warm, sensuous, yet moving
subject round Giuseppino, who was always quiet, always ready, always impersonal. There was a
look of purpose, almost of devotion on his face, that singled him out and made him seem the one stable,
eternal being among them. They quarrelled, and he let them quarrel up to a certain point; then
he called them back.

He let them do as they liked so long as they adhered more or less to the central purpose,
so long as they got on in some measure with the play.

All the while they were drinking beer and smoking cigarettes. The Alberto was barman: he went
out continually with the glasses. The Maddelena had a small glass. In the lamplight of the stage
the little party read and smoked and practised, exposed to the empty
darkness of the big room. Queer and isolated it seemed, a tiny, pathetic
magicland far away from the barrenness of Switzerland. I could believe
in the old fairy-tales where, when the rock was opened, a magic underworld
was revealed.

The Alfredo, flushed, roused, handsome, but very soft
and enveloping in his heat, laughed and threw himself into his pose,
laughed foolishly, and then gave himself up to his part. The Alberto,
slow and laborious, yet with a spark of vividness and natural intensity
flashing through, replied and gesticulated; the Maddelena laid her
head on the bosom of Alfredo, the other men started into action, and
the play proceeded intently for half an hour.

Quick, vivid, and sharp,
the little Giuseppino was always central. But he seemed almost invisible.
When I think back, I can scarcely see him, I can only see the others,
the lamplight on their faces and on their full gesticulating limbs.
I can see--the Maddelena, rather coarse and hard and repellent, declaiming
her words in a loud, half-cynical voice, falling on the breast of
the Alfredo, who was soft and sensuous, more like a female, flushing,
with his mouth getting wet, his eyes moist, as he was roused. I can
see the Alberto, slow, laboured, yet with a kind of pristine simplicity
in all his movements, that touched his fat commonplaceness with beauty.
 We marched to the creek very early in the morning, found the enemy in force, lost
a few men by the shells from the rebel batteries, and returned to camp.

On the 15th our army was visited by Lieutenant-General Grant.

Thus the two armies lay face to face, with the stream and a narrow strip of country between
them, either able to bring on an engagement at any time. The quiet was broken on the morning
of the 19th, when we advanced to win the first of that series of brilliant victories which
startled Europe and America; which gave to our little army an enviable renown among the armies
of the Union, and established the reputation of our chief as one of the foremost generals of
the age.

Early had taken the initiative. On Sunday the 18th, he had sent General Gordon's division toward
Martinsburgh, with orders to drive out the Union forces, and destroy the government property.
Gordon was met by Averill's cavalry and driven back to Drakesville. Sheridan, discovering the
mistake made by Early in separating his forces, was quick to avail himself of the advantage
of his enemy's blunder. Orders were issued to move at once, but, for some reason, several hours
elapsed before the army was ready.

We left our pleasant camps at Berryville, at two o'clock Monday morning, the Sixth corps in
advance, moving in two columns, one on either side of the road, the ammunition wagons, artillery
and ambulances taking the pike. The Third brigade, Second division, led the infantry. The Nineteenth
corps followed the Sixth, marching in similar order, its infantry in the fields and its artillery
and wagons on the pike, while Crook's Kanawha corps moved further to the south, with orders
to connect with the Sixth corps at Opequan creek. Two divisions of cavalry, under Merritt and
Averill, were directed to amuse the enemy near Bunker's Hill, and draw the attention of the
rebel generals in that direction as much as possible. It was the design of General Sheridan
thus to amuse the enemy on the left while he should march his army up the Berryville and Winchester
pike, strike the right flank of Early's army, and by a sudden and unexpected attack, to get
in the rear and cut off the retreat of the rebel forces. By one of those inexplicable mistakes,
which sometimes upset the plans of our generals, this design was not fully realized, and had
General Sheridan been less determined and less dashing, he might have abandoned the idea of
attacking Early at all.

At five o'clock Wilson's cavalry had crossed the creek before us, having dispersed the pickets
of the enemy, driving them back to their line of field works, and then, by a dashing charge,
had leaped their horses over the breastworks of the first line of defenses, and routed the
rebels, capturing about fifty of their number.

Immediately after this gallant exploit of the cavalry, the Sixth corps crossed the creek and
advanced on the turnpike about a mile, where the enemy was found in force. As we moved along,
through the deep ravine, following the pike, we were warned of the active work we might expect
in front, as we saw cavalrymen coming to the rear, some leading their wounded horses, others
with their heads bound in bloody handkerchiefs, some with arms hanging in slings, others borne
on litters. Here by the roadside might be seen the prostrate, lifeless form of some soldier
of the Union; there, where a silvery brook babbled along across the pike, on its grassy banks,
and beneath the shadow of a large tree, was gathered a little group of boys in blue, performing
the last acts of kindness to a comrade in whom the vital spark was almost extinguished, and
a surgeon bending over the dying soldier striving to render less painful the few lingering
moments of life.

We moved up a steep ascent and formed in line of battle in a cornfield; the Third brigade on
the left, the First in the center, and the Vermonters on the right; then on the left of the
Second division the Third division got into position, and the First division came up in the
rear as reserve. Our artillery was brought into position and a vigorous shelling commenced
on both sides.

The Sixth corps was now ready for a charge upon the enemy, but it was discovered that, by some
misconception of orders, the Nineteenth corps, which should have been on the ground, was left
far behind. Orders were dispatched to hasten it to the field of action, but two hours, precious
hours to that army, elapsed before it was in position.

Those two hours of delay enabled Early to strengthen his right; to throw up strong earthworks,
and bring Gordon's division on the run, to his assistance. We had been fortunate only in seizing
the position on the west side of the stream, or the battle would, from this delay, have been
worse for us.

Merritt and Averill, by skillfully maneuvering their troops in front of Bunker's Hill, had
enabled us to seize this advantage.

The Nineteenth corps was formed on the right of the Sixth, in four lines of battle; Wilson's
cavalry was on our left. It was eleven o'clock when the advance was sounded. In our front were
undulating fields, traversed by deep ravines, almost stripped of timber, except where the rebels
had formed their line of battle in a belt of woods that skirted the turnpike. It was an imposing
spectacle to watch that line of battle, stretching three miles across the fields, as it moved
toward the rebel lines, the men as composed as though on parade, the line straight and compact,
the various division, brigade and regimental flags floating gaily in the sunlight. Away in
our front we could see Winchester; its gleaming spires and shining roofs, bright with the warm
glow of mid-day, and we proudly felt that before night it would be ours. Onward, through the
cornfields and over the grassy knolls, now descending into a ravine and now rising upon the
open plain, where the rebel artillery swept with terrible effect, the long line pressed forward,
regardless of the destructive fire that constantly thinned our ranks. At every step forward,
men were dropping, dropping; some dead, some mortally hurt, and some with slight wounds. Now
on this side, now on that they fell; still the line swept forward, leaving the ground behind
it covered with the victims.

Thus we pushed onward, the rebels falling back, desperately disputing every step, when a murderous
fire, from batteries which the enemy had skillfully placed, suddenly swept our right with fearful
slaughter.

Thus far all had gone well. Now our hearts were sick as we looked far to the right and saw
the Nineteenth corps and our Third division falling back, back, back, the grape and canister
of the hostile cannon crashing through the now disordered ranks, and the exulting rebels following
with wild yells of victory.

The retreat of the troops on the right of the Second division left its flank, held by the Vermonters,
exposed, and they, too, were forced to fall behind the Third brigade, which still held its
ground, the fire in its front being at the moment less severe. Our batteries were rushed forward,
and the gallant First division, the noble Russell at its head, came bravely up to the rescue.

As the noble soldier brought his division into position a cannon ball swept him from his horse--dead.
A great spirit had fallen, and in a moment we were made an army of mourners. "I have lost my
captain," said Sheridan, as the work of the day closed.

We all remembered the modest, almost bashful, demeanor of the fallen general among his friends,
and his glorious heroism in the presence of his enemies, and many tears moistened the brown
cheeks of rough soldiers as they thought of the loss of one of our best beloved leaders.

But, notwithstanding the loss of their hero, the brave division pushed straight on. Nothing
could withstand them; and now, joined by the other troops of the corps, the boys with the red
crosses press on, and as the peals of musketry and artillery roll through those valleys, it
tells of victory for the Union. The lost ground is regained, and now the fire in front of the
Sixth corps slackens.

We rested, throwing ourselves on the ground, waiting for orders. Some of the men, fatigued
from the early march and severe morning's work, slept; while others regaled themselves from
their well filled haversacks; and many gathered in groups to talk over the doings of the morning,
and to speak of those who had been stretched upon the sod, who had fallen with their faces
to the foe.

We were waiting for Crook's corps. It had halted on the eastern bank of the river as reserve
for the army. Now it was brought forward at quick pace and placed, a part on the right of the
Nineteenth corps, where the rebels could be seen massing troops on their left, with a view
of turning our right flank, the other part in rear of the Nineteenth corps. Averill and Merritt,
too, were with the army, and our whole force was together. It was nearly three o'clock when
Crook's forces were brought into position. His right was in a thick forest, and against him
were heavy columns of rebels.

At length we, of the Sixth corps, heard rapid firing away on the right of the forest. All was
attention. Every man stood to his arms ready to advance. Sheridan came to our part of the line.
His face all aglow with excitement, the perspiration rolling down his forehead, his famous
black steed spotted with white foam, a single orderly at his back. He rode straight to General
Getty, exclaiming, "General, I have put Torbert on the right, and told him to give 'em h--l,
and he is doing it. Crook, too, is on the right and giving it to them. Press them, General,
they'll run!" and then, using one of those phrases sometimes employed in the army to give additional
force to language, he shouted again, "Press them, General, I know they'll run!" And then the
shout that went up from the men drowned all the other noise of the battle.

We did press them, and they did run. Over the long stretch of open plain, down into the deep
hollow, up again and over the rolling ground, past the white farm house, on we went. The rebels
would run, then reaching a commanding position, they would turn their artillery upon us and
sweep our line with iron hail. On our left was Wilson, with the cavalry charging through the
growing corn, the sabres gleaming in the sunlight, the iron scabbards clanging against iron
spurs, the horses dashing madly forward in seeming disorder, but all rushing, like an avalanche,
against the right wing of the enemy. Now the retreat became a rout. The cheers of the Union
boys rose strong and clear above the roar of artillery and the harsh rattle of musketry, and
Early's scattered and demoralized divisions were rushing through Winchester in consternation
and unutterable confusion. Frightened teamsters were lashing their animals through the streets
in greatest alarm; riderless horses were galloping here and there, and pack mules were on a
general stampede. Some streets became entirely blocked up by the disordered mass, and even
footmen could not press through; a squad of cavalry coming to one of these obstructions leaped
from their horses and made their escape on foot. Our cavalry, taking advantage of the confusion,
rushed among the panic stricken fugitives and gathered hundreds of them; captured fifteen battle-flags
and five guns.

The remnants of the rebel army collected some miles beyond the town, and reformed; but after
a short rest made haste to get farther up the valley. As we advanced we found the mountains
full of fugitives, and in the town were thousands of their wounded.

The infantry halted upon the high grounds at the borders of the town, leaving the cavalry to
follow up the pursuit of the flying foe; and as Generals Sheridan, Wright, Emory and Crook
rode along our front, we made the welkin ring with lusty cheers. Glorious leaders of a victorious
army!

At our feet was Winchester, the scene of Washington's early military experience. Here he was
stationed during the French war, and shared in the perilous sentinelship of the frontier. For
then the valley was ravaged by French and Indians, and fearful massacres were of frequent occurrence;
and when Washington demanded of Governor Dinwiddie reinforcements, and was refused, he offered
to resign; and when the governor could not allow him to resign he sent him men.

Here, on the ground occupied by the Seventy-seventh New York regiment, near the ruins of an
old church, was the grave of General Daniel Morgan, the hero of Quebec and Saratoga, the friend
of Washington. A plain marble tablet, broken across, now covered the grave, with a simple inscription,
his name and the date of his death, 1802.

In the cemetery, still north, we saw, as we passed, the resting place of Thomas, Earl of Fairfax;
a great tory in his day, and the owner of immense tracts of land in this part of Virginia,
and from whom Fairfax county took its name.

The sun had sunk to his golden rest behind the wall of hills on our left when we arrived at
the outskirts of Winchester; and, as darkness set in, the infantry of our victorious army stretched
themselves upon the ground to sleep. It had been a hard day's work, and the men were faint.
It required no unusual inducements to woo the angel of sleep.

If the day had been an active one on the field, it had been no less so in the hospitals. First,
early in the morning, came ambulance loads of men with white crosses; they were from the Third
brigade, Second division, all from the Seventy-seventh New York. Then came men from the Vermont
brigade, and from our First brigade, and soon the hospitals of the Third division began to
be filled. Then, last of all, came the men of the red crosses, bleeding and mangled. Surgeons
worked all day and all night. There was no rest as long as a wounded man was uncared for. Yet,
when morning came, and the medical officers were ordered forward with the army, there was much
to do, and faithful men were left to finish the needful task. Next morning Winchester was full
of rebel wounded and rebel prisoners. Five thousand men in gray were under guard in the court
house yard and other public places, and Colonel Edwards' brigade of the First division was
left to take care of the prisoners and the town. Many brave men had fallen. Russell was gone;
the gallant Upton was wounded; Colonel Elright, of the Third division, was dead, and many,
many brave boys were lying with their blackened faces to the sun, a slip of paper or a letter
envelope pinned to the breast of each to tell the buriers his name and regiment.

The term of service of one of our regiments, the Fourth Vermont, had expired, and on the day
after the battle the small remnant of the regiment, a company of about forty men, under command
of Colonel Foster, started for Harper's Ferry, on their return home. They had suffered heavily,
and they left many of their brave comrades dead upon the battle-field, or suffering in the
hospitals. How had those noble boys, whose lives had, at the very expiration of their three
years of toil, danger and privations, been given for their country, rejoiced at the prospect
of a speedy reunion with the loved ones at home. How had they written, even the day before
the battle, "we are going home!" and then how had the loving ones, away among the beautiful
green hills of Vermont, exulted at the thought that now, after three long years of suspense
and anxiety, the danger and toil were over. And we can picture to our thoughts the mother who
watches with eager interest the smoking train as it dashes along at the base of the old hills,
wondering if her patriot son will not come to-day; but instead, a letter comes with the heavy
news, a great battle has been fought and her son lies in the Valley; or, on the banks of the
sunny Champlain, some young sister or lover gazes from the window of the cottage among the
trees, at the steamer as it glides over the surface of the beautiful lake and touches at the
wharf near by. But her soldier boy is not on board, and she watches in vain to see his familiar
form coming toward the cottage.

We started very early in the morning in pursuit of Early's defeated army, which it was supposed
would halt at the strong position at Strasburgh. On the battle-field which we left, the lifeless
bodies of many of our men were awaiting the office of the burial parties. They lay, not in
thick clusters, but here and there over a great extent of ground, showing that they had fallen
while the lines were in motion; but in places, six or eight mangled bodies would lie in close
proximity, showing the fatal effects of some well directed shell.

In Winchester were nearly five thousand prisoners, and more were constantly coming in, and
hundreds of rebel wounded were being cared for by sympathizing friends and confederate surgeons.

We reached the vicinity of Strasburgh, the Sixth corps in advance, at three o'clock on the
20th, and, as we expected, found the rebels awaiting us in a position, which the citizens of
the valley assured us could be held by Early's army against one hundred thousand men. The position
was indeed a formidable one, but nothing daunted our spirited leader set about devising a way
of taking it.

At Strasburgh the two chains of mountains, the Blue Ridge and the Alleghanies, approach each
other, making the valley quite narrow. As if to interpose an impassable barrier to the advance
of an army, a mountain, Fisher Hill, stretches across from the Blue Ridge to the branch of
the Alleghanies called the North Mountains. At the foot of this mountain, on the north, is
the village of Strasburgh, and still north of Strasburgh Cedar creek runs almost directly across
the valley. We took possession of the northern part of the village of Strasburgh, the Union
pickets occupying one part of the town, and the rebels the other. The night passed with little
of interest.

On the morning of the 21st squads of rebel prisoners were coming in to army head-quarters,
and as brigade after brigade of cavalry passed, each carrying a large number of confederate
flags at the head of the column, it looked as though our cavalry had adopted the confederate
banner and had paraded in gala day splendor.

The mists and fogs melted away, and we discovered that our enemy, lately routed and disorganized,
now with confidence confronted us and awaited our advance. During the night the mountain had
been the scene of busy labors, and now, breastworks of earth and stones, and lines of troublesome
abattis, rendered the position, so strong by nature, apparently too formidable for any army
to attempt to force. But, notwithstanding the brilliant success at Winchester, neither the
rebel army nor our own fully appreciated the fertile resources of our gallant leader. Starting
with his staff early in the day, he rode from one end of the picket line to the other, carefully
noting the character of the ground.

To attempt to storm those heights, now strengthened with earthworks and bristling with cannon,
would be presumptuous; but away on the right seemed the vulnerable point of the enemy's line.
Returning to his quarters, Sheridan determined at once upon his plan of attack. The Nineteenth
corps was thrown farther to the left, and our Sixth corps occupied the position in the center,
facing now to the south. Crook's corps was thrown well to the right, where the North Mountain
formed a precipitous wall for the valley. All day the sharp crack of the skirmishers' rifles,
and the ring of the pioneers' axes were heard as the two lines faced each other, each watching
the movements of the other, and each actively engaged in felling trees from which breastworks
were made.

During the night Crook's corps and our Third division were toiling along the side of the mountain
unseen and unexpected by the rebels. All night and the following morning these two commands
labored to drag artillery along the precipitous mountain side, executing every movement in
silence and with utmost secrecy. The Nineteenth corps and the First and Second divisions of
the Sixth were all this time keeping up a show of determination to attack in front.

At length, just as the sun was sinking behind the mountain barrier, a wild shout was heard
from the hillside where Crook's corps and our Third division were rushing down from the cover
of the forest, upon the flank and rear of the astonished confederates. The shout was taken
up by the troops in front, and at the same time the two remaining divisions of the Sixth corps
and the Nineteenth corps advanced against the rebel front. Completely surprised by the movement
on the flank, the rear of the rebel army was quickly thrown into a panic. Still resistance
was kept up along the front. Steadily the troops of Wright and Emory pressed forward, the rebel
gunners firing their shells over the heads of our men, our line advancing over ditches and
fences, over fallen trees and stone walls, each man his own commander and each pressing eagerly
forward. In the foremost line rode Phil Sheridan, the men cheering him lustily as they pressed
hastily forward. "Let us take the guns," shouted the men; and forward at double-quick they
rushed. The panic in the rear had by this time reached the front, and the whole rebel army
was rushing in unutterable confusion and rout, up the valley. They left with us sixteen guns,
of which Bidwell's brigade captured six. We gathered up the prisoners, and they numbered eleven
hundred.[8] The hill was strewed with small arms, and cannon and caissons met our view wherever
we passed.

    [8] The prisoners taken thus far, at Winchester and Fisher Hill,
    including the wounded, numbered more than seven thousand. The
    absurdity and falsity of Early's statement, that his effective
    force at Winchester amounted to only eight thousand five hundred
    men, is readily seen. The rebel surgeons at Mount Jackson, and
    the citizens, while claiming that we outnumbered Early's forces,
    acknowledged that he retreated from Winchester with more than
    twenty thousand men.

We had lost, as the cost of this brilliant victory, less than forty men in the army; and the
confederate loss in killed and wounded was scarcely greater.

We followed the routed army through Mount Jackson, where were large hospitals, occupied by
wounded confederates, and attended by confederate surgeons; then pressed on to New Market,
keeping up a running fight with the rear-guard of the rebel army.

On the 25th we reached Harrisonburgh, a village more than sixty miles above Winchester.

Our march had been a grand triumphal pursuit of a routed enemy. Never had we marched with such
light hearts; and, though each day had found us pursuing rapidly from dawn till dark, the men
seemed to endure the fatigue with wonderful patience. Our column, as it swept up the valley,
was a spectacle of rare beauty. Never had we, in all our campaigns, seen anything to compare
with the appearance of this victorious little army. The smooth, wide turnpike was occupied
by the artillery, ambulances and baggage wagons moving in double file. The infantry marched
in several parallel columns on either side of the pike, and a line of cavalry, followed by
a skirmish line of infantry, led the way. Cavalry, too, hung on either flank, and scouted the
country. It was intensely exciting to watch the steady progress of the advancing skirmishers.
Now, as they reached the base of some sloping eminence, the rebel skirmishers would confront
them; then, as they advanced, never halting nor slackening their pace, the confederates would
surrender the ground, to appear in our front on the next commanding ground. So we marched up
the valley--a grand excursion--skirmishing only enough to maintain a constant state of pleasant
excitement.

At Harrisonburgh we remained until the 29th, then marched farther up the valley to Mount Crawford,
while the cavalry penetrated as far as Staunton. The rebel army was broken up and demoralized,
yet considerable force was in the vicinity of Lynchburgh, and Early devoted himself to reorganizing
it.

Guerrilla warfare was a favorite resort of the rebels in the Shenandoah Valley, and many of
our men were murdered in cold blood by the cowardly villains who lurked about our camps by
day as harmless farmers, and murdered our men at night dressed in confederate uniform. Among
those who lost their lives by this cowardly species of warfare, were Surgeon Ochenslayer, Medical
Inspector of our army; Colonel Tolles, Chief Quartermaster, and Captain Meigs, son of the Quartermaster-General,
U. S. A.

We fell back from Mount Crawford to Harrisonburgh, burning barns, mills and granaries, driving
before us cattle and sheep, and bringing white and black refugees without number. From Harrisonburgh
we again fell back, retracing our steps through New Market, Mount Jackson and Woodstock, and
encamped on the evening of the 8th of October on the north bank of Cedar creek. Each day as
we marched, dark columns of smoke rose from numberless conflagrations in our rear and on either
flank, where the cavalry was at work carrying out the edict of destruction of the valley. A
certain number of mills with the grain contained, a specified number of wheat-stacks and granaries,
and cattle and sheep sufficient for the wants of the people of the valley were saved; all other
mills, barns, stacks and granaries were burned, and all other cattle and sheep driven away.
Seventy mills, with the flour and grain, and over two thousand barns filled with wheat, hay
and farming implements were thus committed to the flames, and seven thousand cattle and sheep
were either driven off or killed and issued to the men. This destruction, cruel as it seemed,
was fully justified as a matter of military necessity. For so long as a rebel army could subsist
in the valley, so long a large force must remain to guard the frontier of Maryland.

Hundreds of refugees accompanied us from Staunton, Mount Crawford and Harrisonburgh: Unionists
who had endured persecution until it was no longer endurable, and who now left houses and farms
to find relief in the north from their sufferings for loyalty; and negroes who sought freedom
from their ancient bondage.

Among the latter class was a group which had followed the cavalry from Staunton, and which
now took a place in our Sixth corps hospital train, which attracted universal attention. The
party rode in one of the huge Virginia wagons, so familiar to those who have spent much time
in those parts, and consisted of an aged colored woman, probably more than ninety years old,
one or two younger women, a black man of fifty, who was a cripple, a boy of twelve or fifteen
years, and a very large number of small children, varying in hue from jet black to dark brunette.
The load was drawn by four broken down, spavined animals, the crippled man riding one of the
horses of the rear span, the boy one of the leaders. The soldiers manifested great interest
in this curious load of refugees, and freely divided with them their hard tack and coffee.
The writer of these pages, reining his horse to the side of the vehicle, addressed the aged
negress, "Well, aunty, are all those your children?" My first movement was to carry my hands
to my head. It was shaved, and my beard also! A thrill of anguish shot through me at the discovery;
but instead of flying into a rage, as I would have done the evening
before, I only shed a few tears, fearfully regarding the "horse-dealer."

Aye, I cried before that man--aye, I looked at him with fear.

What could have come over me during the night? Was I still under the influence of the philter poured
into the wine? No, my torpor had gone. I found myself active of body, and in sound mind, but in
character and heart I found myself softened, enervated, timid,--and,
why not say the word?--cowardly!

Aye, cowardly! I, Guilhern, son of Joel, the brenn of the tribe of Karnak. I looked timidly
around me. Every minute my heart seemed to sink, and tears came to my eyes, as formerly the
flush of anger and pride had mantled my forehead. Of this inexplicable transformation, due,
perhaps, to sorcery, I was dimly conscious and wondered thereat. Down to this day, when I recall
the incident, I wonder, and none of the details of the horrid day has escaped from my memory.

The
"horse-dealer" observed me in silence with an air of triumph. He had left me my breeches only.
I was stripped to the waist. I was seated on my bed of straw. The dealer addressed me:

"Get up!" said he.

I hastened to obey. My master drew from his pocket a steel mirror, handed it to me, and resumed:

"Look
at yourself!"
I looked at myself. Thanks to the witch-craft of my master, my cheeks
were red, my face clear, as if awful misfortune had not settled upon
me and my family. Nevertheless, on seeing for the first time in the
mirror my face and head completely shaved, as the badge of my bondage,
I shed fresh tears, but tried to hide them from the "horse-dealer,"
for fear of annoying him. But while we waited to get
ready for crossing, a courier came to General Wright with a message from Sheridan to return
to his army in haste. We heard that Longstreet's corps had reinforced Early, and that an attack
had been made, but with no important result. We turned about, encamped for the night among
the hills, started again at three o'clock in the morning, and joined the army again on Cedar
creek, in the afternoon of the 14th, where we remained in the enjoyment of undisturbed quiet
for several days.

Our army was thus resting in apparent security along the banks of Cedar creek. The men were
amusing themselves in visiting the numerous caverns in the vicinity, strolling among the pleasant
groves or wandering by the shady borders of the stream. Sheridan had left the army and returned
to Washington for a day or two, to make arrangements for his future movements, and General
Wright had temporary command of the army.

Our infantry force was arranged from left to right along the creek, first, on the left of the
turnpike, General Crook's "Army of Virginia," or as it was more generally known, the Eighth
corps, holding the left flank, facing eastward and southward; then, the Nineteenth corps, holding
the pike and facing toward the south, its line occupying high bluffs which overhung the creek.
On the right of the Nineteenth corps, and almost at right angles with it, was the Sixth corps,
its line extending far toward the north. The corps faced the stream, looking directly west.
The divisions of the corps were posted, on the right the Second, in the center the First, and
on the left the Third division.

On the flanks of the infantry, cavalry was posted; Custer on the right of the Sixth corps,
and Averill's division, now under Colonel Powell, on the left of the infantry line, near Front
Royal. Our line thus extended from North Mountain, on the right, almost to Front Royal, on
the left, following nearly the course of Cedar creek, and that part of the north branch of
the Shenandoah which crosses the valley at right angles.

The enemy had been trying our line at various points, during the last two or three days, and
in one instance had captured or dispersed a small squad of cavalry on the right, and captured
some signaling instruments. These demonstrations were little heeded; our line had been posted
by General Sheridan, and these slight attacks seemed of little account. In Early's army, however,
they were considered of more weighty import. That army had recently been reinforced by Longstreet's
corps of sixteen thousand men, and the immediate defeat, and, if possible, destruction, of
Sheridan's army was regarded, by both General Lee and the authorities at Richmond, as absolutely
necessary to the safety of Lee's army. Hence every preparation had been made for a most determined
attack, and these lighter demonstrations had been made to ascertain the exact position of our
troops.

When, at two o'clock, on the morning of the nineteenth of October, we heard rapid firing where
Custer, with his horsemen, held the right, and on the left, where Averill's cavalry was posted,
we turned over in our blankets and said, "The cavalry is having a brush," and went to sleep
again. And then, at a later hour, at four o'clock in the morning, when we of the Sixth corps
heard brisk picket firing in front of the Eighth and Nineteenth corps, we were scarcely aroused
from our slumbers, for we thought it to be a mere picket skirmish, in which none but those
directly engaged had any particular interest. But when the firing became general along the
whole line of these two corps, and we saw hundreds of men going with hasty steps and lengthy
strides to the rear, we were at length aroused to the truth that a battle was really in progress.

From a Sixth corps point of view, the scene was at first extremely ludicrous, we did not know
and could not have believed at that time that the flank of our army was turned, and that the
enemy was actually in possession of the camps of one whole corps; and when we saw stragglers
filling the fields, taking rapid strides toward the rear, scarce any two of them going together,
some without hats, others destitute of coats or boots, a few with guns, many wearing the shoulder
straps of officers, all bent on getting a good way to the rear, never stopping to answer a
question or explain what was going on at the front, the spectacle was to us of the Sixth corps
one of infinite amusement. None of these hundreds and thousands of stragglers were so undignified
as to run, but such walking was never seen before. None of them deigned to look to the right
or left, they were bent only upon getting as far on the road to Winchester as possible.

At length the truth flashed upon us. More than half of our army was already beaten and routed,
while the remainder had been in ignorance of the fact that anything serious was transpiring.
Now the rebels were pouring down toward the Winchester and Strasburgh turnpike, sending a perfect
shower of bullets whistling about the vicinity of the head-quarters of the army, into the Sixth
corps hospital camp and into the trains, which were by this time joining in the stampede.

Staff officers now came riding furiously through the camps of the Sixth corps, with orders
to fall in at once, and proceed at double-quick to the left.

We may now turn back and trace the cause of this unexpected state of affairs. Early had, without
doubt, assured himself of the exact position of our army through information conveyed by spies,
who were able to comprehend the whole situation. He then prepared for a bold and sudden movement,
which should take by surprise one flank of our army. Kershaw's rebel division advanced along
the sides of the mountains, and, at midnight, crossed the north branch of the Shenandoah, still
observing the most complete silence. Even the canteens of the soldiers had been left behind
lest the sound of them should betray the movement.

The whole division over, it was massed on the left of General Crook's command. A dense fog
enveloped the whole surrounding country, and so thick was it that no man could see an object
a few feet from him. Under the cover of this fog, the rebels succeeded in quietly capturing
a large part of the picket force and nothing now interposed between the rebels and General
Crook's camps. Toward these they hastened, and so complete was the surprise, that the men of
the Eighth corps were, for the most part, quietly sleeping in their tents. The few who had
got into the breastworks were subjected to a fierce fire in the flank, and were soon forced
to abandon the line. The rebels seized the Union batteries along that part of the line, and
turned them upon the camps of the Nineteenth corps, and at the same time a rebel line of battle
advanced against that corps from the front. The confusion became every moment greater. Daylight
was just merging from night, the thick mists hung like an impenetrable veil over the field,
and the men of the Nineteenth corps were unable to tell whence came all this storm of missiles;
but, trailing their guns in the direction from which the shells seemed to come, the gunners
worked their pieces at random. A general stampede was commenced. The men of the Eighth corps
were mostly fugitives; and those who strove to keep in line were forced back. Both the fugitives
and the disordered line of battle, were rushing through the camps of the Nineteenth corps.
The officers of that corps were, with shouts and wild gesticulations, striving to collect their
disordered commands, but with little success. Riderless horses were galloping here and there,
cows, with which the army was well supplied, were bellowing, mules were braying, bullets whistling
and shells howling. The Eighth corps having left the way clear, the rebels came down upon the
Nineteenth, which gave way and was doubled upon the Sixth corps, but although thrown into confusion
it was not in the panic with which the Eighth corps yielded the ground.

It was at this critical moment that the warning was given to the Sixth corps. General Wright
being in command of the army, the corps was in charge of General Ricketts. He at once faced
the corps to the rear, and moved it over the plain in face of the advancing hosts of the enemy.
General Ricketts was wounded very early in the engagement of the corps, and the command fell
upon General Getty.

The Second division held the left of the new line, the First the center, and the Third the
right. Bidwell's brigade was the left brigade of the Second division, the Vermonters held the
center, and Warner's First brigade the right. The Second division was posted in the edge of
an open oak grove. General Grant, of the Vermont brigade, was in charge.

We now awaited the onset of the victorious columns, which were driving the shattered and disorganized
fragments of the Eighth and Nineteenth corps, beaten and discouraged, wildly through our well
formed ranks to the rear.

The hope of the nation now rested with those heroes of many bloody fields. Now that peerless
band of veterans, the wearers of the Greek cross, whose fame was already among the choicest
treasures of American history, was to show to the country and the world, an exhibition of valor
which should tower above all the grand achievements of the war.

The corps, numbering less than twelve thousand men, now confronted Early's whole army of more
than thirty thousand men, who, flushed with victory, already bringing to bear against us the
twenty-one guns which they had just captured from the two broken corps, rushed upon our lines
with those wild, exultant yells, the terror of which can never be conceived by those who have
not heard them on the field.

With fearless impetuosity the rebel army moved up the gentle rise of ground in front of the
Sixth corps, and the attack, from one end of the line to the other, was simultaneous. It was
like the clash of steel to steel. The astonished columns were checked. They had found an immovable
obstacle to their march of victory.

The Second division, on the left, nearest the pike, had received the most severe shock of the
attack, while Bidwell's brigade, which held the extreme left, and the key to the pike, had
sustained the attack of the whole of Kershaw's rebel division, which came up in compact order
to within very close range. The gallant brigade received the onset with full volleys, which
caused the right of the rebel line to stagger back, and the whole line was, almost at the same
moment, repulsed by the corps. The cavalry on our flank--and never braver men than the cavalry
of our little army mounted saddles--were doing their best to protect the pike leading to Winchester,
and it was the great aim of both the cavalry and the single organized corps of infantry to
hold this pike; for on this depended the safety of the whole army, and more, of our cause.

The rebels checked, General Bidwell ordered his brigade to charge. Rising from their places
in the little graveyard and the grove, the brigade rushed forward, the rebels breaking and
running in confusion down the declivity which they had but just ascended with such confidence,
and across the little stream. But the rebel artillery sent our men back to their places, to
the shelter of the roll of ground. The charge cost us dearly. Major Brower, of the One hundred
and twenty-second New York, lost his life. Captain Lennon, of the Seventy-seventh, was mortally
wounded, Lieutenant Tabor was killed. Captain Taylor, commanding the Sixty-first Pennsylvania,
was also killed, and many other valuable lives were lost, but the most severe blow to the brigade
and the corps, was the loss of our gallant General Bidwell. He fell, while bravely directing
the charge, with a frightful shell wound. He was at once borne to an ambulance. The general
sent one of his staff for the writer of these pages. When he reached the general's ambulance,
the wounded man said: "Doctor, I suppose there is no hope of recovery." The second house was occupied
by the sailors, while the third was left to the natives. These latter were sufficiently conversant
with English to serve as excellent guides. Each day the party bathed in a lagoon in the center
of the island.

This lagoon was bordered by a beach of dazzling white coral sand, and all through its water
extended reefs of living coral of the more delicate and elaborate kinds. These corals gave
the lake a wonderful variety of colors, forming a picture impossible to paint or describe, and with
the least ripple from a passing breeze the whole scene changed to new groups of color. The water
was very clear, and in some places deep; in others so filled with coral that a boat could barely
skim over the surface without scraping the keel. After crossing a long reef, one day, they entered
on a sheet of water so deep that their longest line would not reach the bottom, plainly visible
beneath. Fish swarmed here, and it was characteristic of them that every species, if not brilliantly
colored, was marked in the most peculiar manner. One variety which frequented the shallow water,
where it was heated to the degree uncomfortable to the touch, was a pure milky white, with black
eyes, fins, and tail.

The French party arrived two days after the Americans. They had steamed
directly from Panama with the hope of anticipating the Americans.

It
rained on the morning of the eclipse, but cleared off in good time,
and the definition was particularly good. And now
it was necessary to take another position, which should protect the road to Winchester, and
General Wright directed General Getty to fall back, with his corps, to a more commanding position,
unless he saw good reason for desiring to hold his present position. So the order was given
to take the new position.

The Sixth corps was not driven back. It had thrice repulsed the most desperate charges of the
whole rebel army, and now that the rebels were turning our flank, it was necessary to interpose
an organized force, and there was no organized troops except the cavalry.

Certain erudite historians, who have sent broadcast over our land, compilations of newspaper
paragraphs under the sounding titles of historians of the rebellion, powerful gentlemen, who,
from their comfortable quarters in northern homes, watched our battles from afar, quiet citizens
whose sensibilities were never shocked by the sight of a battle-field, and whose nerves can
hardly withstand the shock of fire crackers on the morning of a Fourth of July, have gravely
informed their readers that our whole army, including the Sixth corps, was driven pell-mell
six miles to the rear; and one of these grave historians very quietly assures those who have
leisure to peruse his queer accumulations of absurdities, that we were driven all the way to
Winchester, a distance of more than twenty miles. For the comfort and encouragement of these
historians, so prolific of martial literature, and so barren of any ideas of military movements,
it is conceded that their accounts of this battle are quite as correct as any which they are
accustomed to give to the public.

We took position just north of Middletown, which was about two miles in the rear of the position
held by the Second division of our corps early in the morning. We went back quietly and in
good order, a single regiment, the Second Vermont, holding without difficulty the position
we abandoned. We carried with us all our wounded, all our shelter tents and all our personal
property of every description, and the rebels did not dare to attack us. When we had taken
our new position in the same order that we had formed in the morning, the Second division on
the left, the First in the center, and the Third on the right, other troops also took position
in the line. The cavalry, which had never for a moment faltered, took position, Custer on the
right, Merritt on the left and the Nineteenth corps, which had now succeeded in restoring order
to its broken ranks, was massed on the right and rear of the Sixth.

With this new line of battle in the strong position we now held, General Wright determined
that not only should the retreat stop here, but that the rebels should be driven back across
Cedar creek. Their career of victory was ended. The grand old Sixth corps, directed by our
own loved General Getty, had turned the fortunes of the day. He had ridden from Winchester
at amazing speed, and now, as he passed the long trains of ambulances in which were the hundreds
of bleeding victims of the morning's work, the wounded men whose shattered limbs or mangled
bodies attested that they had not run away, raised themselves and cheered with wild enthusiasm
the hero of the valley. On he rode; most of his staff left far to the rear, his famous war-horse
covered with foam and dirt, cheered at every step by hundreds of men in whom new courage was
now kindled. Dashing along the pike, he came upon the line of battle. "What troops are those?"
shouted Sheridan. We shall sleep in our old quarters to-night!" were the encouraging words
of the chief as he rode along, while the men threw their hats high in air, leaped and danced
and cheered in wildest joy.

Sheridan at once completed the arrangements already commenced and nearly finished by General
Wright. The men of the Sixth corps meanwhile busied themselves in cooking their morning meal.

None but soldiers can realize the contending emotions we experienced as we waited for the development
of the new arrangements. The sulphate of the protoxide in doses of one or two drachms produces
purgative effects, and is supposed to increase the excretion of bile; and in small doses, both
this salt and the carbonate have been given with the intention of improving the condition of the blood
in cases of anaemia. Manganic acid and permanganate of potash are of great use when applied
in lotions (as in Condy's Fluid diluted) to foul and fetid ulcers. In connection with the medicinal
applications of manganese it may be mentioned that manganic acid is the agent employed in Dr. Angus
Smith's celebrated test for the impurity of the air.

It is the glass maker's soap of glass manufacture, and is used to correct the green color of glass,
which is owing to the presence of protoxide of iron. This it converts into the comparatively
colorless peroxide.

It is also used in the Bessemer and similar processes, to decompose the oxide of iron. Spiegeleisen,
an iron which contains a natural alloy of from 10 to 12 per cent. of manganese, is used for this
purpose when conveniently attainable.--Glassware Reporter.

* * * * *

OZOKERITE, OR EARTH-WAX.
By WILLIAM L. LAY.

ON THE DEPOSITS OF EARTH WAX (OZOKERITE) IN EUROPE
AND AMERICA.

[Footnote: Abstract from a paper read before the New
York Academy of Sciences.]

There exists a large mining and manufacturing
industry in Austria, that of ozokerite, or earth-wax, which has nothing
like it in any other part of the known world, an industry that supplies
Europe with a part of its beeswax, without the aid of the bees. It
may not be generally known that the mining of petroleum was a profitable
industry in Austria long before it was in this country. The Third division on the right of our corps became for a moment embarrassed
in passing through a strip of woods, the First division moved slowly but firmly, gaining a
strong position. The Second division also advanced, but it was ordered to go very slowly, and
this was far more difficult than to rush quickly over the ground. Yet the division obeyed the
order and forced the rebels to fall back. In front of the First and Second brigades was a stone
wall. This they seized and were at once partially sheltered; but there was no such protection
for the Third brigade. In its front was a meadow and a gradually inclined plane, and behind
a wall which skirted the crest, was the rebel line. Between that line and ours, in a hollow,
stood a brick mill, from the windows of which the enemy's sharpshooters picked off our men.
The galling fire from the line of battle, and the fatal shots of the sharpshooters in the mill,
made it impossible to advance slowly, and the line fell back. Our best men were falling fast.
The color-sergeant of the Seventy-seventh fell dead; another sergeant seized the flag and fell.
Adjutant Gilbert Thomas, a youth of rare beauty and surpassing bravery, seized the fallen flag;
he cried, "forward, men!" and fell dead with the staff grasped in his hand.

"I cannot take my brigade over that field, slowly," said Colonel French; "then go quickly,"
responded General Getty. The word was given, and with a bound and a shout the noble brigade
went across the field, quickly driving the confederates from their strong position.

By this time the right of the army had started the rebels, and their whole line was giving
way. The three divisions of the Sixth corps bounded forward, and commenced the wildest race
that had ever been witnessed even in that valley so famous for the flight of beaten armies.
The rebel lines were completely broken, and now in utmost confusion, every man was going in
greatest haste toward Cedar creek. Our men, with wild enthusiasm, with shouts and cheers, regardless
of order or formation, joined in the hot pursuit. There was our mortal enemy, who had but a
few hours since driven us unceremoniously from our camps, now beaten, routed, broken, bent
on nothing but the most rapid flight. We had not forgotten our humiliation of the morning,
and the thought of it gave fleetness to the feet of our pursuers.

From the point where we broke the rebel ranks to the crossing of Cedar creek, was three miles,
an open plain. Over this plain and down the pike the panic-stricken army was flying, while
our soldiers, without ever stopping to load their pieces, were charging tardy batteries with
empty muskets, seizing prisoners by scores and hundreds, every Union soldier his own commander,
bent on nothing but the destruction of the flying foe. As we reached Cedar creek, the pursuit
was given over to the cavalry. The gallant Custer, now in his wild joy, could be heard shouting
to his impetuous men, "Charge them! Charge them!" and then we could hear words, hard to print,
but which added startling emphasis to the commands.

Crossing the river, he came upon the pike, crowded with men and cannon, caissons and ambulances,
wagons and pack animals. With one mighty sweep, forty-five pieces of artillery, many wagons
and ambulances, and hundreds of prisoners, were taken. Merritt, too, captured seven guns, many
battle-flags, and prisoners without number. Indeed, the prisoners could not be numbered, for
there were not enough of the cavalry to guard them, and as soon as they had thrown down their
arms they were passed to the rear, and in the darkness hundreds of them escaped to the mountains.
Through the darkness the cavalry kept up the pursuit until Mount Jackson was passed.

The infantry returned to the camps, and as we took our old places, cheers made the welkin ring;
and then as we heard constantly of new trophies, the wild huzzahs rang from one end of our
army to the other. Such wild joy has rarely been felt by an army. What cared the men of the
Nineteenth corps that they were forced to lie upon the ground without tents or blankets? Our
army was victorious and our honor saved.

The moon shining brightly over the battle-field revealed the camps of the living side by side
with the resting places of the dead. All the way from Middletown to Cedar creek the debris
of battle was scattered over the fields. Here and there were seen the remains of our comrades
of the morning, their lifeless bodies stripped by vandal rebels of almost every garment. They
lay like specters in the pale moonlight; here, still in death, under a cluster of bushes, was
stretched a group; there, by the side of a wall, a row of inanimate bodies marked a spot where
brave men had fallen at their posts; in the ravine where the little creek wound its way, and
beneath the boughs of the chestnut trees of the grove, many slept their last sleep. Among our
camps, the spades of the pioneers were heard as they hollowed out the shallow graves; and as
we threw ourselves upon the ground to rest, we mourned for our comrades, and we rejoiced for
our victory.

Sad, sad it was to think of the noble ones who had left us. Never again were we to see the
form of the great-hearted Bidwell at the head of his brigade. We remembered his heroic bravery
in all the terrible fights of those bloody days, from the Rapidan to Petersburgh; we thought
of him when, at Winchester and Fisher Hill, he directed the movements of his brigade with such
consummate coolness and skill; we remembered his cordial smile and friendly words, and then
we thought of his heroism in the morning, and our hearts were heavy to think that he was gone.

Adjutant Thomas, too, had left us; our noble, beautiful boy. Could he have died a grander death
had he been spared longer? Could his last words have been better chosen had he expired in the
embrace of loved ones at home? "Forward, men; forward!" Were they not grand dying words? Rest,
brother; thy death was as grand as thy life was lovely.

Lennon's bright eye must soon close forever. We should never again hear his hearty laugh or
listen to his sparkling wit. He had fallen as a hero falls, and his life had been the life
of a hero and patriot. Belding and Tabor, too, brave captains of brave men, each had fallen
in advance of his friends.

Major Brower of the One Hundred and Twenty-second, Captain Taylor, commanding the Sixty-first
Pennsylvania, Lieutenant-Colonel Kohler of the Ninety-eighth Pennsylvania and Major Borman
of the Fifteenth New Jersey, all brave and competent officers, were lost to our corps; while
among the wounded were General Ricketts, Colonel Penrose, commander of the New Jersey brigade,
Colonel Dwight of the One Hundred and Twenty-second, Captain Orr of Bidwell's staff, and Lieutenant
Mitchell of the Seventh Maine.

Our army remained along Cedar creek for several days, the cavalry only scouting up the valley
in search of remnants of Early's shattered army. Then, we fell back to the vicinity of Winchester,
where our men built comfortable quarters, and here we remained until General Grant called us
back to Petersburgh. Many of the regiments in the meantime were mustered out of the service
as regiments, the recruits and reënlisted men remaining as battalions with the name of the
original regiments, except the substitution of the battalion for the regiment. Among other
regiments whose time expired was the one whose early career formed the subject of the first
chapters of this narrative, and whose honorable and indeed brilliant course we have never lost
sight of. The returning veterans left camp on the 19th of November, leaving two hundred and
fifty men still to represent the organization. We will not pause to speak of the parting of
those so long companions in arms, of the trip homeward or of the brilliant reception and magnificent
entertainment extended by the patriotic citizens of Saratoga to the veterans of a hundred battles.
These were fitting testimonials of appreciation of the service of patriot soldiers.

On the 9th of December, the Sixth corps was recalled to Petersburgh. We need not describe the
journey to Washington, nor the steamboat ride to City Point; the scenes along this route have
already been described.

We took our position on the Weldon railroad, erected more comfortable huts than we had ever
built before, our sick were placed in hospitals fitted up with great taste, and everything
which the government or our friends at home, through the agencies of Sanitary and Christian
Commissions, could do for their comfort was gladly done.

During our absence in the Shenandoah Valley, the army under General Grant had been making steady
progress in the siege of Petersburgh, and our war-worn brothers of the other corps showed upon
their faces the marks of overwork. We were in fresh vigor. We had marched through a blooming
valley literally abounding in milk and honey. The fruits of the vine, the orchard and the fold
had been ours, and our camps had been in green fields and pleasant groves, we had marched over
wide roads, and through rolling meadows, and we had fought in the open field. We returned to
our old comrades, proud of our own achievements, and of the praise we had won from the nation.
We could point to the valley, and to the memory of Early's army, now no more; and we proudly
claimed that it had been ours to rid the country of one of the most troublesome of the rebel
columns.

Now that we were again in the trenches, we felt a confidence in our own valor which made our
corps eminently fitted for the last grand duty, the crowning act in the glorious history of
this superb corps, the breaking asunder of Lee's lines at Petersburgh, and as the result, the
overthrow of the rebellion.

Grant's army had, during our absence, extended the line much farther to the west and south.
When we left for Washington, our line extended only a little beyond the Jerusalem plank road.
Now, it crossed the Weldon railroad, and reached Hatcher's Run, nearly eight miles from the
position occupied by us when we left the lines. The military railroad, too, had been constructed,
and now all supplies were brought from City Point to the rear of our camps by rail cars.

The famous mine had exploded, and with it the project of taking Petersburgh by surprise. Events
of importance had transpired on the north of the James, and the Dutch Gap canal was in progress.
Yet, Lee's army held us at arm's length, and Petersburgh was still to be taken.

In the latter part of February, our friend, Sheridan, was ordered to leave the valley with
his superb body of horsemen, and cross the country through Lynchburgh, destroy Lee's communications
with the west, pass through Danville and join Sherman in his grand march to the sea. But the
James river, swollen by heavy rains, forbade a crossing, and Sheridan, nowise disconcerted,
turned the heads of his horses toward the White House, and after many adventures, having wrought
much mischief in the rear of the rebel army, he joined Grant's army before Petersburgh, on
the 26th of March. The result was better than though he had been able to accomplish the original
design.

Now, the Army of the Potomac was one again. The Sixth corps, and Sheridan with his cavalry,
were important elements in that grand army; and now, as the glorious spring-time was drying
the depths of the mud, and opening the way for a fresh campaign, we were in most superb condition
to administer the last blows to the already tottering fabric of the rebellion.

We need not dwell long upon the particulars of this final campaign.

Lee took the initiative. Knowing that it would be impossible to hold his present line much
longer, he determined to retreat to Danville; but wishing to cover his retreat by a bold movement
in front, he sent a strong column to attack Fort Steadman, a point toward the right of the
line where the two opposing lines were very close. The fort was guarded by troops of the Ninth
corps. The attack was made very early on the morning of the 25th of March, and resulted in
the complete surprise and capture of the fort and of many of the men of the Ninth corps. My manacles
were carefully inspected and locked on my wrists, and I sat down in a corner of the stall while
the dealer counted and recounted his gold.

CHAPTER XIII.

THE BOOTH ACROSS THE WAY.

While I sat in my former master's stall awaiting the arrival of my new purchaser to take me away,
the cloth that covered the entrance of the opposite stall was raised.

On
one side were three beautiful young women, the same, I doubted not,
who a little before had filled the air with groans and supplications
while their clothes were being torn off them, in order to exhibit
their charms to purchasers. They were still half nude, their feet
bare, plastered with chalk[29] and fastened by rings to a long iron
bar. Colonel
Dwight of the One Hundred and Twenty-second was killed; Captain Oakley and Lieutenant Pierce
lost their lives, and many others of the brigade were killed or wounded.

The 29th of March was the day fixed for the opening of the grand final campaign. The Twenty-fourth
corps relieved the Second and Fifth corps from the intrenchments in front of Petersburgh, and
these two corps were loose to join Sheridan in an expedition on our left with the view of turning
the enemy's right flank.

Leaving camp early on the morning of the 29th, the two corps and the cavalry proceeded to the
southwest, crossed Hatcher's Run, and marched toward Dinwiddie Court House, the infantry reaching
the Quaker road, the cavalry continuing the march to Dinwiddie. We had now an unbroken line
from the Appomattox to Dinwiddie Court House. The corps were posted from right to left, as
follows: Ninth, Sixth, Twenty-fourth, Second, Fifth, and on the left of all, Sheridan with
the cavalry.

On the morning of the 30th, the infantry and cavalry on the left were ready for the grand blow
upon the flank and rear of the enemy, but a heavy rain storm set in, rendering the roads impracticable,
and except some maneuvering to get nearer the enemy's position, no movements were made. On
the following day, the rebels made a fierce onset upon the corps of Warren, but failed to dislodge
him. April 1st, Sheridan, with infantry and cavalry, engaged the rebels at a place called Five
Forks, a position of vital importance to the enemy.

While Sheridan was thus dealing heavy blows upon the flank, we in front were preparing for
a general advance.

The position occupied by the Sixth corps formed a salient, the angle approaching very near
the rebel line. Here, in front of Fort Welch and Fort Fisher, the corps was massed in columns
of brigades in echelon, forming a mighty wedge, which should rive the frame-work of the confederacy.

The corps was formed in the rear of the picket line; the Third brigade, Second division, being
the point of the wedge. On the right of that brigade was the First brigade of the same division,
and on the left, the Vermont brigade. The First division of three brigades was in echelon by
brigades on the right of the Second, and the Third of two large brigades also in echelon. Each
brigade was in column of battalions. Axemen were ready to be sent forward to remove abattis,
and Captain Adams had twenty cannoneers ready to man captured guns. Every commanding officer
of battalions was informed what he was expected to do, and thus all was in readiness.

At half-past four in the morning of April 2d, the signal gun from Fort Fisher sounded the advance.
Without wavering, through the darkness, the wedge which was to split the confederacy was driven
home.

The abattis was past, the breastworks mounted, the works were our own. Thousands of prisoners,
many stands of colors and many guns were our trophies, while many of our friends, dead or wounded,
was the price of our glory. The rebel line was broken, and now the troops of Ord, and those
of the Ninth corps pressed on after us. Humphries, too, of the Second corps, hearing of our
splendid success, stormed the works in his front away on the left and carried them. The confederate
army gathered close around Petersburgh, but we followed closely. I obeyed. The dealer put the wreath
on my head.

Then he took a parchment on which were written several lines in large Roman characters, and
hung the inscription on my chest by means of two strings which he tied behind my neck.
 During the night Lee made his escape with his
army. He had already sent word to Richmond that he was to retreat, and the fatal message reached
Davis while in church.

We all joined in the pursuit next morning. The Second and Sixth corps hastening to the help
of Sheridan, who was following hard after the flying army. We confronted Lee at Jetersville,
and on the morning of the 6th we moved up to attack, but there was no army to attack. Why need
we tell of the forced march that followed; of the gallant fight at Sailor's creek, where we
whipped Lee's army; of the wild joy of the surrender? These are all too well known to repeat,
and the details would be tiresome. 

It filled me with a sort of panic to see him crouched flexibly, like some strange animal god,
doubled on his haunches, before the young vines, and swiftly, vividly, without thought, cut,
cut, cut at the young budding shoots, which fell unheeded on to the
earth.

General Meade, too, says: "Major-General Wright attacked at four A.M., carrying everything
before him, taking possession of the enemy's strong line of works, and capturing many guns
and prisoners. After carrying the enemy's lines in his front, and reaching the Boydtown plank
road, Major-General Wright turned to his left and swept down the enemy's line of intrenchments
till near Hatcher's run, where, meeting the head of the Twenty-fourth corps, General Wright
retraced his steps and advanced on the Boydtown plank road toward Petersburgh, encountering
the enemy in an inner line of works immediately around the city."

The march and halt at Danville, the rapid journey through Fredericksburgh to Alexandria, the
separate review of the corps under the scorching rays of one of the hottest days ever known
even in Washington, when hundreds of our men fell down from sunstroke and exhaustion, the return
to camp and the disbanding, finish the story of the grandest corps that ever faced a foe.