All constraint had vanished between the two, and they began to talk easily and simply. They
spoke of every-day things, of the prospect of snow, of the next church sociable, of the loves
and quarrels of Starkfield. The commonplace nature of what they said produced in Ethan an illusion
of long-established intimacy which no outburst of emotion could have given, and he set his
imagination adrift on the fiction that they had always spent their evenings thus and would
always go on doing so...

"This is the night we were to have gone coasting. Matt," he said at length, with the rich sense,
as he spoke, that they could go on any other night they chose, since they had all time before them.

She smiled back at him. "I guess you forgot!"

"No, I didn't forget; but it's as dark as Egypt outdoors. We might go to-morrow if there's a moon."

She laughed with pleasure, her head tilted back, the lamplight sparkling on her lips and teeth.
"That would be lovely, Ethan!"

He kept his eyes fixed on her, marvelling at the way her face changed with each turn of their
talk, like a wheat-field under a summer breeze. It was intoxicating to find such magic in his
clumsy words, and he longed to try new ways of using it.

"Would you be scared to go down the Corbury road with me on a night like this?" he asked.

Her cheeks burned redder. "I ain't any more scared than you are!"

"Well, I'd be scared, then; I wouldn't do it. That's an ugly corner down by the big elm. If
a fellow didn't keep his eyes open he'd go plumb into it." He luxuriated in the sense of protection
and authority which his words conveyed. To prolong and intensify the feeling he added: "I guess
we're well enough here."

She let her lids sink slowly, in the way he loved. "Yes, we're well enough here," she sighed.

Her tone was so sweet that he took the pipe from his mouth and drew his chair up to the table.
Leaning forward, he touched the farther end of the strip of brown stuff that she was hemming.
"Say, Matt," he began with a smile, "what do you think I saw under the Varnum spruces, coming
along home just now? I saw a friend of yours getting kissed."

The words had been on his tongue all the evening, but now that he had spoken them they struck
him as inexpressibly vulgar and out of place.

Mattie blushed to the roots of her hair and pulled her needle rapidly twice or thrice through
her work, insensibly drawing the end of it away from him. "I suppose it was Ruth and Ned,"
she said in a low voice, as though he had suddenly touched on something grave.

Ethan had imagined that his allusion might open the way to the accepted pleasantries, and these
perhaps in turn to a harmless caress, if only a mere touch on her hand. But now he felt as
if her blush had set a flaming guard about her. He supposed it was his natural awkwardness
that made him feel so. He knew that most young men made nothing at all of giving a pretty girl
a kiss, and he remembered that the night before, when he had put his arm about Mattie, she
had not resisted. But that had been out-of-doors, under the open irresponsible night. Now,
in the warm lamplit room, with all its ancient implications of conformity and order, she seemed
infinitely farther away from him and more unapproachable.

To ease his constraint he said: "I suppose they'll be setting a date before long."

"Yes. I shouldn't wonder if they got married some time along in the summer." She pronounced
the word married as if her voice caressed it. It seemed a rustling covert leading to enchanted
glades. A pang shot through Ethan, and he said, twisting away from her in his chair: "It'll
be your turn next, I wouldn't wonder."

She laughed a little uncertainly. "Why do you keep on saying that?"

He echoed her laugh. "I guess I do it to get used to the idea."

He drew up to the table again and she sewed on in silence, with dropped lashes, while he sat
in fascinated contemplation of the way in which her hands went up and down above the strip
of stuff, just as he had seen a pair of birds make short perpendicular flights over a nest
they were building. At length, without turning her head or lifting her lids, she said in a
low tone: "It's not because you think Zeena's got anything against me, is it?"

His former dread started up full-armed at the suggestion. "Why, what do you mean?" he stammered.

She raised distressed eyes to his, her work dropping on the table between them. "I don't know.
I thought last night she seemed to have."

"I'd like to know what," he growled.

"Nobody can tell with Zeena." It was the first time they had ever spoken so openly of her attitude
toward Mattie, and the repetition of the name seemed to carry it to the farther corners of
the room and send it back to them in long repercussions of sound. Mattie waited, as if to give
the echo time to drop, and then went on: "She hasn't said anything to you?"

He shook his head. "No, not a word."

She tossed the hair back from her forehead with a laugh. "I guess I'm just nervous, then. I'm
not going to think about it any more."

"Oh, no--don't let's think about it, Matt!"

The sudden heat of his tone made her colour mount again, not with a rush, but gradually, delicately,
like the reflection of a thought stealing slowly across her heart. She sat silent, her hands
clasped on her work, and it seemed to him that a warm current flowed toward him along the strip
of stuff that still lay unrolled between them. Cautiously he slid his hand palm-downward along
the table till his finger-tips touched the end of the stuff. A faint vibration of her lashes
seemed to show that she was aware of his gesture, and that it had sent a counter-current back
to her; and she let her hands lie motionless on the other end of the strip.

As they sat thus he heard a sound behind him and turned his head. The cat had jumped from Zeena's
chair to dart at a mouse in the wainscot, and as a result of the sudden movement the empty
chair had set up a spectral rocking.

"She'll be rocking in it herself this time to-morrow," Ethan thought. "I've been in a dream,
and this is the only evening we'll ever have together." The return to reality was as painful
as the return to consciousness after taking an anaesthetic. His body and brain ached with indescribable
weariness, and he could think of nothing to say or to do that should arrest the mad flight
of the moments.

His alteration of mood seemed to have communicated itself to Mattie. She looked up at him languidly,
as though her lids were weighted with sleep and it cost her an effort to raise them. Her glance
fell on his hand, which now completely covered the end of her work and grasped it as if it
were a part of herself. He saw a scarcely perceptible tremor cross her face, and without knowing
what he did he stooped his head and kissed the bit of stuff in his hold. As his lips rested
on it he felt it glide slowly from beneath them, and saw that Mattie had risen and was silently
rolling up her work. She fastened it with a pin, and then, finding her thimble and scissors,
put them with the roll of stuff into the box covered with fancy paper which he had once brought
to her from Bettsbridge.

He stood up also, looking vaguely about the room. The clock above the dresser struck eleven.

"Is the fire all right?" she asked in a low voice.

He opened the door of the stove and poked aimlessly at the embers. When he raised himself again
he saw that she was dragging toward the stove the old soap-box lined with carpet in which the
cat made its bed. Then she recrossed the floor and lifted two of the geranium pots in her arms,
moving them away from the cold window. He followed her and brought the other geraniums, the
hyacinth bulbs in a cracked custard bowl and the German ivy trained over an old croquet hoop.

When these nightly duties were performed there was nothing left to do but to bring in the tin
candlestick from the passage, light the candle and blow out the lamp. Ethan put the candlestick
in Mattie's hand and she went out of the kitchen ahead of him, the light that she carried before
her making her dark hair look like a drift of mist on the moon.

"Good night, Matt," he said as she put her foot on the first step of the stairs.

She turned and looked at him a moment. "Good night, Ethan," she answered, and went up.

When the door of her room had closed on her he remembered that he had not even touched her hand.

VI

The next morning at breakfast Jotham Powell was between them, and Ethan tried to hide his joy
under an air of exaggerated indifference, lounging back in his chair to throw scraps to the
cat, growling at the weather, and not so much as offering to help Mattie when she rose to clear
away the dishes.

He did not know why he was so irrationally happy, for nothing was changed in his life or hers.
He had not even touched the tip of her fingers or looked her full in the eyes. But their evening
together had given him a vision of what life at her side might be, and he was glad now that
he had done nothing to trouble the sweetness of the picture. He had a fancy that she knew what
had restrained him...

There was a last load of lumber to be hauled to the village, and Jotham Powell--who did not
work regularly for Ethan in winter--had "come round" to help with the job. But a wet snow,
melting to sleet, had fallen in the night and turned the roads to glass. There was more wet
in the air and it seemed likely to both men that the weather would "milden" toward afternoon
and make the going safer. Ethan therefore proposed to his assistant that they should load the
sledge at the wood-lot, as they had done on the previous morning, and put off the "teaming"
to Starkfield till later in the day. This plan had the advantage of enabling him to send Jotham
to the Flats after dinner to meet Zenobia, while he himself took the lumber down to the village.

He told Jotham to go out and harness up the greys, and for a moment he and Mattie had the kitchen
to themselves. She had plunged the breakfast dishes into a tin dish-pan and was bending above
it with her slim arms bared to the elbow, the steam from the hot water beading her forehead
and tightening her rough hair into little brown rings like the tendrils on the traveller's joy.

Ethan stood looking at her, his heart in his throat. He wanted to say: "We shall never be alone
again like this." Instead, he reached down his tobacco-pouch from a shelf of the dresser, put
it into his pocket and said: "I guess I can make out to be home for dinner."

She answered "All right, Ethan," and he heard her singing over the dishes as he went.

As soon as the sledge was loaded he meant to send Jotham back to the farm and hurry on foot
into the village to buy the glue for the pickle-dish. With ordinary luck he should have had
time to carry out this plan; but everything went wrong from the start. On the way over to the
wood-lot one of the greys slipped on a glare of ice and cut his knee; and when they got him
up again Jotham had to go back to the barn for a strip of rag to bind the cut. Then, when the
loading finally began, a sleety rain was coming down once more, and the tree trunks were so
slippery that it took twice as long as usual to lift them and get them in place on the sledge.
It was what Jotham called a sour morning for work, and the horses, shivering and stamping under
their wet blankets, seemed to like it as little as the men. It was long past the dinner-hour
when the job was done, and Ethan had to give up going to the village because he wanted to lead
the injured horse home and wash the cut himself.

He thought that by starting out again with the lumber as soon as he had finished his dinner
he might get back to the farm with the glue before Jotham and the old sorrel had had time to
fetch Zenobia from the Flats; but he knew the chance was a slight one. It turned on the state
of the roads and on the possible lateness of the Bettsbridge train. He remembered afterward,
with a grim flash of self-derision, what importance he had attached to the weighing of these
probabilities...

As soon as dinner was over he set out again for the wood-lot, not daring to linger till Jotham
Powell left. The hired man was still drying his wet feet at the stove, and Ethan could only
give Mattie a quick look as he said beneath his breath: "I'll be back early."

He fancied that she nodded her comprehension; and with that scant solace he had to trudge off
through the rain.

He had driven his load half-way to the village when Jotham Powell overtook him, urging the
reluctant sorrel toward the Flats. "I'll have to hurry up to do it," Ethan mused, as the sleigh
dropped down ahead of him over the dip of the school-house hill. He worked like ten at the
unloading, and when it was over hastened on to Michael Eady's for the glue. Eady and his assistant
were both "down street," and young Denis, who seldom deigned to take their place, was lounging
by the stove with a knot of the golden youth of Starkfield. They hailed Ethan with ironic compliment
and offers of conviviality; but no one knew where to find the glue. Ethan, consumed with the
longing for a last moment alone with Mattie, hung about impatiently while Denis made an ineffectual
search in the obscurer corners of the store.

"Looks as if we were all sold out. But if you'll wait around till the old man comes along maybe
he can put his hand on it."

"I'm obliged to you, but I'll try if I can get it down at Mrs. Homan's," Ethan answered, burning
to be gone.

Denis's commercial instinct compelled him to aver on oath that what Eady's store could not
produce would never be found at the widow Homan's; but Ethan, heedless of this boast, had already
climbed to the sledge and was driving on to the rival establishment. Here, after considerable
search, and sympathetic questions as to what he wanted it for, and whether ordinary flour paste
wouldn't do as well if she couldn't find it, the widow Homan finally hunted down her solitary
bottle of glue to its hiding-place in a medley of cough-lozenges and corset-laces.

"I hope Zeena ain't broken anything she sets store by," she called after him as he turned the
greys toward home.

The fitful bursts of sleet had changed into a steady rain and the horses had heavy work even
without a load behind them. Once or twice, hearing sleigh-bells, Ethan turned his head, fancying
that Zeena and Jotham might overtake him; but the old sorrel was not in sight, and he set his
face against the rain and urged on his ponderous pair.

The barn was empty when the horses turned into it and, after giving them the most perfunctory
ministrations they had ever received from him, he strode up to the house and pushed open the
kitchen door.

Mattie was there alone, as he had pictured her. She was bending over a pan on the stove; but
at the sound of his step she turned with a start and sprang to him.

"See, here, Matt, I've got some stuff to mend the dish with! Let me get at it quick," he cried,
waving the bottle in one hand while he put her lightly aside; but she did not seem to hear him.

"Oh, Ethan--Zeena's come," she said in a whisper, clutching his sleeve.

They stood and stared at each other, pale as culprits.

"But the sorrel's not in the barn!" Ethan stammered.

"Jotham Powell brought some goods over from the Flats for his wife, and he drove right on home
with them," she explained.

He gazed blankly about the kitchen, which looked cold and squalid in the rainy winter twilight.

"How is she?" he asked, dropping his voice to Mattie's whisper.

She looked away from him uncertainly. "I don't know. She went right up to her room."

"She didn't say anything?"

"No."

Ethan let out his doubts in a low whistle and thrust the bottle back into his pocket. "Don't
fret; I'll come down and mend it in the night," he said. He pulled on his wet coat again and
went back to the barn to feed the greys.

While he was there Jotham Powell drove up with the sleigh, and when the horses had been attended
to Ethan said to him: "You might as well come back up for a bite." He was not sorry to assure
himself of Jotham's neutralising presence at the supper table, for Zeena was always "nervous"
after a journey. But the hired man, though seldom loth to accept a meal not included in his
wages, opened his stiff jaws to answer slowly: "I'm obliged to you, but I guess I'll go along
back."

Ethan looked at him in surprise. "Better come up and dry off. Looks as if there'd be something
hot for supper."

Jotham's facial muscles were unmoved by this appeal and, his vocabulary being limited, he merely
repeated: "I guess I'll go along back."

To Ethan there was something vaguely ominous in this stolid rejection of free food and warmth,
and he wondered what had happened on the drive to nerve Jotham to such stoicism. Perhaps Zeena
had failed to see the new doctor or had not liked his counsels: Ethan knew that in such cases
the first person she met was likely to be held responsible for her grievance.

When he re-entered the kitchen the lamp lit up the same scene of shining comfort as on the
previous evening. The table had been as carefully laid, a clear fire glowed in the stove, the
cat dozed in its warmth, and Mattie came forward carrying a plate of doughnuts.

She and Ethan looked at each other in silence; then she said, as she had said the night before:
"I guess it's about time for supper."

VII

Ethan went out into the passage to hang up his wet garments. He listened for Zeena's step and,
not hearing it, called her name up the stairs. She did not answer, and after a moment's hesitation
he went up and opened her door. The room was almost dark, but in the obscurity he saw her sitting
by the window, bolt upright, and knew by the rigidity of the outline projected against the
pane that she had not taken off her travelling dress.

"Well, Zeena," he ventured from the threshold.

She did not move, and he continued: "Supper's about ready. Ain't you coming?"

She replied: "I don't feel as if I could touch a morsel."

It was the consecrated formula, and he expected it to be followed, as usual, by her rising
and going down to supper. But she remained seated, and he could think of nothing more felicitous
than: "I presume you're tired after the long ride."

Turning her head at this, she answered solemnly: "I'm a great deal sicker than you think."

Her words fell on his ear with a strange shock of wonder. He had often heard her pronounce
them before--what if at last they were true?

He advanced a step or two into the dim room. "I hope that's not so, Zeena," he said.

She continued to gaze at him through the twilight with a mien of wan authority, as of one consciously
singled out for a great fate. "I've got complications," she said.

Ethan knew the word for one of exceptional import. Almost everybody in the neighbourhood had
"troubles," frankly localized and specified; but only the chosen had "complications." To have
them was in itself a distinction, though it was also, in most cases, a death-warrant. People
struggled on for years with "troubles," but they almost always succumbed to "complications."

Ethan's heart was jerking to and fro between two extremities of feeling, but for the moment
compassion prevailed. His wife looked so hard and lonely, sitting there in the darkness with
such thoughts.

"Is that what the new doctor told you?" he asked, instinctively lowering his voice.

