For a short time the city lay in some peril whilst Edward was engaged with Warwick and Margaret.
The men of Kent again became troublesome. They affected not to believe that Warwick had actually
fallen at Barnet. Under the leadership of Thomas Fauconberg or Falconbridge, generally spoken
of as the "bastard," being a natural son of William Nevill, first Lord Fauconberg, Earl of
Kent, they marched to London, with the intention of releasing Henry from confinement and placing
him again on the throne. Fauconberg, who had been made a freeman of the City in 1454,(931)
assumed the title of captain of King Henry’s people in Kent, and on the 8th May wrote from
Sittingbourne to inform the inhabitants of the city that he had undertaken the cause of Henry
against the "usurper" The propagation is by means of cuttings; slips of half-ripened wood, taken during
the warmest months, if put in sandy loam in a cucumber frame, will root like willow. As soon
as roots have formed, pot them separately and plunge the pots in the same frame for a week or two,
then harden off. For the first winter the young stock ought to be kept either in a greenhouse or
a cold frame, and by the end of the following May they will be ready to plant out. A well-drained
position is important.

Flowering period, November to March, in favourable or mild seasons.

Arisæma
Triphyllum.

Syns. A. ZEBRINUM and ARUM TRIPHYLLUM; Common Names,
THREE-LEAVED ARUM and JACK-IN-THE-PULPIT; Nat. Ord. ARACEÆ.

A hardy
tuberous-rooted perennial from North America. For that reason they dared not, neither would they, suffer him to pass through
the city. They hesitated to accept his assurance as to the peaceable behaviour of his followers,
judging from past experience. As for the statement he had caused to be published, that he held
a commission as captain of the Navy of England and men of war by sea and land under the Earl
of Warwick, whom he still supposed to be alive, they assured him that the earl was dead, and
that his corpse, as well as the corpse of Montague, the earl’s brother, had been exposed to
view for two days in St. Paul’s. They gave him the names of some of the chief men who had fallen
at Tewkesbury, obtained, they assured him, not from hearsay but from eye-witnesses—special
war correspondents, whom the City had despatched for the express purpose of reporting on the
state of the field, and they concluded by exhorting him to do as they themselves had done,
and to acknowledge Edward IV as the rightful king. They would even plead for royal favour on
his behalf, but as to letting him and his host pass through the city, that was out of the question.(932)
Having despatched this answer to Fauconberg, the civic fathers at once set to work to fortify
the river’s bank from Castle Baynard to the Tower, where lay the rebels’ fleet. On Sunday,
the 12th May, the Kentish men tried to force London Bridge and set fire to some beer-houses
near Saint Katherine’s Hospital. The attack was renewed on the following Tuesday, whilst portions
of the rebel force, amounting it was said to 5,000 persons, were told off to try and force
the gates of Aldgate and Bishopsgate. There, however, they were repulsed, and nearly 300 of
them met their death, either in actual fight or in their endeavours to get on board their boats
at Blackwall. An exceedingly beautiful and very much admired alpine plant, which does not die down
like most of the Starworts, but has woody stems; it is seldom seen more than a foot high,
and its large bright purple flowers seem disproportionate. This is one of the plants which should
have a place in every garden, and more especially in rock gardens. There cannot well be a more
neat and telling subject; the form and size of its flowers are not
often seen on such dwarf plants, and it also has the merit of being
a "tidy" subject when not in bloom.

The illustration (Fig. 18) will give a fair idea of its main features.

Its purple flowers, which are fully 2in. across, have for many days an even and well-expanded
ray, when the florets curl or reflex; the disk is large, and numerously set with lemon-yellow
florets; the flowers are well lifted up on stout round stems, covered with short stiff hairs, and furnished
with five or six small leaves; the main foliage is of compact growth, lance-shaped, entire, spathulate
and covered with short hairs.

Considering that this plant has been in English gardens for 220 years, and that its merits must be
seen by anyone at a glance, it is hard to say why it is not better known; even in choice and
large collections it always proves attractive when in flower.

The blooms in a cut state are very durable; they not only hold together,
but also keep a good colour.

Under cultivation it is in no way particular; it will endure anything but being deprived of
light; from its dwarf, stout, and shrubby character, it would form a useful and a handsome edging
to the larger walks; and by growing it so extensively an enviable supply of flowers for cutting
would be at hand.

A stock of young plants may soon be got up by division of strong roots after the flowering season;
such pieces as have roots may be planted at once in their permanent
quarters; the rootless parts should be dibbled into light sandy loam
and shaded with branches for a week or two.

Flowering period, June and July.

A. a. albus is a white-flowered variety, blooming about the same time. There does not appear
to be that vigour about it which characterises the type; this, however, is not the only shortcoming;
when compared with the rich purple flower, the white one, with its large yellow disk, appears, to
say the least, a questionable improvement.

Aster Ptarmicoides.

BOUQUET STARWORT; Nat.

Ord. COMPOSITÆ.

This Starwort is a very recently-imported species from North America. Like many other things
which have proved worthless as decorative flowers, this was highly praised, but for a while its
weedy-looking foliage caused suspicion; after becoming well established, it flowered, and,
I am glad to say, proves a most distinct and useful Starwort. Its small white flowers much
resemble the field daisy, but they are borne on densely-branched
stems in hundreds; in fact, the plant, which grows nearly 2ft. high,
seems to be nearly all flowers.

Each one has a single ray of shining white florets, narrow and separate.

Those of the disk are of a canary-yellow colour; the imbricated calyx is pear-shaped; pedicels
slender, bent, wiry, and furnished with very small leaves; main stems hispid, woody, and brittle.
The leaves of the root are 2in. to 4in. long, smooth, entire, linear, almost grass-like; those
of the stems much less, becoming smaller as they near the flowers;
they are somewhat rough, partaking of the quality of the stems. The
habit of the plant is much branched, the spreading clusters of flowers
being six or ten times the size of the plant, so that it becomes top-heavy;
it blooms for many weeks, and is not damaged by coarse weather. Amongst
other Asters it shows to advantage, flowering earlier than most of
them, but lasting well into their period of bloom. Merchants were
therefore encouraged to send their grain to London by a promise that it should not be intercepted
by the king’s purveyors.(945)

(M509)

The names of the City’s representatives who attended the parliament which met in January, 1483,
are not recorded, but we have the names of four aldermen and five commoners, who were appointed
in the previous month of December to confer with the City members on matters affecting the
City.(946) In addition to parliamentary grants of a fifteenth and tenth, and a renewal of the
tax on aliens, the citizens agreed to lend the king the sum of £2,000, each alderman to lay
down 50 marks and 80 commoners to subscribe £15 a piece.(947) Some difficulty was experienced
in raising the money, and the names of eleven persons who had refused to contribute were forwarded
to the king.(948) A little more than a month elapsed and Edward was dead.

(M510)

The coronation of the young prince who now succeeded to his father’s throne, only to occupy
it however for a few weeks, was fixed to take place on the first Sunday in May; and on the
19th April the City was busy making arrangements for the prince’s reception. It was decided
that the mayor and aldermen should ride forth to meet the king, clad in gowns of scarlet, their
attendants being provided with gowns of the colour of lion’s-foot (pied de lyon), at the public
cost. Five sergeants-at-mace belonging to the mayor, and nineteen sergeants-at-mace in the
service of the sheriffs, were also to ride out to meet the king, clad in gowns of the last-mentioned
colour. The sword-bearer was to be provided with a gown of murrey, and a deputation from the
civic guilds, to the number of 410 persons, clad in gowns of the same colour, was to join the
cavalcade.(949) On the 14th May they rode out to Hornsey, where they met the prince and his
uncle, the Duke of Gloucester, and escorted them to the city. The duke was the same day appointed
Protector, to the great disappointment of the queen, who again took sanctuary at Westminster.
She was induced shortly afterwards to give up possession of her younger son, the Duke of York,
and he and Prince Edward were lodged in the Tower by order of Gloucester, who took up his quarters
at Crosby Palace, the mansion house of Sir John Crosby, in Bishopsgate Street.

Although preparations had been made for the coronation, and the City had appointed representatives
from the livery companies to assist the chief butler at the banquet(950) according to custom,
that ceremony never took place. Gloucester feared that if once the young king was crowned,
the project which he had already begun to entertain of transferring the crown to his own head
would be less capable of realization. Although he took an oath of allegiance to the new king,(951)
it was not long before he determined to feel the pulse of the citizens as to their feelings
towards himself as a claimant of the crown.

(M511)

In order to do this he called to his assistance Dr. Shaw, an eminent preacher, whose brother,
Sir Edmund Shaa, or Shaw, happened to be mayor at the time. Acting upon instructions from Gloucester,
Shaw preached a sermon at Paul’s Cross on Sunday, the 22nd June (1483), in which he charged
the late king with bigamy, Edward IV having, as he declared, made a contract of marriage with
one of his mistresses before he married Elizabeth Woodville, and this being the case the late
king’s children by her were illegitimate, and Gloucester was the rightful heir to the throne.
It was arranged that at this point in his discourse Gloucester himself should appear on the
scene, coming up, as if by chance, from his lodgings at Castle Baynard. By some mischance the
duke failed to appear at the proper moment, and the effect was lost. The citizens sat stolidly
silent, not a single cry being raised in favour of Gloucester.

(M512)

Nothing daunted by this dismal failure, Gloucester made another and more successful attempt
to win over the citizens. On the following Tuesday (24 June) he sent the Duke of Buckingham
to harangue the citizens at the Guildhall. The duke began by reminding his hearers of the danger
to which their wives and daughters had been exposed under the late king; of the undue influence
exercised at court by Jane Shore,(952) one only of a number of respectable women whom Edward,
he said, had seduced; of the excessive taxes and illegal extortions by way of "benevolences"
they had recently suffered, and of the cruel treatment of their own alderman, Cooke. He then
went on to repeat the remarks of Dr. Shaw touching the illegitimacy of the princes, and spoke
of the dangers of having a boy king on the throne, concluding by saying that although it were
doubtful if Gloucester would accept the crown if asked, he would certainly be greatly influenced
by any request proceeding from the "worshipful citizens of the metropolis of the kingdom."(953)
Buckingham’s eloquence was lost on the citizens, who were as little influenced by what their
new Recorder, Thomas Fitz-William, had to say on the matter. At length the duke lost patience
and plainly told them that the matter lay entirely with the lords and commons, and that the
assent of the citizens, however desirable in itself, was not a necessity. By this time the
back of the hall was packed with Gloucester’s partisans, so that when Buckingham put the question
pointedly to the assembly—would they have the Protector assume the crown?—a cry of assent arose
from this quarter and was taken up by a few lads and apprentices. This was enough; the voice
of the few was accepted as the voice of the many, and the citizens were bidden to attend on
the morrow to petition Gloucester to accept the crown.

(M513)

Accordingly, on the morrow, a deputation from the city waited on the Duke of Gloucester at
Baynard’s Castle and invited him to accept the crown. After a considerable show of affected
reluctance, Richard assented, and, having assented, lost no time in carrying out his pre-conceived
purpose. The very next day he hastened to Westminster and, seating himself on the throne, declared
himself king by inheritance and election.

(M514)

On the 6th July the last Angevin king that reigned over England was crowned—crowned with his
wife Anne, widow of Prince Edward, killed at Tewkesbury, but after the battle not in it, and
of whose blood Richard himself is thought to have been guilty. The City accepted the position
and made the new king and queen a present of £1,000; two-thirds for the king and the remainder
for the queen. The money was raised in the city by way of a fifteenth; the poor were not to
be called upon to contribute, and the gift was not to form a precedent.(954) The claim of the
mayor and citizens to assist the chief butler at the coronation banquet was made and allowed,(955)
the king, sitting crowned in le Whitehawle, presented to the mayor and aldermen who were present
on that occasion a gold cup set with pearls and precious stones, to be used by the commonalty
at public entertainments in the Guildhall.(956) Concerning this cup there is the following
curious entry made in the City’s Records, under date 13th July, 1486, when Hugh Brice was mayor:—(957)

    "Item it is aggreed this day by the Court that where Hugh Brice
    Mair of this Citie, hathe in his Kepyng a Cuppe of gold, garneised
    with perle and precious stone of the gifte of Richard, late in
    dede and not of right, Kyng of Englond, which gifte was to thuse
    of the Cominaltie of the said Citee, that if the saide Cuppe be
    stolen or taken away by thevys oute of his possession, or elles by
    the casualtie of Fire hereafter it shall hapne the same Cuppe to
    be brent or lost, that the same Hugh Brice hereafter shall not be
    hurt or impeched therfore."

This extract is interesting as showing that the coronation cup presented to the mayor of the
City by way of honorarium was, at this period at least, looked upon as a gift made to the City’s
use, and that the mayor could not claim it as his own perquisite, as mayors had been in the
habit of doing in days gone by, and as they continued to do afterwards. William Estfeld, who,
as mayor, attended the coronation of Henry VI (6 Nov., 1429), and received the customary gold
cup and ewer, appropriated the gift to his own use, and, as we have already mentioned, bequeathed
them to his grandson.

(M515) (M516)

Richard had scarcely been seated three months on the throne before the Duke of Buckingham,
who had been rewarded for his late services by being appointed lord high constable, was in
open rebellion, and Henry, Earl of Richmond, long an exile in France, was meditating an invasion.
Buckingham’s conspiracy proved a failure, and he paid for his rashness with his head. These kinds,
the specific names of which are not only descriptive, but amply embrace the group, are much added
to by flowers having other names and minor distinctions, the latter, for the most part, being only
shades or mixtures of colour--as crimson, pink, white, and bicolours. The florets in many kinds
are exceedingly pretty, from the way in which they are tipped and shaded; notably, a new variety
that was sent me under the name of Dresden China. These sorts having different tints are usefully
named with "florists'" names--as Pearl, Snowball, Rob Roy, Sweep, Bride, &c. I may say that
I have long grown the Daisy largely, Bride and Sweep being the favourite kinds; both are robust
growers, very hardy and early.

Bride is the purest white, with florets full, shining, and well reflexed;
rather larger than a florin, and when fully developed has a half globular
appearance; another good point is its flower stalks being 4in. to
5in. long, which renders it serviceable as cut bloom.

Sweep is not quite so large, though a good-sized Daisy, it also opens more flat; its colour,
however, is first rate, it is the darkest crimson Daisy I ever saw, is of a quilled form and very
full. Its chief point is its constant colour; if the florets are examined, they are the same
deep crimson underneath as on the face of the flower; this, together with its long stalks,
renders it useful, too, in a cut state.

To grow this useful flower well and render it doubly valuable by having it in bloom in mid-winter,
requires three things: First, timely transplanting; secondly, rich soil; thirdly, partial shade;
these conditions will be more briefly and, perhaps, clearly explained, if I state my method. At
the end of May or fore part of June, plenty of good rotten stable
manure is wheeled into the bush-fruit quarters; it is worked in with
a fork, so as to do as little damage as possible to the bush roots.

A line is drawn, and the old Daisy roots which have just been taken
up are trimmed by shortening both tops and roots.

They are severely divided, and the pieces planted 6in. apart in rows 8in. asunder. In such a cool,
moist situation they soon form good tufts, and I need scarcely say that the dressing of manure has
also a marked effect on the fruit crop. A planting so made is not only a cheerful carpet of greenery
during winter, but is well dotted over with bloom. The plants being well established in rich soil,
and having the shelter of the bushes during summer and winter, are the conditions which have conduced
to such early flowers. This is the method I have adopted for years, and both Daisies and fruit have
been invariably good crops. I ought, however, to say that beds more exposed, together with the
fact that the Daisy roots have to be transplanted in October or November, never flower so early,
from which it will be seen that the treatment explained hardly applies to such bedding; but where
a breadth of bloom is required, say, for cutting purposes, I know no better plan. As cut bloom
the daisy is charming in glass trays on a bed of moss, or even in small bouquets, mixed with
the foliage of pinks, carnations, and rosemary. Such an arrangement has at least the merit
of sweet simplicity, and somehow has also the effect of carrying our thoughts with a bound
to spring-time.

The ancient names for this "old-fashioned" flower were "Little Daisies"
and "Bruisewoorte."

The latter name, according to Gerarde, was applied for the following
reasons: "The leaues stamped, taketh away bruses and swellings proceeding
of some stroke, if they be stamped and laide thereon, whereupon it
was called in olde time Bruisewoorte.

The iuice put into the eies cleereth them, and taketh away the watering;" and here is a dog note: "The
same given to little dogs with milke, keepeth them from growing great."

Flowering period, February to July.

Bocconia Cordata.

Syn.

MACLEAYA CORDATA; Nat. Ord. PAPAVERACEÆ.
 In order to satisfy the Londoners that the rumour of
Warwick’s escape was a fabrication, Henry caused his prisoner to be paraded through the streets
of the city, and exposed to public view at St. Paul’s. After Simnel’s defeat (16 June, 1487),
the Common Council agreed (28 June) to send a deputation, consisting of two aldermen, the recorder,
and four commoners, with a suite of 24 men, to meet the king at Kenilworth, and at the same
time voted the king a present of £1000.(978) This gift was quickly followed (11 July) by the
grant of another loan of £2,000 to be levied on the civic companies as before.(979)

(M528) (M529)

In October Henry was expected in London,(980) and the Common Council again showed their loyalty
by agreeing that the mayor and aldermen should ride forth to meet his highness, clad in cloaks
of scarlet, and accompanied by a suite of servants clothed in medley, at the cost of the "Chamber."
With them also rode a contingent from the various civic guilds, clothed in violet, and numbering
over 400 horsemen. The Mercers, the Grocers, the Drapers, the Fishmongers, and the "Taillours,"
each sent 30 mounted representatives of their guild; the Goldsmiths sent 24, whilst the rest
sent contingents varying from one to twenty.(981) On the occasion of the queen’s coronation,
which took place the following month (25 Nov.), she was made the recipient of a gift of 1,000
marks by the City.(982)

(M530)

The king would willingly have remained at peace if he were allowed, from motives of economy
if for no other reason. England, however, could not sit still and see Brittany overwhelmed
by the French king. Before assistance could be sent to the Duchess Anne, it was imperative
that money should be raised. At the close of 1488 the Common Council voted the king a loan
of £4,000. The money was ordered to be raised by assessment on the companies, but the practice
was not to be drawn into precedent. The king, like a good paymaster as he always was, whatever
other defects he may have had, repaid the money in the following year.(983)

(M531)

Early in the following year parliament(984) granted large supplies which enabled Henry to despatch
6,000 Englishmen to Anne’s assistance, but which caused much discontent among the "rude and
beastlie" people of Yorkshire and Durham.(985) In June, 1491, another loan of £3,000 was raised,
this time by assessment on the wards;(986) and in October Henry declared to parliament his
intention of invading France in person. A grant of two fifteenths and two tenths was immediately
made to assist him in his expedition by parliament; whilst the City contributed a "great benevolence,"
the fellowship of Drapers contributing more than any other fellowship, and every alderman subscribing,
whether he wished it or no, the sum of £200. The amount contributed by the commonalty exceeded
£9,000.(987) Thus furnished with supplies, the king crossed over to Calais on the 6th October,
1492. The campaign, however, had scarcely opened before Henry gladly accepted the liberal terms
offered him by the French king, and peace was signed at Etaples (3 Nov.).

(M532)

The success which, brief as it was, had attended Simnel’s enterprise was sufficient to encourage
a hope that a better planned project might end in overturning the throne. A report was accordingly
blazed abroad that Richard, Duke of York, brother of King Edward V, was yet alive, not having
been murdered in the Tower, as had been supposed; and a man called Perkin Warbeck or Warboys,
a native of Tournay, assumed the name of Richard Plantagenet and succeeded in getting a large
number of people in Ireland and Scotland to believe that in his person they in fact saw Richard,
Duke of York, the rightful heir to the crown. Instead, however, of joining the invaders the
English prepared to repel them, and James retreated into his own country. This took place in
1496. Parliament granted large supplies to enable the king to meet the danger, but the inhabitants
of Cornwall, sick of the constant demands made of them for money, and aware of the large treasure
which Henry had already amassed, openly resisted any attempt at further taxation and determined
to march on London.

(M533)

The Londoners, who not only abstained from opposing the new demand for money, but volunteered
a loan to the king (15 Nov.) of £4,000,(988) lost no time in putting their city into a state
of defence. Six aldermen and a number of representatives from the livery companies were deputed
to attend to the city’s ordnance.(989) The mayor was to be allowed twelve armed men in addition
to his usual suite, and the sheriffs forty sergeants and forty valets in order to assist them
in keeping the peace within the city. Communication was to be kept up at least once in the
day between the mayor and the Lord Chancellor. Houses which had been set up on the city’s walls,
or within sixteen feet of them, were to be abated. John Stokker, who filled the not unworthy
office of Common Hunt,(990) was ordered daily to ride out to learn the king’s pleasure and
report thereon to the mayor and aldermen. Among those appointed to guard the city’s gates and
Temple Bar was Alderman Fabyan, the chronicler.(991) The state of anxiety which prevailed in
the city at this crisis is illustrated by "Jesus Mercy" at the head of one side of the page
of the City’s record, on which the above orders are entered, whilst on the other side are the
words vigilie temporis turbacionis.(992)

(M534) (M535) (M536) (M537)

By the 22nd June, 1497, all immediate danger had passed, the rebels being on that day utterly
defeated at Blackheath. This, however, does not alter its worth. Seen in crevices of dark stone
on rockwork, or in bold tufts near the walks, or planted with judgment near other dwarf foliaged
subjects, it ever proves attractive. It is much less rampant, and, perhaps, less hardy than
the type. It has only been during the recent very severe winters, however, that it has been killed.
The Arabis is easily propagated by slips or rootlets, which should
be taken after flowering. The variegated form is better for being
so propagated every year. The news of Perkin Warbeck having arrived in Cornwall
from Ireland was brought to the mayor and aldermen of the City of London by letter from the
king, which was read to the Common Council on Saturday, the 16th September.(993) The rebels
made an unsuccesful attempt to get possession of Exeter, but hearing of the approach of the
king’s forces, Perkin Warbeck withdrew to Taunton, leaving his followers to take care of themselves.
From Taunton he went to "Mynet" (Minehead) accompanied by less than sixty adherents,(994) and
by the 12th October the king was able to inform the Mayor that Peter "Warboys" had voluntarily
submitted himself and had confessed to his being a native of Tournay.(995) The king had him
conveyed to London and paraded through the streets on horseback, in a species of mock triumph,
and caused his confession to be printed and scattered over the country that people might see
the real character of the man. For a time he appears to have been detained in lax custody about
the court, but after he had made an attempt to escape and reach the sea-coast, and been re-captured,
he was sent to the Tower. There he got into communication with the unfortunate Earl of Warwick,
and entered into a plot for effecting his own and the earl’s liberty. A charge was formulated
against the earl on the most trivial grounds, of a conspiracy to seize the Tower, and Warbeck
was indicted as an accomplice. This size is not usual, but a leaf now before me, and taken from
an outside specimen, measures over a foot, with a stout round stalk,
13in. long; the form of leaf is fan-shaped, having generally seven
lobes, each supported by a strong mid-rib; the lobes are formed by
divisions rather more than half the diameter of the leaf; they are
slightly distant, broadly lance-shaped, waved at the edges, toothed
near the ends, the teeth being somewhat spiny; the substance is very
stout and leather-like to the touch; the upper surface is a dark shining
bronzy-green, beautifully netted or veined; the under surface is a
pale green, and richly ornamented by the risen mid-ribs and nerves
of the whole leaf; the leaf-stalks are thick, round, bending downwards,
and 6in. to 18in. long, springing from the half woody stem.

The habit of the shrub is bushy, somewhat spreading, causing the specimens to have a fine effect
from their roundness, the leaf arrangement also being perfect. Without doubt this is one of the
most distinct and charming evergreens for the ornamental garden, sub-tropical in appearance, and
only inferior to palms as regards size; it is effective anywhere. It need not be stated that
as a vase or table decoration it ranks with the best for effect and
service, as it is already well-known as such.

In planting this subject outside, young but well-rooted examples
should be selected and gradually hardened off.

    At the latter end of May they should be turned out of the pots into
    a rich but sandy loam. The position should be sunny, and sheltered
    from the north. Some have advised that it should be grown under
    trees, but I have proved that when so treated the less ripened
    foliage has suffered with frost, whilst the specimens fully exposed
to the sun have not suffered in the least; they would droop and shrivel
as long as the frost remained, but as soon as the temperature rose
they became normal, without a trace of injury.

When planted as above, young specimens will soon become so established and inured to open-air
conditions, that little concern need be felt as regards winter; even such as were under trees,
where they continued to grow too long, and whose tender tops were
cut away by frost, have, the following summer, made a number of fresh
growths lower down the stems.

I should like to say that on rockwork this shrub has a superb effect,
and I imagine the better drained condition of such a structure is
greatly in favour of its health and hardiness.

 The mayor and aldermen were to stand, clad
in their violet gowns, near Saint Dunstan’s Church, and the next morning to go to Westminster
by barge to attend the solemn requiem.(1002)

(M543)

There was no necessity for hurry in regard to the pageants. More than a twelvemonth was yet
to elapse before they were wanted. At length—on the 2nd October,(1003) 1501—the princess landed
at Plymouth, and five days later the City received notice from the king of her approach to
London. The marriage was solemnized at St. Paul’s on the 14th November, the princess being
presented with silver flagons by the City in honour of the occasion.(1004) Five months later
(2 April, 1502) the bride was a widow, Prince Arthur having died at the early age of fifteen.

(M544)

In 1503 the streets of the city were again put into mourning, for in February of that year
Henry lost his queen. A long account of the manner of "receyvyng of the corps of the most noble
princes Quene Elizabeth" is given in the City’s Archives.(1005) In the following month the
streets presented a very different appearance, the occasion being the solemnization of the
league made between Henry and the King of the Romans. Bonfires were ordered to be lighted at
nine different places, and at each of them was to be placed a hogshead of wine, with two sergeants
and two sheriffs’ yeomen to prevent disturbance; but seeing that it was the Lenten season and
that the queen had so recently died, there was to be no minstrelsy. The City Chamberlain was
instructed to provide a certain quantity of "Ipocras," claret, Rhenish wine and Muscatel, besides
comfits and wafers, and two pots of "Succade" and green ginger, to be presented on the City’s
behalf to the ambassadors of the King of the Romans, lying at "Pasmer Howse"; a similar gift
being presented the following day on behalf of the sheriffs.(1006)

(M545)

Henry’s chief merit was that he established order, and for this the citizens were grateful.
This improvement on the weak government of his immediate predecessors had only been carried
out, however, at the cost of extension of royal power, and the City was made to suffer with
the rest of the kingdom. In 1503 the civic authorities were deprived by statute of their control
over the livery companies,(1007) and in the same year the Tailors of London obtained a charter
which gave umbrage to the mayor and aldermen of the City, as ousting them of their jurisdiction.
The Tailors maintained their independence, and their wardens are expressly mentioned as refusing
to join the Mercers, Grocers, Drapers, Fishmongers, Goldsmiths and other fraternities in a
petition to parliament (1512) for placing them formally under the rule of the mayor and aldermen,
from which they were frequently breaking away.(1008)

(M546)

It was not until 1505 that the City succeeded in getting its charter(1009) from Henry, and
then only on payment of the sum of 5,000 marks. The terms of the charter, moreover, were far
from satisfactory, and an attempt was made to get them altered and obtain an abatement of the
fine,(1010) but to no purpose.

(M547)

Henry continued his high-handed policy towards the City up to the day of his death, and thereby
greatly increased his treasure. His chief instruments were Empson and Dudley, who took up their
residence in the city, occupying two houses in Walbrook, whence each had a door into a garden
of the Earl of Oxford’s house in St. Swithin’s Lane.(1011) There they used to meet and concert
measures for filling the king’s purse and their own. In 1506 Henry removed Robert Johnson,
a goldsmith, from the shrievalty within three days of his election, and put William Fitz-William
in his place. They are invisible until the folded part of the spathe is opened; they are numerous,
arranged in a dense broad ring, sessile, and nearly black. This curious flower is produced on
a stout, round scape, a foot or more in height. The leaves are radical, having a stalk a foot long.
They are, as the specific name implies, divided into three parts, each being of equal length, entire,
wavy, and pointed. The whole plant has a somewhat top-heavy appearance (see Fig. 16), but I never
saw it broken down by the weather. Rather than submit to such extortion he went to prison, and
remained there until the king’s death, when he obtained his freedom and was soon afterwards
re-elected mayor.(1014) Lawrence Aylmer, another mayor, was also a victim of Henry’s tyranny,
and was committed to the compter, where he remained for the rest of the reign.(1015)

(M548)

