But though there were many such Marcias, there were other women of a very different character.
There is, for instance, Flavia, who has a perfect frenzy for "manly" sports, and practises
all manner of athletic exercises, wrestling and fencing like any man, and perhaps becoming
infatuated and practically running away with some brawny but hideous gladiator. She also indulges
frankly in mixed bathing. There is Domitia, who is too fond Of promenading in the colonnades
and temples, where a cavaliere servente, ostensibly her business man--though he does not look
like it--may regularly be seen carrying her parasol. When at home, she neglects her attire
and plasters her face with dough in order to smooth out the wrinkles, so that she may give
to anybody but her own family the benefit of her beauty. There is the ruinously extravagant
Pollia, whose passion for jewels and fine clothes runs her deeply into debt, for which, fortunately,
her husband is not responsible. There is Canidia, who is shrewdly suspected of having poisoned
more than one husband and who has either divorced or been divorced by so many that she has
had eight of them in five years, and dates events by them instead of in the regular way by
the consulships: "Let me see. That was in the year in which I was married to So-and-So." There
is Asinia, whose selfishness is so great, and her affection so frivolous, that she will weep
over a sparrow and "let her husband die to save her lap-dog's life." All these women are most
likely childless, and many a noble Roman house threatens to become extinct.

There are others, again, whose foibles are more innocent. Baebia, for example, is merely a
victim to superstition. She is always consulting the astrologers, the witches, and the dream-readers;
she is devoted to the mystic worship of the Egyptian Isis, with its secret rites of purification,
or she is a proselyte to the pestilent notions of the Jews. She is too much under the influence
of some squalid Oriental who carries his pedlar's basket, or whose business is to buy broken
glass for sulphur matches Meanwhile Corellia is a blue-stocking, as bad as a précieuse with
a salon. As soon as you sit down to table she begins to quote Homer and Virgil and to compare
their respective merits. She cultivates bright conversation in both Greek and Latin, and her
tongue goes loudly and incessantly like a bell or gong. Her poor husband is never permitted
to indulge in an expression which is not strictly grammatical. Worse still, she probably even
writes little poems of her own. She may keep a tame tutor in philosophy, but she makes no scruple
about interrupting his lesson on morals while she writes a little billet-doux. Pomponia is
an ambitious woman, whose mania is to interfere in elections by bringing to bear upon the senators
what has been called in recent times the "duchesses'" influence. If her husband becomes governor
of a province, she will endeavour to be the power behind the throne, and her meddling will
in any case prove harmful to the strict administration of justice.

The remedy in such cases was divorce. In the lower orders of society a mild personal castigation
was quite legal and probably not uncommon; but then in these lower orders divorce was by no
means so convenient. Among the upper classes its frequency made it scarcely a matter of remark.
Nothing like it has been seen until modern America. There was no need of an appeal to the courts
or of a decree nisi; there was not even need of a specific plea, although naturally one would
be offered in most cases. The husband or wife (or the wife's father, if she had one), might
send a formal and witnessed notice declaring the marriage dissolved, or, as it was called,
"breaking the marriage lines." The man had only to take this step and say with due deliberation
"Take your own property"--or, as the satirist puts it, "pack up your traps"--"give up the keys,
and begone." The woman on her side need only give similar notice and "take her departure."
The only check lay in family considerations, in public opinion, which was extremely lenient,
in financial convenience, or in the possibility of particularly wanton conduct being so disapproved
in high quarters that a senator or a knight might perhaps find his name missing from the list
of his order at the next revision.

It has appeared necessary to give this darker side of the social picture, for, though assuredly
not so lurid as might be gathered from the moralists, it was dark enough. For obvious reasons
it is desirable not to elaborate. It is perhaps more profitable, as well as refreshing, to
consider the brighter side. That there were noble women and good wives, and that the froth
and scum and dregs of idle town-life did not make up the existence of the contemporary Roman
world, may be seen from passages like the following, which are either quoted or condensed from
a letter of Pliny concerning a lady named Arria. The events belong to the reign of Nero's predecessor
Claudius. Pliny writes: "Her husband, Caecina Paetus, was ill; so also was her son; and it
was expected that both would die. The son, an extremely handsome and modest youth, succumbed.
His mother arranged for his funeral and carried it out, the husband meanwhile being kept in
ignorance. Not only so, but every time she came into his room she pretended that the son was
alive and better, and very often, when he asked how the boy was getting on, she answered, 'He
has slept well, and shown a good appetite.' Then, when the tears which she had so long kept
back proved too much for her, she used to leave the room and give herself up to grief. When
at last she had dried her eyes and composed her countenance she returned to the room. When
her husband had taken part in an intended revolt against Claudius, he was to be carried as
a prisoner across the Adriatic to Rome. He was on the point of embarking, when Arria begged
the soldiers to take her on board with him. 'I presume,' she said, 'you mean to allow an ex-consul
a few attendants of some kind, to give him his food, and to put on his clothes and shoes. I
will do all that myself.'" Her request being refused, "she hired a fishing-smack and followed
the big vessel in this tiny one." When Claudius ordered the husband to put himself to death,
Arria took a dagger, stabbed herself in the breast, drew the weapon out, and handed it to him
with the words: "Paetus, it does not hurt. It is what you are about to do that hurts."

Arria doubtless is a rare type of heroine. But also of the quiet domesticated wife we have
a description from the same writer. Unfortunately the letter is one of the most priggish of
all the rather self-complacent epistles written by that thoroughly respectable and estimable
man; but that fact takes nothing from the information for which we are looking. Pliny is writing
to his own wife's aunt. "You will be very glad to learn that Calpurnia is turning out worthy
of her father, of yourself, and of her grandfather. She has admirable sense and is an excellent
housekeeper; she is fond of me, which speaks well for her character. Through her affection
for me she has also developed a taste for literature. She possesses my books and is always
reading them; she even learns them by heart. When I am to make a speech in court, she is all
anxiety; when I have made it, she is all joy. She arranges a string of messengers to let her
know what effect I produce, what applause I win, and what result I have obtained. If I give
a reading, she sits in the next room behind a curtain and listens greedily to the compliments
paid to me. She even sets my verses to music and sings them to the harp, with no professional
to teach her, but only love, who is the best of masters. I have therefore every reason to hope
that our harmony will not only last but grow greater every day."

And all this time, away in the country homestead and cottage, the good Marsian or Sabine mother
is a veritable pattern of domestic probity and discipline. If she possesses handmaids, she
teaches them their work in the kitchen or at the loom; if she possesses none, she brings up
her big daughters in the right ways of modesty, frugality, and obedience to the gods; and her
tall sons religiously obey her when she sends them out to chop the firewood in the rain and
cold of the mountain-side.

One subject of perpetual interest where women are concerned is that of dress and personal appearance.
The Roman woman emphatically pursued the cult of beauty and personal adornment. Perhaps the
first prayer which a mother offered for an expected daughter was that she should be beautiful.
Whether she proved so or not, no pains were spared to correct or supplement the work of nature.
It is true that fashion, except in the dressing of hair, underwent none of those rapid and
astonishing changes which perplex the unsophisticated male of to-day. Above all, there were
no hats. But all that gold and jewels, colours--blue, green, yellow, violet--and varied stuffs--woollen,
linen, muslin, and silk--could do for dress was done by every typical woman of means; and every
device for improving the complexion, the teeth, the hair, the height, and the figure--which,
by the way, never sought the wasplike waist--was fully exploited. We need not go too closely
into details. It will be enough to describe the ordinary attire and the ordinary methods of
beautification.

The conventional indoor dress consisted of, first, an inner tunic, short and sleeveless, with
a band passing over or under the breast, so as to produce something resembling what is called
the Empire figure; second, an outer tunic of linen or half-silk, less often of whole silk,
which fell to the feet. The outer tunic was fastened on the shoulders with brooches; it had
sleeves over the upper arm, and, in the case of adults but not of young girls, a flounce or
furbelow at the bottom. A girdle produced a fold under the breast. The garment was commonly
white, but might be bordered with coloured fringes and embroidery; for ladies of senatorial
rank it bore the broad stripe worked in purple or gold. On the feet sandals were often worn,
but for out-of-doors these were replaced by soft shoes of white, coloured or gilded leather,
sometimes studded with pearls or other gems.

When a lady left the house she threw over the indoor dress a large mantle or shawl, much resembling
the toga of the men, except that its colour was apparently what she pleased. This article was
passed over the left shoulder and under the right arm, which was left free; it then fell in
graceful folds to the feet. Works of art show that a fold of the shawl was frequently laid
over the top and back of the head, for which no less becoming covering had yet been introduced.

The hair alone was subject to innumerable vagaries either of fashion or of individual taste.
It might have a parting or no parting; it might be plaited over the head and fastened by jewelled
tortoise-shell combs, or by pins of ivory, silver, or bronze with jewelled heads, as varied
and ornamental as the modern hatpin; it might be carried to the back and rest in a knot on
the neck, where it was bound with ribbons; it might be piled into a huge pyramid or "towers
of many stories," so that a woman often looked tall in front and appeared quite a different
person at the back; it might be encased in a coloured cloth or in a net of gold thread, for
which poorer people substituted a bladder. But in all cases it was preferred that the hair
should be wavy, and this was a matter which was attended to by a special coiffeur kept among
the slaves. No handmaid had a harder or more ungrateful task than the tiring-woman, who built
up and fastened the reluctant locks while the mistress contemplated the effect in her bronze
or silver mirror. There was no rule for a woman's treatment of herself in this respect. "Consult
your mirror," is the advice of the poet Ovid, who has hopelessly lost all count of styles,
since they were "more numerous than the leaves on the oak or the bees on Hybla." To full dress
belonged a coronal or tiara, consisting of a band of gold and precious stones.

But who shall dare to speak of the jewellery that bedecked a Roman matron en grande tenue--of
the pearl and pendant earrings, the necklaces of pearl and diamonds, the gold snake armlets
with their emerald eyes, the bangles and finger-rings, the brooches and buckles on the shoulders
and down the sleeves, the gems scattered among the hair, the chains and châtelaines strung
with all manner of glittering articles? Says one who lived at the time: "I have seen Lollia
Paulina covered with emeralds and pearls gleaming all over her head, hair, ears, neck, and
fingers to the value of over £300,000." If Rome is the eternal city, it is eternal in this
respect at least as much as in any other.

Who, still more bold, shall pry into her apparatus for the beautification of her person, examining
her patch-box and the innocent little pots of rouge, vermilion, and white lead for the complexion,
and of soot to rub under the eyes? Who shall scrutinise too closely that delicate blue which
tinges her temples? Who shall dare to question whether that yellow hair of the most approved
tone, then best seen in Germany, grew where you find it or came from some head across the Rhine?
Who shall venture to ask whether that smooth skin was preserved by her wearing last night a
mask of meal, which she washed off this morning with asses' milk? Petronius, indeed, says that
the "lady takes her eyebrows out of a little box," and probably Petronius knew. For her artificial
teeth there is an obvious and sensible excuse, and it is no reproach to her if, as the poet
declared, "she puts her teeth aside at night, just as she does her silks." Probably she scents
herself far too heavily, but there are many Roman men who are just as bad.

She is ready now for all emergencies, and we may leave her, sitting in her long-backed cushioned
chair, waving in one hand a fan of peacock's feathers or of thin wood covered with gold-leaf,
and holding in the other a ball of amber or glass to keep her hands cool and dry.

CHAPTER XVII

CHILDREN AND EDUCATION

Unlike too many couples of the same class, Silius and Marcia are blessed with children. We
will assume that there are two, a boy, whose full name shall be Publius Silius Bassus, and
a girl, who is to be called Silia Bassa. It is perhaps to be regretted that there is not a
third, for in that case the father would enjoy to the full certain privileges granted by law
to parents who so far do their duty by the state. As it is, he will in the regular course of
things receive preference over childless men, when it comes to candidature for a public office
or to the allotting of a governorship. The decline in the birthrate had become so startling
at the close of the republic that the first emperor, Augustus, had decided that it was necessary
on the one side to penalise persons who remained either unmarried or childless, and on the
other to grant fixed concessions to all who were the parents of three. A bachelor could not,
for instance, receive a legacy from any one but a near relative; a married man without children
could only receive half of such a legacy; a man with three children could not only enjoy his
legacy in full, but could take the shares forfeited by any bachelor or childless legatee who
figured in the same will. It does not appear that the law produced any great effect, and, to
make it still more futile, the later emperors began to bestow what was called the "privilege
of three children" on persons who actually had either fewer or none at all.

The power of the father over the children is theoretically almost absolute. Even when a son
is grown up and married he legally belongs to his father; so does all his supposed property.
The same is the case with a daughter, unless she becomes a Vestal Virgin, or unless she marries
according to the stricter of the two kinds of matrimony already described. In the older days
of Rome the father could, and sometimes did, put his children to death if he chose. Though
too free an exercise of so extreme an authority was no longer recognised, it was still quite
legal to make away with an infant which was badly deformed. Says Seneca, in the most matter-of-fact
way, "We drown our monstrosities." It was quite legal also to expose a child, and leave it
either to perish or to be taken up by whosoever chose. In most such instances doubtless the
child became the slave of the finder. Not only was this allowable at Rome and in the romanized
part of the empire; it was a frequent practice throughout the Greek or Eastern portion. Again,
a father might sell his child as a slave, particularly for continual disobedience. All these
things the parent might legally do; but it is extremely difficult to discover how far they
were actually done, inasmuch as our information in this respect hardly touches the lower classes,
while among the upper classes there was naturally far less temptation to be rid of the burden
of maintaining such few children as most families produced. On the whole it appears highly
improbable that in the truly Roman part of the empire there was any considerable destruction
of infant life or exposure of infants. It does not follow that, because the strict law does
not prevent you from doing a thing, you will therefore do it, in the face of public disapproval
and of all the promptings of natural affection. In their family relations the ancient Romans
possessed at least as much natural feeling as is commonly shown in modern times. The fact is
that in matters of law the Romans were eminently conservative; they left as much as possible
to the silent working of social opinion. In the oldest times the patriarchal system existed
in the family, and new Roman legislation interfered with parental power only just so far as
experience had loudly demanded such intervention. There can have been no very pronounced abuse
of the powers of the father, and, as the discipline of the family was regarded as essential
to the discipline of the state, the law was always unwilling to weaken in any way the hold
of such family discipline. The strictly legal authority of the father was therefore maintained,
while its abusive exercise was limited by the risk, if not the certainty, that it would meet
with both public and private censure.

Nevertheless, to return to the point which called for this explanation, it is quite in the
power of Silius to expose or sell little Publius or little Silia. But for a man in his position
to do anything of the kind would bring the scorn of all Roman society about his ears; and,
among other humiliations, almost undoubtedly his name would be expunged from the senatorial
list. Moreover Silus, though a pagan, is a human being, and his affection for his children
would certainly be no less warm than that of the average Christian man of to-day.

Immediately after birth there is a little ceremony. The babe is brought and laid upon the hearth
or floor before the household gods for the father to inspect it. As has been said already,
if it is a monstrosity, he may order it to be made away with. Otherwise it is still open to
him either to acknowledge the infant or to refuse to have anything to do with it. The act of
acknowledgment consists in stooping down and lifting up the child from the ground. For this
reason the expression used for acknowledging and undertaking to rear a child was "lifting"
or "picking up." In our instance the little son and daughter are, of course, not only picked
up, but welcomed as the young hopes of the proud house of Silii Bassi.

On the ninth day in case of the boy, or the eighth in that of the girl, the child is named,
after certain ceremonies of purification. The whole proceeding bears much resemblance to a
christening, except that there is no calling in of the services of a church. The relations
and friends gather in the hall, each bringing his present, and even the slaves make their little
inexpensive offerings. The gifts are chiefly little trinkets of gold, silver, and ivory--rings,
miniature hands, axes, swords, or crescents--which are to be strung across the baby's breast.
The original purpose of all these objects was to act as charms against the blighting of the
child by evil powers, or, more definitely, by the "evil eye," that malignant influence which
still troubles so many good Italians, both ignorant and learned. With the same intention the
father hangs upon the child's neck a certain object which it will carry till it comes of age.
If a few years later you met the boy Publius in the Roman streets, you would find him wearing
a round case or locket in gold, some two inches in diameter and resembling the modern cased
watch. Inside is shut his protecting amulet. When he is sixteen and puts on the man's toga,
his amulet will be laid aside. In the case of the little Silia it will be worn until she marries.
Poorer folk, for whom gold is too expensive, will enclose the amulet in a case of leather.

The naming over, the child is registered. The Romans were adepts in the art of utilising a
religious or superstitious practice for purposes of state, and the development of the registration
of births and deaths is but one instance. In older times it had been a custom, on the occasion
of a birth, to pay a visit to the shrine of "Juno the Birth-Goddess," and to leave a small
coin by way of offering. It is easy for a state to convert an already established general custom
into a rule; and at our date this shrine of Juno had become practically a registration office,
where a small fee was paid and the name of the child entered upon the rolls.

We need not follow with any closeness the infancy of either boy or girl till the seventh year.
The ancient world was very much like the modern. Suffice it to glance at them cutting their
teeth on the teeth of wolves or horses, rocked in cradles decorated with gold and purple, or
running about and calling their parents by the time-honoured mamma, tata--words, if we can
call them words, which came from those small Roman mouths precisely as they have come from
time immemorial from so many others. Their slave nurse, who is a Greek and talks Greek to them,
tells them the old wives' tales and fables. They play with rattles, balls, and little carts,
with pet birds and monkeys, and the girl with dolls of ivory or wax or of painted terra-cotta.
They have swings, and ride on sticks and build houses. When bigger, the boy has his tops and
hoops, with or without bells, and he plays marbles with nuts. Meanwhile attempts are made,
somewhat after the kindergarten pattern, to teach them their alphabet by means of letters shaped
in wood or ivory. Whether or not it is modern kindergarten method to tempt children to learn
by offers of sugar-plums, that course was often adopted in the world of both Greece and Rome.

On the whole the life of the child, though strictly governed, appears to have been pleasant
enough until schooldays began. Though many children were taught at home by a more or less learned
slave acting as private tutor, the great majority, at least of the boys, were sent to school.
There was at this date no compulsory education; the state dictated nothing and provided nothing
in connection with the matter; many children must have received no education at all, and many
only the barest elements. Nevertheless the average parent realised the practical utility of
at least reading, writing, and simple arithmetic, and schools of the elementary type sprang
up according to the demand. What the higher education was like will be set forth in its place.

The ideal education, as understood in the older days of Rome, was a training which should fit
a man for his duty to the gods, the state, and the family. It was above all things a moral
and practical training. A man has certain domestic, political, and religious functions to perform:
let him learn how best to perform these. Under this system there was little room for accomplishments
or for purely intellectual pursuits. Little by little, however, such liberal elements, artistic
and philosophical, struggled into the sphere of Roman education, but never to the extent or
with the intellectual effect which belonged to them in Greece. Even by A.D. 64 the education
of a Roman boy was very narrow, and, in the direction in which it sought some liberality, it
often went sadly astray. The clearest course will be for us to take young Publius Silius through
a course typical of the time. We will assume that he does not receive all his lessons at home,
but that, through an old-fashioned preference on the part of his father, he goes to a school,
along with boys who are mostly but not necessarily of the same social standing with himself.

