	As this story has no evidence to support it, so neither has it any probability.  The Gentleman
has given you the character of the disciples; that they were weak, ignorant men, full of the
popular prejudices and superstitions of their country,which stuck close to them notwithstanding
their long acquaintance with their master.  The apostles are not much wronged in this account;
and is it likely that such men should engage in so desperate design, as to steal away the body,
in  opposition to the combined power of the Jews and Romans? What could tempt them to it? 
What good could the dead body do them? Or if it could have done them any, what hope had they
to succeed in their attempt?  A dead body is not to be removed by sleight of hand; it requires
many hands to move it: besides, the great stone at the mouth of the sepulchre was to be removed;
which could not be done silently, or by men walking on tip-toes to prevent discovery: so that
if the guards had really been asleep, yet there was no encouragement to go on this enterprise;
for it is hardly possible to suppose, but that rolling away the stone, moving the body, the
hurry and confusion of carrying it off, must awaken them.

	But supposing the thing was practicable, yet the attempt was such as the disciples consistently
with their own notions could not undertake.  The Gentleman says, they continued all their master's
lifetime to expect to see him a temporal prince; and a friend of the Gentleman's has observed,
what is equally true, that they had the same expectation after his death.  Consider now their
case.  Their master was dead;  and they are to contrive to steal away his body.  For what?
Did they expect to make a King of the dead body, if they could get it into their power? Or
did they think, if they had it, they could raise it to life again?  If they trusted so far
to their master's prediction, as to expect his resurrection, (which I think is evident they
did not), could they yet think the resurrection depended on their having the dead body?  It
is in all views absurd.  But the Gentleman supposes, that they meant to carry on the design
for themselves, in the master's, if they could but have persuaded the people to believe him
risen from the dead.  But he does not consider, that by this supposition he strips the disciples
of every part of their character at once, and presents to us a new set of men, in every respect
different from the former.  The former disciples were weak, plain men; but these are bold,
hardy, cunning, and contriving: the former were full of the superstitions of their country,
and expected a prince from the authority of their Prophets; but these were despisers of the
Prophets, and of the notions of their countrymen, and are designing to turn these fables to
their own advantage; for it cannot be supposed that they believed the Prophets, and at the
same time thought to accomplish or defeat them by so manifest a cheat, to which they themselves
at least were conscious.

	But let us take leave of these suppositions, and see how the true evidence is this case stands.
Guards were placed, and they did their duty.  But what are guards and sentinels against the
power of God? An angel of the Lord opened the sepulchre; the guards saw him, and became like
dead men.  This account they gave to the chief priests, who, still persisting in their obstinacy,
bribed the guards to tell the contradictory story, of their being asleep, and the body stolen.

	I cannot but observe to your Lordship, that all these circumstances, so much questioned and
suspected, were necessary circumstances, supposing the resurrection to be true.  The seal was
broken, the body came out of the sepulchre, the guards were placed in vain to prevent it. 
Be it so:  I desire to know, whether the Gentleman thinks that the seal put God under covenant?
or could prescribe to him a method for performing this great work? or whether he thinks the
guards were placed to maintain the seal in opposition to the power of God?  If he will maintain
neither of these points, then the opening of the seals, notwithstanding the guard set upon
them, will be an evidence, not of the fraud, but of the power of the resurrection; and the
guards will have nothing to answer for, but only this, that they were not stronger than God.
The seal was a proper check upon the guards: the Jews had no other meaning in it; they could
not be so stupid as to imagine, that they could by this contrivance disappoint the designs
of providence.  And it is surprising to hear these circumstances made use of to prove the resurrection
to be a fraud, which yet could not but happen, supposing the resurrection to be true.

	But there is another circumstance still, which the Gentleman reckons very material, and upon
which I find great stress is laid.  The resurrection happened, we are told, a day sooner than
the prediction imported. Only our little game. Fall in, and take your turn."

Rather afraid of falling over, but didn't like to spoil sport; cleared OLD MORALITY capitally;
scrambled over AKERS-DOUGLAS; but couldn't manage JACKSON.

	

"I can't get over him," I said, apologetically.

"No," said AKERS-DOUGLAS,
"he's a Yorkshireman."

"'Tis but a primitive pastime," observed OLD
MORALITY, when, later, we sat down to dinner; "but remarkably refreshing;
a great stimulant for the appetite. And indeed violence, if there had been an opportunity of using it, would have
been insignificant:  beating the guards, and removing the dead body by force, would have destroyed
all pretences to a resurrection.  Now, surely the guards, supposing them to be enough in number
to withstand all violence, were at least sufficient to prevent or to discover fraud.  What
occasion then to hasten the plot for fear of numbers meeting at the tomb, since there were
numbers always present sufficient to discover any fraud; the only method that could be used
in the case?

	Suppose then that we could not give a satisfactory account of the way of reckoning the time
from the crucifixion to the resurrection; yet this we can say, that the resurrection happened
during the time that the guards had the sepulchre in keeping; and it is impossible to imagine
what opportunity this could give to fraud.  Had the time been delayed, the guards removed,
and then a resurrection pretended, it might with some colour of reason have been said, Why
did he not come within his time? why did he chuse to come after his time, when all witnesses,
who had patiently expected the appointed hour, were withdrawn?  But now what is to be objected?
You think he came too soon.  But were not your guards at the door when he came?  did they not
see what happened?  and  what other satisfaction could you have had, supposing he had come
a day later?

	By saying of this, I do not mean the decline the Gentleman's objection, which is founded upon
a mistake of a way of speaking, common to the Jews and other people; who, when they name any
number of days and years, include the first and last of the days or years to make up the sum.
Christ, alluding to his own resurrection, says, In three days I will raise it up.  The angels
report his prediction thus, The Son of Man shall be crucified, and the third day rise again.
Elsewhere it is said, After three days; and again, that he was to be in the bowels of the earth
three days and three nights.  These expressions are equivalent to each other; for we always
reckon the night into the day, when we reckon by so many days.  If you agree to do a thing
ten days hence, you stipulate for forbearance for the nights as well as days; and therefore,
in reckoning, two days, and two days and two nights, are the same thing.  That the expression,
After three days, means inclusive days, is proved by Grotius on Matt. xxvii. 63 and by others.
The prediction therefore was, that he would rise on the third day.  Now, he was crucified on
Friday and buried; he lay in  the grave all Saturday, and rose early on Sunday morning.  But
the Gentleman thinks he ought not to have risen before Monday.  Pray try what the use of common
language requires to be understood in a like case.  Suppose you were told, that your friend
sickened on Friday, was let blood on Saturday, and the third day he died;  what day would you
think  he died on?  If you have any doubt about it, put the question to the first plain man
you meet, and he will resolve it.  The Jews could have no doubt in this case; for so they practised
in one of the highest points of their law. Every male child was to be circumcised on the eighth
day.  How did they reckon the days?  Why, the day of the birth was one, and the day of the
circumcision another; and though a child was born towards the every end of the first day, he
was capable of circumcision on any time of the eighth day.  And therefore it is not new nor
strange, that the third day, in our case, should be reckoned into the number, though Christ
rose at the very beginning of it.  It is more strange to reckon whole years in this manner;
and yet this is the constant method observed in Ptolemy's canon, the most valuable piece of
ancient chronology, next to the Bible, now extant.  If a King lived over the first day of a
year, and died the week after, that whole year is reckoned to his reign.

	I have now gone through the several objections upon this head: what credit they may gain in
this age, I know not; but 'tis plain they had no credit when they were first spread abroad;
nay, 'tis evident, that the very persons who set abroad this story of the body being stolen,
did not believe it themselves.  And, not to insist here upon the plain fact, which was, that
the guards were hired to tell this lie by the chief priests, it will appear from the after
conduct of the chief priests themselves, that they were conscious that the story was false.
Not long after the resurrection of Christ, the disciples having received new power from above,
appeard publickly in Jerusalem, and in the very temple, and testified the resurrection of Christ,
even before those who had murdered him.  What now do the chief priests do? They seize upon
the apostles, they threaten them, they beat them,. they scourge them, and all to stop their
mouths, insisting that they should say no more of the matter.  But why did they not, when they
had the disciples in their power, charge them directly with their notorious cheat in stealing
the body, and expose them to the people as imposters?  This had been much more to their purpose,
than all their menaces and ill usage, and would more effectually have undeceived the people.
But of this not one word is said.  They try to murder them, enter into combinations to assassinate
them, prevail with Herod to put one of them to death; but not so much as a charge against them
of any fraud in the resurrection.  Their orator Tertullus, who could not have missed so fine
a topick of declamation, had there been but a suspicion to support it, is quite silent on this
head, and is content to flourish on the common-place of sedition and heresy, profaning the
temple, and the like: very trifles to his cause, in comparison to the other accusation, had
there been any ground to make use of it. I asked, never remembering to have seen the Member for
Evesham in the company of a rake.
"No; CHARLES THE SECOND's Minister, who went down to Sheen two centuries
before the Orleanist Princes, and grew roses. Of course I don't mean
to be there much in the Session.  After
this, Agrippa hears Paul himself; and had he suspected, much less had he been convinced that
there was a cheat in the resurrection, he would hardly have said to Paul at the end of the
conference, Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.

	But let us see what the council and senate of the children of Israel thought of this matter,
in the most solemn and serious deliberation they ever had about it.  Not long after the resurrection,
the apostles were taken;  the High Priest  thought the matter of that weight, that he summoned
the council and senate of the children of Israel.  The apostles are brought before them, and
make their defence.  The defence was indeed a heavy charge upon the senate, and in the warmth
of their anger, their first resolution was to slay them all.  But Gamaliel, one of the council,
stood up, and told them, that the matter deserved more consideration.  The council agreed to
this advice, and after some ill treatment, the apostles were discharged.  I ask now, and let
any man of common sense answer,  Could Gamaliel possibly have given this advice, and supposed
that the hand of God might be with the apostles, if he had known that there was a cheat discovered
in the resurrection of Jesus?  Could the whole senate have followed this advice, had they believed
the discovery of the cheat?  Was there not among them one man wise enough to say, How can you
suppose God to have anything to do in this affair, when the resurrection of Jesus, upon which
all depends, was a notorious cheat, and manifestly proved to be so?  I should but lessen the
weight of this authority by saying more, and therefore I will rest here, and give way to the
Gentleman to go on with his accusation.

	Mr. A.	My Lord, Before I proceed any further, I beg leave to say a few words in reply to what
the Gentleman has offered on this head.

	The Gentleman thinks, that the detection in the case of Lazarus ought to have made the Jews
quite unconcerned in the case of Jesus, and secure as to the event of his own resurrection.
He says very true, supposing their care had been for themselves:  but governors have another
care upon their hands, the care of their people; and 'tis not enough for them to guard against
being imposed on themselves, they must be watchful to guard the multitude against frauds and
deceits.  The chief priests were satisfied indeed of the fraud in the case of Lazarus, yet
they saw the people deceived by it; and for this reason, and not for their own satisfaction,
they used the caution in the case of the resurrection of Jesus, which I before laid before
you.  In so doing, they are well justified; and the inconsistency charged on the other side,
between their opinion of Jesus, and their fear of being imposed on by his pretended resurrection,
is fully answered.

	The next observation relates to the seal of the sepulchre.  The Gentleman thinks the seal
was used as a check upon the Roman soldiers. But what reason had the Jews to suspect them?
They were not disciples of Jesus; they were servants of the Roman governor, and employed in
the service of the Jews: and I leave it to the court to judge, whether the Jews set the seal
to guard against their friends, or their enemies? But if the seals were really used against
the guards, then the breaking of  the seals is a proof that the guards were corrupted: and
if so, 'tis easy to conceive how the body was removed.

	As to the disciples, the Gentleman observes, that the part allotted them in the management
of the resurrection supposes an unaccountable change in their character.  It will not be long
before the Gentleman will have occasion for as great a change in their character: for these
weak men you will find soon employed in converting the world, and sent to appear before Kings
and Princes in the name of their master; soon you will see them grow wise and powerful, and
every way qualified for their extensive and important business.  The only difference between
me and the Gentleman on the other side will be found to be this, that I date this change a
little earlier than he does: A small matter, surely, to determine the right of this controversy.

	The last observation relates to King Agrippa's complaisance to Paul, and Gamaliel's advice.
I cannot answer for Agrippa's meaning: but certainly he meant but little; and if this matter
is to be tried by his opinion, we know that he never did turn Christian.  As for Gamaliel,
'tis probable that he saw great numbers of the people engaged zealously in favour of the apostles,
and might think it prudent to pass the matter over in silence, and not to come to extremities.
This is a common case in all governments: the multitude and their leaders often escape punishment,
not because they do not deserve it, but because it is not, in some circumstances, prudent to
exact it.

	I pass over these things lightly, because the next article contains the great, to us indeed,
who live at this distance, the only great question;  for whatever reason the Jews had to believe
the resurrection, it is nothing to us, unless the story has been conveyed to us upon such evidence
as is sufficient to support the weight laid on it.

	My Lord, we are now to enter upon the last and main article of this case; the nature of the
evidence upon which the credit of the resurrection stands.  Before I inquire into the qualifications
of the particular witnesses whose words we are desired to take in this case, I would ask, why
this evidence, which manifestly relates to the most essential point of Christianity, was not
put beyond all exception? Many of the miracles of Christ are said to be done in the streets,
nay even in the temple, under the observation of all the world; but the like is not so much
as pretended as to this; nay, we have it upon the confession of Peter, the ringleader of the
apostles, that Christ appeared, not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before of
God.  Why picking and culling of witnesses in this case more than in any other?  Does it not
import some suspicion, raise some jealousy, that this case would not bear the publick light?

	I would ask more particularly, Why did not Jesus after his resurrection appear openly to the
chief priests and rulers of the Jews? Since his commission related to them in an especial manner,
why were not his credentials laid before them?  The resurrection is acknowledged to be the
chief proof of his mission, why then was it concealed from those who were more than all others
concerned in the event of his mission?  Suppose an ambassador from some foreign prince should
come into England,  make his publick entry through the city, pay and receive visits, and at
last refuse to shew any letters of credence, or to wait on the King, what would you think of
him?  Whatever you would think in that case, you must think in this; for there is no difference
between them.

	But we must take the evidence as it is.  It was thought proper, in this case, to have select
chosen witnesses; and we must now consider who they were, and what reason we have to take their
word.

	The first witness was an angel, or angels.  They appeared like men to some women who went
early to the sepulchre.  If they appeared like men, upon what ground are we to take them for
angels?  The women saw men, and therefore they can witness only to the seeing of men.  But
I suppose it is the women's judgement, and not their evidence, that we are to follow in this
case.  Here then we have a story of one apparition to support the credit of another apparition:
and the first apparition hath not so much as the evidence of the women to support it, but is
grounded on their superstition, ignorance, and fear.  Every country can afford an hundred instances
of this kind; and there is this common to them all, that as learning and common sense prevail
in any country, they die away, and are no more heard of. 

	But to this the author replies, that there are two classes of nebulæ--one resolvable into constellations--another
comparatively near, that remains unaffected by telescopic power, and that until this last description
can be separated, the nebular hypothesis is not disproved.
One part of the account given of them is very rational, that they were surprised and frightened
beyond measure; and I leave it to your Lordship and the court to judge, how well qualified
they were to give a just relation of what passed.

	After this, Jesus appears to two of his disciples as they were upon a journey;  he joins them,
and introduces a discourse about himself; and spent much time, till it began to grow dark,
in expounding the prophecies relating to the death and resurrection of the Messias. All this
while, the disciples knew him not.  But then going into an house to lodge together,  at supper
he broke bread, and gave it to them;  immediately they knew him, immediately he vanished. 
Here then are two witnesses more.  But what will you call them?  eye-witnesses? Why their eyes
were open, and they had their senses, when he reasoned with them and they knew him not.  So
far therefore they are witnesses that it was not he.  Tell us therefore upon what account you
reject the evidence of their sense before the breaking of the bread,  and insist on it afterwards?
And why did Jesus vanish as soon as known; which has more of the air of an apparition, than
of the appearance of a real man restored to life?

	Cleopas, who was one of these two disciples, finds out the apostles, to make the report of
what had passed to them.  No sooner was the story told, but Jesus appears among them.  They
were all frightened and confounded, and thought they saw a spectre.  He rebukes them for infidelity,
and their slowness in believing the prophecies of his resurrection: and though he refused before
to let the women touch him (a circumstance which I ought not to have omitted); yet now he invites
the apostles to handle him, to examine his hands and feet, and search the wounds of the cross.
But what body was it they examined?  The same that came in  when the doors were shut; the same
that vanished from the two disciples; the same that the women might not touch:  in a word,
a body quite different from a human body, which we know cannot pass through walls, or appear
or disappear at pleasure.  What then could their hands or eyes inform them of in this case?
Besides, is it credible that God should raise a body imperfectly, with the very wounds in it
of which it died?  Or, if the wounds were such as destroyed the body before, how could a natural
body subsist with them afterwards?

