Mrs. Leonard said, musingly: "He knows that you are Baroness Ludolph. I told him last week,
for I thought he ought to know, and the fact of your approaching departure for Europe has been
no secret of late. He thinks you are pledged to a future in which he cannot share; and in your
grateful, dependent condition he would not cause you the pain of refusing him. I think that
is just where he stands," she concluded, with a woman's mastery of the science of love, and
taking almost as much interest in her friend's affair as she had felt in her own. To most ladies
this subject has a peculiar fascination, and, having settled their own matters, they enter
with scarcely less zest on the task of helping others arrange theirs. Mrs. Leonard rallied
faster under the excitement of this new interest than from the doctor's remedies.

After a few moments' thought Christine said, decidedly: "All that nonsense about the Baroness
Ludolph is past forever--burned up in the fire with many things of more value. I have been
fed too long on the husks of human greatness and ambition to want any more of them. They never
did satisfy me, and in the light and heat of the terrific ordeal through which I have just
passed they shrivelled into utter nothingness. I want something that I cannot lose in a whiff
of smoke and flame, and I think I have found it. Henceforth I claim no other character than
that of a simple Christian girl." Then bowing her head on her friend's shoulder she added,
in a whisper, "If I could climb to true greatness by Mr. Fleet's side, as he portrayed it in
his picture, it seems to me heaven would begin at once."

The doctor, who had taken the professor aside, now joined them, and said: "Mrs. Leonard, you
have only to take reasonable care of yourself, and you will soon recover from this shock and
exposure. I wish all my patients were doing as well."

She replied with a smile, taking her husband's hand: "Since I have found my old Greek here,
with his learned spectacles, I am quite myself, and I feel as if I were only playing invalid."

"You may have slept in a church before," said the doctor, with a twinkle in his eye, "and you
must do so again. But no one will thunder at you from the pulpit this time, so I leave you
in peace and security, and to-night will be within call."

Christine followed him to the lobby of the church, when the irrepressible joker could not forbear
saying: "Now let me give you a little paternal advice. Don't be too grateful to that young
Fleet. He only did his duty, and of course doesn't deserve any special--"

Christine, with flushing cheeks, interrupted him as if she had not heard: "Doctor, how good
and kind you are! Here you are off without any rest to look after the sick and suffering, and
you seem to bring health and hope wherever you go."

"Yes, yes; but I send my bill in too--mind that." (Some of his poorer patients never received
any, and he, when twitted of the fact, would mutter, roughly, "Business oversight--can't attend
to everything.")

Christine looked for a moment at the face so inspiring in its hearty benevolence, and with
an impulse, so unlike the cold, haughty girl of old, sprang forward, threw her arms around
his neck, and gave him a kiss which he declared afterward was like a mild stroke of lightning,
and said, "And there is the first instalment of what I owe you."

The old gentleman looked as if he decidedly liked the currency, and with moistened eyes that
he vainly tried to render humorous, he raised his finger impressively in parting, and said,
"Don't you ever get out of debt to me."

CHAPTER XLIX

BILL CRONK'S TOAST

After all, it was a long day to Christine.  Tears would start from her eyes at the thought
of her father, but she realized that the only thing for her to do was to shroud his memory
in a great, forgiving pity, and put it away forever.  She could only turn from the mystery
of his life and death--the mystery of evil--to Him who taketh away the sin of the world.  There
was no darkness in that direction.  She busied herself with Mrs. Leonard, and the distribution
of food to others, till six o'clock, and then she stood near the door to watch till her true
knight should appear in his shirt-sleeves, with a shovel on his shoulder, and an old burned,
tattered felt hat on his head, instead of jewelled crest and heron plume.

Dennis had gone to his work not very hopeful.  He knew Christine would be his grateful friend
while she lived, and would perhaps even regard him as a brother, but all this might be and
still she be unable to respond to his deeper feelings.  Moreover, he knew she was Baroness
Ludolph, and might be heiress of such titles and estates in Germany as would require that she
should go at once to secure them; and so she seemed clearly to pass beyond his sphere.

As he shovelled the hot bricks and cinders hour after hour among other laborers, the distance
between himself and the Baroness Ludolph seemed to increase; and when, begrimed and weary,
he sat down to eat his dinner of a single sandwich saved from breakfast (for as yet he had
no money), the ruins around him were quite in keeping with his feelings. He thought most regretfully
of his two thousand dollars and burned picture. The brave, resolute spirit of the morning had
deserted him. He did not realize that few men have lived who could be brave and hopeful when
weary and hungry, and fewer still, when, in addition, they doubted the favor of the lady of
their love.

The work of the afternoon seemed desperately hard and long, but with dogged persistency Dennis
held his own with the others till six, and in common with them received his two dollars. Whether
Christine would accept the supper he brought or not, he determined to fulfil his promise and
bring one. Wearily he trudged off to the west side, in order to find a store. No one who met
him would have imagined that this plodding laborer was the artist who the week before had won
the prize and title of genius.

If he had been purchasing a supper for himself, he would doubtless have been sensible about
it; but one that the Baroness Ludolph might share was a different matter. He bought some very
rich cake, a can of peaches, a box of sardines, some fruit, and then his money gave out! But,
with these incongruous and indigestible articles made up into one large bundle, he started
for the church. He had gone but a little way when some one rushed upon him, and little Ernst
clasped him round the neck and fairly cried for joy. Sitting on the sidewalk near were the
other little Bruders, looking as forlorn and dirty as three motherless children could. Dennis
stopped and sat down beside them (for he was too tired to stand), while Ernst told his story--how
their mother had left them, and how she had been found so burned that she was recognized only
by a ring (which he had) and a bit of the picture preserved under her body. They had been looking
ever since to find him, and had slept where they could.

As Ernst sobbingly told his story the other children cried in doleful chorus, and Dennis's
tears fell fast too, as he realized how his humble friend had perished. He remembered her kindness
to his mother and little sisters, and his heart acknowledged the claim of these poor little
orphans. Prudence whispered, "You cannot afford to burden yourself with all these children,"
and pride added, "What a figure you will make in presenting yourself before the Baroness Ludolph
with all these children at your heels!" But he put such thoughts resolutely aside, and spoke
like a brother; and when one of the children sobbed, "We so hungry!" out came the Baroness
Ludolph's fruit and cake, and nothing remained for Christine but the sardines and peaches,
since these could not well be opened in the street. The little Bruders having devoured what
seemed to them the ambrosia of the gods, he took the youngest in his arms, Ernst following
with the others; and so they slowly made their way to the church where Christine was now anxiously
waiting, with many surmises and forebodings at Dennis's delay.

At last, in the dusk, the little group appeared at the church-door, and she exclaimed, "What
has kept you so, Mr. Fleet?"

He determined to put the best face on the situation, and indulge in no heroics, so he said,
"You could not expect such a body of infantry as this to march rapidly."

"What!" she exclaimed, "have you brought all the lost children in the city back with you?"

"No, only those that fell properly to my care;" and in a few words he told their story.

"And do you, without a cent in the world, mean to assume the burden of these four children?"
she asked, in accents of surprise.

He could not see her face, but his heart sank within him, for he thought that to her it would
seem quixotic and become another barrier between them; but he answered, firmly: "Yes, till
God, who has imposed the burden, removes it, and enables me to place them among friends in
a good home. Mrs. Bruder, before she died, wrote to her family in Germany, telling her whole
story. Relatives may take the children; if not, some way will be provided."

"Mr. Fleet, I wonder at you," was her answer. His sketch-book was quite as suggestive of genius as his studio.

The "Sketch of a Statue to crown the Dome of the United States Capitol"--a photograph of which
is before us as we write, dated two years ago--is an instance in point. A more grand figure, original
and symbolic, graceful and sublime, in attitude, aspect, drapery,
accessories, and expression, or one more appropriate, cannot be imagined;
and yet it is only one of hundreds of national designs, more or less
mature, which that fertile brain, patriotic heart, and cunning hand
devised.

We are justified in regarding the appropriation by the State of Virginia, for a monument to Washington
by such a man, as an epoch in the history of national Art. Crawford hailed it as would a confident
explorer the ship destined to convey him to untracked regions, the ambitious soldier tidings
of the coming foe, or any brave aspirant a long-sought opportunity.

It is one of the drawbacks to elaborate achievement in sculpture, that the materials and the
processes of the art require large pecuniary facilities. To plan and execute a great national
monument, under a government commission, was precisely the occasion for which Crawford had long
waited.

Happening to read the proposals in a journal, while on a visit to this country, he repaired immediately
to Richmond, submitted his views, and soon received the appointment.

The absence of complexity in the language and intent of sculpture
is always obvious in the expositions of its votaries.

In no class of men have we found such distinct and scientific views of Art. One lovely evening
in spring, we stood with Bartolini beside the corpse of a beautiful
child.

Bereavement in a foreign land has a desolation of its own, and the afflicted mother desired
to carry home a statue of her loved and lost. We conducted the sculptor
to the chamber of death, that he might superintend the casts from
the body.

No sooner did his eyes fall upon it, than they glowed with admiration and filled with tears. He
waved the assistants aside, clasped his hands, and gazed spellbound
upon the dead child.

Its brow was ideal in contour, the hair of wavy gold, the cheeks
of angelic outline.

"How beautiful!" exclaimed Bartolini; and drawing us to the bedside, with a mingled awe and
intelligence, he pointed out how the rigidity of death coincided,
in this fair young creature, with the standard of Art;--the very hands,
he declared, had stiffened into lines of beauty; and over the beautiful
clay we thus learned from the lips of a venerable sculptor how intimate
and minute is the cognizance this noble art takes of the language
of the human form.

Greenough would unfold by the hour the exquisite relation between function and beauty, organization
and use,--tracing therein a profound law and an illimitable truth. No more genial spectacle greeted
us in Rome than Thorwaldsen at his Sunday-noon receptions;--his white
hair, kindly smile, urbane manners, and unpretending simplicity gave
an added charm to the wise and liberal sentiments he expressed on
Art,-- reminding us, in his frank eclecticism, of the spirit in which
Humboldt cultivates science, and Sismondi history.

Nor less indicative of this clear apprehension was the thorough solution we have heard Powers give,
over the mask taken from a dead face, of the problem, how its living aspect was to modify its
sculptured reproduction; or the original views expressed by Palmer
as to the treatment of the eyes and hair in marble.

During Crawford's last visit to America, we accompanied him to examine
a portrait of Washington by Wright.

It boasts no elegance of arrangement or refinement of execution;
at a glance it was evident that the artist had but a limited sense
of beauty and lacked imagination; but, on the other hand, he possessed
what, for a sculptor's object,--namely, facts of form and feature,--is
more important,--conscience.

Crawford declared this was the only portrait of Washington which
literally represented his costume; having recently examined the uniform,
sword, etc., he was enabled to identify the strands of the epaulette,
the number of buttons, and even the peculiar seal and watch-key.

A man so faithful to details, so devoted to authenticity, Crawford argued, was reliable in more
essential things.

He remarked, that one of his own greatest difficulties in the equestrian statue had been to
reconcile the shortness of the neck in Stuart's portrait and Houdon's statue (the body of which
was not taken from life) with the stature of Washington,--there being an anatomical incongruity
therein. "I had determined," he continued, "to follow what the laws of Nature and all precedent indicate
as the right proportion,-- otherwise it would be impossible to make
a graceful and impressive statue; but in this picture, bearing such
remarkable evidence of authenticity, I find the correct distance between
chin and breast."

 He naturally thought that the Baroness Ludolph might hesitate before entering
such a circle of intimates. But he was not guilty of the meanness of cutting a humble friend,
even though he saw the eyes of Christine resting on him. In his embarrassment, however, he
held out the washbasin in his confused effort to shake hands, and said, heartily, "Why, Cronk,
I am glad you came safely out of it."

"Is this gentleman a friend of yours?" asked Christine, with inimitable grace.

"Yes!" said Dennis, firmly, though coloring somewhat. "He once rendered me a great kindness--"

"Well, miss, you bet your money on the right hoss that time," interrupted Bill. "If I hain't
a friend of his'n, I'd like to know where you'll find one; though I did kick up like a cussed
ole mule when he knocked the bottle out of my hand. Like enough if he hadn't I wouldn't be here."

"Won't you present me, Mr. Fleet?" said Christine, with an amused twinkle in her eye.

"Mr. Cronk," said Dennis (who had now reached that state of mind when one becomes reckless),
"this lady is Miss Ludolph, and, I hope I may venture to add, another friend of mine."

She at once put out her hand, that seemed like a snowflake in the great horny paw of the drover,
and said, "Indeed, Mr. Cronk, I will permit no one to claim stronger friendship to Mr. Fleet
than mine."

"I can take any friend of Mr. Fleet's to my buzzom at once," said Bill, speaking figuratively,
but Christine instinctively shrank nearer Dennis. In talking with men, Bill used the off-hand
vernacular of his calling, but when addressing ladies, he evidently thought that a certain
style of metaphor bordering on sentiment was the proper thing. But Christine said, "As a friend
of Mr. Fleet's you shall join our party at once"; and she led them to the further end of the
room, where at a table sat Dr. Arten, Professor and Mrs. Leonard, Ernst, and the little Bruders,
who at the prospect of more eating were wide awake again. After the most hearty greetings they
were seated, and she took her place by the side of the little children in order to wait on
them. Few more remarkable groups sat down together, even in that time of chaos and deprivation.
Professor Leonard was without vest or collar, and sat with coat buttoned tight up to his chin
to hide the defect. He had lost his scholarly gold-rimmed spectacles; and a wonderful pair
of goggles bestrode his nose in their place. Mrs. Leonard was lost in the folds of an old delaine
dress that was a mile too large, and her face looked as if she had assisted actively in an
Irish wake. Dr. Arten did the honors at the head of the table in his dress coat and vest that
had once been white, though he no longer figured around in red flannel drawers as he had done
on the beach. The letter of Ignatius found Xavier dead. But we may judge of what he would have
done, by what he writ before his death to Ignatius himself, who had testified so earnest a desire
to see him: "Your holy charity," says he in his letter, "tells me, that you have an earnest
desire to see me once again in this present life: God, who looks into the bottom of my heart, can
tell how sensibly that mark of your tenderness has touched me. Truly, whenever that expression
of yours returns to my remembrance, and it frequently returns, the tears come dropping from
my eyes, and I cannot restrain them; while I revolve that happy thought, that once, yet once again
it may be given me to embrace you. I confess, it appears difficult to compass my desires, but
all things are possible to holy obedience."

Undoubtedly, if the letter of Ignatius had found Xavier alive, he had soon been seen in Europe;
for having offered, of his own free motion, to leave the Indies, Japan, and China, and all the
business which he had upon his hands, and having said, that the least beckoning of his superior
should be sufficient for it, what would he not have done, when he
had received a positive command to abandon all, and repass the seas?

His maxims of obedience shew clearly what his own submission was.

"There is nothing more certain, nor less subject to mistake, than
always to be willing to obey.

On the contrary, it is dangerous to live in complaisance to our own
wills, and without following the motion of our superiors; for though
we chance to perform any good action, yet if we never so little deviate
from that which is commanded us, we may rest assured, that our action
is rather vicious than good.

"The devil, by his malicious suggestions, tempts the greatest part of those who have devoted
themselves to God's service: 'What make you there?' he secretly whispers; 'See you not that you
do but lose your labour?' Resist that thought with all your strength; for it is capable not
only of hindering you in the way to perfection, but also of seducing you from it: and let every
one of you persuade himself, that he cannot better serve our Lord, than in that place where
he is set by his superior. Be also satisfied, that when the time of God is come, he will inspire
your superiors with thoughts of sending you to such places, where your labours shall abundantly succeed.
In the mean time, you shall possess your souls in peace.

By this means, you will well employ your precious time, though too many do not understand its
value, and make great proficiencies in virtue. It is far otherwise with those restless souls, who
do no good in those places where they wish to be, because they are
not there; and are unprofitable both to themselves and others where
they are, because they desire to be otherwhere.

Dennis also saw her expression, and could not disguise his admiration, but every moment he
increasingly felt how desperately hard it would be to give her up, now that she seemed to realize
his very ideal of womanhood.

And Cronk, having satisfied the clamors of his appetite, began to be fascinated in his rough
way with her grace and beauty. Nudging Dennis he asked in a loud whisper heard by all, which
nearly caused Dr. Arten to choke, "The young filly is a German lady, ain't she?"

Dennis, much embarrassed, nodded assent.

A happy thought struck Bill. Though impeded by the weight of an indefinite number of sandwiches,
he slowly rose and looked solemnly round on the little group. Dennis trembled, for he feared
some dreadful bull on the part of his rough, though well-meaning friend, but Dr. Arten, in
a state of intense enjoyment, cried, "Mr. Cronk has the floor."

Lifting a can of coffee containing about a quart, the drover said impressively, and with an
attempt at great stateliness:

"Beautiful ladies and honorable gentlemen here assembled, I would respectfully ask you to drink
to a toast in this harmless beverage: The United States of Ameriky! When the two great elemental
races--the sanguinary Yankee and the phlegmatic German--become one, and, as represented in
the blooded team before me" (waving his hand majestically over the heads of Dennis and Christine),
"pull in the traces together, how will the ship of state go forward!" and his face disappeared
behind his huge flagon of coffee in the deepest pledge. Bill thought he had uttered a very
profound and elegant sentiment, but his speech fell like a bombshell in the little company.

"The very spirit of mischief is abroad to-day," Dennis groaned. And Christine, with a face
like a peony, snatched up the youngest little Bruder, saying, "It is time these sleepy children
were in bed"; but the doctor and the Leonards went off again and again in uncontrollable fits
of laughter, in which Dennis could not refrain from joining, though he wished the unlucky Cronk
a thousand miles away. Bill put down his mug, stared around in a surprised and nonplussed manner,
and then said, in a loud whisper, "I say, Fleet, was there any hitch in what I said?"

This set them off again, but Dennis answered good-naturedly, slapping his friend on the shoulder,
"Cronk, you would make a man laugh in the face of fate."

Bill took this as a compliment, and the strange party, thrown together by an event that mingled
all classes in the community, broke up and went their several ways.

CHAPTER L

EVERY BARRIER BURNED AWAY

Dennis was glad to escape, and went to a side door where he could cool his hot cheeks in the
night air. He fairly dreaded to meet Christine again, and, even where the wind blew cold upon
him, his cheeks grew hotter and hotter, as he remembered what had occurred. He had been there
but a little time when a light hand fell on his arm, and he was startled by her voice--"Mr.
Fleet, are you very tired?"

"Not in the least," he answered, eagerly.

"You must be: it is wrong for me to think of it."

"Miss Ludolph, please tell me what I can do for you?"

She looked at him wistfully and said: "This is a time when loss and disaster burden every heart,
and I know it is a duty to try to maintain a cheerful courage, and forget personal troubles.
I have tried to-day, and, with God's help, hope in time to succeed. While endeavoring to wear
in public a cheerful face, I may perhaps now, and to so true a friend as yourself, show more
of my real feelings. Is it too far--would it take too long, to go to where my father died?
His remains could not have been removed."

