During this time Mr. Kilbright's interest in his grandson seemed to be on the increase. He
would frequently walk past the house of that old gentleman merely for the purpose of looking
at him as he sat by the open window reading his newspaper or quietly smoking his evening pipe
on a bench in his side yard. When he had been with me about ten days he said: "I now feel that
I must go and make myself known to my grandson. I am earning my own subsistence; and, however
he may look upon me, he need not fear that I am come to be a burden upon him. You will not
wonder, sir, that I long to meet with this son of the little baby girl I left behind me."

I did not wonder, and my wife and I agreed to go with him that very evening to old Mr. Scott's
house. The old gentleman received us very cordially in his little parlor.

"You are a stranger in this town, sir," he said to Kilbright. "I did not exactly catch your
name--Kilbright?" he said, when it had been repeated to him, "that is one of my family names,
but it is long since I have heard of anyone bearing it. My mother was a Kilbright, but she
had no brothers, and no uncles of the name. My grandfather was the last of our branch of the
Kilbrights. His name was Amos, and he was a Bixbury man. From what part of the country do you
come, sir?"

"My name is Amos, and I was born in Bixbury."

Old Mr. Scott sat up very straight in his chair. "Young man, that seems to me impossible!"
he exclaimed. "How could there be any Kilbrights in Bixbury and I not know of it?" Then taking
a pair of big silver spectacles from his pocket he put them on and attentively surveyed his
visitor, whose countenance during this scrutiny was filled with emotion.

Presently the old gentleman took off his spectacles and, rising from his chair, went into another
room. Quickly returning, he brought with him a small oil-painting in a narrow, old-fashioned
frame. He stood it up on a table in a position where a good light from the lamp fell upon it.
It was the portrait of a young man with a fresh, healthy face, dressed in an old-style high-collared
coat, with a wide cravat coming up under his chin, and a bit of ruffle sticking out from his
shirt-bosom. My wife and I gazed at it with awe.

"That," said old Mr. Scott, "is the picture of my grandfather, Amos Kilbright, taken at twenty-five.
He was drowned at sea some years afterward, but exactly how I do not know. My mother did not
remember him at all. And I must say," he continued, putting on his spectacles again, "that
there is something of a family likeness between you, sir, and that picture. If it wasn't for
the continental clothes in the painting there would be a good deal of resemblance--yes, a very
great deal."

"It is my portrait," said Mr. Kilbright, his voice trembling as he spoke. "It was painted by
Tatlow Munson in the winter of seventeen eighty, in payment for my surveying a large tract
of land north of the town, he having no money to otherwise compensate me. He wrote his name
in ink upon the back of the canvas."

Old Mr. Scott took up the picture and turned it around. And there we all saw plainly written
upon the time-stained back, "Tatlow Munson, 1780."

Old Mr. Scott laid the picture upon the table, took off his spectacles, and with wide-open
eyes gazed first at Mr. Kilbright and then at us.

The sight of the picture had finished the conversion of my wife. "Oh, Mr. Scott," she cried,
leaning so far forward in her chair that it seemed as if she were about to go down on her knees
before the old man, "this gentleman is your grandfather! Yes, he is, indeed! Oh, don't discard
him, for it was you who were the cause of his being here. Don't you remember when you went
to the spiritualist meeting, and asked to see the spirit of your grandfather? That spirit came,
but you didn't know it. The people who materialized him were surprised when they saw this young
man, and they thought he couldn't be your grandfather, and so they didn't say anything about
it; and they left him right in the middle of whatever they use, and he kept on materializing
without their thinking of him until he became just what you see him now. And if he now wore
old-fashioned clothes with a queue, he would be the exact image of that portrait of him which
you have, only a little bit older looking and fuller in the face. But the spiritualists made
him cut off his long hair, because they said that wouldn't do in these days, and dressed him
in those common clothes just like any other person. And oh, dear Mr. Scott, you must see for
yourself that he is truly your grandfather!"

Old Mr. Scott made no answer, but still sat with wide-open eyes gazing from one to the other
of us. As I looked at that aged, white-haired man and thought of his mother, who must have
died ever so long ago, being the daughter of the young man who sat opposite to him, it was
indeed difficult to believe that these things could be so.

"Mr. Scott," exclaimed my wife, "will you not speak to him? Will you not give him your hand?
Will you not acknowledge him as your grandfather, whose picture you have always had near you,
and which, when a little boy, I expect your dear mother has often told you to look up to and
try to be like? And if you have grown old, and he has not, on account of differences in circumstances,
why should that make any difference in your feelings, dear Mr. Scott? Oh, why don't you let
him take you to his heart? I don't see how you can help it," she said, with a sob, "and you
his little daughter's only child!"

Old Mr. Scott rose to his feet. He pulled down the sleeves of his coat, and gave an adjusting
shake to its collar and lapels. Then he turned to my wife and said: "Madam, let us two dance
a Virginia reel while your husband and that other one take the poker and tongs and beat out
the music on the shovel. We might as well be durned fools one way as another, and all go to
the lunatic asylum together."

Now arose Mr. Kilbright to his feet, and stood up very tall. "Grandson Lemuel," he said, "I
leave not your house in anger. I see well that too heavy a task has been laid upon your declining
years when you are asked to believe that which you have heard to-day. But I wish you to know
that I am here to ask nothing of you save that you will give me your hand. I earnestly crave
that I may again touch one of my own flesh and blood."

Old Mr. Scott picked up the portrait and looked at it. Then he laid it down and looked at Mr.
Kilbright. "Young man," said he, "can you stand there and put your hand upon your heart, and
say to me that you are truly Amos Kilbright, my mother's father, who was drowned in the last
century, and who was brought back and turned into a live man by those spiritualists; and that
you are willing to come here and let yourself be vouched for by Mr. and Mrs. Colesworthy, who
belong to some sort of society of that kind and ought to know about such things?"

I was on the point of remarking that the Society for Psychical Research had nothing to do with
spiritualism except to investigate it, but my wife saw my intention and checked me.

Mr. Kilbright put his hand upon his heart and bowed. "What you have heard is true," he said.
"On my honor, I swear it."

