Laughter-loving, born to conquer, quick to reward, Janus was tender and generous to a fault;
for it was whispered that he could take what lay nearest to give to those who offered him adoring
service on his triumphal march, and that the murmur of the wronged belonged to the more serious
side of life for which his full-flowing Greek blood had small patience. Such strange, unlikely
tales one's enemy may tell!

And for his religion--be it Greek, or Latin, or whatever else--had he not been named Archbishop
of Nikosia at the responsible age of fifteen, before he had exchanged the Episcopal Mitre for
the Royal Crown?

These things were told, in all truth, of Janus II, King of Cyprus: and if some others were
known, they were not discussed. For the monarch had lost his heart to the rare charm of the
youthful Caterina, niece to a Venetian noble who had become his friend in Cyprus, and had more
than once stood his helper with good Venetian gold; and who, in innocence or wile, had one
day given him sight of the girl's fair face with its tender flush like a flower in spring,
painted with rare skill by the greatest artist of Venice. The breeze might have toyed with
that mist of golden hair, and the great dark eyes--softly luminous--had the expectancy of a
gazelle awaiting the joy of the daydawn. She was daughter to one of the most ancient and noble
of the patrician houses, in direct descent, so the Cornari claimed, of the Cornelii of Rome.

"There need be no haste," the Signor Andrea had said lightly, as he returned the miniature
to its case blazoned in pearls with the arms of the Cornari, "for the child is but fourteen,
though she hath the loveliness of twenty. But it is the way with our patricians of Venice,
and Messer Marco of the Cornari, father to Caterina, is already planning with an ancient noble
house of the elder branch with estates of unknown wealth, for the marriage of his daughter.
Thus the fancy of the King must pass--there will be another--in Venice or Cyprus--the world
is large."

"Nay, none so beautiful," the King made answer; "and for me none other. And for the matter
of birth----"

"Naught hindereth that she might be Queen," Messer Andrea replied with nonchalance, having
a scheme somewhat more deeply laid than the casual dropping of the miniature would seem to
imply. "For the matter of birth--it is a trifle--and doubtless the Republic would make her,
by adoption, Daughter to Venice--if there were aught in a created title to enhance her princely
name with semblance of royalty. But there are already quarterings enough to match with the
arms of Cyprus, and the Lusignans are a house far less ancient than the Cornelii."

Messer Andrea could say things with a certain facile grace that kept them from rankling, and
at the moment the utterance of this truth was of consequence.

The King threw him a quick glance, half in amusement, half in admiration of his easy insolence,
while Messer Andrea placidly explained that the Casa Cornaro was one of the twelve original
families which composed the ancient ruling class of the Republic.

"And if the matter hath an interest for your Majesty," he continued, "our great-grandfather
on our father's side, was that Marco Cornaro who was Doge of Venice; and the most noble Lady
Fiorenza, mother to the child Caterina and wife to my brother Marco, was grand-daughter to
Comnene, Emperor of Trebizonde. But that counteth little," he added magnanimously; "since the
Empire of Trebizonde hath ceased to be."

"For the matter of birth--verily, as thou hast said, 'it is a trifle,'" the King admitted with
a laugh: "but I must create thee Master to the Pedigree of the House of Lusignan--a right royal
post--and at thy discretion thou mayest find or make it of a color noble enough to mate with
thy fair maid of Venice."

"It pleaseth your Majesty to be of a merry mood. And for the dowry----"

Thence followed this embassy to Venice, for Janus was of those who would bear no thwarting
nor delay. The princely dowry was forthcoming, for it had been offered by Messer Andrea Cornaro
himself, and the condition of adoption by the Republic, "that the bride might be of a station
befitting the royal alliance," well became the pleasure of the dignified Signoria.

II

They had just told her a thing most strange--a secret that made her childish heart stand still
with wonder, then beat with a sort of frightened excitement, all unbefitting the new dignity
to which she was called; for she was still enough a child to feel the glamour of it through
all the strangeness, and she had stolen out upon the balcony, high over the Canal, to say over
to herself the words that had been confided to her--the little maid Caterina.

She dropped the title softly down to the water below, and started at the echo of her own trembling
voice.

Caterina Queen of Cyprus: Caterina--Regina!

A swaying figure in a passing gondola glanced up to the balcony of the old Palazzo Cornaro
and the young girl hastily fled, not pausing until she had reached her own little chamber,
looking on an inner court--the only sanctuary that she could call her own, in all this great
ancestral palace, she, the future Queen of Cyprus.

Had any one heard her murmur those words? Would the Senate know that some one in a gondola
had caught the new title from her own lips? And so--perchance--to punish the indiscretion--for
the Senate was masterful, never-to-be-disobeyed, and the matter was not to be known until it
should be declared by that solemn body of world-rulers. And if the gondoliero had carried her
word to the Palazzo San Marco----? What if he had been sent there by the Senate itself to watch
and see if she were already woman enough to be trusted? Then there would be an end to the golden
dream--no coronation--no splendid ceremony of adoption. For there was more. Before she should
be made queen of that distant island she was to be formally acknowledged "The Daughter of the
Republic----" She was to be made a real Princess of Venice!

What wonder that the heart of this young Venetian maid quivered with the excitement of these
visions of splendor, for by all the traditions of her ancestors she measured the unwonted honor
that was being decreed for her--no one had yet been adopted "Daughter to the Republic"--the
title was to be created that she might wear a crown, to the further honor of Venice! For her,
who had never worn a jewel, nor a robe of state, nor taken part in any but the simplest fête,
who had never left the walls of her ancestral palace, save under closest veil and guard--this
sudden vision of freedom and empire was intoxicating.

If she had known of those wonderful tales of the "Arabian Nights" these things that were happening
to her would have seemed more wonderful still: but her young mind was free of similes--a sensitive
blank whereon the Senate might duly inscribe whatever tendencies seemed judicious; and after
the Betrothal there would be much time.

Caterina had taken courage again and stolen back to the balcony that opened upon the Canal
Grande from the vast upper salon, impelled by her longing for freedom and light. The ripple
of the water to the plash of passing gondolas took on the note of distance and soothed her
like a lullaby, as the charming maid yielded herself to the golden daydream--the soft breezes
lifting the bright rings of hair that clustered about her dainty head, while the wonderful
light of the skies of Venice smiled down upon her like a caress. The strangeness slipped away
from the new facts she had been repeating to herself, for she had already begun to take pride
in them; and the other questions that had troubled her for a moment, were forgotten. All kings
were to her youthful imagination great and noble when they were the friends of the Republic,
and Janus was the close ally of Venice. In this stately patrician household she had suddenly
risen to be first--not only as all maids are wont to be on the eve of their betrothal, with
much circumstance of laces and brocade and gifts and jewels--but she was to bring new honor
to their ancient house--honor even upon Venice, for her father had declared that the Senators,
the Councillors, all the great men of the Republic--the Serenissimo himself--would bring her
homage. It was a dizzying dream of glory--beautiful, child-hearted and fancy-free, she could
dream of no more golden vision than the Signoria were preparing for her.

So many generations of Cornari had gone forth from their palaces scattered through the great
places of Venice, as ambassadors on momentous missions, or as Senators or Savii, had instilled
the lesson of the glory of service to Venice; and more than once the mighty Lion of San Marco
had set his imperial seal above their portal, and she, Caterina, was to lead them all in the
honor she was bringing upon her country! If her own estimate of the part she was to play was
a foolish one, only a Venetian patrician maid could comprehend the glamour that overlay this
vision of Caterina's--the royal delivery from bondage--the unknown delights it must open to her!

"Thou art sent for, carina, to the crimson salon; thy Father would speak with thee."

It was the Lady Fiorenza, who seemed always a little sad to Caterina--too sad for all the state
that surrounded her; too grave to suit the splendor of her silken robes and gleaming jewels;
too weak to cope with the masterful ways of her lord, the Senator Marco Cornaro. Her mother's
hand almost crushed hers in the strenuous clasp which, strangely to Caterina, seemed to convey
a passionate message of sympathy; yet surely, at this radiant moment, there was nothing to
regret! She met the love in her mother's eyes with the smile of a satisfied child, though she
would have liked them all to rejoice with her.

The curtain that hung before the door of the crimson salon was raised by the page who stood
in waiting. Her stately father rose to greet her--which he had never done before in all her
little life. She felt with a sudden vague discomfort, that the world was changing for her.

"My daughter," he said, with a gravity of demeanor that befitted the importance of his message,
"thou bringest honor, not alone to the Casa Cornaro, but also to the Republic. I have this
day received from the island of Cyprus--of which thou shalt be Queen--" and he bent his knee,
in courtly fashion before his child, as though he would be first to bring her homage, "by the
hand of the ambassador Mastachelli, this portrait of thy Lord, Janus, the King; and these Eastern
pearls--a royal gift."

He kissed the little hand which Caterina eagerly stretched out for the casket; but her mother
covered her face with her hands, almost in an attitude of prayer.

The miniature was blazing with diamonds, and the pearls were more lustrous than any that had
ever been seen in Venice--for Cyprus was even beyond Venetia in luxury; and Caterina called
to her mother, with a note of triumph, to clasp them about her childish throat.

"I must learn to look a Queen!" she said with a little, playful, regal air: and then she dropped
her eyes upon the beautiful, laughing face of the royal lover who was to open paradise to her.
Her father watched her furtively; while her mother, over her child's shoulder, studied the
picture closely, feeling that it was too beautiful to trust.

"He is charming!" the girl cried in pleased surprise. She had not known what his face would
be like; she had scarcely had time to think of it since the strange news had been brought her,
a few hours before.

"He will be kind to thee," the mother said at length with conviction, yet with a sigh, as if
dissatisfied.