'I see it all,' said the archdeacon. 'The sly tartufe! He thinks to buy the daughter by providing
for the father. He means to show how powerful he is, how good he is, and how much he is willing
to do for her beaux yeux; yes, I see it all now. But we'll be too many for him yet, Mr Harding;'
he said, turning to his companion with some gravity, and pressing his hand on the other's arm.
'It would, perhaps, be better for you to lose the hospital than get it on such terms.'

'Lose it!' said Mr Harding; 'why I've lost it already. I don't want it. I've made up my mind
to do without it. I'll withdraw altogether. I'll just go and write a line to the bishop and
tell him that I withdraw my claim altogether.'

Nothing would have pleased him better than to be allowed to escape from the trouble and difficulty
in such a manner. But he was now going too fast for the archdeacon.

'No--no--no! We'll do no such thing,' said Dr Grantly; 'we'll still have the hospital. I hardly
doubt but that we'll have it. But not by Mr Slope's assistance. If that be necessary, we'll
lose it; but we'll have it, spite of his teeth, if we can. Arabin will be at Plumstead to-morrow;
you must come over and talk to him.'

The two now turned into the cathedral library, which was used by the clergymen of the close
as a sort of ecclesiastical club-room, for writing sermons and sometimes letters; also for
reading theological works, and sometimes magazines and newspapers. The theological works were
not disturbed, perhaps, quite as often as from the appearance of the building the outside public
might have been led to expect. Here the two allies settled on their course of action. The archdeacon
wrote a letter to the bishop, strongly worded, but still respectful, in which he put forward
his father-in-law's claim to the appointment, and expressed his own regret that he had not
been able to see his lordship when he called. Of Mr Slope me made no mention whatsoever. It
was then settled that Mr Harding should go to Plumstead on the following day; and after considerable
discussion on the matter, the archdeacon proposed to ask Eleanor there also, so as to withdraw
her, if possible, from Mr Slope's attentions. 'A week or two,' said he, 'may teach her what
he is, and while she is there she will be out of harm's way. Mr Slope won't come there after her.'

Eleanor was not a little surprised when her brother-in-law came back and very civilly pressed
her to go out to Plumstead with her father. She instantly perceived that her father had been
fighting her battles for her behind her back. She felt thankful to him, and for his sake she
would not show her resentment to the archdeacon by refusing his invitation. But she could not,
she said, go on the morrow; she had an invitation to drink tea at the Stanhopes which she had
promised to accept. She would, she added, go with her father on the next day, if he would wait;
or she would follow him.

'The Stanhopes!' said Dr Grantly; 'I did not know you were so intimate with them.'

'I did not know it myself,' said she, 'till Miss Stanhope called yesterday. However, I like
her very much, and I have promised to go and play chess with some of them.'

'Have they a party there?' said the archdeacon, still fearful of Mr Slope.

'Oh, no,' said Eleanor; 'Miss Stanhope said there was to be nobody at all. But she had learnt
that Mary had left me for a few weeks, and she had learnt from some one that I play chess,
and so she came over on purpose to ask me to go in.'

'Well, that's very friendly,' said the ex-warden. 'They certainly do look more like foreigners
than English people, but I dare say they are none the worse for that.'

The archdeacon was inclined to look upon the Stanhopes with favourable eyes, and had nothing
to object on the matter. It was therefore arranged that Mr Harding should postpone his visit
to Plumstead for one day, and then take with him Eleanor, the baby, and the nurse.

Mr Slope is certainly becoming of some importance in Barchester.

CHAPTER XIX

BARCHESTER BY MOONLIGHT

There was much cause for grief and occasional perturbation of spirits in the Stanhope family,
but yet they rarely seemed to be grieved or to be disturbed. It was the peculiar gift of each
of them that each was able to bear his or her own burden without complaint, and perhaps without
sympathy. They habitually looked on the sunny side of the wall, if there was a gleam on the
either side for them to look at; and, if there was none, they endured the shade with an indifference
which, if not stoical, answered the end at which the Stoics aimed. Old Stanhope could not but
feel that he had ill-performed his duties as a father and a clergyman; and could hardly look
forward to his own death without grief at the position in which he would leave his family.
His income for many years had been as high as L 3000 a year, and yet they had among them no
other provision than their mother's fortune of L 10,000. He had not only spent his income,
but was in debt. Yet, with all this, he seldom showed much outward sign of trouble.

It was the same with the mother. If she added little to the pleasures of her children she detracted
still less: she neither grumbled at her lot, nor spoke much of her past or future sufferings;
as long as she had a maid to adjust her dress, and had those dresses well made, nature with
her was satisfied. It was the same with her children. Charlotte never rebuked her father with
the prospect of their future poverty, nor did it seem to grieve her that she was becoming an
old maid so quickly; her temper was rarely ruffled, and, if we might judge by her appearance,
she was always happy. The signora was not so sweet-tempered, but she possessed much enduring
courage; she seldom complained--never, indeed, to her family. Though she had a cause for affliction
which would have utterly broken down the heart of most women as beautiful as she and as devoid
of all religious support, yet, she bore her suffering in silence, or alluded to it only to
elicit the sympathy and stimulate the admiration of the men with whom she flirted. As to Bertie,
one would have imagined from the sound of his voice and the gleam of his eye that he had not
a sorrow nor a care in the world. Nor had he. He was incapable of anticipating tomorrow's griefs.
The prospect of future want no more disturbed his appetite than does that of the butcher's
knife disturb the appetite of the sheep.

Such was the usual tenor of their way; but there were rare exceptions. Occasionally the father
would allow an angry glance to fall from his eye, and the lion would send forth a low dangerous
roar as though he meditated some deed of blood. Occasionally also Madame Neroni would become
bitter against mankind, more than usually antagonistic to the world's decencies, and would
seem as though she was about to break from her moorings and allow herself to be carried forth
by the tide of her feelings to utter ruin and shipwreck. She, however, like the rest of them,
had no real feelings, could feel no true passion. In that was her security. Before she resolved
on any contemplated escapade she would make a small calculation, and generally summed up that
the Stanhope villa or even Barchester close was better than the world at large.

They were most irregular in their hours. The father was generally the earliest in the breakfast-parlour,
and Charlotte would soon follow and give him coffee; but the others breakfasted anywhere anyhow,
and at any time. On the morning after the archdeacon's futile visit to the palace, Dr Stanhope
came down stairs with an ominously dark look about his eyebrows; his white locks were rougher
than usual, and he breathed thickly and loudly as he took his seat in his arm-chair. He had
open letters in his hand, and when Charlotte came into the room he was still reading them.
She went up and kissed him as was her wont, but he hardly noticed her as she did so, and she
knew at once that something was the matter.

'What's the meaning of that?' said he, throwing over the table a letter with a Milan post-mark.
Charlotte was a little frightened as she took it up, but her mind was relieved when she saw
that it was merely the bill of their Italian milliner. The sum total was certainly large, but
not so large as to create an important row.

'It's for our clothes, papa, for six months before we came here. The three of us can't dress
for nothing you know.'

'Nothing, indeed!' said he, looking at the figures, which in Milanese denominations were certainly
monstrous.

'The man should have sent it to me,' said Charlotte.

'I wish he had with all my heart--if you would have paid it. I see enough in it, to know that
three quarters of it are for Madeline.'

'She has little else to amuse her, sir,' said Charlotte with true good nature.

'And I suppose he has nothing to amuse him,' said the doctor, throwing over another letter
to his daughter. It was from some member of the family of Sidonia, and politely requested the
father to pay a small trifle of L 700, being the amount of a bill discounted in favour of Mr
Ethelbert Stanhope, and now overdue for a period of nine months.

Charlotte read the letter, slowly folded it up, and put it under the edge of the tea-tray.

'I suppose he has nothing to amuse him but discounting bills with Jews. Does he think I'll
pay that?'

'I am sure he thinks no such thing,' said she.

'And who does he think will pay it?'

'As far as honesty goes, I suppose it won't much matter if it is never paid,' said she. 'I
dare say he got very little of it.'

'I suppose it won't much matter either,' said the father, 'if he goes to prison and rots there.
It seems to me that that's the other alternative.'

Dr Stanhope spoke the custom of his youth. But his daughter, though she lived so long abroad,
was much more completely versed in the ways of the English world. 'If the man arrests him,'
said she, 'he must go through the court.'

It is thus, thou great family of Sidonia--it is thus that we Gentiles treat thee, when, in
our most extreme need, thou and thine have aided us with mountains of gold as big as lions--and
occasionally with wine-warrants and orders for dozens of dressing-cases.

'What, and become an insolvent?' said the doctor.

'He's that already,' said Charlotte, wishing always to get over a difficulty.

'What a condition,' said the doctor, 'for the son of a clergyman of the Church of England.'

'I don't see why clergymen's sons should pay their debts more than other young men,' said Charlotte.

'He's had as much from me since he left school as is held sufficient for the eldest son of
many a nobleman,' said the angry father.

'Well, sir,' said Charlotte, 'give him another chance.'

'What!' said the doctor, 'do you mean that I am to pay that Jew?'

'Oh, no! I wouldn't pay him, he must take his chance; and if the worst comes to the worst,
Bertie must go abroad. But I want you to be civil to Bertie, and let him remain here as long
as we stop. He has a plan in his head, that may put him on his feet after all.'

Just at that moment the door opened, and Bertie came in whistling. The doctor immediately devoted
himself to his egg, and allowed Bertie to whistle himself round to his sister's side without
noticing him.

Charlotte gave a little sign to him with her eye, first glancing at her father, and then at
the letter, the corner of which peeped out from under the tea-tray. Bertie saw and understood,
and with the quiet motion of a cat abstracted the letter, and made himself acquainted with
its contents. The doctor, however, had seen him, deep as he appeared to be mersed in his egg-shell,
and said in his harshest voice, 'Well, sir, do you know that gentleman?'

'Yes, sir,' said Bertie. 'I have a sort of acquaintance with him, but none that can justify
him in troubling you. If you will allow me, sir, I will answer this.'

'At any rate I shan't,' said the father, and then he added, after a pause, 'Is it true, sir,
that you owe the man L 700?'

'Well,' said Bertie, 'I think I should be inclined to dispute the amount, if I were in a condition
to pay him such of it as I really do owe him.'

'Has he your bill for L 700?' said the father, speaking very loudly and very angrily.

'Well, I believe he has,' said Bertie; 'but all the money I ever got from him was L 150.'

'And what became of the L 550?'

'Why, sir; the commission was L 100, or so, and I took the remainder in paving-stones and rocking-horses.'

'Paving-stones and rocking-horses!' said the doctor, 'where are they?'

'Oh, sir, I suppose they are in London somewhere--but I'll inquire if you wish for them.'

'He's an idiot,' said the doctor, 'and it's sheer folly to waste more money on him. Nothing
can save him from ruin,' and so saying, the unhappy father walked out of the room.

'Would the governor like to see the paving-stones?'

'I'll tell you what,' said she. 'If you don't take care, you will find yourself loose upon
the world without even a house over your head: you don't know him as well as I do. He's very
angry.'

Bertie stroked his big beard, sipped his tea, chatted over his misfortunes in a half comic,
half serious tone, and ended by promising his sister that he would do his very best to make
himself agreeable to the widow Bold. Then Charlotte followed her father to his own room and
softened down his wrath, and persuaded him to say nothing more about the Jew bill discounter,
at any rate for a few weeks. He even went so far as to say he would pay the L 700, or at any
rate settle the bill, if he saw a certainty of his son's securing for himself anything like
a decent provision in life. Nothing was said openly between them about poor Eleanor: but the
father and the daughter understood each other.

They all met together in the drawing-room at nine o'clock, in perfect good humour with each
other; and about that hour Mrs Bold was announced. She had never been in the house before,
though she had of course called: and now she felt it strange to find herself there in her usual
evening dress, entering the drawing-room of these strangers in this friendly unceremonious
way, as though she had known them all her life. But in three minutes they made her at home.
Charlotte tripped downstairs and took her bonnet from her, and Bertie came to relieve her from
her shawl, and the signora smiled on her as she could smile when she chose to be gracious,
and the old doctor shook hands with her in a kind and benedictory manner that went to her heart
at once, and made her feel that he must be a good man.

She had not been seated for above five minutes when the door again opened, and Mr Slope was
announced. She felt rather surprised, because she was told that nobody was to be there, and
it was very evident from the manner of some of them that Mr Slope was unexpected. But still
there was not much in it. In such invitations a bachelor or two more or less are always spoken
of as nobodies, and there was no reason why Mr Slope should not drink tea at Dr Stanhope's
as well as Eleanor herself. He, however, was very much surprised and not very much gratified
at finding that his own embryo spouse made one of the party. He had come there to gratify himself
by gazing on Madame Neroni's beauty, and listening to and returning her flattery: and though
he had not owned as much to himself, he still felt that if he spent the evening as he had intended
to do, he might probably not thereby advance his suit with Mrs Bold.

The signora, who had no idea of a rival, received Mr Slope with her usual marks of distinction.
As he took her hand, she made some confidential communication to him in a low voice, declaring
that she had a plan to communicate to him after tea, and was evidently prepared to go on with
her work of reducing the chaplain to a state of captivity. Poor Mr Slope was rather beside
himself. He thought that Eleanor could not but have learnt from his demeanour that he was an
admirer of her own, and he had also flattered himself that the idea was not unacceptable to
her. What would she think of him if he now devoted himself to a married woman?

But Eleanor was not inclined to be severe in her criticism on him in that respect, and felt
no annoyance of any kind, when she found herself seated between Bertie and Charlotte Stanhope.
She had not suspicion of Mr Slope's intentions; she had no suspicion even of the suspicion
of other people; but still she felt well pleased not to have Mr Slope too near to her.

And she was not ill-pleased to have Bertie Stanhope near her. It was rarely indeed that he
failed to make an agreeable impression on strangers. With a bishop indeed who thought much
of his own dignity it was possible that he might fail, but hardly with a young lady and pretty
woman. He possessed the tact of becoming instantly intimate with women without giving rise
to any fear of impertinence. He had about him somewhat of the propensities of a tame cat. It
seemed quite natural that he should be petted, caressed, and treated with familiar good nature,
and that in return he should purr, and be sleek and graceful, and above all never show his
claws. Like other tame cats, however, he had his claws, and sometimes, made them dangerous.

When tea was over Charlotte went to the open window and declared loudly that the full harvest
moon was much too beautiful to be disregarded, and called them to look at it. To tell the truth,
there was but one there who cared much about the moon's beauty, and that one was not Charlotte;
but she knew how valuable an aid to her purpose the chaste goddess might become, and could
easily create a little enthusiasm for the purpose of the moment. Eleanor and Bertie were soon
with her. The doctor was now quiet in his arm- chair, and Mrs Stanhope in hers, both prepared
for slumber.

'Are you a Whewellite or a Brewsterite, or a t'othermanite, Mrs Bold?' said Charlotte, who
knew a little about everything, and had read about a third of each of the books to which she
alluded.

'Oh!' said Eleanor; 'I have not read any of the books, but I feel sure that there is one man
in the moon at least, if not more.'

'You don't believe in the pulpy gelatinous matter?' said Bertie.

'I heard about that,' said Eleanor; 'and I really think it's almost wicked to talk in such
a manner. How can we argue about God's power in the other stars from the laws which he has
given for our role in this one?'

'How indeed!' said Bertie. 'Why shouldn't there be a race of salamanders in Venus? And even
if there be nothing but fish in Jupiter, why shouldn't the fish there be as wide awake as the
men and women here?'

'That would be saying very little for them,' said Charlotte. 'I am for Dr Whewell myself; for
I do not think that men and woman are worth being repeated in such countless worlds. There
may be souls in other stars, but I doubt their having any bodies attached to them. But come,
Mrs Bold, let us put our bonnets on and walk round the close. If we are to discuss sidereal
questions, we shall do so much better under the towers of the cathedral, than stuck in this
narrow window.

Mrs Bold made no objection, and a party was made to walk out. Charlotte Stanhope well knew
the rule as to three being no company, and she had therefore to induce her sister to allow
Mr Slope to accompany them.

'Come, Mr Slope,' she said; 'I'm sure you'll join us. We shall be in again in quarter of an
hour, Madeline.'

Madeline read in her eye all that she had to say, knew her object, and as she had to depend
on her sister for so many of her amusements, she felt that she must yield. It was hard to be
left alone while others of her own age walked out to feel the soft influence of the bright
night, but it would be harder still without the sort of sanction which Charlotte gave to all
her flirtations and intrigues. Charlotte's eye told her that she must give up just at present
for the good of the family, and so Madeline obeyed.

But Charlotte's eyes said nothing of the sort to Mr Slope. He had no objection at all to the
tete-a-tete with the signora, which the departure of the other three would allow him, and gently
whispered to her, 'I shall not leave you alone.'

'Oh, yes,' said she; 'go--pray go, pray go, for my sake. Do not think that I am so selfish.
It is understood that nobody is kept within for me. You will understand this too when you know
me better. Pray join them, Mr Slope, but when you come in speak to me for five minutes before
you leave us.'

Mr Slope understood that he was to go, and he therefore joined the party in the hall. He would
have had no objection at all to this arrangement, if he could have secured Mrs Bold's arm;
but this was of course out of the question. Indeed, his fate was very soon settled, for no
sooner had he reached the hall-door, than Miss Stanhope put her hand within his arm, and Bertie
walked off with Eleanor just as naturally as though she were already his own property.

And so they sauntered forth: first they walked round the close, according to their avowed intent;
then they went under the old arched gateway below St Cuthbert's little church, and then they
turned behind the grounds of the bishop's palace, and so on till they came to the bridge just
at the edge of the town, from which passers-by can look down into the gardens of Hiram's hospital;
and her Charlotte and Mr Slope, who were in advance, stopped till the other two came up to
them. Mr Slope knew that the gable-ends and old brick chimneys which stood up so prettily in
the moonlight, were those of Mr Harding's late abode, and would not have stopped on such a
spot, in such company, if he could have avoided it; but Miss Stanhope would not take the hint
which he tried to give.

'This is a very pretty place, Mrs Bold,' said Charlotte; 'by far the prettiest place near Barchester.
I wonder your father gave it up.'

It was a very pretty place, and now by the deceitful light of the moon looked twice larger,
twice prettier, twice more antiquely picturesque than it would have done in truth-telling daylight.
Who does not know the air of complex multiplicity and the mysterious interesting grace which
the moon always lends to old gabled buildings half surrounded, as was the hospital, by fine
trees! As seen from the bridge on the night of which we are speaking, Mr Harding's late abode
did look very lovely; and though Eleanor did not grieve at her father's having left it, she
felt at the moment an intense wish that he might be allowed to return.

'He is going to return to it immediately, is he not?' asked Bertie.

Eleanor made no immediate reply. Much such a question passed unanswered, without the notice
of the questioner; but such was not now the case. They all remained silent as though expecting
her to reply, and after a moment or two, Charlotte said, 'I believe it is settled that Mr Harding
returns to the hospital, is it not?'

'I don't think anything about it is settled yet,' said Eleanor.

'But it must be a matter of course,' said Bertie; 'that is, if your father wishes it; who else
on earth could hold it after what has occurred?'

Eleanor quietly made her companion to understand that the matter was one which she could not
discuss in the present company; and then they passed on; Charlotte said she would go a short
way up the hill out of the town so as to look back on the towers of the cathedral, and as Eleanor
leant upon Bertie's arm for assistance in the walk, she told him how the matter stood between
her father and the bishop.

'And, he,' said Bertie, pointing on to Mr Slope, 'what part does he take in it?'

Eleanor explained how Mr Slope had at first endeavoured to tyrannize over her father, but how
he had latterly come round, and done all he could to talk the bishop over in Mr Harding's favour.
'But my father,' said she, 'is hardly inclined to trust him; they all say he is so arrogant
to the old clergyman of the city.'

'Take my word for it,' said Bertie, 'your father is right. If I am not very much mistaken,
that man is both arrogant and false.'

They strolled up the top of the hill, and then returned through the fields by a footpath which
leads by a small wooden bridge, or rather a plank with a rustic rail to it, over the river
to the other side of the cathedral from that at which they had started. They had thus walked
round the bishop's grounds, through which the river runs, and round the cathedral and adjacent
fields, and it was past eleven before they reached the doctor's door.

'It is very late,' said Eleanor, 'it will be a shame to disturb your mother at such an hour.'

'Oh,' said Charlotte, laughing, 'you won't disturb mamma; I dare say she is in bed by this
time, and Madeline would be furious if you do not come in and see her. Come, Bertie, take Mrs
Bold's bonnet from her.'

They went up stairs, and found the signora alone, reading. She looked somewhat sad and melancholy,
but not more so perhaps than was sufficient to excite additional interest in the bosom of Mr
Slope; and she was soon deep in whispered intercourse with that happy gentleman, who was allowed
to find a resting-place on her sofa. The signora had a way of whispering that was peculiarly
her own, and was exactly the reverse of that which prevails among great tragedians. The great
tragedian hisses out a positive whisper, made with bated breath, and produced by inarticulate
tongue-formed sounds, but yet he is audible through the whole house. The signora however used
no hisses, and produced all her words in a clear silver tone, but they could only be heard
by the ear into which they were poured.

Charlotte hurried and skurried about the room hither and thither, doing, or pretending to do
many things; and then saying something about seeing her mother, ran up stairs. Eleanor was
then left alone with Bertie, and she hardly felt and hour fly by her. To give Bertie his due
credit, he could not have played his cards better. He did not make love to her, nor sigh, nor
look languishing; but he was amusing and familiar, yet respectful; and when he left Eleanor
at her own door at one o'clock, which he did by the bye with the assistance of the now jealous
Slope, she thought he was one of the most agreeable men, and the Stanhopes decidedly the most
agreeable family, that she had ever met.

CHAPTER XX

MR ARABIN

The Reverend Francis Arabin, fellow of Lazarus, late professor of poetry at Oxford, and present
vicar of St Ewold, in the diocese of Barchester, must now be introduced personally to the reader.
And as he will fill a conspicuous place in this volume, it is desirable that he should be made
to stand before the reader's eye by the aid of such portraiture as the author is able to produce.

It is to be regretted that no mental method of daguerreotype or photography has yet been discovered,
by which the characters of men can be reduced to writing and put into grammatical language
with an unerring precision of truthful description. How often does the novelist feel, ay, and
the historian also and the biographer, that he has conceived within his mind and accurately
depicted on the tablet of his brain the full character and personage of a man, and that nevertheless,
when he flies to pen and ink to perpetuate the portrait, his words forsake, elude, disappoint,
and play the deuce with him, till at the end of a dozen pages the man described has no more
resemblance to the man conceived than the sign board at the corner of the street has to the
Duke of Cambridge?

And yet such mechanical descriptive skill would hardly give more satisfaction to the reader
than the skill of the photographer does to the anxious mother desirous to possess an absolute
duplicate of her beloved child. The likeness is indeed true; but it is a dull, dead, unfeeling,
inauspicious likeness. The face is indeed there, and those looking at it will know at once
whose image it is; but the owner of the face will not be proud of the resemblance.

There is no royal road to learning; no short cut to the acquirement of any art. Let photographers
and daguerreotypers do what they will, and improve as they may with further skill on that which
skill has already done, they will never achieve a portrait of the human face as we may under
the burdens which we so often feel too heavy for our shoulders; we must either bear them up
like men, or own ourselves too weak for the work we have undertaken. There is no way of writing
well and also of writing easily.

Labor omnia vincit improbus. Such should be the chosen motto of every labourer, and it may
be that labour, if adequately enduring, may suffice at last to produce even some not untrue
resemblance of the Rev. Francis Arabin.

Of his doings in the world, and of the sort of fame which he has achieved, enough has already
been said. It has also been said that he is forty years of age, and still unmarried. He was
the younger son of a country gentleman of small fortune in the north of England. At an early
age he went to Winchester, and was intended by his father for New College; but though studious
as a boy, he was not studious within the prescribed limits; and at the age of eighteen he left
school with a character for talent, but without a scholarship. All that he had obtained, over
and above the advantage of his character, was a gold medal for English verse, and hence was
derived a strong presumption on the part of his friends that he was destined to add another
name to the imperishable list of English poets.

From Winchester he went to Oxford, and was entered as a commoner at Balliol. Here his special
career very soon commenced. He utterly eschewed the society of fast men, gave no wine parties,
kept no horses, rowed no boats, joined no rows, and was the pride of his college tutor. Such
at least was his career till he had taken his little go; and then he commenced a course of
action which, though not less creditable to himself as a man, was hardly so much to the taste
of his tutor. He became a member of a vigorous debating society, and rendered himself remarkable
there for humorous energy. Though always in earnest, yet his earnestness was always droll.
To be true in his ideas, unanswerable in his syllogisms, and just in his aspirations was not
enough for him. He had failed, failed in his own opinion as well as that of others when others
came to know him, if he could not reduce the arguments of his opponents to an absurdity, and
conquer both by wit and reason. To say that his object was ever to raise a laugh, would be
most untrue. He hated such common and unnecessary evidence of satisfaction on the part of his
hearers. A joke that required to be laughed at was, with him, not worth uttering. He could
appreciate by a keener sense than that of his ears the success of his wit, and would see in
the eyes of his auditory whether or no he was understood and appreciated.

He had been a religious lad before he left school. That is, he had addicted himself to a party
of religion, and having done so had received that benefit which most men do who become partisans
in such a cause. We are much too apt to look at schism in our church as an unmitigated evil.
Moderate schism, if there may be such a thing, at any rate calls attention to the subject,
draws its supporters who would otherwise have been inattentive to the matter, and teaches men
to think about religion. How great an amount of good of this description has followed that
movement of the Church of England which commenced with the publication of Froude's Remains!

As a boy young Arabin took up the cudgels on the side of the Tractarians, and at Oxford he
sat for a while at the feet of the great Newman. To this cause he lent all his faculties. For
it he concocted verses, for it he made speeches, for it he scintillated the brightest sparks
of his quiet wit. For it he ate and drank and dressed, and had his being. In due process of
time he took his degree, and wrote himself B.A., but he did not do so with any remarkable amount
of academical eclat. He had occupied himself too much with high church matters, and the polemics,
politics, and outward demonstrations usually concurrent with high churchmanship, to devote
himself with sufficient vigour to the acquisition of a double first. He was not a double first,
nor even a first class man; but he revenged himself on the university by putting first and
double firsts out of fashion for the year, and laughing down a species of pedantry which at
the age of twenty-three leaves no room in a man's mind for graver subjects than conic sections
or Greek accents.

Greek accents, however, and conic sections were esteemed necessaries at Balliol, and there
was no admittance there for Mr Arabin within the list of its fellows. Lazarus, however, the
richest and the most comfortable abode of Oxford dons, opened its bosom to the young champion
of a church militant. Mr Arabin was ordained, and became a fellow soon after taking his degree,
and shortly after that was chosen professor of poetry.

And now came the moment of his great danger. After many mental struggles, and an agony of doubt
which may be well surmised, the great prophet of the Tractarians confessed himself a Roman
Catholic. Mr Newman left the Church of England, and with him carried many a waverer. He did
not carry off Mr Arabin, but the escape which that gentleman had was a very narrow one. He
left Oxford for a while that he might meditate in complete peace on the step which appeared
for him to be all but unavoidable, and shut himself up in a little village on the sea-shore
of one of our remotest counties, that he might learn by communing with his own soul whether
or no he could with a safe conscience remain within the pale of his mother church.

Things would have gone badly with him there had he been left entirely to himself. Every thing
was against him: all his worldly interests required him to remain a Protestant; and he looked
on his worldly interests as a legion of foes, to get the better of whom was a point of extremest
honour. In his then state of ecstatic agony such a conquest would have cost him little; but
it cost him much to get over the idea of choosing the Church of England he should be open in
his own mind to the charge that he had been led to such a choice by unworthy motives. Then
his heart was against him: he loved with a strong and eager love the man who had hitherto been
his guide, and yearned to follow his footsteps. His tastes were against him: the ceremonies
and pomps of the Church of Rome, their august feasts and solemn fasts, invited his imagination
and pleased his eye. His flesh was against him: how great an aid would it be to a poor, weak,
wavering man to be constrained to high moral duties, self-denial, obedience, and chastity by
laws which were certain in their enactments, and not to be broken without loud, palpable, unmistakable
sin! Then his faith was against him: he required to believe so much; panted so early to give
signs of his belief; deemed it so insufficient to wash himself simply in the waters of Jordan;
that some great deed, such as that of forsaking everything for a true church, had for him allurements
almost past withstanding.

Mr Arabin was at this time a very young man, and when he left Oxford for his far retreat was
much too confident in his powers of fence, and too apt to look down on the ordinary sense of
ordinary people, to expect aid in the battle that he had to fight from any chance inhabitants
on the spot which he had selected. But Providence was good to him; and there, in that all but
desolate place, on the storm-beat shore of that distant sea, he met one who gradually changed
his mind, quieted his imagination, and taught him something of a Christian's duty. When Mr
Arabin left Oxford, he was inclined to look upon the rural clergymen of most English parishes
almost with contempt. It was his ambition, should he remain within the fold of the church,
to do somewhat towards redeeming and rectifying their inferiority, and to assist in infusing
energy and faith into the hearts of Christian ministers, who were, as he thought, too often
satisfied to go through life without much show of either.

And yet it was from such a one that Mr Arabin in his extremest need received that aid which
he so much required. It was from a poor curate of a small Cornish parish that he first learnt
to know that the highest laws for the governance of a Christian's duty must act from within
and not from without; that no man can become a serviceable servant solely by obedience to written
edicts; and that the safety which he was about to seek within the gates of Rome was no other
than the selfish freedom from personal danger which the bad soldier attempts to gain who counterfeits
illness on the eve of battle.

Mr Arabin returned to Oxford a humbler but a better and a happier man; and from that time forth
he put his shoulder to the wheel as a clergyman of the Church for which he had been educated.
The intercourse of those among whom he familiarly lived kept him staunch to the principles
of that system of the Church to which he had always belonged. Since his severance from Mr Newman,
no one had had so strong an influence over him as the head of his college. During the time
of his expected apostasy, Dr Gwynne had not felt much predisposition in favour of the young
fellow. Though a High Churchman himself within moderate limits, Dr Gwynne felt no sympathy
with men who could not satisfy their faiths with the Thirty-nine Articles. He regarded the
enthusiasm of such as Newman as a state of mind more nearly allied to madness than to religion;
and when he saw it evinced by a very young men, was inclined to attribute a good deal of it
to vanity. Dr Gwynne himself, though a religious man, was also a thoroughly practical man of
the world, and he regarded with no favourable eye the tenets of any one who looked on the two
things as incompatible. When he found Mr Arabin was a half Roman, he began to regret all that
he done towards bestowing a fellowship on so unworthy a recipient; and when again he learnt
that Mr Arabin would probably complete his journey to Rome, he regarded with some satisfaction
the fact that in such case the fellowship would be again vacant.

When, however, Mr Arabin returned and professed himself a confirmed Protestant, the master
of Lazarus again opened his arms to him, and gradually he became the pet of the college. For
some little time he was saturnine, silent, and unwilling to take any prominent part in university
broils; but gradually his mind recovered, or rather made its tone, and he became known as a
man always ready at a moment's notice to take up the cudgels in opposition to anything which
savoured of an evangelical bearing. He was great in sermons, great on platforms, great at after
dinner conversations, and always pleasant as well as great. He took delight in elections, served
on committees, opposed tooth and nail all projects of university reform, and talked jovially
over his glass of port of the ruin to be committed by the Whigs. The ordeal through which he
had gone, in resisting the blandishments of the lady of Rome, had certainly done much towards
the strengthening of his character. Although in small and outward matters he was self-confident
enough, nevertheless in things affecting the inner man he aimed at a humility of spirit which
would never have been attractive to him but for that visit to the coast of Cornwall. This visit
he now repeated every year.

Such is an interior view of Mr Arabin at the time when he accepted the living of St Ewold.
Exteriorly, he was not a remarkable person. He was above the middle height, well made, and
very active. His hair which had been jet black, was now tinged with gray, but his face bore
no sign of years. It would perhaps be wrong to say that he was handsome, but his face was,
nevertheless, high for beauty, and the formation of the forehead too massive and heavy: but
his eyes, nose and mouth were perfect. There was a continual play of lambent fire about his
eyes, which gave promise of either pathos or humour whenever he essayed to speak, and that
promise was rarely broken. There was a gentle play about his mouth which declared that his
wit never descended to sarcasm, and that there was no ill-nature in his repartee.

Mr Arabin was a popular man among women, but more so as a general than a special favourite.
Living as a fellow at Oxford, marriage with him had been out of the question, and it may be
doubted whether he had ever allowed his heart to be touched. Though belonging to a Church in
which celibacy is not the required lot of its ministers, he had come to regard himself as one
of those clergymen to whom to be a bachelor is almost a necessity. He had never looked for
parochial duty, and his career at Oxford was utterly incompatible with such domestic joys as
a wife and nursery. He looked on women, therefore, in the same light that one sees then regarded
by many Romish priests. He liked to have near him that which was pretty and amusing, but women
generally were little more to him than children. He talked to them without putting out all
his powers, and listened to them without any idea that what he should hear from them could
either actuate his conduct or influence his opinion.

Such was Mr Arabin, the new vicar of St Ewold, who is going to stay with the Grantlys, at Plumstead
Episcopi.

Mr Arabin reached Plumstead the day before Mr Harding and Eleanor, and the Grantly family were
thus enabled to make his acquaintance and discuss his qualifications before the arrival of
the other guests. Griselda was surprised to find that he looked so young; but she told Florinda
her younger sister, when they had retired for the night, that he did not talk at all like a
young man: and she decided with the authority that seventeen has over sixteen, that he was
not at all nice, although his eyes were lovely. As usual, sixteen implicitly acceded to the
dictum of seventeen in such a matter, and said that he certainly was not nice. They then branched
off on the relative merits of other clerical bachelors in the vicinity, and both determined
without any feeling of jealousy between them that a certain Rev. Augustus Green was by many
degrees the most estimable of the lot. The gentleman in question had certainly much in his
favour, as, having a comfortable allowance from his father, he could devote the whole proceeds
of his curacy to violet gloves and unexceptionable neck ties. Having thus fixedly resolved
that the new comer had nothing about him to shake the pre-eminence of the exalted Green, the
two girls went to sleep in each other's arms, contented with themselves and the world.

Mrs Grantly at first sight came to much the same conclusion about her husband's favourite as
her daughters had done, though, in seeking to measure his relative value, she did not compare
him to Mr Green; indeed, she made no comparison by name between him and any one else; but she
remarked to her husband that one person's swans were very often another person's geese, thereby
clearly showing that Mr Arabin had not yet proved his qualifications in swanhood to her satisfaction.

'Well, Susan,' said he, rather offended at hearing his friend spoken of so disrespectfully,
'if you take Mr Arabin for a goose, I cannot say that I think very highly of your discrimination.'

'A goose! No of course, he's not a goose. I've no doubt he's a very clever man. But you're
so matter-of-fact, archdeacon, when it suits your purpose, that one can't trust oneself to
any facon de parler. I've no doubt Mr Arabin is a very valuable man--at Oxford, and that he'll
be a good vicar at St Ewold. All I mean is, that having passed one evening with him, I don't
find him to be absolutely a paragon. In the first place, if I am not mistaken, he is a little
inclined to be conceited.'

'Of all the men that I know intimately,' said the archdeacon, 'Arabin is, in my opinion, the
most free from any taint of self-conceit. His fault is that he's too diffident.'

'Perhaps so,' said the lady; 'only I must own I did not find it out this evening.'

Nothing further was said about him. Dr Grantly thought that his wife was abusing Mr Arabin
merely because he had praised him; and Mrs Grantly knew that it was useless arguing for or
against any person in favour of, or in opposition to whom the archdeacon had already pronounced
a strong opinion.

In truth they were both right. Mr Arabin was a diffident man in social intercourse with those
whom he did not intimately know; when placed in situations which it was his business to fill,
and discussing matters with which it was his duty to be conversant, Mr Arabin was from habit
brazed-faced enough. When standing on a platform in Exeter Hall, no man would be less mazed
than he by the eyes of the crowd before him; for such was the work which his profession had
called on him to perform; but he shrank from a strong expression of opinion in general society,
and his doing so not uncommonly made it appear that he considered the company not worth the
trouble of his energy. He was averse to dictate when the place did not seem to him to justify
dictation; and as those subjects on which people wished to hear him speak were such as he was
accustomed to treat with decision, he generally shunned the traps there were laid to allure
him into discussion, and, by doing so, not unfrequently subjected himself to such charges as
those brought against him by Mrs Grantly.

Mr Arabin, as he sat at his open window, enjoying the delicious moonlight and gazing at the
gray towers of the church, which stood almost within the rectory grounds, little dreamed that
he was the subject of so many friendly or unfriendly criticisms. Considering how much we are
all given to discuss the characters of others, and discuss them often not in the strictest
spirit of charity, it is singular how little we are inclined to think that others can speak
ill-naturedly of us, and how angry and hurt we are when proof reaches us that they have done
so. It is hardly too much to say that we all of us occasionally speak of our dearest friends
in a manner which those dearest friends would very little like to hear themselves mentioned;
and that we nevertheless expect that our dearest friends shall invariably speak of us as though
they were blind to all our faults, but keenly alive to every shade of our virtues.

It did not occur to Mr Arabin that he was spoken of at all. It seemed to him, when he compared
himself with his host, that he was a person of so little consequence to any, that he was worth
no one's words or thoughts. He was utterly alone in the world as regarded domestic ties and
those inner familiar relations which are hardly possible between others than husbands and wives,
parents and children, or brothers and sisters. He had often discussed with himself the necessity
of such bonds for a man's happiness in this world, and had generally satisfied himself with
the answer that happiness in this world was not a necessity. Herein he deceived himself, or
rather tried to do so. He, like others, yearned for the enjoyment of whatever he saw enjoyable;
and though he attempted, with the modern stoicism of so many Christians, to make himself believe
that joy and sorrow were matters which here should be held as perfectly indifferent, those
things were not indifferent to him. He was tired of his Oxford rooms and his college life.
He regarded the wife and children of his friend with something like envy; he all but coveted
the pleasant drawing-room, with its pretty windows opening on to lawns and flower-beds, the
apparel of the comfortable house, and--above all--the air of home which encompassed all.

It will be said that no time can have been fitted for such desires on his part as this, of
a living among fields and gardens, of a house which a wife would grace. It is true there was
a difference between the opulence of Plumstead and the modest economy of St Ewold; but surely
Mr Arabin was not a man to sigh after wealth! Of all men, his friends would have unanimously
declared he was the last to do so. But how little our friends know us! In his period of stoical
rejection of this world's happiness, he had cast from him as utter dross all anxiety as to
fortune. He had, as it were, proclaimed himself to be indifferent to promotion, and those who
chiefly admired his talents, and would mainly have exerted to secure them their deserved reward,
had taken him at his word. And now, if the truth must out, he felt himself disappointed--disappointed
not by them but by himself. The daydream of his youth was over, and at the age of forty he
felt that he was not fit to work in the spirit of an apostle. He had mistaken himself, and
learned his mistake when it was past remedy. He had professed himself indifferent to mitres
and diaconal residences, to rich livings and pleasant glebes, and now he had to own to himself
that he was sighing for the good things of other men, on whom in his pride he had ventured
to look down.

Not for wealth, in its vulgar sense, had he ever sighed; not for the enjoyment of rich things
had he ever longed; but for the allotted share of worldly bliss, which a wife, and children,
and happy home could give him, for that usual amount of comfort which he had ventured to reject
as unnecessary for him, he did now feel that he would have been wiser to search.

He knew that his talents, his position, and his friends would have won for him promotion, had
he put himself in the way of winning it. Instead of doing so, he had allowed himself an income
of some L 300 a year, should he, by marrying, throw up his fellowship. Such, at the age of
forty, was the worldly result of labour, which the world had chosen to regard as successful.
The world also thought that Mr Arabin was, in his own estimation, sufficiently paid. Alas!
alas! the world was mistaken; and Mr Arabin was beginning to ascertain that such was the case.

And here, may I beg the reader not to be hard in the judgement upon this man. Is not the state
at which he has arrived, the natural result of efforts to reach that which is not the condition
of humanity? Is not modern stoicism, built though it be on Christianity, as great an outrage
on human nature as was the stoicism of the ancients? The philosophy of Zeno was built on true
laws, but on true laws misunderstood, and therefore misapplied. It is the same with our Stoics
here, who would teach us that wealth and worldly comfort and happiness on earth are not worth
the search. Also, for a doctrine which can find no believing pupils and no true teachers!

The case of Mr Arabin was the more singular, as he belonged to a branch of the Church of England
well inclined to regard its temporalities with avowed favour, and had habitually lived with
men who were accustomed to much worldly comfort. But such was his idiosyncrasy, that these
very facts had produced within him, in early life, a state of mind that was not natural to
him. He was content to be a High Churchman, if he could be so on principles of his own, and
could strike out a course showing a marked difference from those with whom he consorted. He
was ready to be a partisan as long as he was allowed to have a course of action and of thought
unlike that of his party. His party had indulged him, and he began to feel that his party was
right and himself wrong, but when such a conviction was too late to be of service to him. He
discovered, when much was discovery was no longer serviceable, that it would have been worth
his while to have worked for the usual pay assigned to work in this world, and have earned
a wife and children, with a carriage for them to sit in; to have earned a pleasant dining-room,
in which his friends could drink his wine, and the power of walking up in the high street of
his country town, with the knowledge that all its tradesmen would have gladly welcomed him
within their doors. Other men arrived at those convictions in their start of life, and so worked
up to them. To him they had come when they were too late to be of use.

It has been said that Mr Arabin was a man of pleasantry and it may be thought that such a state
of mind as that described, would be antagonistic to humour. But surely such is not the case.
Wit is the outward mental casing of the man, and has no more to do with the inner mind of thought
and feelings than have the rich brocaded garments of the priest at the altar with the asceticism
of the anchorite below them, whose skin is tormented with sackcloth, and whose body is half
flayed with rods. Nay, will not such a one often rejoice more than any other in the rich show
of outer apparel? Will it not be food for his pride to feel that he groans inwardly, while
he shines outwardly? So it is with the mental efforts which men make. Those which they show
forth daily to the world are often the opposites of the inner workings of the spirit.

In the archdeacon's drawing-room, Mr Arabin had sparkled with his usual unaffected brilliancy,
but when he retired to his bed-room, he sat there sad, at his open window, repining within
himself that he also had no wife, no bairns, no soft award of lawn duly mown for him to be
on, no herd of attendant curates, no bowings from the banker's clerks, no rich rectory. That
apostleship that he had thought of had evaded his grasp, and he was now only vicar of St Ewold's,
with a taste for a mitre. Truly he had fallen between two stools.

CHAPTER XXI

ST EWOLD'S PARSONAGE

When Mr Harding and Mrs Bold reached the rectory on the following morning, the archdeacon and
his friend were at St Ewold's. They had gone over that the new vicar might inspect his church,
and be introduced to the squire, and were not expected back before dinner. Mr Harding rambled
out by himself, and strolled, as was his wont at Plumstead, about the lawn and round the church;
and as he did so, the two sisters naturally fell into conversation about Barchester.

There was not much sisterly confidence between them. Mrs Grantly was ten years older than Eleanor,
and had been married while Eleanor was yet a child. They had never, therefore, poured into
each other's ears their hopes and loves; and now that one was a wife and the other a widow,
it was not probable that they would begin to do so. They lived too much asunder to be able
to fall into that kind of intercourse which makes confidence between sisters almost a necessity;
and, moreover, that which is so easy at eighteen is often very difficult at twenty-eight. Mrs
Grantly knew this, and did not, therefore, expect confidence from her sister; and yet she longed
to ask her whether in real truth Mr Slope was agreeable to her.

It was by no means difficult to turn the conversation to Mr Slope. That gentleman had become
so famous at Barchester, had so much to do with all clergymen connected with the city, and
was so specially concerned in the affairs of Mr Harding, that it would have been odd if Mr
Harding's daughters had not talked about him. Mrs Grantly was soon abusing him, which she did
with her whole heart; and Mrs Bold was nearly as eager to defend him. She positively disliked
the man, would have been delighted to learn that he had taken himself off so that she should
never see him again, had indeed almost a fear of him, and yet she constantly found herself
taking his part. The abuse of other people, and abuse of a nature that she felt to be unjust,
imposed that necessity on her, and at last made Mr Slope's defence an habitual course of argument
with her.

From Mr Slope the conversation turned to the Stanhopes, and Mrs Grantly was listening with
some interest to Eleanor's account of the family, when it dropped out that Mr Slope was one
of the party.

'What!' said the lady of the rectory, 'was Mr Slope there too?'

Eleanor merely replied that such had been the case.

'Why, Eleanor, he must be very fond of you, I think; he seems to follow you everywhere.'

Even this did not open Eleanor's eyes. She merely laughed, and said that she imagined Mr Slope
found other attraction at Dr Stanhope's. And so they parted. Mrs Grantly felt quite convinced
that the odious match would take place; and Mrs Bold as convinced that that unfortunate chaplain,
disagreeable as he must be allowed to be, was more sinned against than sinning.

The archdeacon of course heard before dinner that Eleanor had remained the day before at Barchester
with the view of meeting Mr Slope, and that she had so met him. He remembered how she had positively
stated that there were to be guests at the Stanhopes, and he did not hesitate to accuse her
of deceit. Moreover, the fact, or rather the presumed fact, of her being deceitful on such
a matter, spoke but too plainly in evidence against her as to her imputed crime of receiving
Mr Slope as a lover.

'I am afraid that anything we can do will be too late,' said the archdeacon. 'I own I am fairly
surprised. I never liked your sister's taste with regard to men; but still I did not give her
credit for--ugh!'

'And so soon, too,' said Mrs Grantly, who thought more, perhaps, of her sister's indecorum
in having a lover before she had put off her weeds, than her bad taste in having such a lover
as Mr Slope.

'Well, my dear, I shall be sorry to be harsh, or to do anything that can hurt your father;
but, positively, neither that man nor his wife shall come within my doors.'

Mrs Grantly sighed, and then attempted to console herself and her lord by remarking that, after
all, the thing was not accomplished yet. Now that Eleanor was at Plumstead, much might be done
to wean her from her fatal passion. Poor Eleanor!

The evening passed off without anything to make it remarkable. Mr Arabin discussed the parish
of St Ewold with the archdeacon, and Mrs Grantly and Mr Harding, who knew the parsonages of
the parish, joined in. Eleanor also knew them, but spoke little. Mr Arabin did not apparently
take much notice of her, and she was not in a humour to receive at that time with any special
grace any special favourite of her brother-in-law. Her first idea on reaching her bedroom was
that a much more pleasant family party might be met at Dr Stanhope's than at the rectory. She
began to think that she was getting tired of clergymen and their respectable humdrum wearisome
mode of living, and that after all, people in the outer world, who had lived in Italy, London,
or elsewhere, need not necessarily be regarded as atrocious and abominable. The Stanhopes,
she had thought, were a giddy, thoughtless, extravagant set of people; but she had seen nothing
wrong about them, and had, on the other hand, found that they thoroughly knew how to make their
house agreeable. It was a thousand pities, she thought, that the archdeacon should not have
a little of the same savoir vivre. Mr Arabin, as we have said, did not apparently take much
notice of her; but yet he did not go to bed without feeling that he had been in company with
a very pretty woman; and as is the case with most bachelors, and some married men, regarded
the prospect of his month's visit at Plumstead in a pleasanter light, when he learnt that a
very pretty woman was to share it with him.

Before they all retired it was settled that the whole party should drive over on the following
day to inspect the parsonage at St Ewold. The three clergymen were to discuss dilapidations,
and the two ladies were to lend their assistance in suggesting such changes as might be necessary
for a bachelor's abode. Accordingly, soon after breakfast, the carriage was at the door. There
was only room for four inside, and the archdeacon got upon the box. Eleanor found herself opposite
to Mr Arabin, and was, therefore, in a manner forced into conversation with him. They were
soon on comfortable terms together; and had she thought about it, she would have thought that,
in spite of his black cloth, Mr Arabin would not have been a bad addition to the Stanhope family
party.

Now that the archdeacon was away, they could all trifle. Mr Harding began by telling them in
the most innocent manner imaginable an old legend about Mr Arabin's new parish. There was,
he said, in days of yore, an illustrious priestess of St Ewold, famed through the whole country
for curing all manner of diseases. She had a well, as all priestesses have ever had, which
well was extant to this day, and shared in the minds of many of the people the sanctity which
belonged to the consecrated grounds of the parish church. Mr Arabin declared that he should
look on such tenets on the part of the parishioners as anything but orthodox. And Mrs Grantly
replied that she so entirely disagreed with him as to think that no parish was in a proper
estate that had not its priestess as well as its priest. 'The duties are never well done,'
said she, 'unless they are so divided.'

'I suppose, papa,' said Eleanor, 'that in the oldest times the priestess bore all the sway
herself. Mr Arabin, perhaps, thinks that such might be too much the case now if a sacred lady
were admitted within the parish.'

'I think, at any rate,' said he, 'that it is safer to run no such risk. No priestly pride has
ever exceeded that of sacerdotal females. A very lowly curate, I might, perhaps, essay to rule;
but a curatess would be sure to get the better of me.'

'There are certainly examples of such accidents happening,' said Mrs Grantly. 'They do say
that there is a priestess at Barchester who is very imperious in all things touching the altar.
Perhaps the fear of such a fate as that is before your eyes.'

When they were joined by the archdeacon on the gravel before the vicarage, they descended again
to grave dullness. Not that Archdeacon Grantly was a dull man; but his frolic humours were
of a cumbrous kind; and his wit, when he was witty, did not generally extend itself to his
auditory. On the present occasion, he was soon making speeches about wounded roofs and walls,
which he declared to be in want of some surgeon's art. There was not a partition that he did
not tap, nor a block of chimneys that he did not narrowly examine; all water-pipes, flues,
cisterns, and sewers underwent his examination; and he even descended, in the care of his friend,
so far as to bore sundry boards in the floors with a bradawl.

Mr Arabin accompanied him through the rooms, trying to look wise in such domestic matters,
and the other three also followed. Mrs Grantly showed that she herself had not been priestess
of a parish twenty years for nothing, and examined the bells and window panes in a very knowing
way.

'You will, at any rate, have a beautiful prospect out of your own window, if this is to be
your private sanctum,' said Eleanor. She was standing at the lattice of a little room up stairs,
from which the view certainly was very lovely. It was from the back of the vicarage, and there
was nothing to interrupt the eye between the house and the glorious gray pile of the cathedral.
The intermediate ground, however, was beautifully studded with timber. In the immediate foreground
ran the little river which afterwards skirted the city; and, just to the right of the cathedral
the pointed gables and chimneys of Hiram's Hospital peeped out of the elms which encompass it.

'Yes,' said he, joining her. 'I shall have a beautifully complete view of my adversaries. I
shall sit down before the hostile town, and fire away at them at a very pleasant distance.
I shall just be able to lodge a shot in the hospital, should the enemy ever get possession
of it; and as for the palace, I have it within full range.'

'I never saw anything like you clergymen,' said Eleanor; 'you are always thinking of fighting
each other.'

'Either that,' said he, 'or else supporting each other. The pity is that we cannot do the one
without the other. But are we not here to fight? Is not ours a church militant? What is all
our work but fighting, and hard fighting, if it be well done?'

'But not with each other.'

'That's as it may be. The same complaint which you make of me for battling with another clergyman
of our own church, the Mahometan would make against me for battling with the error of a priest
of Rome. Yet, surely, you would not be inclined to say that I should be wrong to do battle
with such as him. A pagan, too, with his multiplicity of gods, would think it equally odd that
the Christian and the Mahometan should disagree.'

'Ah! But you wage your wars about trifles so bitterly.'

'Wars about trifles,' said he, 'are always bitter, especially among neighbours. When the differences
are great, and the parties comparative strangers, men quarrel with courtesy. What combatants
are ever so eager as two brothers?'

'But do not such contentions bring scandal on the church?'

'More scandal would fall on the church if there were no such contentions. We have but one way
to avoid them--that of acknowledging a common head of our church, whose word on all points
of doctrine shall be authoritative. Such a termination of our difficulties is alluring enough.
It has charms which are irresistible to many, and all but irresistible, I own, to me.'

'You speak now of the Church of Rome?' said Eleanor.

'No,' said he, 'not necessarily the Church of Rome; but of a church with a head. Had it pleased
God to vouchsafe to us such a church our path would have been easy. But easy paths have not
been thought good for us.' He paused and stood silent for a while, thinking of the time when
he had so nearly sacrificed all he had, his powers of mind, his free agency, the fresh running
waters of his mind's fountain, his very inner self, for an easy path in which no fighting would
be needed; and then he continued: 'What you say is partly true; our contentions do bring on
us some scandal. The outer world, though it constantly reviles us for our human infirmities,
and throws in our teeth the fact that being clergymen we are still no more then men, demands
of us that we should do our work with godlike perfection. There is nothing godlike about us:
we differ from each other with the acerbity common to man--we allow differences on subjects
of divine origin to produce among us antipathies and enmities which are anything but divine.
This is all true. But what would you have in place of it? There is no infallible head for a
church on earth. This dream of believing man has been tried, and we see in Italy and in Spain
what has become of it. Grant that there are and have been no bickerings within the pale of
the Pope's Church. Such an assumption would be utterly untrue; but let us grant it, and then
let us say which church has incurred the heaviest scandals.'

There was a quiet earnestness about Mr Arabin, as he half acknowledged and half defended himself
from the charge brought against him, which surprised Eleanor. She had been used all her life
to listen to clerical discussion; but the points at issue between the disputants had so seldom
been of more than temporal significance as to have left on her mind no feeling of reverence
for such subjects. There had always been a hard worldly leaven of the love either of income
or power in the strains that she had heard; there had been no panting for the truth; no aspirations
after religious purity. It had always been taken for granted by those around her that they
were indubitably right, that there was no ground for doubt, that the hard uphill work of ascertaining
what the duty of a clergyman should be had been already accomplished in full; and that what
remained for an active militant parson to do, was to hold his own against all comers. Her father,
it is true, was an exception to this; but then he was so essentially non-militant in all things,
that she classed him in her own mind apart from all others. She had never argued the matter
within herself, or considered whether this common tone was or was not faulty; but she was sick
of it without knowing that she was so. And now she found to her surprise and not without a
certain pleasurable excitement, that this new comer among them spoke in a manner very different
from that to which she was accustomed.

'It is so easy to condemn,' said he, continuing the thread of his thoughts. 'I know no life
that must be so delicious as that of a writer for newspapers, or a leading member of the opposition--to
thunder forth accusations against men in power; show up the worst side of every thing that
is produced; to pick holes in every coat; to be indignant, sarcastic, jocose, moral, or supercilious;
to damn with faint praise, or crush with open calumny! What can be so easy as this when the
critic has to be responsible for nothing? You condemn what I do; but put yourself in my position
and do the reverse, and then see if I cannot condemn you.'

'Oh! Mr Arabin, I do not condemn you.'

'Pardon me, you do, Mrs Bold--you as one of the world; you are now the opposition member; you
are now composing your leading article, and well and bitterly you do it. "Let dogs delight
to bark and bite;" you fitly began with an elegant quotation; "but if we are to have a church
at all, in heaven's name let the pastors who preside over it keep their hands from each other's
throats. Lawyers can live without befouling each other's names; doctors do not fight duels.
Why is that clergymen alone should indulge themselves in such unrestrained liberty of abuse
against each other?" and so you go on reviling us for our ungodly quarrels, our sectarian propensities,
and scandalous differences. It will, however, give you no trouble to write another article
next week in which we, or some of us, shall be twitted with an unseemly apathy in matters of
our vocation. It will not fall on you to reconcile the discrepancy; your readers will never
ask you how the poor parson is to be urgent in season and out of season, and yet never come
in contact with men who think widely differently from him. You, when you condemn this foreign
treaty, or that official arrangement, will have to incur no blame for the graver faults of
any different measure. It is so easy to condemn; and so pleasant too; for eulogy charms no
listeners as detraction does.'

Eleanor only half followed him in his raillery; but she caught his meaning. 'I know I ought
to apologise for presuming to criticise you,' she said; 'but I was thinking with sorrow of
the ill-will that has lately come among us at Barchester, and I spoke more freely than I should
have done.'

'Peace on earth and good-will among men, are, like heaven, promises for the future;' said he,
following rather his own thoughts than hers. 'When that prophecy is accomplished, there will
no longer be any need for clergymen.'

Here they were interrupted by the archdeacon, whose voice was heard from the cellar shouting
to the vicar.

'Arabin, Arabin,'--and then turning to his wife, who was apparently at his elbow--'where is
he gone to? This cellar is perfectly abominable. It would be murder to put a bottle of wine
into it till it has been roofed, walled, and floored. How on earth old Goodenough ever got
on with it, I cannot guess. But then Goodenough never had a glass of wine that any man could
drink.'

'What is it, archdeacon?' said the vicar, running down stairs, and leaving Eleanor above to
her meditations.

'This cellar must be roofed, walled, and floored,' repeated the archdeacon. 'Now mind what
I say, and don't let the architect persuade you that it will do; half of those fellows know
nothing about wine. This place as it is now would be damp and cold in winter, and hot and muggy
in summer. I wouldn't give a straw for the best wine that ever was minted, after it had lain
here a couple of years.'

Mr Arabin assented, and promised that the cellar should be reconstructed according to the archdeacon's
receipt.

'And, Arabin, look here; was such an attempt at a kitchen grate ever seen?'

'The grate is really very bad,' said Mrs Grantly; 'I am sure the priestess won't approve of
it, when she is brought here to the scene of future duties. Really, Mr Arabin, no priestess
accustomed to such an excellent well as that above could put up with such a grate as this.'

'If there must be a priestess at St Ewold's at all, Mrs Grantly, I think we shall leave her
to her well, and not call down her divine wrath on any of the imperfections rising from our
human poverty. However, I own I am amenable to the attractions of a well-cooked dinner, and
the grate shall certainly be changed.'

By this time the archdeacon had again ascended, and was now in the dining-room. 'Arabin,' said
he, speaking in his usual loud clear voice, and with that tone of dictation which was so common
to him; 'you must positively alter this dining-room, that is, remodel it altogether; look here,
it is just sixteen feet by fifteen; did anybody ever hear of a dining-room of such proportions?'
and the archdeacon stepped the room long-ways and cross-ways with ponderous steps, as though
a certain amount of ecclesiastical dignity could be imparted even to such an occupation as
that by the manner of doing it. 'Barely sixteen; you may call it a square.'

'It would do very well for a round table,' suggested the ex-warden.

Now there was something peculiarly unorthodox in the archdeacon's estimation in the idea of
a round table. He had always been accustomed to a goodly board of decent length, comfortably
elongating itself according to the number of guests, nearly black with perpetual rubbing, and
as bright as a mirror. Now round dinner tables are generally of oak, or else of such new construction
as not to have acquired the peculiar hue which was so pleasing to him. He connected them with
what he called the nasty new fangled method of leaving cloth on the table, as though to warn
people that they were not to sit long. In his eyes there was something democratic and parvenu
in a round table. He imagined that dissenters and calico-printers chiefly used them, and perhaps
a few literary lions more conspicuous for their wit than their gentility. He was a little flurried
at the idea of such an article, being introduced into the diocese by a protege of his own,
and at the instigation of his father-in-law.

'A round dinner-table,' said he, with some heat, 'is the most abominable article of furniture
that ever was invented. I hope that Arabin has more taste than to allow such a thing in his house.'

Poor Mr Harding felt himself completely snubbed, and of course said nothing further; but Mr
Arabin, who had yielded submissively in the small matters of the cellar and kitchen grate,
found himself obliged to oppose reforms which might be of a nature too expensive for his pocket.

'But it seems to me, archdeacon, that I can't very well lengthen the room without pulling down
the wall, and if I pull down the wall, I must build it up again; then if I throw out a bow
on this side, I must do the same on the other, then if I do it for the ground floor, I must
carry it up to the floor above. That will be putting a new front to the house, and will cost,
I suppose, a couple of hundred pounds. The ecclesiastical commissioners will hardly assist
me when they hear that my grievance consists in having a dining-room only sixteen feet long.'

The archdeacon proceeded to explain that nothing would be easier than adding six feet to the
front of the dining-room, without touching any other of the house. Such irregularities of construction
in small country houses were, he said, rather graceful than otherwise, and he offered to pay
for the whole thing out of his own pocket if it cost more than forty pounds. Mr Arabin, however,
was firm, and, although the archdeacon fussed and fumed about it, would not give way.

Forty pounds, he said, was a matter of serious moment to him, and his friends, if under such
circumstances they would be good-natured enough to come to him at all, must put up with the
misery of a square room. He was willing to compromise matters by disclaiming any intention
of having a round table.

'But,' said Mrs Grantly, 'what if the priestess insists on have both the rooms enlarged?'

'The priestess in that case must do it for herself, Mrs Grantly.'

'I have no doubt she will be well able to do so,' replied the lady; 'to do that and many more
wonderful things. I am quite sure that the priestess of St Ewold, when she does come, won't
come empty-handed.'

Mr Arabin, however, did not appear well inclined to enter into speculative expenses on such
a chance as this, and therefore, any material alterations in the house, the cost of which could
not fairly be made to lie at the door either of the ecclesiastical commission or of the estate
of the late incumbent, were tabooed. With this essential exception, the archdeacon ordered,
suggested, and carried all points before him in a manner very much to his own satisfaction.
A close observer, had there been one there, might have seen that his wife had been quite as
useful in the matter as himself. No one knew better than Mrs Grantly the appurtenances necessary
to a comfortable house. She did not, however, think it necessary to lay claim to any of the
glory which her lord and master was so ready to appropriate as his own.

Having gone through their work effectively, and systematically, the party returned to Plumstead
well satisfied with their expedition.

CHAPTER XXII

THE THORNES OF ULLATHORNE

On the following Sunday Mr Arabin was to read himself in at his new church. It was agreed at
the rectory that the archdeacon should go over with him and assist at the reading-desk, and
that Mr Harding should take the archdeacon's duty at Plumstead Church. Mrs Grantly had her
school and her buns to attend to, and professed that she could not be spared; but Mrs Bold
was to accompany them. It was further agreed also, that they would lunch at the squire's house,
and return home after the afternoon service.

Wilfred Thorne, Esq., of Ullathorne, was the squire of St Ewold's; or rather the squire of
Ullathorne; for the domain of the modern landlord was of wider notoriety than the fame of the
ancient saint. He was a fair specimen of what that race has come to in our days, which a century
ago was, as we are told, fairly represented by Squire Western. If that representation be a
true one, few classes of men can have made faster strides in improvement. Mr Thorne, however,
was a man possessed of quite a sufficient number of foibles to lay him open to much ridicule.
He was still a bachelor, being about fifty, and was not a little proud of his person. When
living at home at Ullathorne there was not much room for such pride, and there therefore he
always looked like a gentleman, and like that which he certainly was, the first man in his
parish. But during the month or six weeks which he annually spent in London, he tried so hard
to look like a great man there also, which he certainly was not, that he was put down as a
fool by many at his club. He was a man of considerable literary attainment in a certain way
and on certain subjects. His favourite authors were Montaigne and Burton, and he knew more
perhaps than any other man in his own county, and the next to it, of the English essayists
of the two last centuries. He possessed complete sets of the 'Idler', the 'Spectator,' the
'Tatler,' the 'Guardian,' and the 'Rambler;' and would discourse by hours together on the superiority
of such publications to anything which has since been produced in our Edinburghs and Quarterlies.
He was a great proficient in all questions of genealogy, and knew enough of almost every gentleman's
family in England to say of what blood and lineage were descended all those who had any claim
to be considered as possessors of any such luxuries. For blood and lineage he himself had a
must profound respect. He counted back his own ancestors to some period long antecedent to
the Conquest; and could tell you, if you would listen to him, how it had come to pass that
they, like Cedric the Saxon, had been permitted to hold their own among the Norman barons.
It was not, according to his showing, on account of any weak complaisance on the part of his
family towards their Norman neighbours. Some Ealfried of Ullathorne once fortified his own
castle, and held out, not only that, but the then existing cathedral of Barchester also, against
one Godfrey de Burgh, in the time of King John; and Mr Thorne possessed the whole history of
the siege written on vellum, and illuminated in a most costly manner. It little signified that
no one could read the writing, as, had that been possible, no one could have understood the
language. Mr Thorne could, however, give you all the particulars in good English, and had no
objection to do so.

It would be unjust to say that he looked down in men whose families were of recent date. He
did not do so. He frequently consorted with such, and had chosen many of his friends from among
them. But he looked on them as great millionaires are apt to look on those who have small incomes;
as men who have Sophocles at their fingers' ends regard those who know nothing of Greek. They
might doubtless be good sort of people, entitled to much praise for virtue, very admirable
for talent, highly respectable in every way; but they were without the one great good gift.
Such was Mr Thorne's way of thinking on this matter; nothing could atone for the loss of good
blood; nothing could neutralise its good effects. Few indeed were now possessed of it, but
the possession was on that account the more precious. It was very pleasant to hear Mr Thorne
descant on this matter. Were you in your ignorance to surmise that such a one was of a good
family because the head of his family was a baronet of an old date, he would open his eyes
with a delightful look of affected surprise, and modestly remind you that baronetcies only
dated from James I. He would gently sigh if you spoke of the blood of the Fitzgeralds and De
Burghs; would hardly allow the claims of the Howards and Lowthers; and has before now alluded
to the Talbots as a family who had hardly yet achieved the full honours of a pedigree.

In speaking once of a wide spread race whose name had received the honours of three coronets,
scions from which sat for various constituencies, some one of whose members had been in almost
every cabinet formed during this present century, a brilliant race such as there are few in
England, Mr Thorne called them all 'dirt'. He had not intended any disrespect to these men.
He admired them in many senses, and allowed them their privileges without envy. He had merely
meant to express his feeling that the streams which ran through their not veins were yet purified
by time to that perfection, had not become so genuine an ichor, as to be worthy of being called
blood in the genealogical sense.

When Mr Arabin was first introduced to him, Mr Thorne had immediately suggested that he was
one of the Arabins of Uphill Stanton. Mr Arabin replied that he was a very distant relative
of the family alluded to. To this Mr Thorne surmised that the relationship could not be very
distant. Mr Arabin assured him that it was so distant that the families knew nothing of each
other. Mr Thorne laughed his gentle laugh at this, and told Mr Arabin that there was not existing
no branch of his family separated from the parent stock at an earlier date than the reign of
Elizabeth; and that therefore Mr Arabin could not call himself distant. Mr Arabin himself was
quite clearly an Arabin of Uphill Stanton.

'But,' said the vicar, 'Uphill Stanton has been sold to the De Greys, and has been in their
hands for the last fifty years.'

'And when it has been there one hundred and fifty, if it unluckily remain there so long,' said
Mr Thorne, 'your descendants will not be a whit the less entitled to describe themselves as
being of the family of Uphill Stanton. Thank God, no De Grey can buy that--and, thank God--no
Arabin, and no Thorne, can sell it.'

In politics, Mr Thorne was an unflinching conservative. He looked on those fifty-three Trojans,
who, as Mr Dod tell us, censured free trade in November 1852, as the only patriots left among
the public men of England. When that terrible crisis of free trade had arrived, when the repeal
of the corn laws was carried by those very men whom Mr Thorne had hitherto regarded as the
only possible saviours of his country, he was for a time paralysed. His country was lost; but
that was comparatively a small thing. Other countries had flourished and fallen, and the human
race still went on improving under God's providence. But now all trust in human faith must
for ever be at an end. Not only must ruin come, but it must come through the apostasy of those
who had been regarded as the truest of true believers. Politics in England, as a pursuit for
gentlemen, must be at an end. Had Mr Thorne been trodden under foot by a Whig, he could have
borne it as a Tory and a martyr; but to be so utterly thrown over and deceived by those he
had so earnestly supported, so thoroughly trusted, was more than he could endure and live.
He therefore ceased to live as a politician, and refused to hold any converse with the world
at large on the state of the country.

Such were Mr Thorne's impressions for the first two or three years after Sir Robert Peel's
apostasy; but by degrees his temper, as did that of others, cooled down. He began once more
to move about, to frequent the bench and the market, and to be seen at dinners, shoulder to
shoulder with some of those who had so cruelly betrayed him. It was a necessity for him to
live, and that plan of his for avoiding the world did not answer. He, however, had others around
him, who still maintained the same staunch principles of protection--men like himself, who
were too true to flinch at the cry of a mob--had their own way of consoling themselves. They
were, and felt themselves to be, the only true depositories left of certain Eleusinian mysteries,
of certain deep and wondrous services of worship by which alone the gods could be rightly approached.
To them and them only was it now given to know these things, and to perpetuate them, if that
might still be done, by the careful and secret education of their children.

We have read how private and peculiar forms of worship have been carried on from age to age
in families, which to the outer world have apparently adhered to the service of some ordinary
church. And so by degrees it was with Mr Thorne. He learnt at length to listen calmly while
protection was talked of as a thing dead, although he knew within himself that it was still
quick with a mystic life. Nor was he without a certain pleasure that such knowledge though
given to him should be debarred from the multitude. He became accustomed to hear, even among
country gentlemen, that free trade was after all not so bad, and to bear this without dispute,
although conscious within himself that everything good in England had gone with his old palladium.
He had within him something of the feeling of Cato, who gloried that he could kill himself
because Romans were no longer worthy of their name. Mr Thorne had no thought of killing himself,
being a Christian, and still possessing his L 4000 a year; but the feeling was not on that
account the less comfortable.

Mr Thorne was a sportsman, and had been active though not outrageous in his sports. Previous
to the great downfall of politics in his country, he had supported the hunt by every means
in his power. He had preserved game till no goose or turkey could show a tail in the parish
of St Ewold's. He had planted gorse covers with more care than oaks and larches. He had been
more anxious for the comfort of his foxes than of his ewes and lambs. No meet had been more
popular than Ullathorne; no man's stables had been more liberally open to the horses of distant
men than Mr Thorne's; no man had said more, written more, or done more to keep the club up.
The theory of protection could expand itself so thoroughly in the practices of the country
hunt! But the great ruin came; when the noble master of the Barchester hounds supported the
recreant minister in the House of Lords, and basely surrendered his truth, his manhood, his
friends, and his honour for the hope of a garter, then Mr Thorne gave up the hunt. He did not
cut his covers, for that would not have been the act of a gentleman. He did not kill his foxes,
for that according to his light would have been murder. He did not say that his covers should
not be drawn, or his earths stopped, for that would have been illegal according to the by-laws
prevailing among country gentlemen. But he absented himself from home on the occasions of every
meet at Ullathorne, left the covers to their fate, and could not be persuaded to take his pink
coat out of the press, or his hunters out of his stable. This lasted for two years, and then
by degrees he came round. He first appeared at a neighbouring meet on a pony, dressed in his
shooting coat, as though he had trotted in by accident; then he walked up one morning on foot
to see his favourite gorse drawn, and when his groom brought his mare out by chance, he did
not refuse to mount her. He was next persuaded, by one of the immortal fifty-three, to bring
his hunting materials over to the other side of the county, and take a fortnight with the hounds
there; and so gradually he returned to his old life. But in hunting as in other things he was
only supported by the inward feeling of mystic superiority to those with whom he shared the
common breath of outer life.

Mr Thorne did not live in solitude at Ullathorne. He had a sister, who was ten years older
than himself, and who participated in his prejudices and feelings so strongly, that she was
a living caricature of all his foibles. She would not open a modern quarterly, did not choose
to see a magazine in her drawing-room, and would not have polluted her fingers with a shred
of "The Times" for any consideration. She spoke of Addison, Swift, and Steele, as though they
were still living, regarded De Foe as the best known novelist of his country, and thought of
Fielding as a young but meritorious novice in the fields of romance. In poetry, she was familiar
with then names as late as Dryden, and had once been seduced into reading the "Rape of the
Lock"; but she regarded Spenser as the purest type of her country's literature in this line.
Genealogy was her favourite insanity. Those things which are the pride of most genealogists
were to her contemptible. Arms and mottoes set her beside herself. Ealfried of Ullathorne had
wanted no motto to assist him in cleaving to the brisket Geoffrey De Burgh; and Ealfried's
great grandfather, the gigantic Ullafrid, had required no other arms than those which nature
gave him to hurl from the top of his own castle a cousin of the base invading Norman. To her
all modern English names were equally insignificant. Hengist, Horsa, and such like, had for
her the only true savour of nobility. She was not contented unless she could go beyond the
Saxons; and would certainly have christened her children, had she had children, by the names
of the ancient Britons. In some respects she was not unlike Scott's Ulrica, and had she been
given to cursing, she would certainly have done so in the names of Mista, Skogula, and Zernebock.
Not having submitted to the embraces of any polluting Normans, as poor Ulrica had done, and
having assisted no parricide, the milk of human kindness was not curdled in her bosom. She
never cursed, therefore, but blessed rather. This, however, she did in a strange uncouth Saxon
manner, that would have been unintelligible to any peasants but her own.

As a politician, Miss Thorne had been so thoroughly disgusted with public life by base deeds
long antecedent to the Corn Law question, that that had but little moved her. In her estimation
her brother had been a fast young man, hurried away by a too ardent temperament into democratic
tendencies. Now happily he was brought to sounder views by seeing the iniquity of the world.
She had not yet reconciled herself to the Reform Bill, and still groaned in spirit over the
defalcations of the Duke as touching the Catholic Emancipation. If asked whom she thought the
Queen should take as her counsellor, she would probably have named Lord Eldon; and when reminded
that that venerable man was no longer present in the flesh to assist us, she would probably
have answered with a sigh that none now could help us but the dead.

In religion, Miss Thorne was a pure Druidess. We would not have it understood by that, that
she did actually in these latter days assist at any human sacrifices, or that she was in fact
hostile to the Church of Christ. She had adopted the Christian religion as a milder form of
the worship of her ancestors, and always appealed to her doing so as evidence that she had
no prejudices against reform, when it could be shown that reform was salutary. This reform
was the most modern of any to which she had as yet acceded, it being presumed that British
ladies had given up their paint and taken to some sort of petticoats before the days of St
Augustine. That further feminine step in advance which combines paint and petticoats together,
had not found votary in Miss Thorne.

But she was a Druidess in this, that she regretted she knew not what in the usages and practices
of her Church. She sometimes talked and constantly thought of good things gone by, though she
had but the faintest idea of what those good things had been. She imagined that a purity had
existed which was now gone; that a piety had adorned our pastors and a simple docility our
people, for which it may be feared history gave her but little true warrant. She was accustomed
to speak of Cranmer as though he had been the firmest and most simple-minded of martyrs, and
of Elizabeth as though the pure Protestant faith of her people had been the one anxiety of
her life. It would have been cruel to undeceive her, had it been possible; but it would have
been impossible to make her believe that the one was a time-serving priest, willing to go any
length to keep his place, and that the other was in heart a papist, with this sole proviso,
that she should be her own pope.

And so Miss Thorne went on sighing and regretting, looking back to the divine right of kings
as the ruling axiom of a golden age, and cherishing, low down in the bottom of her hearts of
hearts, a dear unmentioned wish for the restoration of some exiled Stuart. Who would deny her
the luxury of her sighs, or the sweetness of her soft regrets!

In her person and her dress she was perfect, and well she knew her own perfection. She was
a small elegantly made old woman, with a face from which the glow of her youth had not departed
without leaving some streaks of a roseate hue. She was proud of her colour, proud of her grey
hair which she wore in short crisp curls peering out all around her face from the dainty white
cap. To think of all the money that she spent in lace used to break the heart of poor Mrs Quiverful
with her seven daughters. She was proud of her teeth, which were still white and numerous,
proud of her bright cheery eye, proud of her short jaunty step, and very proud of the neat,
precise, small feet with which those steps were taken. She was proud also, ay, very proud,
of the rich brocaded silk in which it was her custom to ruffle through her drawing-room.

We know what was the custom of the lady of Branksome--
      "Nine and twenty knights of fame
       Hung their shields in Branksome Hall."

The lady of Ullathorne was not so martial in her habits, but hardly less costly. She might
have boasted that nine-and-twenty silken shirts might have been produced in her chamber, each
fit to stand alone. The nine-and-twenty shields of the Scottish heroes were less independent,
and hardly more potent to withstand any attack that might be made on them. Miss Thorne when
fully dressed might be said to have been armed cap-a-pie, and she was always fully dressed,
as far as was ever known to mortal man.

For all this rich attire Miss Thorne was not indebted to the generosity of her brother. She
had a very comfortable independence of her own, which she divided among juvenile relatives,
the milliners, and the poor, giving much the largest share to the latter. It may be imagined,
therefore, that with all her little follies she was not unpopular. All her follies have, we
believe, been told. Her virtues were too numerous to describe, and not sufficiently interesting
to deserve description.

While we are on the subject of the Thornes, one word must be said of the house they lived in.
It was not a large house, nor a fine house, nor perhaps to modern ideas a very commodious house;
but by those who love the peculiar colour and peculiar ornaments of genuine Tudor architecture
it was considered a perfect gem. We beg to own ourselves among the number, and therefore take
this opportunity to express our surprise that so little is known by English men and women of
the beauties of English architecture. The ruins of the Colosseum, the Campanile at Florence,
St Mark's, Cologne, the Bourse and Notre Dame, are with our tourists as familiar as household
words; but they know nothing of the glories of Wiltshire, Dorsetshire, and Somersetshire. Nay,
we much question whether many noted travellers, many who have pitched their tents perhaps under
Mount Sinai, are not still ignorant that there are glories in Wiltshire, Dorsetshire and Somersetshire.
We beg that they will go and see.

Mr Thorne's house was called Ullathorne Court, and was properly so called; for the house itself
formed two sides of a quadrangle, which was completed in the other two sides by a wall about
twenty feet high. This was built of cut stone, rudely cut indeed, and now much worn, but of
a beautiful rich tawny yellow colour, the effect of that stonecrop of minute growth, which
it had taken three centuries to produce. The top of this wall was ornamented by huge round
stone balls of the same colour as the wall itself. Entrance into the court was had through
a pair of iron gates, so massive that no one could comfortably open or close them, consequently
they were rarely disturbed. From the gateway two paths led obliquely across the court; that
to the left reaching the hall-door, which was in the corner made by the angle of the house,
and that to the right leading to the back entrance, which was at the further end of the longer
portion of the building.

With those who are now adept at contriving house accommodation, it will militate much against
Ullathorne Court, that no carriage could be brought to the hall-door. If you enter Ullathorne
at all, you must do so, fair reader, on foot, or at least in a bath-chair. No vehicle drawn
by horses ever comes within that iron gate. But this is nothing to the next horror that will
encounter you. On entering the front door, which you do by no very grand portal, you find yourself
immediately in the dining-room. What--no hall? exclaims my luxurious friend, accustomed to
all the comfortable appurtenances of modern life. Yes, kind sir; a noble hall, if you will
but observe it; a true old English hall of excellent dimensions for a country gentleman's family;
but, if you please, no dining-parlour.

But Mr and Miss Thorne were proud of this peculiarity of their dwelling, though the brother
was once all but tempted by his friends to alter it. They delighted in the knowledge that they,
like Cedric, positively dined in their true hall, even though they so dined tete-a-tete. But
though they had never owned, they had felt and endeavoured to remedy the discomfort of such
an arrangement. A huge screen partitioned off the front door and a portion of the hall, and
from the angle so screened off a second door led into a passage, which ran along the larger
side of the house next to the courtyard. Either my reader or I must be a bad hand at topography,
if it be not clear that the great hall forms the ground-floor of the smaller portion of the
mansion, that which was to your left as you entered the iron gate, and that it occupies the
whole of this wing of the building. It must be equally clear that it looks out on a trim mown
lawn, through three quadrangular windows with stone mullions, each window divided into a larger
portion at the bottom, and a smaller portion at the top, and each portion again divided into
five by perpendicular stone supporters. There may be windows which give a better light than
such as those, and it may be, as my utilitarian friend observes, that the giving of light is
the desired object of a window. I will not argue the point with him. Indeed I cannot. But I
shall not the less die in the assured conviction that no sort of description of window is capable
of imparting half as much happiness to mankind as that which has been adopted at Ullathorne
Court. What--not an oriel? says Miss Diana de Midellage. No, Miss Diana; not even an oriel,
beautiful as is an oriel window. It has not about it so perfect a feeling of quiet English
homely comfort. Let oriel windows grace a college, or the half public mansion of a potent peer;
but for the sitting room of quiet country ladies, of ordinary homely folk, nothing can equal
the square mullioned windows of the Tudor architects.

The hall was hung round with family female insipidities by Lely, and unprepossessing male Thornes
in red coats by Kneller; each Thorne having been let into a panel in the wainscoting in the
proper manner. At the further end of the room was a huge fire-place, which afforded much ground
of difference between the brother and sister. An antiquated grate that would hold about a hundred
weight of coal, had been stuck on the hearth, by Mr Thorne's father. This hearth had of course
been intended for the consumption of wood fagots, and the iron dogs for the purpose were still
standing, though half buried in the masonry of the grate. Miss Thorne was very anxious to revert
to the dogs. The dear good old creature was always to revert to anything, and had she been
systematically indulged, would doubtless in time have reflected that fingers were made before
forks, and have reverted accordingly. But in the affairs of the fire-place, Mr Thorne would
not revert. Country gentlemen around him, all had comfortable grates in their dining-rooms.
He was not exactly the man to have suggested a modern usage; but he was not so far prejudiced
as to banish those which his father had prepared for his use. Mr Thorne had, indeed, once suggested
that with very little contrivance the front door might have been so altered, as to open at
least into the passage; but on hearing this, his sister Monica, such was Miss Thorne's name,
had been taken ill, and had remained so for a week. Before she came down stairs she received
a pledge from her brother that the entrance should never be changed in her lifetime.

At the end of the hall opposite to the fire-place a door led into the drawing-room, which was
of equal size, and lighted with precisely similar windows. But yet the aspect of the room was
very different. It was papered, and the ceiling, which in the hall showed the old rafters,
was whitened and finished with a modern cornice. Miss Thorne's drawing-room, or, as she always
called it, withdrawing-room, was a beautiful apartment. The windows opened on to the full extent
of the lovely trim garden; immediately before the windows were plots of flowers in stiff, stately,
stubborn little beds, each bed surrounded by a stone coping of its own; beyond, there was a
low parapet wall, on which stood urns and images, fawns, nymphs, satyrs, and a whole tribe
of Pan's followers; and then again, beyond that, a beautiful lawn sloped away to a sunk fence,
which divided the garden from the park. Mr Thorne's study was at the end of the drawing-room,
and beyond that were the kitchen and the offices. Doors opened into both Miss Thorne's withdrawing-room
and Mr Thorne's sanctum from the passage above alluded to; which, as it came to the latter
room, widened itself so as to make space for the huge black oak stairs, which led to the upper
region.

Such was the interior of Ullathorne Court. But having thus described it, perhaps somewhat too
tediously, we beg to say that it is not the interior to which we wish to call the English tourist's
attention, though we advise him to lose no legitimate opportunity of becoming acquainted with
it in a friendly manner. It is the outside of Ullathorne that is so lovely. Let the tourist
get admission at least into the garden, and fling himself on that soft award just opposite
to the exterior angle of the house. He will there get the double frontage, and enjoy that which
is so lovely--the expanse of architectural beauty without the formal dullness of one long line.

It is the colour of Ullathorne that is so remarkable. It is all of that delicious tawny hue
which no stone can give, unless it has on it the vegetable richness of centuries. Strike the
wall with your hand, and you will think that the stone has on it no covering, but rub it carefully,
and you will find that the colour comes off upon your finger. No colourist that ever yet worked
from a palette has been able to come up to this rich colouring of years crowding themselves
on years.

Ullathorne is a high building for a country house, for it possesses three stories; and in each
storey, the windows are of the same sort as that described, though varying in size, and varying
also in their lines athwart the house. Those of the ground floor are all uniform in size and
position. But those above are irregular both in size and place, and this irregularity gives
a bizarre and not unpicturesque appearance to the building. Along the top, on every side, runs
a low parapet, which nearly hides the roof, and at the corners are more figures of fawns and
satyrs.

Such is Ullathorne House. But we must say one word of the approach to it, which shall include
all the description which we mean to give of the church also. The picturesque old church of
St Ewold's stands immediately opposite to the iron gates which open into the court, and is
all but surrounded by the branches of lime trees, which form the avenue leading up to the house
from both sides. This avenue is magnificent, but it would lose much of its value in the eyes
of many proprietors, by the fact that the road through it is not private property. It is a
public lane between hedgerows, with a broad grass margin on each side of the road, from which
the lime trees spring. Ullathorne Court, therefore, does not stand absolutely surrounded by
its own grounds, though Mr Thorne is owner of all the adjacent land. This, however, is the
source of very little annoyance to him. Men, when they are acquiring property, think much of
such things, but they who live where their ancestors have lived for years, do not feel the
misfortune. It never occurred to either Mr or Miss Thorne that they were not sufficiently private,
because the world at large might, if it so wished, walk or drive by their iron gates. That
part of the world which availed itself of the privilege was however very small.

Such a year or two since were the Thornes of Ullathorne. Such, we believe, are the inhabitants
of many an English country home. May it be long before their number diminishes.

CHAPTER XXIII

MR ARABIN READS HIMSELF IN AT ST EWOLD'S

On the Sunday morning the archdeacon with his sister-in-law and Mr Arabin drove over to Ullathorne,
as had been arranged. On their way thither the new vicar declared himself to be considerably
disturbed in his mind at the idea of thus facing his parishioners for the first time. He had,
he said, been always subject to mauvaise honte and an annoying degree of bashfulness, which
often unfitted him for any work of a novel description; and now he felt this so strongly that
he feared he should acquit himself badly in St Ewold's reading-desk. He knew, he said, that
those sharp little eyes of Miss Thorne would be on to him, and that they would not approve.
All this the archdeacon greatly ridiculed. He himself knew not, and had never known, what it
was to be shy. He could not conceive that Miss Thorne, surrounded as she would be by the peasants
of Ullathorne, and a few of the poorer inhabitants of the suburbs of Barchester, could in any
way affect the composure of a man well accustomed to address the learned congregations of St
Mary's at Oxford, and he laughed accordingly at the idea of Mr Arabin's modesty.

Thereupon Mr Arabin commenced to subtilise. The change, he said, from St Mary's to St Ewold's
was quite as powerful on the spirits as would be that from St Ewold's to St Mary's. Would not
a peer who, by chance of fortune, might suddenly be driven to herd among the navvies be as
afraid of the jeers of his companions, as would any navvy suddenly exalted to a seat among
the peers? Whereupon the archdeacon declared with a loud laugh that he would tell Miss Thorne
that her new minister had likened her to a navvy. Eleanor, however, pronounced such a conclusion
unfair; a comparison might be very just in its proportions which did not at all assimilate
the things compared. But Mr Arabin went in subtilising, regarding neither the archdeacon's
raillery nor Eleanor's defence. A young lady, he said, would execute with most perfect self-possession
a difficult piece of music in a room crowded with strangers, who would not be able to express
herself in any intelligible language, even on any ordinary subject and among her most intimate
friends, if she were required to do so standing on a box somewhat elevated among them. It was
all an affair of education, and he at forty found it difficult to educate himself now.

Eleanor dissented on the matter of the box; and averred she could speak very well about dresses,
or babies, or legs of mutton from any box, provided it were big enough for her to stand upon
without fear, even though all her friends were listening to her. The archdeacon was sure she
would not be able to say a word; but this proved nothing in favour of Mr Arabin. Mr Arabin
said that he would try the question out with Mrs Bold, and get her on a box some day when the
rectory might be full of visitors. To this Eleanor assented, making condition that the visitors
should be of their own set, and the archdeacon cogitated in his mind, whether by such a condition
it was intended that Mr Slope should be included, resolving also that, if so, the trial should
certainly never take place in the rectory drawing-room at Plumstead.

And so arguing, they drove up to the iron gates of Ullathorne Court.

Mr and Miss Thorne were standing ready dressed for church in the hall, and greeted their clerical
visitors with cordiality. The archdeacon was an old favourite. He was a clergyman of the old
school, and this recommended him to the lady. He had always been an opponent of free trade
as long as free trade was an open question; and now that it was no longer so, he, being a clergyman,
had not been obliged, like most of his lay Tory companions, to read his recantation. He could
therefore be regarded as a supporter of the immaculate fifty-three, and was on this account
a favourite with Mr Thorne. The little bell was tinkling, and the rural population were standing
about the lane, leaning on the church stile, and against the walls of the old court, anxious
to get a look at their new minister as he passed from the house to the rectory. The archdeacon's
servant had already preceded them thither with the vestments.

They all went together; and when the ladies passed into the church the three gentlemen tarried
a moment in the lane, that Mr Thorne might name to the vicar with some kind of one-sided introduction,
the most leading among his parishioners.

'Here are our churchwardens, Mr Arabin; Farmer Greenacre and Mr Stiles. Mr Stiles has the mill
as you go into Barchester; and very good churchwardens they are.'

'Not very severe, I hope,' said Mr Arabin: the two ecclesiastical officers touched their hats,
and each made a leg in the approved rural fashion, assuring the vicar that they were glad to
have the honour of seeing him, and adding that the weather was very good for the harvest. Mr
Stiles being a man somewhat versed in town life, had an impression of his own dignity, and
did not quite like leaving his pastor under the erroneous idea that he being a churchwarden
kept the children in order during church time. 'Twas thus he understood Mr Arabin's allusion
to his severity, and hastened to put matters right by observing that 'Sexton Clodheave looked
to the younguns, and perhaps sometimes there maybe a thought too much stick going on during
sermon.' Mr Arabin's bright eye twinkled as he caught that of the archdeacon; and he smiled
to himself as he observed how ignorant his officers were of the nature of their authority,
and of the surveillance which it was their duty to keep even over himself.

Mr Arabin read the lessons and preached. It was enough to put a man a little out, let him have
been ever so used to pulpit reading, to see the knowing way in which the farmers cocked their
ears, and set about a mental criticism as to whether their new minister did or did not fall
short of the excellence of him who had lately departed from them. A mental and silent criticism
it was for the existing moment, but soon to be made public among the elders of St Ewold's over
the green graves of their children and forefathers. The excellence, however, of poor old Mr
Goodenough had not been wonderful, and there were few there who did not deem that Mr Arabin
did his work sufficiently well, in spite of the slightly nervous affection which at first impeded
him, and which nearly drove the archdeacon beside himself.

But the sermon was the thing to try the man. It often surprises us that very young men can
muster courage to preach for the first time to a strange congregation. Men who are as yet little
more than boys, who have but just left, what indeed we may not call a school, but a seminary
intended for their tuition as scholars, whose thoughts have been mostly of boating, cricketing,
and wine parties, ascend a rostrum high above the heads of the submissive crowd, not that they
may read God's word to those below, but that they may preach their own word for the edification
of their hearers. It seems strange to us that they are not stricken dumb by the new and awful
solemnity of their position. How am I, just turned twenty-three, who have never yet passed
then thoughtful days since the power of thought first came to me, how am I to instruct these
grey beards, who with the weary thinking of so many years have approached so near the grave?
Can I teach them their duty? Can I explain to them that which I so imperfectly understand,
that which years of study may have made so plain to them? Has my newly acquired privileges,
as one of God's ministers, imparted to me as yet any fitness for the wonderful work of a preacher?

It must be supposed that such ideas do occur to young clergymen, and yet they overcome, apparently
with ease, this difficulty which to us appears to be all but insurmountable. We have never
been subjected in the way of ordination to the power of a bishop's hands. It may be that there
is in them something that sustains the spirit and banishes the natural modesty of youth. But
for ourselves we must own that the deep affection which Dominie Sampson felt for his young
pupils has not more endeared him to us than the bashful spirit which sent him mute and inglorious
from the pulpit when he rose there with the futile attempt to preach God's gospel.

There is a rule in our church which forbids the younger order of our clergymen to perform a
certain portion of the service. The absolution must be read by a minister in priest's orders.
If there be no such minister present, the congregation can have the benefit of no absolution
but that which each may succeed in administering to himself. The rule may be a good one, though
the necessity for it hardly comes home to the general understanding. But this forbearance on
the part of youth would be much more appreciated if it were extended likewise to sermons. The
only danger would be that the congregation would be too anxious to prevent their young clergymen
from advancing themselves to the ranks of the ministry. Clergymen who could not preach would
be such blessings that they would be bribed to adhere to their incompetence.

Mr Arabin, however, had not the modesty of youth to impede him, and he succeeded with his sermon
even better than with the lessons. On this he enlarged, but not very amply, and after twenty
minutes succeeded in sending his new friends home to their baked mutton and pudding well pleased
with their new minister.

Then came the lunch at Ullathorne. As soon as they were in the hall Miss Thorne took Mr Arabin's
hand, and assured him that she received him into her house, into the temple, she said, in which
she worshipped, and bade him God speed with all her heart. Mr Arabin was touched, and squeezed
the spinster's hand without uttering a word in reply. Then Mr Thorne expressed a hope that
Mr Arabin found the church easy to fill, and Mr Arabin having replied that he had no doubt
he should do so as soon as he had learnt to pitch his voice to the building, they all sat down
to the good things before them.

Miss Thorne took special care of Mrs Bold. Eleanor still wore her widow's weeds, and therefore
had about her that air of grave and sad maternity which is the lot of recent widows. This opened
the soft heart of Miss Thorne, and made her look on her young guest as though too much could
not be done for her. She heaped chicken and ham upon her plate, and poured out for her a full
bumper of port wine. When Eleanor, who was not sorry to get it, had drunk a little of it, Miss
Thorne at once essayed to fill it again. To this Eleanor objected, but in vain. Miss Thorne
winked and nodded and whispered, saying that it was the proper thing and must be done, and
that she knew all about it; and so she desired Mrs Bold to drink it up, and mind any body.

'It is your duty, you know, to support yourself,' she said into the ear of the young mother;
'there's more than yourself depending on it;' and thus she coshered up Eleanor with cold fowl
and port wine. How it is that poor men's wives, who have no cold fowl and port wine on which
to be coshered up, nurse their children without difficulty, whereas the wives of rich men,
who eat and drink everything that is good, cannot do so, we will for the present leave to the
doctors and mothers to settle between them.

And then Miss Thorne was great about teeth. Little Johnny Bold had been troubled for the last
few days with his first incipient masticator, and with that freemasonry which exists between
ladies, Miss Thorne became aware of the fact before Eleanor had half finished her wing. The
old lady prescribed at once a receipt which had been much in vogue in the young days of her
grandmother, and warned Eleanor with solemn voice against the fallacies of modern medicine.

'Take his coral, my dear,' said she, 'and rub it well with carrot-juice; rub it till the juice
dries on it, and then give it to him to play with--'

'But he hasn't got a coral,' said Eleanor.

'Not got a coral!' said Miss Thorne, with almost angry vehemence. 'Not got a coral!--How can
you expect that he should cut his teeth? Have you got Daffy's Elixir?'

Eleanor explained that she had not. It had not been ordered by Mr Rerechild, the Barchester
doctor whom she employed; and then the young mother mentioned some shockingly modern succedaneum,
which Mr Rerechild's new lights had taught him to recommend.

Miss Thorne looked awfully severe. 'Take care, my dear,' said she, 'that the man knows what
he is about; take care he doesn't destroy your little boy. 'But'--and her voice softened into
sorrow as she said it, and spoke more in pity than in anger--'but I don't know who there is
in Barchester now that you can trust. Poor dear old Dr Bumpwell, indeed--'

'Why, Miss Thorne, he died when I was a little girl.'

'Yes, my dear, he did, and an unfortunate day it was for Barchester. As to those young men
that have come up since' (Mr Rerechild, by the by, was quite as old as Miss Thorne herself),
'one doesn't know where they came from or who they are, or whether they know anything about
their business or not.'

'I think there are very clever men in Barchester,' said Eleanor.

'Perhaps there may be; only I don't know them; and it's admitted on all sides that medical
men aren't now what they used to be. They used to be talented, observing, educated men. But
now any whipper-snapper out of an apothecary's shop can call himself a doctor. I believe no
kind of education is now thought necessary.'

Eleanor was herself the widow of a medical man, and felt a little inclined to resent all these
hard sayings. But Miss Thorne was so essentially good-natured that it was impossible to resent
anything she said. She therefore sipped her wine and finished her chicken.

'At any rate, my dear, don't forget the carrot-juice, and by all means get him a coral at once.
My grandmother Thorne had the best teeth in the county, and carried them to the grave with
her at eighty. I have heard her say it was all the carrot-juice. She couldn't bear the Barchester
doctors. Even poor Dr Bumpwell didn't please her.' It clearly never occurred to Miss Thorne
that some fifty years ago Dr Bumpwell was only a rising man, and therefore as much in need
of character in the eyes of the then ladies of Ullathorne, as the present doctors were in her own.

The archdeacon made a very good lunch, and talked to his host about turnip-drillers and new
machines for reaping; while the host, thinking it only polite to attend to a stranger, and
fearing that perhaps he might not care about turnip crops on a Sunday, mooted all manner of
ecclesiastical subjects.

'I never saw a heavier lot of wheat, Thorne, than you've got there in the field beyond the
copse. I suppose that's guano,' said the archdeacon.

'Yes, guano. I get it from Bristol myself. You'll find you often have a tolerable congregation
of Barchester people out here, Mr Arabin. They are very fond of St Ewold's, particularly of
an afternoon, when the weather is not too hot for a walk.'

'I am under an obligation to them for staying away today, at any rate,' said the vicar. 'The
congregation can never be too small for a maiden sermon.'

'I got a ton and a half at Bradley's in High Street,' said the archdeacon, 'and it was a complete
take in. I don't believe there was five hundred-weight of guano in it.'

'That Bradley never has anything good,' said Miss Tborne, who had just caught the name during
her whisperings with Eleanor. 'And such a nice shop as there used to be in that very house
before he came. Wilfred, don't you remember what good things old Ambleoff used to have?'

'There have been three men since Ambleoff's time,' said the archdeacon, 'and each as bad as
the other. But who gets it for you at Bristol, Thorne?'

'I ran up myself this year and bought it out of the ship. I am afraid as the evenings get shorter,
Mr Arabin, you'll find the reading desk too dark. I must send a fellow with an axe and make
him lop off some of those branches.'

Mr Arabin declared that the morning light at any rate was perfect, and deprecated any interference
with the lime trees. And then they took a stroll out among the trim parterres, and Mr Arabin
explained to Mrs Bold the difference between a naiad and a dryad, and dilated on vases and
the shapes of urns. Miss Thorne busied herself among the pansies; and her brother, finding
it quite impracticable to give anything of a peculiarly Sunday tone to the conversation, abandoned
the attempt, and had it out with the archdeacon about the Bristol guano.

At three o'clock they again went into church; and now Mr Arabin read the service and the archdeacon
preached. Nearly the same congregation was present, with some adventurous pedestrians from
the city, who had not thought the heat of the mid-day August sun too great to deter them. The
archdeacon took his text from the Epistle of Philemon. 'I beseech thee for my son Onesimus,
whom I have begotten in my bonds.' From such a text it may be imagined the kind of sermon which
Dr Grantly preached, and on the whole it was neither dull, nor bad, nor out of place.

He told them it had become his duty to look about for a pastor for them; to supply the place
of one who had been long among them; and that in this manner he regarded as a son him whom
he had selected, as St Paul had regarded the young disciple whom he sent forth. Then he took
a little merit to himself for having studiously provided the best man he could without reference
to patronage or favour; but he did not say that the best man according to his views was he
who was best able to subdue Mr Slope, and make that gentleman's situation in Barchester too
hot to be comfortable. As to the bonds, they had consisted in the exceeding struggle which
he had made to get a good clergyman for them. He deprecated any comparison between himself
and St Paul, but said that he was entitled to beseech them for their good will towards Mr Arabin,
in the same manner that the apostle had besought Philemon and his household with regard to
Onesimus.

The archdeacon's sermon, text, blessing and all, was concluded within the half hour. Then they
shook hands with their Ullathorne friends, and returned to Plumstead. 'Twas thus that Mr Arabin
read himself in at St Ewold's.

 CHAPTER XXIV

MR SLOPE'S MANAGES MATTERS VERY CLEVERLY AT PUDDINGDALE

The next two weeks passed pleasantly enough at Plumstead. The whole party there assembled seemed
to get on well together. Eleanor made the house agreeable, and the archdeacon and Mrs Grantly
seemed to have forgotten her injury as regarded Mr Slope. Mr Harding had his violoncello, and
played to them while his daughters accompanied him. Johnny Bold, by the help either of Mr Rerechild
or else by that of his coral and carrot-juice, got through his teething troubles. There had
been gaieties too of all sorts. They had dined at Ullathorne, and the Thornes had dined at
the rectory. Eleanor had been duly put to stand on her box, and in that position had found
herself quite unable to express her opinion on the merits of flounces, such having been the
subject given to try her elocution. Mr Arabin had of course been much in his own parish, looking
to the doings at his vicarage, calling on his parishioners, and taking on himself the duties
of his new calling. But still he had been every evening at Plumstead, and Mrs Grantly was partly
willing to agree with her husband that he was a pleasant inmate in a house.

They had also been at a dinner party at Dr Stanhope's, of which Mr Arabin had made one. He
also, moth-like, burnt his wings in the flames of the signora's candle. Mrs Bold, too, had
been there, and had felt somewhat displeased with the taste, want of taste she called it, shown
by Mr Arabin in paying so much attention to Madame Neroni. It was as infallible that Madeline
should displease and irritate the women, as that she should charm and captivate the men. The
one result followed naturally on the other. It was quite true that Mr Arabin had been charmed.
He thought her a very clever and a very handsome woman; he thought also that her peculiar afflictions
entitled her to the sympathy of all. He had never, he said, met so much suffering joined to
such perfect beauty and so clear a mind. 'Twas thus he spoke of the signora coming home in
the archdeacon's carriage; and Eleanor by no means liked to hear the praise. It was, however,
exceedingly unjust of her to be angry with Mr Arabin, as she had herself spent a very pleasant
evening with Bertie Stanhope, who had taken her down to dinner, and had not left her side for
one moment after the gentlemen came out of the dining-room. It was unfair that she should amuse
herself with Bertie and yet begrudge her new friend his licence of amusing himself with Bertie's
sister. And yet she did so. She was half angry with him in the carriage, and said something
about meretricious manners. Mr Arabin did not understand the ways of women very well, or else
he might have flattered himself that Eleanor was in love with him.

But Eleanor was not in love with him. How many shades there are between love and indifference,
and how little the graduated scale is understood! She had now been nearly three weeks in the
same house with Mr Arabin, and had received much of his attention, and listened daily to his
conversation. He had usually devoted at least some portion of his evening to her exclusively.
At Dr Stanhope's he had devoted himself exclusively to another. It does not require that a
woman should be in love to be irritated at this; it does not require that she should even acknowledge
to herself that it was unpleasant to her. Eleanor had no such self-knowledge. She thought in
her own heart it was only on Mr Arabin's account that she regretted that he could condescend
to be amused by the signora. 'I thought he had more mind,' she said to herself, as she sat
watching her baby's cradle on her return from the party. 'After all, I believe Mr Stanhope
is the pleasanter man of the two.' Alas for the memory of poor John Bold! Eleanor was not in
love with Bertie Stanhope, nor was she in love with Mr Arabin. But her devotion to her late
husband was fast fading, when she could revolve in her mind, over the cradle of his infant,
the faults and failings of other aspirants to her favour.

Will any one blame my heroine for this? Let him or her rather thank God for all His goodness,--for
His mercy endureth for ever.

Eleanor, in truth, was not in love; neither was Mr Arabin. Neither indeed was Bertie Stanhope,
though he had already found occasion to say nearly as much as that he was. The widow's cap
had prevented him from making a positive declaration, when otherwise he would have considered
himself entitled to do so on a third or fourth interview. It was, after all, but a small cap
now, and had but little of the weeping-willow left in its construction. It is singular how
these emblems of grief fade away by unseen gradations. Each pretends to be the counterpart
of the forerunner, and yet the last little bit of crimped white crape that sits so jauntily
on the back of the head, is as dissimilar to the first huge mountain of woe which disfigured
the face of the weeper, as the state of the Hindoo is to the jointure of the English dowager.

But let it be clearly understood that Eleanor was in love with no one, and that no one was
in love with Eleanor. Under these circumstances her anger against Mr Arabin did not last long,
and before two days were over they were both as good friends as ever. She could not but like
him, for every hour spent in his company was spent pleasantly. And yet she could not quite
like him, for there was always apparent in his conversation a certain feeling on his part that
he hardly thought it worth his while to be in earnest. It was almost as though he were playing
with a child. She knew well enough that he was in truth a sober thoughtful man, who in some
matters and on some occasions could endure an agony of earnestness. And yet to her he was always
gently playful. Could she have seen his brow once clouded she might have learnt to love him.

So things went on at Plumstead, and on the whole not unpleasantly, till a huge storm darkened
the horizon, and came down upon the inhabitants of the rectory with all the fury of a water-spout.
It was astonishing how in a few minutes the whole face of the heavens was changed. The party
broke up from breakfast in perfect harmony; but fierce passions had arisen before the evening,
which did not admit of their sitting at the same board for dinner. To explain this, it will
be necessary to go back a little.

It will be remembered that the bishop expressed to Mr Slope in his dressing-room, his determination
that Mr Quiverful should be confirmed in his appointment to the hospital, and that his lordship
requested Mr Slope to communicate this decision to the archdeacon. It will also be remembered
that the archdeacon had indignantly declined seeing Mr Slope, and had, instead, written a strong
letter to the bishop, in which he all but demanded the situation of warden for Mr Harding.
To this letter the archdeacon received an immediate formal reply from Mr Slope, in which it
was stated, that the bishop had received and would give his best consideration to the archdeacon's
letter.

The archdeacon felt himself somewhat checkmated by this reply. What could he do with a man
who would neither see him, nor argue with him by letter, and who had undoubtedly the power
of appointing any clergyman he pleased? He had consulted with Mr Arabin, who had suggested
the propriety of calling in the aid of the master of Lazarus. 'If,' said he, 'you and Dr Gwynne
formally declare your intention of waiting upon the bishop, the bishop will not dare to refuse
to see you; and if two such men as you see him together, you will probably not leave him without
carrying your point.'

The archdeacon did not quite like admitting the necessity of his being backed by the master
of Lazarus before he could obtain admission into the episcopal palace of Barchester; but still
he felt that the advice was good, and he resolved to take it. He wrote again to the bishop,
expressing a hope that nothing further would be done in the matter of the hospital, till the
consideration promised by his lordship had been given, and then sent off a warm appeal to his
friend the master, imploring him to come to Plumstead and assist in driving the bishop into
compliance. The master had rejoined, raising some difficulty, but not declining; and the archdeacon
again pressed his point, insisting on the necessity for immediate action. Dr Gwynne unfortunately
had the gout, and could therefore name no immediate day, but still agreed to come, if it should
be finally found necessary. So the matter stood, as regarded the party at Plumstead.

But Mr Harding had another friend fighting the battle for him, quite as powerful as the master
of Lazarus, and this was Mr Slope. Though the bishop had so pertinaciously insisted on giving
way to his wife in the matter of the hospital, Mr Slope did not think it necessary to abandon
the object. He had, he thought, daily more and more reason to imagine that the widow would
receive his overtures favourably, and he could not but feel that Mr Harding at the hospital,
and placed there by his means would be more likely to receive him as a son-in-law, than Mr
Harding growling in opposition and disappointment under the archdeacon's wing at Plumstead.
Moreover, to give Mr Slope due credit, he was actuated by greater motives even than these.
He wanted a wife, and he wanted money, but he wanted power more than either. He had fully realised
the fact that he must come to blows with Mrs Proudie. He had no desire to remain in Barchester
as her chaplain. Sooner than do so, he would risk the loss of his whole connection with the
diocese. What! Was he to feel within him the possession of no ordinary talents; was he to know
himself to be courageous, firm, and, in matters where his conscience did not interfere, unscrupulous;
and yet be contented to be the working factotum of a woman-prelate? Mr Slope had higher ideas
of his own destiny. Either he or Mrs Proudie must go to the wall; and now had come the time
when he would try which it would be.

The bishop had declared that Mr Quiverful should be the new warden. As Mr Slope went down stairs
prepared to see the archdeacon if necessary, but fully satisfied that no such necessity would
arise, he declared to himself that Mr Harding should be warden. With the object of carrying
this point he rode over to Puddingdale, and had a further interview with the worthy expectant
of clerical good things. Mr Quiverful was on the whole a worthy man. The impossible task of
bringing up as ladies and gentlemen fourteen children on an income which was insufficient to
give them with decency the common necessities of life, had had an effect upon him not beneficial
either to his spirit, or his keen sense of honour. Who can boast that he would have supported
such a burden with a different result? Mr Quiverful was an honest, pain- staking, drudging
man; anxious, indeed, for bread and meat, anxious for means to quiet his butcher and cover
with returning smiles the now sour countenance of the baker's wife, but anxious also to be
right with his own conscience. He was not careful, as another might be who sat on an easier
worldly seat, to stand well with those around him, to shun a breath which might sully his name,
or a rumour which might affect his honour. He could not afford such niceties of conduct, such
moral luxuries. It must suffice for him to be ordinarily honest according the ordinary honesty
of the world's ways, and to let men's tongues wag as they would.

He had felt that his brother clergymen, men whom he had known for the last twenty years, looked
coldly on him from the first moment that he had shown himself willing to sit at the feet of
Mr Slope; he had seen that their looks grew colder still, when it became bruited about that
he was to be the bishop's new warden at Hiram's hospital. This was painful enough; but it was
the cross which he was doomed to bear. He thought of his wife, whose last new silk dress was
six years in wear. He thought of all his young flock, whom he could hardly take to church with
him on Sundays, for there was not decent shoes and stockings for them all to wear. He thought
of the well-worn sleeves of his own black coat, and of the stern face of the draper from whom
he would fain ask for cloth to make another, did he not know that the credit would be refused
him. Then he thought of the comfortable house in Barchester, of the comfortable income, of
his boys sent to school, of the girls with books in their hands instead of darning needles,
of his wife's face again covered with smiles, and of his daily board again covered with plenty.
He thought of all these things; and do thou also, reader, think of them, and then wonder, if
thou canst, that Mr Slope had appeared to him to possess all those good gifts which would grace
a bishop's chaplain. 'How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good
tidings.'

Why, moreover, should the Barchester clergy have looked so coldly on Mr Quiverful? Had they
not all shown that they regarded with complacency the loaves and fishes of their mother church?
Had they not all, by some hook or crook, done better for themselves than he had done? They
were not burdened as he was burdened. Dr Grantly had five children, and nearly as many thousands
a year on which to feed them. It was very well for him to turn up his nose at a new bishop
who could do nothing for him, and a chaplain who was beneath his notice; but it was cruel in
a man so circumstanced to set the world against the father of fourteen children because he
was anxious to obtain for them an honourable support! He, Mr Quiverful, had not asked for the
wardenship; he had not even accepted it till he had been assured that Mr Harding had refused
it. How hard then that he should be blamed for doing that which not to have done would have
argued a most insane imprudence!

Thus in this matter of the hospital poor Mr Quiverful had his trials; and he had also his consolations.
On the whole the consolations were the more vivid of the two. The stern draper heard of the
coming promotion, and the wealth of his warehouse was at Mr Quiverful's disposal. Coming events
cast their shadows before, and the coming event of Mr Quiverful's transference to Barchester
produced a delicious shadow in the shape of a new outfit for Mrs Quiverful and her three elder
daughters. Such consolations come home to the heart of a man, and quite home to the heart of
a woman. Whatever the husband might feel, the wife cared nothing for the frowns of the dean,
archdeacon, or prebendary. To her the outsides and insides of her husband and fourteen children
were everything. In her bosom every other ambition had been swallowed up in that maternal ambition
of seeing them and him and herself duly clad and properly fed. It had come to that with her
that life had now no other purpose. She recked nothing of the imaginary rights of others. She
had no patience with her husband when he declared to her that he could not accept the hospital
unless he knew that Mr Harding had refused it. Her husband had no right to be Quixotic at the
expense of fourteen children. The narrow escape of throwing away his good fortune which her
lord had had, almost paralysed her. Now, indeed, they had received the full promise not only
from Mr Slope, but also from Mrs Proudie. Now, indeed, they might reckon with safety on their
good fortune. But what if it all had been lost? What if her fourteen bairns had been resteeped
to the hips in poverty by the morbid sentimentality of their father? Mrs Quiverful was just
at present a happy woman, but yet it nearly took her breath away when she thought of the risk
they had run.

'I don't know what your father means when he talks so much of what is due to Mr Harding,' she
said to her eldest daughter. 'Does he think that Mr Harding would give him L 450 out of fine
feeling? And what signifies it when he offends, as long as he gets the place? He does not expect
anything better. It passes me to think how your father can be so soft, while everybody around
him is so griping.'

This, while the rest of the world was accusing Mr Quiverful of rapacity for promotion and disregard
for his honour, the inner world of his own household was falling foul of him, with equal vehemence,
for his willingness to sacrifice their interest to a false feeling of sentimental pride. It
is astonishing how much difference the point of view makes in the aspect of all that we look at!

Such was the feelings of the different members of the family at Puddingdale on the occasion
of Mr Slope's second visit. Mrs Quiverful, as soon as she saw his horse coming up the avenue
from the vicarage gate, hastily packed up her huge basket of needlework, and hurried herself
and her daughter out of the room in which she was sitting with her husband. 'It's Mr Slope,'
she said. 'He's come to settle with you about the hospital. I do hope we shall now be able
to move at once.' And she hastened to bid the maid of all work to go to the door, so that the
welcome great man might not be kept waiting.

Mr Slope thus found Mr Quiverful alone. Mrs Quiverful went off to her kitchen and back settlements
with anxious beating heart, almost dreading that there might be some slip between the cup of
her happiness and the lip of her fruition, but yet comforting herself with the reflection that
after what had taken place, any such slip could hardly be possible.

Mr Slope was all smiles as he shook his brother clergyman's hand, and said that he had ridden
over because he thought it right at once to put Mr Quiverful in possession of the facts of
the matter regarding the wardenship of the hospital. As he spoke, the poor expectant husband
and father saw at a glance that his brilliant hopes were to be dashed to the ground, and that
his visitor was now there for the purpose of unsaying what on his former visit he had said.
There was something in the tone of the voice, something in the glance of the eye, which told
the tale. Mr Quiverful knew it all at once. He maintained his self-possession, however, smiled
with a slight unmeaning smile, and merely said that he was obliged to Mr Slope for the trouble
he was taking.

'It has been a troublesome matter from first to last,' said Mr Slope; 'and the bishop has hardly
known how to act. Between ourselves--but mind this of course must go no farther, Mr Quiverful.'

Mr Quiverful said of course that it should not. 'The truth is, that poor Mr Harding has hardly
known his own mind. You remember our last conversation, no doubt.'

Mr Quiverful assured him that he remembered it very well indeed.

'You will remember that I told you that Mr Harding had refused to return to the hospital.'

Mr Quiverful declared that nothing could be more distinct in his memory.

'And acting on this refusal I suggested that you should take the hospital,' continued Mr Slope.

'I understood you to say that the bishop had authorised you to offer it to me.'

'Did I? Did I go so far as that? Well, perhaps it may be, that in my anxiety on your behalf
I did commit myself further than I should have done. So far as my own memory serves me, I don't
think I did go quite so far as that. But I own I was very anxious that you should get it; and
I may have said more than was quite prudent.'

'But,' said Mr Quiverful, in his deep anxiety to prove his case, 'my wife received as distinct
a promise from Mrs Proudie as one human being could give to another.'

Mr Slope smiled, and gently shook his head. He meant that smile for a pleasant smile, but it
was diabolical in the eyes of the man he was speaking to. 'Mrs Proudie!' he said. 'If we are
to go to what passes between the ladies in these matters, we shall really be in a nest of troubles
from which we shall never extricate ourselves. Mrs Proudie is a most excellent lady, kind-hearted,
charitable, pious, and in every way estimable. But, my dear Mr Quiverful, the patronage of
the diocese is not in her hands.'

Mr Quiverful for a moment sat panic-stricken and silent. 'Am I to understand, then, that I
have received no promise?' he said, as soon as he had sufficiently collected his thoughts.

'If you will allow me, I will tell you exactly how the matter rests. You certainly did receive
a promise conditional on Mr Harding's refusal. I am sure you will do me the justice to remember
that you yourself declared that you could accept the appointment on no other condition than
the knowledge that Mr Harding had declined it.'

'Yes,' said Mr Quiverful; 'I did say that, certainly.'

'Well; it now appears that he did not refuse it.'

'But surely you told me, and repeated it more than once, that he had done so in your hearing.'

'So I understood him. But it seems I was in error. But don't for a moment, Mr Quiverful, suppose
that I mean to throw you over. No. Having held out my hand to a man in your position, with
your large family and pressing claims, I am not now going to draw it back again. I only want
you to act with me fairly and honestly.'

'Whatever I do, I shall endeavour at any rate to act fairly,' said the poor man, feeling that
he had to fall back for support on the spirit of martyrdom within him.

'I am sure you will,' said the other. 'I am sure you have no wish to obtain possession of an
income which belongs by all rights to another. No man knows better than you do Mr Harding's
history, or can better appreciate his character. Mr Harding is very desirous of returning to
his old position, and the bishop feels that he is at the present moment somewhat hampered,
though of course he is not bound, by the conversation which took place on the matter between
you and me.'

'Well,' said Mr Quiverful, dreadfully doubtful as to what his conduct under such circumstances
should be, and fruitlessly striving to harden his nerves with some of that instinct of self-preservation
which made his wife so bold.

'The wardenship of this little hospital is not the only thing in the bishop's gift, Mr Quiverful,
nor is it by many degrees the best. And his lordship is not the man to forget any one whom
he has once marked with approval. If you would allow me to advise you as a friend--'

'Indeed I shall be grateful to you,' said the poor vicar of Puddingdale--

'I should advise you to withdraw from any opposition to Mr Harding's claims. If you persist
in your demand, I do not think you will ultimately succeed. Mr Harding has all but a positive
right to the place. But if you will allow me to inform his lordship that you decline to stand
in Mr Harding's way, I think I may promise you--though, by the bye, it must not be taken as
a formal promise--that the bishop will not allow you to be a poorer man than you would have
been had you become warden.'

Mr Quiverful sat in his arm chair silent, gazing at vacancy. What was he to say? All this that
came from Mr Slope was so true. Mr Harding had a right to the hospital. The bishop had a great
many good things to give away. Both the bishop and Mr Slope would be excellent friends and
terrible enemies to a man in his position. And then he had no proof of any promise; he could
not force the bishop to appoint him.

'Well, Mr Quiverful, what do you say about it?'

'Oh, of course, whatever you think, Mr Slope. It's a great disappointment, a very great disappointment.
I won't deny that I am a very poor man, Mr Slope.'

'In the end, Mr Quiverful, you will find that it will have been better for you.'

The interview ended in Mr Slope receiving a full renunciation from Mr Quiverful of any claim
he might have to the appointment in question. It was only given verbally and without witnesses;
but then the original promise was made in the same way.

Mr Slope assured him that he should not be forgotten, and then rode back to Barchester, satisfied
that he would now be able to mould the bishop to his wishes.

CHAPTER XXV

FOURTEEN ARGUMENTS IN FAVOUR OF MR QUIVERFUL'S CLAIMS

We have most of us heard of the terrible anger of a lioness when, surrounded by her cubs, she
guards her prey. Few of us wish to disturb the mother of a litter of puppies when mouthing
a bone in the midst of her young family. Medea and her children are familiar to us, and so
is the grief of Constance. Mrs Quiverful, when she first heard from her husband the news which
he had to impart, felt within her bosom all the rage of a lioness, the rapacity of the hound,
the fury of the tragic queen, and the deep despair of a bereaved mother.

Doubting, but yet hardly fearing, what might have been the tenor of Mr Slope's discourse, she
rushed back to her husband as soon as the front door was closed behind the visitor. It was
well for Mr Slope that he had so escaped,--the anger of such a woman, at such a moment, would
have cowed even him. As a general rule, it is highly desirable that ladies should keep their
temper; a woman when she storms always makes herself ugly, and usually ridiculous also. There
is nothing so odious to man as a virago. Though Theseus loved an Amazon, he showed his love
but roughly; and from the time of Theseus downward, no man ever wished to have his wife remarkable
rather for forward prowess than retiring gentleness.

Such may be laid down as a general rule; and few women should allow themselves to deviate from
it, and then only on rare occasions. But if there be a time when a woman may let her hair to
the winds, when she may loose her arms, and scream out trumpet-tongued to the ears of men,
it is when nature calls out within her not for her own wants, but for the wants of those whom
her womb has borne, whom her breasts have suckled, for those who look to her for their daily
bread as naturally as man looks to his Creator.

There was nothing poetic in the nature of Mrs Quiverful. She was neither a Medea nor a Constance.
When angry, she spoke out her anger in plain words, and in a tone which might have been modulated
with advantage; but she did so, at any rate, without affectation. Now, without knowing it,
she rose to a tragic vein.

'Well, my dear; we are not to have it.' Such were the words with which her ears were greeted
when she entered the parlour, still hot from the kitchen fire.

'What!' said she,--and Mrs Siddons could not have put more passion into a single syllable,--'What!
Not have it? Who says so?' And she sat opposite to her husband, with her elbows on the table,
her hands clasped together, and her coarse, solid, but once handsome face stretched over it
towards him.

She sat as silent as death while he told his story, and very dreadful to him her silence was.
He told it very lamely and badly, but still in such a manner that she soon understood the whole
of it.

'And so you have resigned it?' said she.

'I have had no opportunity of accepting it,' he replied. 'I had no witnesses to Mr Slope's
offer, even if that offer would bind the bishop. It was better for me, on the whole, to keep
on good terms with such men than to fight for what I should never get!'

'Witnesses!' she screamed, rising quickly to her feet, and walking up and down the room. 'Do
clergymen require witnesses to their words? He made the promise in the bishop's name, and if
it is to be broken I'll know the reason why. Did he not positively say that the bishop had
sent him to offer you the place?'

'He did, my dear. But that is now nothing to the purpose.'

'It is everything to the purpose, Mr Quiverful. Witnesses indeed! And then to talk of your
honour being questioned because you wish to provide for fourteen children. It is everything
to the purpose; and so they shall know, if I scream it into their ears from the town cross
of Barchester.'

'You forget, Letitia, that the bishop has so many things in his gift. We must wait a little
longer. That is all.'

'Wait! Shall we feed the children by waiting? Will waiting put George and Tom, and Sam, out
into the world? Will it enable my poor girls to give up some of their drudgery? Will waiting
make Bessy and Jane fit even to be governesses? Will waiting pay for the things we got in Barchester
last week?'

'It is all we can do, my dear. The disappointment is as much to me as to you; and yet, God
knows, I feel it more for your sake than my own.'

Mrs Quiverful was looking full into her husband's face, and saw a small hot tear appear on
each of those furrowed cheeks. This was too much for her woman's heart. He also had risen,
and was standing with his back to the empty grate. She rushed towards him, and seizing him
in her arms, sobbed aloud upon his bosom.

'Yes, you are too good, too soft, too yielding,' she said at last. 'These men, when they want
you, they use you like a cat's-paw; and when they want you no longer, they throw you aside
like an old shoe. This is twice they have treated you so.'

'In one way this will be for the better,' argued he. 'It will make the bishop feel that he
is bound to do something for me.'

'At any rate, he shall hear of it,' said the lady, again reverting to her more angry mood.
'At any rate he shall hear of it, and that loudly; and so shall she. She little knows Letitia
Quiverful, if she thinks I will sit down quietly with the loss after all that passed between
us at the palace. If there's any feeling within her, I'll make her ashamed of herself,'--and
she paced the room again, stamping the floor as she went with her fat heavy foot.

'Good heavens! What a heart she must have within her to treat in such a way as this the father
of fourteen unprovided children!'

Mr Quiverful proceeded to explain that he didn't think that Mrs Proudie had anything to do with it.

'Don't tell me,' said Mrs Quiverful; 'I know more about it than that. Doesn't all the world
know that Mrs Proudie is bishop of Barchester, and that Mr Slope is merely her creature? Wasn't
it she that made me the promise just as though the thing was in her own particular gift? I
tell you, it was that woman who sent him over here to-day because, for some reason of her own,
she wants to go back on her word.'

'My dear, you're wrong--'

'Now, Q, don't be so soft,' she continued. 'Take my word for it, the bishop knows no more about
it than Jemima does.' Jemima was the two-year old. 'And if you'll take my advice, you'll lose
no time in going over and seeing him yourself.'

Soft, however, as Mr Quiverful might be, he would not allow himself to be talked out of his
opinion on this occasion; and proceeded with much minuteness to explain to his wife the tone
in which Mr Slope had spoken of Mrs Proudie's interference in diocesan matters. As he did so,
a new idea gradually instilled itself into the matron's head, and a new course of action presented
itself to her judgement. What if, after all, Mrs Proudie knew nothing of this visit of Mr Slope's?
In that case, might it not be possible that that lady would still be staunch to her in this
matter, still stand her friend, and, perhaps, possibly carry her through in opposition to Mr
Slope? Mrs Quiverful said nothing as this vague hope occurred to her, but listened with more
than ordinary patience to what her husband had to say. While he was still explaining that in
all probability the world was wrong in its estimation of Mrs Proudie's power and authority,
she had fully made up her mind as to her course of action. She did not, however, proclaim her
intention. She shook her head continuously, as he continued his narration; and when he had
completed she rose to go, merely observing that it was cruel, cruel treatment. She then asked
if he would mind waiting for a late dinner instead of dining at their usual hour of three,
and, having received from him a concession on this point, she proceeded to carry her purpose
into execution.

She determined that she would at once go to the palace; that she would do so, if possible,
before Mrs Proudie could have had an interview with Mr Slope; and that she would be either
submissive, piteous and pathetic, or indignant violent and exacting, according to the manner
in which she was received.

She was quite confident in her own power. Strengthened as she was by the pressing wants of
fourteen children, she felt that she could make her way through legions of episcopal servants,
and force herself, if need be, into the presence of the lady who had so wronged her. She had
no shame about it, no mauvaise honte, no dread of archdeacons. She would, as she declared to
her husband, make her wail heard in the market-place if she did not get redress and justice.
It might be very well for an unmarried young curate to be shamefaced in such matters; it might
be all right that a smug rector, really in want of nothing, but still looking for better preferment,
should carry out his affairs decently under the rose. But Mrs Quiverful, with fourteen children,
had given over being shamefaced, and, in some things, had given over being decent. If it were
intended that she should be ill used in the manner proposed by Mr Slope, it should not be done
under the rose. All the world would know of it.

In her present mood, Mrs Quiverful was not over careful about her attire. She tied her bonnet
under her chin, threw her shawl over her shoulders, armed herself with the old family cotton
umbrella, and started for Barchester. A journey to the palace was not quite so easy a thing
for Mrs Quiverful as for our friend at Plumstead. Plumstead is nine miles from Barchester,
and Puddingdale is but four. But the archdeacon could order round his brougham, and his high-trotting
fast bay gelding would take him into the city within the hour. There was no brougham in the
coach-house of Puddingdale Vicarage, no bay horse in the stables. There was no method of locomotion
for its inhabitants but that which nature had assigned to man.

Mrs Quiverful was a broad heavy woman, not young, nor given to walking. In her kitchen, and
in the family dormitories, she was active enough; but her pace and gait were not adapted for
the road. A walk into Barchester and back in the middle of an August day would be to her a
terrible task, if not altogether impracticable. There was living in the parish about half a
mile from the vicarage on the road to the city, a decent, kindly farmer, well to do as regards
this world, and so far mindful of the next that he attended his parish church with decent regularity.
To him Mrs Quiverful had before now appealed in some of her more pressing family troubles,
and had not appealed in vain. At his door she now presented herself, and, having explained
to his wife that most urgent business required her to go at once to Barchester, begged that
Farmer Subsoil would take her thither in his tax-cart. The farmer did not reject her plan;
and, as soon as Prince could be got into his collar, they started on their journey.

Mrs Quiverful did not mention the purpose of her business, nor did the farmer alloy his kindness
by any unseemly questions. She merely begged to be put down at the bridge going into the city,
and to be taken up again at the same place in the course of two hours. The farmer promised
to be punctual to his appointment, and the lady, supported by her umbrella, took the short
cut to the close, and in a few minutes was at the bishop's door.

Hitherto she had felt no dread with regard to the coming interview. She had felt nothing but
an indignant longing to pour forth her claims, and declare her wrongs, if those claims were
not fully admitted. But now the difficulty of her situation touched her a little. She had been
at the palace once before, but then she went to give grateful thanks. Those who have thanks
to return for favours received find easy admittance to the halls of the great. Such is not
always the case with men, or even women, who have favours to beg. Still less easy is access
for those who demand the fulfilment of promises already made.

Mrs Quiverful had not been slow to learn the ways of the world. She knew all this, and she
knew also that her cotton umbrella and all but ragged shawl would not command respect in the
eyes of the palace servants. If she were too humble, she knew well that she would never succeed.
To overcome by imperious overbearing with such a shawl as hers upon her shoulders, and such
a bonnet on her head, would have required a personal bearing very superior to that which nature
had endowed her. Of this also Mrs Quiverful was aware. She must make it known she was the wife
of a gentleman and a clergyman, and must yet condescend to conciliate.

The poor lady knew but one way to overcome these difficulties at the very threshold of her
enterprise, and to this she resorted. Low as were the domestic funds at Puddingdale, she still
retained possession of a half-crown, and this she sacrificed to the avarice of Mrs Proudie's
metropolitan sesquipedalian serving-man. She was, she said, Mrs Quiverful of Puddingdale, the
wife of the Rev. Mr Quiverful. She wished to see Mrs Proudie. It was indeed quite indispensible
that she should see Mrs Proudie. James Fitzplush looked worse than dubious, did not know whether
his lady were out, or engaged, or in her bed-room; thought it most probable that she was subject
to one of these or to some cause that would make her invisible; but Mrs Quiverful could sit
down in the waiting-room, while inquiry was being made of Mrs Proudie.

'Look here, man,' said Mrs Quiverful; 'I must see her;' and she put her card and half-crown--think
of it, my reader, think of it; her last half-crown--into the man's hand, and sat herself down
on a chair in the waiting-room.

Whether the bribe carried the day, or whether the bishop's wife really chose to see the vicar's
wife, it boots not now to inquire. The man returned, and begging Mrs Quiverful to follow him,
ushered her into the presence of the mistress of the diocese.

Mrs Quiverful at once saw that her patroness was in a smiling humour. Triumph sat throned upon
her brow, and all the joys of dominion hovered about her curls. Her lord had that morning contested
with her a great point. He had received an invitation to spend a couple of days with the archbishop.
His soul longed for the gratification. Not a word, however, in his grace's note alluded to
the fact that he was a married man; and, if he went at all, he must go alone. This necessity
would have presented an insurmountable bar to the visit, or have militated against the pleasure,
had he been able to go without reference to Mrs Proudie. But this he could not do. He could
not order his portmanteau to be packed, and start with his own man, merely telling the lady
of his heart that he would probably be back on Saturday. There are men--may we not rather say
monsters?--who do such things; and there are wives--may we not rather say slaves?--who put
up with such usage. But Dr and Mrs Proudie were not among the number.

The bishop with some beating about the bush, made the lady understand that he very much wished
to go. The lady, without any beating about the bush, made the bishop understand that she wouldn't
hear of it. It would be useless here to repeat the arguments that were used on each side, and
needless to record the result. Those who are married will understand very well how the battle
was lost and won; and those who are single will never understand it till they learn the lesson
which experience alone can give. When Mrs Quiverful was shown into Mrs Proudie's room, that
lady had only returned a few minutes from her lord. But before she left him she had seen the
answer to the archbishop's note written and sealed. No wonder that her face was wreathed with
smiles as she received Mrs Quiverful.

She instantly spoke of the subject which was so near the heart of her visitor. 'Well, Mrs Quiverful,'
said she, 'is it decided yet when you are to move to Barchester?'

'That woman', as she had an hour or two since been called, became instantly re-endowed with
all the graces that can adorn a bishop's wife. Mrs Quiverful immediately saw that her business
was to be piteous, and that nothing was to be gained by indignation; nothing, indeed, unless
she could be indignant in company with her patroness.

'Oh, Mrs Proudie,' she began, 'I fear we are not to move to Barchester at all.'

'Why not?' said the lady sharply, dropping at a moment's notice her smiles and condescension,
and turning with her sharp quick way to business which she saw at a glance was important.

And then Mrs Quiverful told her tale. As she progressed in the history of her wrongs she perceived
that the heavier she leant upon Mr Slope the blacker became Mrs Proudie's brow, but that such
blackness was not injurious to her own cause. When Mr Slope was at Puddingdale vicarage that
morning she had regarded him as the creature of the lady-bishop; now she perceived that they
were enemies. She admitted her mistake to herself without any pain or humiliation. She had
but one feeling, and that was confined to her family. She cared little how she twisted and
turned among these new-comers at the bishop's palace as long as she could twist her husband
into the warden's house. She cared not which was her friend or which was her enemy, if only
she could get this preference which she so sorely wanted.

She told her tale, and Mrs Proudie listened to it almost in silence. She told how Mr Slope
had cozened her husband into resigning his claim, and had declared that it was the bishop's
will that none but Mr Harding should be warden. Mrs Proudie's brow became blacker and blacker.
At last she started from her chair, and begging Mrs Quiverful to sit and wait for her return,
marched out of the room.

'Oh, Mrs Proudie, it's for fourteen children--for fourteen children.' Such was the burden that
fell on her ear as she closed the door behind her.

CHAPTER XXVI

MRS PROUDIE TAKES A FALL

It was hardly an hour since Mrs Proudie had left her husband's apartment victorious, and yet
so indomitable was her courage that she now returned thither panting for another combat. She
was greatly angry with what she thought was his duplicity. He had so clearly given her a promise
on this matter of the hospital. He had been already so absolutely vanquished on that point.
Mrs Proudie began to feel that if every affair was to be thus discussed and battled about twice
and even thrice, the work of the diocese would be too much even for her.

Without knocking at the door she walked quickly into her husband's room and found him seated
at his office table, with Mr Slope opposite to him. Between his fingers was the very note which
he had written to the archbishop in her presence--and it was open! Yes, he had absolutely violated
the seal which had been made sacred by her approval. They were sitting in deep conclave, and
it was too clear that the purport of the archbishop's invitation had been absolutely canvassed
again, after it had been already debated and decided on in obedience to her behests! Mr Slope
rose from his chair, and bowed slightly. The two opposing spirits looked each other fully in
the face, and they knew that they were looking each at an enemy.

'What is this, bishop, about Mr Quiverful?' said she, coming to the end of the table and standing
there.

Mr Slope did not allow the bishop to answer, but replied himself. 'I have been out to Puddingdale
this morning, ma'am, and have seen Mr Quiverful. Mr Quiverful has abandoned his claim to the
hospital, because he is now aware that Mr Harding is desirous to fill his old place. Under
these circumstances I have strongly advised his lordship to nominate Mr Harding.'

'Mr Quiverful has not abandoned anything,' said the lady, with a very imperious voice. 'His
lordship's word has been pledged to him, and it must be respected.'

The bishop still remained silent. He was anxiously desirous of making his old enemy bite the
dust beneath his feet. His new ally had told him that nothing was more easy for him than to
do so. The ally was there now at his elbow to help him, and yet his courage failed him. It
is so hard to conquer when the prestige of the former victories is all against one. It is so
hard for the cock who has once been beaten out of his yard to resume his courage and again
take a proud place upon a dunghill.

'Perhaps I ought not to interfere,' said Mr Slope, 'but yet--'

'Certainly you ought not,' said the infuriated dame.

'But yet,' continued Mr Slope, not regarding the interruption, 'I have thought it my imperative
duty to recommend to the bishop not to slight Mr Harding's claims.'

'Mr Harding should have known his own mind,' said the lady.

'If Mr Harding be not replaced at the hospital, his lordship will have to encounter much ill
will, not only in the diocese, but in the world at large. Besides, taking a higher ground,
his lordship, as I understood, feels it to be his duty to gratify, in this matter, so very
worthy a man and so good a clergyman as Mr Harding.'

'And what is to become of the Sabbath-day school, and of the Sunday services in the hospital?'
said Mrs Proudie, with something very nearly approaching to a sneer on her face.

'I understand that Mr Harding makes no objection to the Sabbath-day school,' said Mr Slope.
'And as to the hospital services, that matter will be best discussed after his appointment.
If he has any personal objection, then, I fear, the matter must rest.'

'You have a very easy conscience in such matters, Mr Slope,' said she.

'I should not have an easy conscience,' he rejoined, 'but a conscience very far from being
easy, if anything said or done by me should lead the bishop to act unadvisedly on this matter.
It is clear that in the interview I had with Mr Harding, I misunderstood him--'

'And it is equally clear that you have misunderstood Mr Quiverful,' said she, not at the top
of her wrath. 'What business have you at all with these interviews? Who desired you to go to
Mr Quiverful this morning? Who commissioned you to manage this affair? Will you answer me,
sir?--who sent you to Mr Quiverful this morning?'

There was a dead pause in the room. Mr Slope had risen from his chair, and was standing with
his hand on the back of it, looking at first very solemn and now very black. Mrs Proudie was
standing as she had at first placed herself, at the end of the table, and as she interrogated
her foe she struck her hand upon it with almost more than feminine vigour. The bishop was sitting
in his easy chair twiddling his thumbs, turning his eyes now to his wife, and now to his chaplain,
as each took up the cudgels. How comfortable it would be if they could fight it out between
them without the necessity of any interference on his part; fight it out so that one should
kill the other utterly, as far as the diocesan life was concerned, so that he, the bishop,
might know clearly by whom it behoved him to be led. There would be the comfort of quiet in
either case; but if the bishop had a wish as to which might prove the victor, that wish was
certainly not antagonistic to Mr Slope.

'Better the devil you know than the devil you don't know', is an old saying, and perhaps a
true one; but the bishop had not yet realised the truth of it.

'Will you answer me, sir?' she repeated. 'Who instructed you to call on Mr Quiverful this morning?'
There was another pause. 'Do you intend to answer me, sir?'

'I think, Mrs Proudie, that under all the circumstances it will be better for me not to answer
such a question,' said Mr Slope. Mr Slope had many tones in his voice, all duly under his command;
among them was a sanctified low tone, and a sanctified loud tone; and he now used the former.

'Did anyone send you, sir?'

'Mrs Proudie,' said Mr Slope, 'I am quite aware how much I owe to your kindness. I am aware
also what is due by courtesy from a gentleman to a lady. But there are higher considerations
than either of those, and I hope I shall be forgiven if I now allow myself to be actuated solely
by them. My duty in this matter is to his lordship, and I can admit of no questioning but from
him. He has approved of what I have done, and you must excuse me if I say, that having that
approval and my own, I want none other.'

What horrid words were these which greeted the ear of Mrs Proudie? The matter was indeed too
clear. There was premeditated mutiny in the camp. Not only had ill-conditioned minds become
insubordinate by the fruition of a little power. The bishop had not yet been twelve months
in this chair, and rebellion had already reared her hideous head within the palace. Anarchy
and misrule would quickly follow, unless she took immediate and strong measures to put down
the conspiracy which she had detected.

'Mr Slope,' she said, with slow and dignified voice, differing much from that which she had
hitherto used, 'Mr Slope, I will trouble you, if you please, to leave the apartment. I wish
to speak to my lord alone.'

Mr Slope also felt that everything depended on the present interview. Should the bishop now
be repetticoated, his thraldom would be complete and for ever. The present moment was peculiarly
propitious for rebellion. The bishop had clearly committed himself by breaking the seal of
the answer to the archbishop; he had therefore fear to influence him. Mr Slope had told him
that no consideration ought to induce him to refuse the archbishop's invitation; he had therefore
hoped to influence him. He had accepted Mr Quiverful's resignation, and therefore dreaded having
to renew that matter with his wife. He had been screwed up to the pitch of asserting a will
of his own, and might possibly be carried on till by an absolute success he should have been
taught how possible it was to succeed. Now was the moment for victory or rout. It was now that
Mr Slope must make himself master of the diocese, or else resign his place and begin his search
for fortune again. He saw all this plainly. After what had taken place any compromise between
him and the lady was impossible. Let him once leave the room at her bidding, and leave the
bishop in her hands, and he might at once pack up his portmanteau and bid adieu to episcopal
honours, Mrs Bold, and the Signora Neroni.

And yet it was not so easy to keep his ground when he was bidden by a lady to go; or to continue
to make a third in a party between husband and wife when the wife expressed a wish for a tete-a-tete
with her husband.

'Mr Slope,' she repeated, 'I wish to be alone with my lord.'

'His lordship has summoned me on most important diocesan business,' said Mr Slope, glancing
with uneasy eye at Dr Proudie. He felt that he must trust something to the bishop, and yet
that trust was so woefully misplaced. 'My leaving him at the present moment is, I fear, impossible.'

'Do you bandy words with me, you ungrateful man?' said she. 'My lord, will you do me the favour
to beg Mr Slope to leave the room?'

My lord scratched his head, but for the moment said nothing. This was as much as Mr Slope expected
from him, and was on the whole, for him, an active exercise of marital rights.

'My lord,' said the lady, 'is Mr Slope to leave this room, or am I?'

Here Mrs Proudie made a false step. She should not have alluded to the possibility of retreat
on her part. She should not have expressed the idea that her order for Mr Slope's expulsion
could be treated otherwise than by immediate obedience. In answer to such a question the bishop
naturally said in his own mind, that it was necessary that one should leave the room, perhaps
it might be as well that Mrs Proudie did so. He did say so in his own mind, but externally
he again scratched his head and again twiddled his thumbs.

Mrs Proudie was boiling over with wrath. Alas, alas! could she but have kept her temper as
her enemy did, she would have conquered as she had ever conquered. But divine anger got the
better of her, as it has done of other heroines, and she fell.

'My lord,' said she, 'am I to be vouchsafed an answer or am I not?'

At last he broke his deep silence and proclaimed himself a Slopeite. 'Why, my dear,' said he,
'Mr Slope and I are very busy.'

That was all. There was nothing more necessary. He had gone to the battle-field, stood the
dust and heat of the day, encountered the fury of the foe, and won the victory. How easy is
success to those who will only be true to themselves!

Mr Slope saw at once the full amount of his gain, and turned on the vanquished lady a look
of triumph which she never forgot and never forgave. Here he was wrong. He should have looked
humbly at her, and with meek entreating eye had deprecated her anger. He should have said by
his glance that he asked pardon for his success, and that he hoped forgiveness for the stand
which he had been forced to make in the cause of duty. So might he perchance have somewhat
mollified that imperious bosom, and prepared the way for future terms. But Mr Slope meant to
rule without terms. Ah, forgetful, inexperienced man! Can you cause that little trembling victim
to be divorced from the woman who possesses him? Can you provide that they shall be separated
at bed and board? Is he not flesh of her flesh and bone of her bone, and must he not so continue?
It is very well now for you to stand your ground, and triumph as she is driven ignominiously
from the room; but can you be present when those curtains are drawn, when that awful helmet
of proof has been tied beneath the chin, when the small remnants of the bishop's prowess shall
be cowed by the tassel above his head? Can you then intrude yourself when the wife wishes 'to
speak to my lord alone?'

But for the moment Mr Slope's triumph was complete; for Mrs Proudie without further parley
left the room, and did not forget to shut the door after her. Then followed a close conference
between the new allies, to which was said much which it astonished Mr Slope to say and the
bishop to hear. And yet the one said it and the other heard it without ill will. There was
no mincing of matters now. The chaplain plainly told the bishop that the world gave him credit
for being under the governance of his wife; that his credit and character in the diocese was
suffering; that he would surely get himself into hot water if he allowed Mrs Proudie to interfere
in matters which were not suitable for a woman's powers; and in fact that he would become contemptible
if he did not throw off the yoke under which he groaned. The bishop at first hummed and hawed,
and affected to deny the truth of what was said. But his denial was by silence and quickly
broke down. He soon admitted by silence his state of vassalage, and pledged himself with Mr
Slope's assistance, to change his courses. Mr Slope did not make out a bad case for himself.
He explained how it grieved him to run counter to a lady who had always been his patroness,
who had befriended him in so many ways, who had, in fact, recommended him to the bishop's notice;
but, as he stated, his duty was now imperative; he held a situation of peculiar confidence,
and was immediately and especially attached to the bishop's person. In such a situation his
conscience required that he should regard solely the bishop's interests, and therefore he had
ventured to speak out.

The bishop took this for what it was worth, and Mr Slope only intended that he should do so.
It gilded the pill which Mr Slope had to administer, and which the bishop thought would be
less bitter than that other pill which he had been so long taking.

'My lord,' had his immediate reward, like a good child. He was instructed to write and at once
did write another note to the archbishop accepting his grace's invitation. This note Mr Slope,
more prudent than the lady, himself took away and posted with his own hands. Thus he made sure
that this act of self-jurisdiction should be as nearly as possible a fait accompli. He begged,
and coaxed, and threatened the bishop with a view of making him also write at once to Mr Harding;
but the bishop, though temporarily emancipated from his wife, was not yet enthralled to Mr
Slope. He said, and probably said truly, that such an offer must be made in some official form;
that he was not yet prepared to sign the form; and that he should prefer seeing Mr Harding
before he did so. Mr Slope, might, however, beg Mr Harding to call upon him. Not disappointed
with his achievement Mr Slope went his way. He first posted the precious note which he had
in his pocket, and then pursued other enterprises in which we must follow him in other chapters.

Mrs Proudie, having received such satisfaction as was to be derived from slamming her husband's
door, did not at once betake herself to Mrs Quiverful. Indeed for the first few moments after
her repulse she felt that she could not again see that lady. She would have to own that she
had been beaten, to confess that the diadem had passed from her brow, and the sceptre from
her hand! No, she would send a message to her with the promise of a letter on the next day
or the day after. Thus resolving, she betook herself to her bed-room; but here she again changed
her mind. The air of that sacred enclosure restored her courage, and gave her some heart. As
Achilles warmed at the sight of his armour, as Don Quixote's heart grew strong when he grasped
his lance, so did Mrs Proudie look forward to fresh laurels, as her hey fell on her husband's
pillow. She would not despair. Having so resolved, she descended with dignified mien and refreshed
countenance to Mrs Quiverful.

This scene in the bishop's study took longer in the acting than in the telling. We have not,
perhaps, had the whole of the conversation. At any rate Mrs Quiverful was beginning to be very
impatient, and was thinking that farmer Subsoil would be tired of waiting for her, when Mrs
Proudie returned. Oh! Who can tell the palpitations of that maternal heart, as the suppliant
looked into the face of the great lady to see written there either a promise of a house, income,
comfort, and future competence, or else the doom of continued and ever increasing poverty.
Poor mother! Poor wife! There was little there to comfort you!

'Mrs Quiverful,' thus spoke the lady with considerable austerity, and without sitting down
herself. 'I find that your husband has behaved in this matter in a very weak and foolish manner.'

Mrs Quiverful immediately rose upon her feet, thinking it disrespectful to remain sitting while
the wife of the bishop stood. But she was desired to sit down again, and made to do so, so
that Mrs Proudie might stand and preach over her. It is generally considered an offensive thing
for a gentleman to keep his seat while another is kept standing before him, and we presume
the same law holds with regard to ladies. It often is so felt; but we are inclined to say that
it never produces half the discomfort or half the feeling of implied inferiority that is shown
by a great man who desires his visitor to be seated while he himself speaks from his legs.
Such a solecism in good breeding, when construed into English means this: "The accepted rule
of courtesy in the world require that I should offer you a seat; if I did not do so, you would
bring a charge against me in the world of being arrogant and ill-mannered; I will obey the
world; but, nevertheless, I will not put myself on an equality with you. You may sit down,
but I won't sit with you. Sit, therefore, at my bidding, and I'll stand and talk to you."

This was just what Mrs Proudie meant to say; and Mrs Quiverful, though she was too anxious
and too flurried thus to translate the full meaning of the manoeuvre, did not fail to feel
its effect. She was cowed and uncomfortable, and a second time essayed to rise from her chair.

'Pray be seated, Mrs Quiverful, pray keep your seat. Your husband, I say, has been most weak
and most foolish. It is impossible, Mrs Quiverful, to help people who will not help themselves.
I much fear that I can now do nothing for you in this matter.'

'Oh! Mrs Proudie--don't say so,' said the poor woman, again jumping up.

'Pray be seated, Mrs Quiverful. I much fear that I can do nothing further for you in this matter.
Your husband has, in a most unaccountable manner, taken upon himself to resign that which I
was empowered to offer him. As a matter of course, the bishop expects that his clergy shall
know their own minds. What he may ultimately do--what we may finally decide on doing--I cannot
say. Knowing the extent of your family--'

'Fourteen children, Mrs Proudie, fourteen of them! and hardly bread--barely bread! It's hard
for the children of a clergyman, it's hard for one who has always done his duty respectably!'
Not a word fell from her about herself; but the tears came running down her big coarse cheeks,
on which the dust of the August road had left its traces.

Mrs Proudie has not been portrayed in these pages as an agreeable or amiable lady. There has
been no intention to impress the reader much in her favour. It is ordained that all novels
should have a male and female angel, and a male and female devil. If it be considered that
this rule is obeyed in these pages, the latter character must be supposed to have fallen to
the lot of Mrs Proudie. But she was not all devil. There was a heart inside that stiff-ribbed
bodice, though not, perhaps, of large dimensions, and certainly not easily accessible. Mrs
Quiverful, however, did gain access, and Mrs Proudie proved herself a woman. Whether it was
the fourteen children with their probable bare bread and the possible bare backs, or the respectability
of the father's work, or the mingled dust and tears on the mother's face, we will not pretend
to say. But Mrs Proudie was touched.

She did not show it as other women might have done. She did not give Mrs Quiverful eau-de-Cologne,
or order her a glass of wine. She did not take her to her toilet table, and offer her the use
of brushes and combs, towels and water. She did not say soft little speeches and coax her kindly
with equanimity. Mrs Quiverful, despite her rough appearance, would have been as amenable to
such little tender cares as any lady in the land. But none such was forthcoming. Instead of
that, Mrs Proudie slapped one hand upon the other, and declared--not with an oath; for as a
lady and a Sabbatarian and a she-bishop, she could not swear,--but with an adjuration, that
'she wouldn't have it done.'

The meaning of this was that she wouldn't have Mr Quiverful's promised appointment cozened
away by the treachery of Mr Slope and the weakness of her husband. This meaning she very soon
explained to Mrs Quiverful.

'Why was your husband such a fool,' said she, now dismounted from her high horse and sitting
confidentially down close to her visitor, 'as to take the bait which that man threw to him?
If he had not been so utterly foolish, nothing could have prevented your going to the hospital.'

Poor Mrs Quiverful was ready enough with her own tongue in accusing her husband to his face
of being soft, and perhaps she did not always speak of him to her children quite so respectfully
as she might have done. But she did not like to hear him abused by others, and began to vindicate
him, and to explain that of course he had taken Mr Slope to be an emissary of Mrs Proudie herself;
that Mr Slope was thought to be peculiarly her friend; and that, therefore, Mr Quiverful would
have been failing in respect to her had he assumed to doubt what Mr Slope had said.

Thus mollified Mrs Proudie again declared that she 'would not have it done,' and at last sent
Mrs Quiverful home with an assurance that, to the furthest stretch of her power and influence
in the palace, the appointment of Mr Quiverful should be insisted upon. As she repeated that
word 'insisted', she thought of the bishop in his night-cap, and with compressed lips slightly
shook her head. Oh! my aspiring pastors, divines to whose ears nolo episcopari are the sweetest
of words, which of you would be a bishop on such terms as these?

Mrs Quiverful got home in the farmer's cart, not indeed with a light heart, but satisfied that
she had done right in making her visit.

CHAPTER XXVII

A LOVE SCENE

Mr Slope, as we have said, left the palace with a feeling of considerable triumph. Not that
he thought that his difficulties were over; he did not so deceive himself; but he felt that
he had played his first move well, as well as the pieces on the board would allow; and that
he had nothing with which to reproach himself. He first of all posted the letter to the archbishop,
and having made that sure he proceeded to push the advantage which he had gained. Had Mrs Bold
been at home, he would have called on her; but he knew that she was at Plumstead, as he wrote
the following note. It was the beginning of what, he trusted, might be a long and tender series
of epistles.

'My dear Mrs Bold,--You will understand perfectly that I cannot at present correspond with
your father. I heartily wish that I could, and hope the day may be not long distant, when mists
shall have cleared away, and we may know each other. But I cannot preclude myself from the
pleasure of sending you these few lines to say that Mr Q. has to-day, in my presence, resigned
any title that he ever had to the wardenship of the hospital, and that the bishop has assured
me that it is his intention to offer it to your esteemed father.

'Will you, with my respectful compliments, ask him, who I believe is a fellow visitor with
you, to call on the bishop either on Wednesday or Thursday, between ten and one. This is by
the bishop's desire. If you will so far oblige me as to let me have a line naming either day,
and the hour which will suit Mr Harding, I will take care that the servants shall have orders
to show him in without delay. Perhaps I should say no more,--but still I wish you could make
your father understand that no subject will be mooted between his lordship and him, which will
refer at all to the method in which he may choose to perform his duty. I for one, am persuaded
that no clergyman could perform it more satisfactorily than he did, or than he will do again.

'On a former occasion I was indiscreet and much too impatient, considering your father's age
and my own. I hope he will not now refuse my apology. I still hope also that with your aid
and sweet pious labours, we may live to attach such a Sabbath school to the old endowment,
as may, by God's grace and furtherance, be a blessing to the poor of this city.

'You will see at once that this letter is confidential. The subject, of course, makes it so.
But, equally, of course, it is for your parent's eye as well as for your own, should you think
it proper to show it to him.

'I hope my darling little friend Johnny is as strong as ever,-- dear little fellow. Does he
still continue his rude assaults on those beautiful long silken tresses?

'I can assure your friends miss you from Barchester sorely; but it would be cruel to begrudge
you your sojourn among flowers and fields during this truly sultry weather.

'Pray believe me, my dear Mrs Bold Yours most sincerely, 'OBADIAH SLOPE. 'Barchester, Friday.'

Now this letter, taken as a whole, and with the consideration that Mr Slope wished to assume
a great degree of intimacy with Eleanor, would not have been bad, but for the allusion to the
tresses. Gentlemen do not write to ladies about their tresses, unless they are on very intimate
terms indeed. But Mr Slope could not be expected to be aware of this. He longed to put a little
affection into his epistle, and yet he thought it injudicious, as the letter would he knew
be shown to Mr Harding. He would have insisted that the letter should be strictly private and
seen by no eyes but Eleanor's own, had he not felt that such an injunction would have been
disobeyed. He therefore restrained his passion, did not sign himself 'yours affectionately,'
and contented himself instead with the compliment to the tresses.

We will now follow his letter. He took it to Mrs Bold's house, and learning there, from the
servant, that things were to be sent out to Plumstead that afternoon, left it, with many injunctions,
in her hands.

We will now follow Mr Slope so as to complete the day with him, and then return to his letter
and its momentous fate in the next chapter.

There is an old song which gives us some very good advice about courting:--

      "It's gude to be off with the auld luve
       Before ye be on wi' the new."

Of the wisdom of this maxim Mr Slope was ignorant, and accordingly, having written his letter
to Mrs Bold, he proceeded to call upon the Signora Neroni. Indeed it was hard to say which
was the old love and which was the new, Mr Slope having been smitten with both so nearly at
the same time. Perhaps he thought it not amiss to have two strings to his bow. But two strings
to Cupid's bow are always dangerous to him on whose behalf they are to be used. A man should
remember that between two stools he may fall to the ground.

But in sooth Mr Slope was pursuing Mrs Bold in obedience to his better instincts, and the signora
in obedience to his worse. Had he won the widow and worn her, no one could have blamed him.
You, O reader, and I, and Eleanor's other friends would have received the story of such a winning
with much disgust and disappointment; but we should have been angry with Eleanor, not with
Mr Slope. Bishop, male and female, dean and chapter and diocesan clergy in full congress, could
have found nothing to disapprove of in such an alliance. Convocation itself, that mysterious
and mighty synod, could in no wise have fallen foul of it. The possession of L 1000 a year
and a beautiful wife would not al all have hurt the voice of the pulpit character, or lessened
the grace and piety of the exemplary clergyman.

But not of such a nature were likely to be his dealings with the Signora Neroni. In the first
place he knew that her husband was living, and therefore he could not woo her honestly. Then
again she had nothing to recommend her to his honest wooing had such been possible. She was
not only portionless, but also from misfortune unfitted to be chosen as the wife of any man
who wanted a useful mate. Mr Slope was aware that she was a helpless hopeless cripple.

But Mr Slope could not help himself. He knew that he was wrong in devoting his time to the
back drawing-room in Dr Stanhope's house. He knew that what took place would if divulged utterly
ruin him with Mrs Bold. He knew that scandal would soon come upon his heels and spread abroad
among the black coats of Barchester some tidings, some exaggerated tidings, of the sighs which
he poured into the lady's ears. He knew that he was acting against the recognised principles
of his life, against those laws of conduct by which he hoped to achieve much higher success.
But as we have said, he could not help himself. Passion, for the first time in his life, passion
was too strong for him.

As for the signora, no such plea can be put forward for her, for in truth, she cared no more
for Mr Slope than she did for twenty others who had been at her feet before him. She willingly,
nay greedily, accepted his homage. He was the finest fly that Barchester had hitherto afforded
to her web; and the signora was a powerful spider that made wondrous webs, and could in no
way live without catching flies. Her taste in this respect was abominable, for she had no use
for the victims when caught. She could not eat them matrimonially as young lady-flies do whose
webs are most frequently of their mother's weaving. Nor could she devour them by any escapade
of a less legitimate description. Her unfortunate affliction precluded her from all hope of
levanting with a lover. It would be impossible to run away with a lady who required three servants
to move her from a sofa.

The signora was subdued by no passion. Her time for love was gone. She had lived out her heart,
such heart as she ever had ever had, in her early years, at an age when Mr Slope was thinking
of his second book of Euclid and his unpaid bill at the buttery hatch. In age the lady was
younger than the gentleman; but in feelings, in knowledge of the affairs of love, in intrigue,
he was immeasurably her junior. It was necessary to her to have some man at her feet. It was
the one customary excitement of her life. She delighted in the exercise of power which this
gave her; it was now nearly the only food for her ambition; she would boast to her sister that
she could make a fool of any man, and the sister, as little imbued with feminine delicacy as
herself, good naturedly thought it but fair that such amusement should be afforded to a poor
invalid who was debarred from the ordinary pleasures of life.

Mr Slope was madly in love, but hardly knew it. The signora spitted him, as a boy does a cockchafer
on a cork, that she might enjoy the energetic agony of his gyrations. And she knew very well
what she was doing.

Mr Slope having added to his person all such adornments as are possible to a clergyman making
a morning visit, such as a clean neck tie, clean handkerchief, new gloves, and a soupcon of
not necessary scent, called about three o'clock at the doctor's house. At about this hour the
signora was almost always in the back drawing-room. The mother had not come down. The doctor
was out or in his own room. Bertie was out, and Charlotte at any rate left the room if any
one called whose object was specially with her sister. Such was her idea of being charitable
and sisterly.

Mr Slope, as was his custom, asked for Mr Stanhope, and was told, as was the servant's custom,
that the signora was in the drawing-room. Upstairs he accordingly went. He found her, as he
always did, lying on her sofa with a French volume before her, and a beautiful little inlaid
writing case open on her table. At the moment of his entrance she was in the act of writing.

'Ah, my friend,' said she, putting out her left hand to him across the desk, 'I did not expect
you to-day and was this very instant writing to you--'

Mr Slope, taking the soft fair delicate hand in his, and very soft and fair and delicate it
was, bowed over it his huge red head and kissed it. It was a sight to see, a deed to record
if the author could fitly do it, a picture to put on canvas. Mr Slope was big, awkward, cumbrous,
and having his heart in his pursuit was ill at ease. The lady was fair, as we have said, and
delicate; every thing about her was fine and refined; her hand in his looked like a rose lying
among carrots, and when he kissed it he looked as a cow might do on finding such a flower among
her food. She was graceful as a couchant goddess, and, moreover, as self-possessed as Venus
must have been when courting Adonis.

Oh, that such grace and such beauty should have condescended to waste itself on such a pursuit!

'I was in the act of writing to you,' said she, 'but now my scrawl may go into the basket;'
and she raised the sheet of gilded note paper from off her desk as though to tear it.

'Indeed it shall not,' said he, laying the embargo of half a stone weight of human flesh and
blood upon the devoted paper. 'Nothing that you write for my eyes, signora, shall be so desecrated,'
and he took up the letter, put that also among the carrots and fed on it, and then proceeded
to read it.

'Gracious me! Mr Slope,' said she. 'I hope you don't mean to say that you keep all the trash
I write to you. Half my time I don't know what I write, and when I do, I know it is only fit
for the black of the fire. I hope you have not that ugly trick of keeping letters.'

'At any rate I don't throw them into a waste-paper basket. If destruction is their doomed lot,
they perish worthily, and are burnt on a pyre, as Dido was of old.'

'With a steel pen stuck through them, of course,' said she, 'to make the simile more complete.
Of all the ladies of my acquaintance I think Lady Dido was the most absurd. Why did she not
do as Cleopatra did? Why did she not take out her ships and insist on going with him? She could
not bear to lose the land she had got by a swindle; and then she could not bear the loss of
her lover. So she fell between two stools. Mr Slope, whatever you do, never mingle love and
business.'

Mr Slope blushed up to his eyes, and over his mottled forehead to the very roots of his hair.
He felt sure that the signora knew all about his intentions with reference to Mrs Bold. His
conscience told him that he was detected. His doom was to be spoken; he was to be punished
for his duplicity, and rejected by the beautiful creature before him. Poor man. He little dreamt
that had all his intentions with reference to Mrs Bold been known to the signora, it would
only have added zest to that lady's amusement. It was all very well to have Mr Slope at her
feet, to show her power by making an utter fool of a clergyman, to gratify her own infidelity
by thus proving the little strength which religion had in controlling the passions even of
a religious man; but it would be an increased gratification if she could be made to understand
that she was at the same time alluring her victim away from another, whose love if secured
would be in every way beneficial and salutary.

The signora had indeed discovered with the keen instinct of such a woman, that Mr Slope was
bent on matrimony with Mrs Bold, but in alluding to Dido she had not thought of it. She instantly
perceived, however, from her lover's blushes, what was on his mind, and was not slow in taking
advantage of it.

She looked at him full in the face, not angrily, nor yet with a smile, but with an intense
and overpowering gaze; and then holding up her forefinger, and slightly shaking her head she
said:- 'Whatever you do, my friend, do not mingle love and business. Either stick to your treasure
and your city of wealth, or else follow your love like a true man. But never attempt both.
If you do, you'll have to die with a broken heart as did poor Dido. Which is it to be with
you, Mr Slope, love or money?'

Mr Slope was not so ready with a pathetic answer as he usually was with touching episodes in
his extempore sermons. He felt that he ought to say something pretty, something also that should
remove the impression on the mind of his lady love. But he was rather put about how to do it.

'Love,' said he, 'true overpowering love, must be the strongest passion a man can feel; it
must control every other wish, and put aside every other pursuit. But with me love will never
act in that way unless it is returned;' and he threw upon the signora a look of tenderness
which was intended to make up for all the deficiencies of his speech.

'Take my advice,' said she. 'Never mind love. After all, what is it? The dream of a few weeks.
That is all its joy. The disappointment of a life is its Nemesis. Who was ever successful in
true love? Success in love argues that the love is false. True love is always despondent or
tragical. Juliet loved. Haidee loved. Dido loved, and what came of it? Troilus loved and ceased
to be a man.'

'Troilus loved and he was fooled,' said the more manly chaplain. 'A man may love and yet not
be a Troilus. All women are not Cressids.'

'No; all women are not Cressids. The falsehood is not always on the woman's side. Imogen was
true, but now was she rewarded? Her lord believed her to be the paramour of the first he who
came near her in his absence. Desdemona was true and was smothered. Ophelia was true and went
mad. There is no happiness in love, except at the end of an English novel. But in wealth, money,
houses, lands, goods and chattels, in the good things of this world, yes, in them there is
something tangible, something that can be retained and enjoyed.'

'Oh, no,' said Mr Slope, feeling himself bound to enter some protest against so very unorthodox
a doctrine, 'this world's wealth will make no one happy.'

'And what will make you happy--you--you?' said she, raising herself up, and speaking to him
with energy across the table. 'From what source do you look for happiness? Do not say that
you look for none? I shall not believe you. It is a search in which every human being spends
an existence.'

'And the search is always in vain,' said Mr Slope. 'We look for happiness on earth, while we
ought to be content to hope for it in heaven.'

'Pshaw! you preach a doctrine which you know you don't believe. It is the way with you all.
If you know that there is no earthly happiness, why do you long to be a bishop or a dean? Why
do you want lands and income?'

'I have the natural ambition of a man,' said he.

'Of course you have, and the natural passions; and therefore I say that you don't believe the
doctrine you preach. St Paul was an enthusiast. He believed so that his ambition and passions
did not war against his creed. So does the Eastern fanatic who passes half his life erect upon
a pillar. As for me, I will believe in no belief that does not make itself manifest by outward
signs. I will think no preaching sincere that is not recommended by the practice of the preacher.'

Mr Slope was startled and horrified, but he felt that he could not answer. How could he stand
up and preach the lessons of his Master, being there as he was, on the devil's business? He
was a true believer, otherwise this would have been nothing to him. He had audacity for most
things, but he had not audacity to make a plaything of the Lord's word. All this the signora
understood, and felt much interest as she saw her cockchafer whirl round upon her pin.

'Your wit delights in such arguments,' said he, 'but your heart and your reason do not quite
go along with them.'

'My heart!' said she; 'you quite mistake the principles of my composition if you imagine that
there is such a thing about me.' After all, there was very little that was false in anything
the signora said. If Mr Slope allowed himself to be deceived it was his own fault. Nothing
could have been more open than her declarations about herself.

The little writing table with her desk was still standing before her, a barrier, as it were,
against the enemy. She was sitting as nearly upright as she ever did, and he had brought a
chair close to the sofa, so that there was only the corner of the table between him and her.
It so happened that as she spoke her hand lay upon the table, and as Mr Slope answered her
he put his hand upon hers.

'No heart!' said he. 'That is a very heavy charge which you bring against yourself, and one
of which I cannot find you guilty--'

She withdrew her hand, not quickly and angrily, as though insulted by his touch, but gently
and slowly.

'You are in no condition to give a verdict on the matter,' said she, 'as you have not tried
me. No; don't say that you intend doing so, for you know you have no intention of the kind;
nor indeed have I either. As for you, you will take your vows where they will result in something
more substantial than the pursuit of such a ghostlike, ghastly love as mine--'

'Your love should be sufficient to satisfy the dream of a monarch,' said Mr Slope, not quite
clear as to the meaning of his words.

'Say an archbishop, Mr Slope,' said she. Poor fellow! She was very cruel to him. He went round
again upon his cork on this allusion to his profession. He tried, however, to smile, and gently
accused her of joking on a matter, which was, he said, to him of such vital moment.

'Why--what gulls do you men make of us,' she replied. 'How you fool us to the top of our bent;
and of all men you clergymen are the most fluent of your honeyed caressing words. Now look
me in the face, Mr Slope, boldly and openly.'

Mr Slope did look at her with a languishing loving eye, and as he did so, he again put forth
his hand to get hold of hers.

'I told you to look at me boldly, Mr Slope; but confine your boldness to your eyes.'

'Oh, Madeline,' he sighed.

'Well, my name is Madeline,' said she; 'but none except my own family usually call me so. Now
look me in the face, Mr Slope. Am I to understand that you say you love me?'

Mr Slope never had said so. If he had come there with any formed plan at all, his intention
was to make love to the lady without uttering any such declaration. It was, however, quite
impossible that he should now deny his love. He had, therefore, nothing for it, but to go down
on his knees distractedly against the sofa, and swear that he did love her with a love passing
the love of man.'

The signora received the assurance with very little palpitations or appearance of surprise.
'And now answer me another question,' said she; 'when are you to be married to Eleanor Bold?'

Poor Mr Slope went round and round in mortal agony. In such a condition as his it was really
very hard for him to know what answer to give. And yet no answer would be his surest condemnation.
He might as well at once plead guilty to the charge brought against him.

'And why do you accuse me of such dissimulation?'

'Dissimulation! I said nothing of dissimulation. I made no charge against you, and make none.
Pray don't defend yourself to me. You swear that you are devoted to my beauty, and yet you
are on the eve of matrimony with another. I feel this to be rather a compliment. It is to Mrs
Bold that you must defend yourself. That you may find difficult; unless, indeed, you can keep
her in the dark. You clergymen are cleverer than other men.'

'Signora, I have told you that I loved you, and now you rail at me?'

'Rail at you. God bless the man; what would he have? Come, answer me this at your leisure,--not
without thinking now, but leisurely and with consideration,--are you not going to be married
to Mrs Bold?'

'I am not,' said he. And as he said it, he almost hated, with an exquisite hatred, the woman
whom he could not help loving with an exquisite love.

'But surely you are a worshipper of hers?'

'I am not,' said Mr Slope, to whom the word worshipper was peculiarly distasteful. The signora
had conceived that it would be so.

'I wonder at that,' said she. 'Do you not admire her? To my eyes she is the perfection of English
beauty. And then she is rich too. I should have thought she was just the person to attract
you. Come, Mr Slope, let me give you advice on this matter. Marry the charming widow! She will
be a good mother to your children and an excellent mistress of a clergyman's household.'

'Oh, signora, how can you be so cruel?'

'Cruel,' said she, changing the voice of her banter which she had been using for one which
was expressively earnest in its tone; 'is that cruelty?'

'How can I love another, while my heart is entirely your own?'

'If that were cruelty, Mr Slope, what might you say of me if I were to declare that I returned
your passion? What would you think if I bound you even by a lover's oath to do daily penance
at this couch of mine? What can I give in return for a man's love? Ah, dear friend, you have
not realised the condition of my fate.'

Mr Slope was not on his knees all this time. After his declaration of love he had risen from
them as quickly as he thought consistent with the new position which he now filled, and as
he stood was leaning on the back of his chair. This outburst of tenderness on the Signora's
part quite overcame him, and made him feel for the moment that he could sacrifice everything
to be assured of the love of the beautiful creature before him, maimed, lame, and already married
as she was.

'And can I not sympathise with your lot?' said he, now seating himself on her sofa, and pushing
away the table with his foot.

'Sympathy is so near to pity!' said she. 'If you pity me, cripple as I am, I shall spurn you
from me.'

'Oh, Madeline, I will only love you,' and again he caught her hand and devoured it with kisses.
Now she did not draw from him, but sat there as he kissed it, looking at him with her great
eyes, just as a great spider would look at a great fly that was quite securely caught.

'Suppose Signor Neroni were to come to Barchester,' said she, 'would you make his acquaintance?'

'Signor Neroni!' said he.

'Would you introduce him to the bishop, and Mrs Proudie, and the young ladies?' said she, again
having recourse to that horrid quizzing voice which Mr Slope so particularly hated.

'Why do you ask me such a question?' said he.

'Because it is necessary that you should know that there is a Signor Neroni. I think you had
forgotten it.'

'If I thought that you retained for that wretch one particle of the love of which he was never
worthy, I would die before I would distract you by telling you what I feel. No! were your husband
the master of your heart, I might perhaps love you; but you should never know it.'

'My heart again! How you talk. And you consider then, that if a husband be not master of his
wife's heart, he has not right to her fealty; if a wife ceases to love, she may cease to be
true. Is that your doctrine on this matter, as a minister of the Church of England?'

Mr Slope tried hard within himself to cast off the pollution with which he felt that he was
defiling his soul. He strove to tear himself away from the noxious siren that had bewitched
him. He had looked for rapturous joy in loving this lovely creature, and he already found that
he met with little but disappointment and self-rebuke. He had come across the fruits of the
Dead Sea, so sweet and delicious to the eye, so bitter and nauseous to the taste. He had put
the apple to his mouth, and it had turned to ashes between his teeth. Yet he could not tear
himself away. He knew, he could not but know, that weakness of his religion. But she half permitted
his adoration, and that half permission added such fuel to his fire that all the fountain of
piety could not quench it. He began to feel savage, irritated, and revengeful. He meditated
some severity of speech, some taunt that should cut her, as her taunts cut him. He reflected
as he stood there for a moment, silent before her, that if he desired to quell her proud spirit,
he should do so by being prouder even than herself; that if he wished to have her at his feet
suppliant for his love it behoved him to conquer her by indifference. All this passed through
his mind. As far as dead knowledge went, he knew, or thought he knew, how a woman should be
tamed. But when he essayed to bring his tactics to bear, he failed like a child. What chance
has dead knowledge with experience in any of the transactions between man and man? What possible
between man and woman? Mr Slope loved furiously, insanely, and truly; but he had never played
the game of love. The signora did not love at all, but she was up to every move on the board.
It was Philidor pitched against a school-boy.

And so she continued to insult him, and he continued to bear it.

'Sacrifice the world for love!' said she, in answer to some renewed rapid declaration of his
passion, 'how often has the same thing been said, and how invariably with the same falsehood!'

'Falsehood,' said he. 'Do you say that I am false to you? Do you say that my love is not real?'

'False? Of course it is false, false as the father of falsehood--if indeed falsehoods need
a sire and are not self-begotten since the world began. You are ready to sacrifice the world
for love? Come let us see what you will sacrifice. I care nothing for nuptial vows. The wretch,
I think you were kind enough to call him so, whom I swore to love and obey, is so base that
he can only be thought of with repulsive disgust. In the council chamber of my heart I have
divorced him. To me that is as good as though aged lords had gloated for months over the details
of his licentious life. I care nothing for what the world can say. Will you be as frank? Will
you take me to your home as your wife? Will you call me Mrs Slope before bishop, dean, and
prebendaries?' The poor tortured wretch stood silent, not knowing what to say. 'What! You won't
do that. Tell me then, what part of the world is it that you will sacrifice for my charms?'

'Were you free to marry, I would take you to my house to-morrow and wish no higher privilege.'

'I am free;' said she, almost starting up in her energy. For though there was no truth in her
pretended regard for her clerical admirer, there was a mixture of real feeling in the scorn
and satire with which she spoke of love and marriage generally. 'I am free; free as the winds.
Come, will you take me as I am? Have your wish; sacrifice the world, and prove yourself a true
man.'

Mr Slope should have taken her at her word. She would have drawn back, and he would have had
the full advantage of the offer. But he did not. Instead of doing so, he stood wrapt in astonishment,
passing his fingers through his lank red hair, and thinking as he stared upon her animated
countenance that her wondrous beauty grew more and more wonderful as he gazed on it. 'Ha! Ha!
Ha!,' she laughed out loud. 'Come, Mr Slope, don't talk of sacrificing the world again. People
beyond one-and-twenty should never dream of such a thing. You and I, if we have the dregs of
any love left in us, if we have the remnants of a passion remaining in our hearts, should husband
our resources better. We are not in our premiere jeunesse. The world is a very nice place.
Your world, at any rate, is so. You have all manner of fat rectories to get, and possible bishoprics
to enjoy. Come, confess; on second thoughts you would not sacrifice such things for the smiles
of a lame lady?'

It was impossible for him to answer this. In order to be in any way dignified, he felt that
he must be silent.

'Come,' said she--'don't boody with me: don't be angry because I speak out some home truths.
Alas, the world, as I have found it, has taught me bitter truths. Come, tell me that I am forgiven.
Are we not to be friends?' and she again put her hand to him.

He sat himself down on the chair beside her, and took her proffered hand and leant over her.

'There,' said she, with her sweetest, softest smile--a smile to withstand which a man should
be cased in triple steel, 'there; seal your forgiveness on it,' and she raised it towards his
face. He kissed it again and again, and stretched over her as though desirous of extending
the charity of his pardon beyond the hand that was offered to him. She managed, however, to
check his ardour. For one so easily allured as this poor chaplain, her hand was surely enough.

'Oh, Madeline!' said he, 'tell me that you love me--do you--do you love me?'

'Hush,' said she. 'There is mother's step. Our tete-a-tete has been of monstrous length. Now
you had better go. But we shall see you soon again, shall we not?'

Mr Slope promised that he would call again on the following day.

'And Mr Slope,' she continued, 'pray answer my note. You have it in your hand, though, I declare
during these two hours you have not been gracious enough to read it. It is about the Sabbath
school and the children. You know how anxious I am to have them here. I have been learning
the catechism myself, on purpose. You must manage it for me next week. I will teach them, at
any rate, to submit themselves to their spiritual pastors and masters.'

Mr Slope said but little on the subject of Sabbath schools, but he made his adieu, and betook
himself home with a sad heart, troubled mind, and uneasy conscience. The archdeacon and Mr
Harding had in fact come into town together in the brougham, and it had been arranged that
they should call for Eleanor's parcels as they left on their way home. Accordingly they did
so call, and the maid, as she handed to the coachman a small basket and large bundle carefully
and neatly packec, gave in at the carriage window Mr Slope's epistle. The archdeacon, who was
sitting next to the window, took it, and immediately recognised the hand-writing of his enemy.

'Who left this?' said he.

'Mr Slope called with it himself, your reverence,' said the girl; ' and was very anxious that
missus should have it to-day.'

So the brougham drove off, and the letter was left in the archdeacon's hand. He looked at it
as though he held a basket of adders. He could not have thought worse of the document had he
read it and discovered it to be licentious and atheistical. He did, moreover, what so many
wise people are accustomed to do in similar circumstances; he immediately condemned the person
to whom the letter was written, as though she were necessarily a particeps criminis.

Poor Mr Harding, though by no means inclined to forward Mr Slope's intimacy with his daughter,
would have given anything to have kept the letter from his son-in-law. But that was now impossible.
There it was in his hand; and he looked as thoroughly disgusted as though he were quite sure
that it contained all the rhapsodies of a favoured lover.

'It's very hard on me,' said he, after a while, 'that this should go on under my roof.'

Now here the archdeacon was certainly the most unreasonable. Having invited his sister-in-law
to his house, it was a natural consequence of that she should receive her letters there. And
if Mr Slope chose to write to her, his letter would, as a matter of course, be sent after her.
Moreover, the very fact of an invitation to one's house implies confidence on the part of the
inviter. He had shown that he thought Mrs Bold to be a fit person to stay with him by his making
her to do so, and it was most cruel to her that he should complain of her violating the sanctity
of his roof-tree, when the laches committed were none of her committing.

Mr Harding felt this; and felt also that when the archdeacon talked thus about his roof, what
he said was most offensive to himself as Eleanor's father. If Eleanor did receive a letter
from Mr Slope, what was there in that to pollute the purity of Dr Grantly's household. He was
indignant that his daughter should be so judged and so spoken of; and, he made up his mind
that even as Mrs Slope she must be dearer to him than any other creature on God's earth. He
almost broke out, and said as much; but for the moment he restrained himself.

'Here,' said the archdeacon, handing the offensive missile to his father-in-law; 'I am not
going to be the bearer of his love letters. You are her father, and may do as you think fit
with it.'

By doing as he thought fit with it, the archdeacon certainly meant that Mr Harding would be
justified in opening and reading the letter, and taking any steps which might in consequence
be necessary. To tell the truth, Dr Grantly did feel rather a stronger curiosity than was justified
by his outraged virtue, to see the contents of the letter. Of course he could not open it himself,
but he wished to make Mr Harding understand that he, as Eleanor's father, would be fully justified
in doing so. The idea of such a proceeding never occurred to Mr Harding. His authority over
Eleanor ceased when she became the wife of John Bold. He had not the slightest wish to pry
into her correspondence. He consequently put the letter into his pocket, and only wished that
he had been able to do so without the archdeacon's knowledge. They both sat silent during the
journey home, and then Dr Grantly said, 'Perhaps Susan had better give it to her. She can explain
to her sister, better than you or I can do, how deep is the disgrace of such an acquaintance.'

'I think you are very hard upon Eleanor,' replied Mr Harding. 'I will not allow that she has
disgraced herself, nor do I think it likely that she will do so. She has a right to correspond
with whom she pleases, and I shall not take upon myself to blame her because she gets a letter
from Slope.'

'I suppose,' said Dr Grantly, 'you don't wish her to marry this man. I suppose you'll admit
that she would disgrace herself if she did so.'

'I do not wish her to marry him,' said the perplexed father; 'I do not like him, and do not
think he would make a good husband. But if Eleanor decides to do so, I shall certainly not
think that she has disgraced herself.'

'Good heavens!' exclaimed Dr Grantly, and threw himself back into the corner of his brougham.
Mr Harding said nothing more, but commenced playing a dirge, with an imaginary fiddle bow upon
an imaginary violoncello, for which there did not appear to be quite room enough in the carriage;
and he continued the tune, with sundry variations, till he arrived at the rectory door.

The archdeacon had been meditating sad things in his mind. Hitherto he had always looked on
his father-in-law as a true partisan, though he knew him to be a man devoid of all the combative
qualifications for that character. He had felt no fear that Mr Harding would go over to the
enemy, though he had never counted much on the ex-warden's prowess in breaking the battle ranks.
Now, however, it seemed that Eleanor, with her wiles, had completely trepanned and bewildered
her father, cheated him out of his judgement, robbed him of the predilections and tastes of
life, and caused him to be tolerant of a man whose arrogance and vulgarity would, in a few
years since, have been unendurable to him. That the whole thing was as good as arranged between
Eleanor and Mr Slope there was no longer any room to doubt. That Mr Harding knew that such
was the case, even this could hardly be doubted. It was too manifest that he at any rate suspected
it, and was prepared to sanction it.

And to tell the truth, such was the case. Mr Harding disliked Mr Slope as much as it was in
his nature to dislike any man. Had his daughter wished to do her worst to displease him by
a second marriage, she could hardly have succeeded better than by marrying Mr Slope. But, as
he said to himself now very often, what right had he to condemn her if she did nothing that
was really wrong? If she liked Mr Slope it was her affair. It was indeed miraculous to him,
that a woman with such a mind, so educated, so refined, so nice in her tastes, should like
such a man. Then he asked himself whether it was possible that she did so.

Ah, thou weak man; most charitable, most Christian, but weakest of men! Why couldst thou not
have asked herself? Was she not the daughter of thy loins, the child of thy heart, the most
beloved of thee of all humanity? Had she not proved to thee, by years of closest affection,
her truth and goodness and filial obedience? And yet, groping in darkness, hearing her name
in strains which wounded thy loving heart, and being unable to defend her as thou shouldst
have done!

Mr Harding had not believed, did not believe, that his daughter meant to marry this man; but
he feared to commit himself to such an opinion. If she did do it there would be then no means
of retreat. The wishes of his heart were--First, that there should be no truth in the archdeacon's
surmises; and in this wish he would have fain trusted entirely, had he dared to do so; Secondly,
that the match might be prevented, if unfortunately, it had been contemplated by Eleanor; Thirdly,
that should she be so infatuated as to marry this man, he might justify his conduct, and declare
that no cause existed for his separating himself from her.

He wanted to believe her incapable of such a marriage; he wanted to show that he so believed
of her; but he wanted also to be able to say hereafter, that she had done nothing amiss, if
she could unfortunately prove herself to be different from what he thought her to be.

Nothing but affection could justify such fickleness; but affection did justify it. There was
but little of the Roman about Mr Harding. He could not sacrifice his Lucretia even though she
should be polluted by the accepted addresses of the clerical Tarquin at the palace. If Tarquin
could be prevented, well and good; but if not, the father would still open his heart to his
daughter, and accept her as she present herself, Tarquin and all.

Dr Grantly's mind was of a stronger calibre, and he was by no means deficient in heart. He
loved with an honest genuine love his wife and children and friends. He loved his father-in-law;
and he was quite prepared to love Eleanor too, if she would be one of his party, if she would
be on his side, if she would regard the Slopes and the Proudies as the enemies of mankind,
and acknowledge and feel the comfortable merits of the Gwynnes and Arabins. He wished to be
what he called "safe" with all those whom he had admitted to the penetralia of his house and
heart. He could luxuriate in no society that was deficient in a certain feeling of faithful
staunch high-churchism, which to him was tantamount to freemasonry. He was not strict in his
lines of definition. He endured without impatience many different shades of Anglo-church conservatism;
but with the Slopes and Proudies he could not go on all fours.

He was wanting in, moreover, or perhaps it would be more correct to say, he was not troubled
by that womanly tenderness which was so peculiar to Mr Harding. His feelings towards his friends
were, that while they stuck to him he would stick to them; that he would work with them shoulder
to shoulder; that he would be faithful to the faithful. He knew nothing of that beautiful love
which can be true to a false friend.

And thus these two men, each miserable enough in his own way, returned to Plumstead.

It was getting late when they arrived there, and the ladies had already gone up to dress. Nothing
more was said as the two parted in the hall. As Mr Harding passed to his own room, he knocked
at Eleanor's door and handed in the letter. The archdeacon hurried to his own territory, there
to unburden his heart to his faithful partner.

What colloquy took place between the marital chamber and the adjoining dressing-room shall
not be detailed. The reader, now intimate with the persons concerned, can well imagine it.
The whole tenor of it also might be read in Mrs Grantly's brow as she came down to dinner.

Eleanor, when she received the letter from her father's hand, had no idea from whom it came.
She had never seen Mr Slope's handwriting, or if so, had forgotten it; and did not think of
him as she twisted the letter as people do twist letters when they do not immediately recognise
their correspondents either by the writing or the seal. She was sitting at her glass brushing
her hair, and rising every other minute to play with her boy who was sprawling on the bed,
and who engaged pretty nearly the whole attention of the maid as well as of the mother.

At last, sitting before her toilet table, she broke the seal, and turning over the leaf saw
Mr Slope's name. She first felt surprised, and then annoyed, and then anxious. As she read
it she became interested. She was so delighted to find that all obstacles to her father's return
to the hospital were apparently removed that she did not observe the fulsome language in which
the tidings were conveyed. She merely perceived that she was commissioned to tell her father
that such was the case, and she did not realise the fact that such a commission should not
have been made, in the first instance, to her by an unmarried young clergyman. She felt, on
the whole, grateful to Mr Slope, and anxious to get on her dress that she might run with the
news to her father. Then she came to the allusion to her own pious labours, and she said in
her heart that Mr Slope was an affected ass. Then she went on again and was offended by her
boy being called Mr Slope's darling--he was nobody's darling but her own; or at any rate not
the darling of a disagreeable stranger like Mr Slope. Lastly she arrived at the tresses and
felt a qualm of disgust. She looked up in the glass, and there they were before her, long and
silken, certainly, and very beautiful. I will not say but that she knew them to be so, but
she felt angry with them and brushed them roughly and carelessly. She crumpled the letter with
angry violence, and resolved, almost without thinking of it, that she would not show it to
her father. She would merely tell him the contents of it. She then comforted herself again
with her boy, and her dress fastened, she went down to dinner.

As she tripped down the stairs she began to ascertain that there was some difficulty in her
situation. She could not keep from her father the news about the hospital, nor could she comfortably
confess the letter from Mr Slope before the Grantlys. Her father had already gone down. She
had heard his step upon the lobby. She resolved therefore to take him aside, and tell him her
little bit of news. Poor girl! She had no idea how severely the unfortunate letter had already
been discussed.

When she entered the drawing-room the whole party were there, including Mr Arabin, and the
whole party looked glum and sour. The two girls sat silent and apart as though they were aware
that something was wrong. Even Mr Arabin was solemn and silent. Eleanor had not seen him since
breakfast. He had been the whole day at St Ewold's, and such having been the case it was natural
that he should tell how matters were going on there. He did nothing of the kind, however, but
remained solemn and silent. They were all solemn and silent. Eleanor knew in her heart that
they had been talking about her, and her heart misgave her as she thought of Mr Slope and his
letter. At any rate she felt it to be quite impossible to speak to her father alone while matters
were in this state.

Dinner was soon announced, and Dr Grantly, as was his wont, gave Eleanor his arm. But he did
so as though the doing it were an outrage on his feelings rendered necessary by sternest necessity.
With quick sympathy Eleanor felt this, and hardly put her fingers on his coat sleeve. It may
be guessed in what way the dinner-hour was passed. Dr Grantly said a few words to Mr Arabin,
Mr Arabin said a few words to Mrs Grantly, she said a few words to her father, and he tried
to say a few words to Eleanor. She felt that she had been tried and found guilty of something,
though she knew not what. She longed to say out to them all, 'Well, what is it that I have
done; out with it; and let me know my crime; for heaven's sake let me hear the worst of it;'
but she could not. She could say nothing, but sat there silent, half feeling that she was guilty,
and trying in vain to pretend even to eat her dinner.

At last the cloth was drawn, and the ladies were not long following it. When they were gone
the gentlemen were somewhat more sociable but not much so. They could not of course talk over
Eleanor's sins. The archdeacon had indeed so far betrayed his sister-in-law as to whisper into
Mr Arabin's ear in the study, as they met there before dinner, a hint of what he feared. He
did so with the gravest and saddest of fears, and Mr Arabin became grave and apparently sad
enough as he heard it. He opened his eyes and his mouth and said in a sort of whisper, 'Mr
Slope!' in the same way as he might have said, The Cholera!' had his friend told him that that
horrid disease was in his nursery. 'I fear so, I fear so,' said the archdeacon, and then together
they left the room.

We will not accurately analyse Mr Arabin's feelings on receipt of such astounding tidings.
It will suffice to say that he was surprised, vexed, sorrowful, and ill at ease. He had not
perhaps thought very much about Eleanor, but he had appreciated her influence, and had felt
that close intimacy with her in a country house was pleasant to him, and also beneficial. He
had spoken highly of her intelligence to the archdeacon, and had walked about the shrubberies
with her, carrying her boy on his back. When Mr Arabin had called Johnny his darling, Eleanor
was not angry.

Thus the three men sat over their wine, all thinking of the same subject, but unable to speak
of it to each other. So we will leave them, and follow the ladies into the drawing-room.

Mrs Grantly had received a commission from her husband, and had undertaken it with some unwillingness.
He had desired her to speak gravely to Eleanor, and to tell her that, if she persisted in her
adherence to Mr Slope, she could no longer look for the countenance of her present friends.
Mrs Grantly probably knew her sister better than the doctor did, and assured him that it would
be in vain to talk to her. The only course likely to be of any service in her opinion was to
keep Eleanor away from Barchester. Perhaps she might have added, for she had a very keen eye
in such things, that there might be some ground for hope in keeping Eleanor near Mr Arabin.
Of this, however, she said nothing. But the archdeacon would not be talked over; he spoke much
of his conscience, and declared that if Mrs Grantly would not do it he would. So instigated,
the lady undertook the task, stating, however, her full conviction that her interference would
be worse than useless. And so it proved.

As soon as they were in the drawing-room Mrs Grantly found some excuse for sending her girls
away, and then began her task. She knew well that she could exercise but very slight authority
over her sister. Their various modes of life, and the distance between their residences, had
prevented very close confidence. They had hardly lived together since Eleanor was a child.
Eleanor had moreover, especially in latter years, resented in a quiet sort of way, the dictatorial
authority which the archdeacon seemed to exercise over her father, and on this account had
been unwilling to allow the archdeacon's wife to exercise authority over herself.

'You got a letter just before dinner, I believe,' began the eldest sister.

Eleanor acknowledged that she had done so, and felt that she turned red as she acknowledged
it. She would have given anything to have kept her colour, but the more she tried to do so,
the more she signally failed.

'Was it not from Mr Slope?'

Eleanor said that the letter was from Mr Slope.

'Is he a regular correspondent of yours, Eleanor?'

'Not exactly,' said she, already beginning to feel angry at the cross-examination. She determined,
and why it would be difficult to say, that nothing would induce her to tell her sister Susan
what was the subject of the letter. Mrs Grantly, she knew, was instigated by the archdeacon,
and she would not plead to any arraignment made against her by him.

'But, Eleanor dear, why do you get letters from Mr Slope at all, knowing, as you do, he is
a person so distasteful to papa, and to the archdeacon, and indeed to all your friends?'

'In the first place, Susan, I don't get letters from him; and in the next place, as Mr Slope
wrote the one letter which I have got, and as I only received it, which I could not very well
help doing, as papa handed it to me, I think you had better ask Mr Slope instead of me.'

'What was the letter about, Eleanor?'

'I cannot tell you,' said she, 'because it was confidential. It was on business respecting
a third person.'

'It was in no way personal to yourself, then?'

'I won't exactly say that, Susan,' said she, getting more and more angry at her sister's questions.

'Well I must say it's rather singular,' said Mrs Grantly, affecting to laugh, 'that a young
lady in your position should receive a letter from an unmarried gentleman of which she will
not tell the contents, and which she is ashamed to show her sister.'

'I am not ashamed,' said Eleanor, blazing up; 'I am not ashamed of anything in the matter;
only I do not choose to be cross-examined as to my letters by any one.'

'Well, dear,' said the other, 'I cannot tell you that I do not think that Mr Slope a proper
correspondent for you.'

'If he be ever so improper, how can I help his having written to me? But you are all prejudiced
against him to such an extent, that that which would be kind and generous in another man is
odious and impudent in him. I hate a religion that teaches one to be so onesided to one's charity.'

'I am sorry, Eleanor, that you hate the religion you find here; but surely you should remember
that in such matters the archdeacon must know more of the world than you do. I don't ask you
to respect or comply with me, although I am, unfortunately, so many years your senior; but
surely, in such a matter as this, you might consent to be guided by the archdeacon. He is most
anxious to be your friend if you will let him.'

'In such a matter as what?' said Eleanor very testily. 'Upon my word I don't know what this
is all about.'

'We all want you to drop Mr Slope.'

'You all want me to be illiberal as yourselves. That I shall never be. I see no harm in Mr
Slope's acquaintance, and I shall not insult the man by telling him that I do. He has thought
it necessary to write to me, and I do not want the archdeacon's advice about the letter. If
I did I would ask it.'

'Then, Eleanor, it is my duty to tell you,' and now she spoke with a tremendous gravity, 'that
the archdeacon thinks that such a correspondence is disgraceful, and that he cannot allow it
to go on in this house.'

Eleanor's eyes flashed fire as she answered her sister, jumping up from her seat as she did
so. 'You may tell the archdeacon that wherever I am I shall receive what letters I please and
from whom I please. And as for the word disgraceful, if Dr Grantly has used it of me he has
been unmanly and inhospitable,' and she walked off to the door. 'When papa comes from the dining-room
I will thank you to ask him to step up to my bed-room. I will show him Mr Slope's letter, but
I will show it to no one else.' And so saying she retreated to her baby.

She had no conception of the crime with which she was charged. The idea that she could be thought
by her friends to regard Mr Slope as a lover, had never flashed upon her. She conceived that
they were all prejudiced and illiberal in their persecution of him, and therefore she would
not join in the persecution, even though she greatly disliked the man.

Eleanor was very angry as she seated herself in a low chair by her open window at the foot
of her child's bed. 'To dare to say that I have disgraced myself,' she repeated to herself
more than once. 'How papa can put up with that man's arrogance! I will certainly not sit down
to dinner in this house again unless he begs my pardon for that word.' And then a thought struck
her that Mr Arabin might perchance hear of her 'disgraceful' correspondence with Mr Slope,
and she turned crimson with pure vexation. Oh, if she had known the truth! If she could have
conceived that Mr Arabin had been informed as a fact that she was going to marry Mr Slope!

She had not been long in her room before her father joined her. As he left the drawing-room
Mrs Grantly took her husband into the recess of the window, and told him how signally she had
failed.

'I will speak to her myself before I go to bed,' said the archdeacon.

'Pray do no such thing,' said she; 'you can do no good and will only make an unseemly quarrel
in the house. You have no idea how headstrong she can be.'

The archdeacon declared that as to that he was quite indifferent. He knew his duty and he would
do it. Mr Harding was weak in the extreme in such matters. He would not have it hereafter on
his conscience that he had not done all that in him lay to prevent so disgraceful an alliance.
It was in vain that Mrs Grantly assured him that speaking to Eleanor angrily would only hasten
such a crisis, and render it certain if at present there were any doubt. He was angry, self-willed,
and sore. The fact that a lady in his household had received a letter from Mr Slope had wounded
his pride in the sorest place, and nothing could control him.

Mr Harding looked worn and woebegone as he entered his daughter's room. These sorrows worried
him sadly. He felt that if they were continued he must go to the wall in a manner so kindly
prophesied to him by the chaplain. He knocked gently at his daughter's door, waited till he
was distinctly bade to enter, and then appeared as though he and not she was the suspected
criminal.

Eleanor's arm was soon within his, and she had soon kissed his forehead and caressed him, not
with joyous but with eager love. 'Oh, papa,' she said, 'I do so want to speak to you. They
have been talking about me downstairs to-night; don't you know they have, papa?'

Mr Harding confessed with a sort of murmur that the archdeacon had been speaking of her.

'I shall hate Dr Grantly soon--'

'Oh, my dear!'

'Well; I shall. I cannot help it. He is so uncharitable, so unkind, so suspicious of everyone
that does not worship himself: and then he is so monstrously arrogant to other people who have
a right to their opinions as well as he has to his own.'

'He is an earnest, eager man, my dear: but he never means to be unkind.'

'He is unkind, papa, most unkind. There, I got that letter from Mr Slope before dinner. It
was you yourself who gave it to me. There; pray read it. It is all for you. It should have
been addressed to you. You know how they have been talking about it downstairs. You know how
they behaved to me at dinner. And since dinner Susan has been preaching to me, till I could
not remain in the room with her. Read it, papa; and then say whether that is a letter that
need make Dr Grantly so outrageous.'

Mr Harding took his arm from his daughter's waist, and slowly read the letter. She expected
to see his countenance lit up with joy as he learnt that his path back to the hospital was
made so smooth; but she was doomed to disappointment, as had once been the case before on a
somewhat similar occasion. His first feeling was one of unmitigated disgust that Mr Slope should
have chosen to interfere in his behalf. He had been anxious to get back to the hospital, but
he would have infinitely sooner resigned all pretensions to the place, than have owned in any
manner to Mr Slope's influence in his favour. Then he thoroughly disliked the tone of Mr Slope's
letter; it was unctuous, false, and unwholesome, like the man. He saw, which Eleanor had failed
to see, that much more had been intended than was expressed. The appeal to Eleanor's pious
labours as separate from his own grated sadly against his feelings as a father. And then, when
he came to the 'darling boy,' and the 'silken tresses,' he slowly closed and folded the letter
in despair. It was impossible that Mr Slope should so write unless he had been encouraged.
It was impossible that Eleanor should have received such a letter, and received it without
annoyance, unless she were willing to encourage him. So at least, Mr Harding argued to himself.

How hard it is to judge accurately of the feelings of others. Mr Harding, as he came to close
the letter, in his heart condemned his daughter for indelicacy, and it made him miserable to
do so. She was not responsible for what Mr Slope might write. True. But then she expressed
no disgust at it. She had rather expressed approval of the letter as a whole. She had given
it to him to read, as a vindication for herself and also for him. The father's spirits sank
within him as he felt that he could not acquit her.

And yet it was the true feminine delicacy of Eleanor's mind which brought her on this condemnation.
Listen to me, ladies, and I beseech you to acquit her. She thought of this man, this lover
of whom she was so unconscious, exactly as her father did, exactly as the Grantlys did. At
least she esteemed him personally as they did. But she believed him to be in the main an honest
man, and one truly inclined to assist her father. She felt herself bound, after what had passed,
to show the letter to Mr Harding. She thought it necessary that he should know what Mr Slope
had to say. But she did not think it necessary to apologise for, or condemn, or even allude
to the vulgarity of the man's tone, which arose, as does all vulgarity, from ignorance. It
was nauseous to her to have such a man like Mr Slope commenting on her personal attractions;
and she did not think it necessary to dilate with her father upon what was nauseous. She never
supposed they could disagree on such a subject. It would have been painful for to point it
out, painful to her to speak strongly against a man of whom, on the whole she was anxious to
think and speak well. In encountering such a man she had encountered what was disagreeable,
as she might do in walking the streets. But in such encounters she never thought it necessary
to dwell on what disgusted her.

Mr Harding slowly folded the letter, handed it back to her, kissed her forehead and bade God
bless her. He then crept slowly away to his own room.

As soon as he had left the passage another knock was given at Eleanor's door, and Mrs Grantly's
very demure own maid, entering on tiptoe, wanted to know would Mrs Bold be so kind as to speak
to the archdeacon for two minutes in the archdeacon's study, if not disagreeable. The archdeacon's
compliments, and he wouldn't detain her two minutes.

Eleanor thought it was very disagreeable; she was tired and fagged and sick at heart; her present
feelings towards Dr Grantly were anything but those of affection. She was, however, no coward,
and therefore promised to be in the study in five minutes. So she arranged her hair, tied on
her cap, and went down with a palpitating heart.

CHAPTER XXIX

A SERIOUS INTERVIEW

There are people who delight in serious interviews, especially when to them appertain the part
of offering advice or administering rebuke, and perhaps the archdeacon was one of these. Yet
on this occasion he did not prepare himself for the coming conversation with much anticipation
of pleasure. Whatever might be his faults he was not an inhospitable man, and he almost felt
that he was sinning against hospitality in upbraiding Eleanor in his own house. Then, also
he was not quite sure that he would get the best of it. His wife had told him that he decidedly
would not, and he usually gave credit to what his wife said. He was, however, so convinced
of what he considered to be the impropriety of Eleanor's conduct, and so assured also of his
own duty in trying to check it, that his conscience would not allow him to take his wife's
advice and go to bed quietly.

Eleanor's face as she entered the room was not much as to reassure him. As a rule she was always
mild in manner and gentle in conduct; but there was that in her eye which made it not an easy
task to scold her. In truth she had been little used to scolding. No one since her childhood
had tried it but the archdeacon, and he had generally failed when he did try it. He had never
done so since her marriage; and now, when he saw her quiet easy step, as she entered the room,
he almost wished he had taken his wife's advice.

He began by apologising for the trouble he was giving her. She begged him not to mention it,
assured him that walking down the stairs was no trouble to her at all, and then took a seat
and waited patiently for him to begin his attack.

'My dear Eleanor,' he said, 'I hope you believe me when I assure you that you have no sincerer
friend than I am.' To this Eleanor answered nothing, and therefore he proceeded. 'If you had
a brother of your own I should not probably trouble you with what I am going to say. But as
it is I cannot but think that it must be a comfort to you to know that you have near you one
who is as anxious for your welfare as any brother of your own could be.'

'I never had a brother,' said she.

'I know you never had, and it is therefore that I speak to you.'

'I never had a brother,' she repeated; 'but I have hardly felt the want. Papa has been to me
both father and brother.'

'Your father is the fondest and most affectionate of men. But--'

'He is--the fondest and most affectionate of men, and the best of counsellors. While he lives
I can never want advice.'

This rather put the archdeacon out. He could not exactly contradict what his sister-in-law
said about her father; and yet he did not at all agree with her. He wanted her to understand
that he tendered his assistance because her father was a soft good-natured gentleman, not sufficiently
knowing in the ways of the world; but he could not say this to her. So he had to rush into
the subject-matter of his proffered counsel without any acknowledgement on her part that she
could need it, or would be grateful for it.

'Susan tells me that you received a letter this evening from Mr Slope.'

'Yes; papa brought it in the brougham. Did he not tell you?'

'And Susan says that you objected to let her know what it was about.'

'I don't think she asked me. But had she done so I should not have told her. I don't think
it nice to be asked about one's letters. If one wishes to show them one does so without being
asked.'

'True. Quite so. What you say is quite true. But is not the fact of your receiving letters
from Mr Slope, which you do not wish to show to your friends, a circumstance which must excite
some--some surprise--some suspicion--'

'Suspicion!' said she, not speaking above her usual voice, speaking still in a soft womanly
tone, but yet with indignation; 'suspicion! and who suspects me, and of what?'

And then there was a pause, for the archdeacon was not quite ready to explain the ground of
his suspicion. 'No, Dr Grantly, I did not choose to show Mr Slope's letter to Susan. I could
not show it to any one till papa had seen it. If you have any wish to read it now, you can
do so,' and she handed the letter to him over the table.

This was an amount of compliance which he had not at all expected, and which rather upset him
in his tactics. However, he took the letter, perused it carefully, and then refolding it, kept
it on the table under his hand. To him it appeared to be in almost every respect the letter
of a declared lover; it seemed to corroborate his worst suspicions; and the fact of Eleanor's
showing it to him was all but tantamount to a declaration on her part, that it was her pleasure
to receive love-letters from Mr Slope. He almost entirely overlooked the real subject-matter
of the epistle; so intent was he on the forthcoming courtship and marriage.

'I'll thank you to give it back, please, Dr Grantly.'

He took his hand and held it up, but made no immediate overture to return it. 'And Mr Harding
has seen this?' said he.

'Of course he has,' said she; 'it was written that he might see it. It refers solely to his
business--of course I showed it to him.'

'And Eleanor, do you think that that is a proper letter for you--for a person in your condition--to
receive from Mr Slope?'

'Quite a proper letter,' said she, speaking, perhaps, a little out of obstinacy; probably forgetting
at the moment the objectionable mention of her silken curls.

'Then, Eleanor, it is my duty to tell you that I wholly differ from you.'

'So I suppose,' said she, instigated now by sheer opposition and determination not to succumb.
'You think Mr Slope is a messenger direct from Satan. I think he is an industrious, well-meaning
clergyman. It's a pity that we differ as we do. But, as we do differ, we had probably better
not talk about it.'

Here undoubtedly Eleanor put herself in the wrong. She might probably have refused to talk
to Dr Grantly on the matter in dispute without any impropriety; but having consented to listen
to him, she had no business to tell him that regarded Mr Slope as an emissary from the evil
one; nor was she justified in praising Mr Slope, seeing that in her heart of hearts she did
not think well of him. She was, however, wounded in spirit, and very angry and bitter. She
had been subjected to contumely and cross-questioning and ill-usage through the whole evening.
No one, not even Mr Arabin, not even her father, had been kind to her. All this she attributed
to the prejudice and conceit of the archdeacon, and therefore she resolved to set no bounds
to her antagonism to him. She would neither give nor take quarter. He had greatly presumed
in daring to question her about her correspondence, and she was determined to show that she
thought so.

'Eleanor, you are forgetting yourself,' said he, looking very sternly at her. 'Otherwise you
would never tell me that I conceive any man to be a messenger from Satan.'

'But you do,' said she. 'Nothing is too bad for him. Give me that letter, if you please;' and
she stretched out her hand and took it from him. 'He has been doing his best to serve papa,
doing more than any of papa's friends could do; and yet, because he is the chaplain of a bishop
whom you don't like, you speak of him as though he had no right to the usage of a gentleman.'

'He has done nothing for your father.'

'I believe that he has done a great deal; and, as far as I am concerned, I am grateful to him.
I judge people by their acts, and his, as far as I can see them, are good.' She then paused
for a moment. 'If you have nothing further to say, I shall be obliged by being permitted to
say good night--I am very tired.'

Dr Grantly had, as he thought, done his best to be gracious to his sister-in-law. He had endeavoured
not to be harsh with her, and had striven to pluck the sting from his rebuke. But he did not
intend that she should leave him without hearing him.

'I have something to say, Eleanor; and I fear I must trouble you to hear it. You profess that
it is quite proper that you should receive from Mr Slope such letters as that you have in your
hand. Susan and I think very differently. You are, of course, your own mistress, and much as
we both must grieve should anything separate you from us, we have no power to prevent you from
taking steps which may lead to such a separation. If you are so wilful as to reject the counsel
of your friends, you must be allowed to cater for yourself. Is it worth you while to break
away from all those you have loved--from all who love you--for the sake of Mr Slope?'

'I don't know what you mean, Dr Grantly; I don't know what you are talking about. I don't want
to break away from anybody.'

'But you will do so if you connect yourself with Mr Slope. Eleanor, I must speak out to you.
You must choose between your sister and myself and our friends, and Mr Slope and his friends.
I say nothing of your father, as you may probably understand his feelings better than I do.'

'What do you mean, Dr Grantly? What am I to understand? I never heard such wicked prejudice
in my life.'

'It is no prejudice, Eleanor. I have known the world longer than you have done. Mr Slope is
altogether beneath you. You ought to know and feel that he is so. Pray--pray think of this
before it is too late.'

'Too late!'

'Or if you will not believe me, ask Susan; you cannot think she is prejudiced against you.
Or even consult your father, he is not prejudiced against you. Ask Mr Arabin--'

'You haven't spoken to Mr Arabin about this!' said she, jumping up and standing before him.

'Eleanor, all the world in and about Barchester will be speaking of it soon.'

'But you have spoken to Mr Arabin about me and Mr Slope?'

'Certainly I have, and he quite agrees with me.'

'Agree with what?' said she. 'I think you are trying to drive me mad.'

'He agrees with me and Susan that it is quite impossible you should be received at Plumstead
as Mrs Slope.'

Not being favourites with the tragic muse we do not dare to attempt any description of Eleanor's
face when she first heard the name of Mrs Slope pronounced as that which would or should or
might at some time appertain to herself. The look, such as it was, Dr Grantly did not soon
forget. For a moment or two she could find no words to express her deep anger and deep disgust;
and, indeed, at this conjuncture, words did not come to her very freely.

'How dare you be so impertinent?' at last she said; and then hurried out of the room, without
giving the archdeacon the opportunity of uttering another word. It was with difficulty that
she contained herself till she reached her own room; and then, locking the door, she threw
herself on her bed and sobbed as though her heart would break.

But even yet she had no conception of the truth. She had no idea that her father and sister
had for days past conceived in sober earnest the idea that she was going to marry the man.
She did not even then believe that the archdeacon thought that she would do so. By some manoeuvre
of her brain, she attributed the origin of the accusation to Mr Arabin, and as she did so her
anger against him was excessive, and the vexation of her spirit almost unendurable. She could
not bring herself to think the charge was made seriously. It appeared to her most probable
that the archdeacon and Mr Arabin had talked over her objectionable acquaintance with Mr Slope;
that Mr Arabin, in his jeering sarcastic way, had suggested the odious match as being the severest
way of treating with contumely her acquaintance with his enemy; and that the archdeacon, taking
the idea from him, thought proper to punish her by the allusion. The whole night she lay awake
thinking of what had been said, and this appeared to be the most probable solution.

But the reflection that Mr Arabin should have in any way mentioned her name in connection with
that of Mr Slope was overpowering; and the spiteful ill-nature of the archdeacon, in repeating
the charge to her, made her wish to leave his house almost before the day had broken. One thing
was certain: nothing should make her stay there beyond the following morning, and nothing should
make her sit down in company with Dr Grantly. When she thought of the man whose name had been
linked with her own, she cried from sheer disgust. It was only because she would be thus disgusted,
thus pained, and shocked and cut to the quick, that the archdeacon had spoken the horrid word.
He wanted her to make her quarrel with Mr Slope, and therefore he had outraged her by his abominable
vulgarity. She determined that at any rate he should know that she appreciated it.

Nor was the archdeacon a bit better satisfied with the result of his serious interview than
was Eleanor. He gathered from it, as indeed he could hardly fail to do, that she was very angry
with him; but he thought that she was thus angry, not because she was suspected of an intention
to marry Mr Slope, but because such an intention was imputed to her as a crime. Dr Grantly
regarded this supposed union with disgust; but it never occurred to him that Eleanor was outraged,
because she looked at it exactly in the same light.

He returned to his wife vexed and somewhat disconsolate, but, nevertheless, confirmed in his
wrath against his sister-in-law. 'Her whole behaviour,' said he, 'has been most objectionable.
She handed me his love letter to read as though she were proud of it. And she is proud of it.
She is proud of having this slavering, greedy man at her feet. She will throw herself and John
Bold's money into his lap; she will ruin her boy, disgrace her father and you, and be a wretched
miserable woman.'

His spouse who was sitting at her toilet table, continued her avocations, making no answer
to all this. She had known that the archdeacon would gain nothing be interfering; but she was
too charitable to provoke him by saying so while he was in such deep sorrow.

'This comes of a man making a will as that of Bold's' he continued. 'Eleanor is no more fitted
to be trusted with such an amount of money in her own hands than is a charity-school girl.'
Still Mrs Grantly made no reply. 'But I have done my duty; I can do nothing further. I have
told her plainly that she cannot be allowed to form a link of connection between me and that
man. From henceforward it will not be in my power to make her welcome at Plumstead. I cannot
have Mr Slope's love letters coming here. I think you have better let her understand that as
her mind on this subject seems to be irrevocably fixed, it will be better for all parties that
she should return to Barchester.

Now Mrs Grantly was angry with Eleanor, nearly as angry as her husband; but she had no idea
of turning her sister out of the house. She, therefore, at length spoke out, and explained
to the archdeacon in her own mild seducing way, that he was fuming and fussing and fretting
himself very unnecessarily. She declared that things, if left alone, would arrange themselves
much better than he could arrange them; and at last succeeded in inducing him to go to bed
in a somewhat less inhospitable state of mind.

On the following morning Eleanor's maid was commissioned to send word into the dining-room
that her mistress was not well enough to attend prayers, and that she would breakfast in her
own room. Here she was visited by her father and declared to him her intention of returning
immediately to Barchester. He was hardly surprised by the announcement. All the household seemed
to be aware that something had gone wrong. Every one walked about with subdued feet, and people's
shoes seemed to creak more than usual. There was a look of conscious intelligence on the faces
of the women; and the men attempted, but in vain, to converse as though nothing were the matter.
All this had weighed heavily on the heart of Mr Harding; and when Eleanor told him that her
immediate return to Barchester was a necessity, he merely sighed piteously, and said that he
would be ready to accompany her.

But here she objected strenuously. She had a great wish, she said, to go alone; a great desire
that it might be seen that her father was not implicated in her quarrel with Dr Grantly. To
this at last he gave way; but not a word passed between them about Mr Slope--not a word was
said, not a question asked as to the serious interview on the preceding evening. There was,
indeed, very little confidence between them, though neither of them knew why it should be so.
Eleanor once asked him whether he would not call upon the bishop; but he answered rather tartly
that he did not know--he did not think he should, but he could not say just at present. And
so they parted. Each was miserably anxious for some show of affection, for some return of confidence,
for some sign of the feeling that usually bound them together. But none was given. The father
could not bring himself to question his daughter about her supposed lover; and the daughter
would not sully her mouth by repeating the odious word with which Dr Grantly had aroused her
wrath. And so they parted.

There was some trouble in arranging the method of Eleanor's return. She begged her father to
send for a postchaise; but when Mrs Grantly heard of this, she objected strongly. If Eleanor
would go away in dudgeon with the archdeacon, why should she let all the servants and all the
neighbourhood know that she had done so? So at last Eleanor consented to make use of the Plumstead
carriage; and as the archdeacon had gone out immediately after breakfast and was not to return
till dinner-time, she also consented to postpone her journey till after lunch, and to join
the family at that time. As to the subject of the quarrel not a word was said by any one. The
affair of the carriage was arranged by Mr Harding, who acted as Mercury between the two ladies;
they, when they met, kissed each other very lovingly, and then sat down each to her crochet
work as though nothing was amiss in all the world.

CHAPTER XXX

ANOTHER LOVE SCENE

But there was another visitor at the rectory whose feelings in this unfortunate matter must
be somewhat strictly analysed. Mr Arabin had heard from his friend of the probability of Eleanor's
marriage with Mr Slope with amazement, but not with incredulity. It has been said that he was
not in love with Eleanor, and up to this period this certainly had been true. But as soon as
he heard that she loved some one else, he began to be very fond of her himself. He did not
make up his mind that he wished to have her for his wife; he had never thought of her, and
did not know how to think of her, in connection with himself; but he experienced an inward
indefinable feeling of deep regret, a gnawing sorrow, and unconquerable depression of spirits,
and also a species of self-abasement that he--he Mr Arabin--had not done something to prevent
that other he, that vile he, whom he so thoroughly despised, from carrying off his sweet prize.

Whatever man may have reached the age of forty unmarried without knowing something of such
feelings must have been very successful or else very cold hearted.

Mr Arabin had never thought of trimming the sails of his bark so that he might sail as convoy
to this rich argosy. He had seen that Mrs Bold was beautiful, but he had not dreamt of making
her beauty his own. He knew that Mrs Bold was rich, but he had no more idea of appropriating
her wealth than that of Dr Grantly. He had discovered that Mrs Bold was intelligent, warm-hearted,
agreeable, sensible, all, in fact, that a man could wish his wife to be; but the higher were
her attractions, the greater her claims to consideration, the less had he imagined that he
might possible become the possessor of them. Such had been his instinct rather than his thoughts,
so humble and so diffident. Now his diffidence was to be rewarded by his seeing this woman,
whose beauty was to his eyes perfect, whose wealth was such as to have deterred him from thinking
of her, whose widowhood would have silenced him had he not been so deterred, by his seeing
her become the prey of--Obadiah Slope!

On the morning of Mrs Bold's departure he got on his horse to ride over to St Ewold's. As he
rode he kept muttering to himself a line from Van Artevelde:-

How little flattering is woman's love.

And then he strove to recall his mind and to think of other affairs, his parish, his college,
his creed--but his thoughts would revert to Mrs Bold and the Flemish chieftain:

      When we think upon it
      How little flattering is woman's love,
      Given commonly to whosoe'er is nearest
      And propped with most advantage.

It was not that Mrs Bold should marry any one but him; he had not put himself forward as a
suitor; but that she should marry Mr Slope--and so he repeated over and over again:

Outward grace Nor inward light is needful--day by day Men wanting both are mated with the best
And loftiest of God's feminine creation, Whose love takes no distinction but of gender And
ridicules the very name of choice.

And so he went on troubled much in his mind.

He had but an uneasy ride of it that morning, and little good did he do at St Ewold's.

The necessary alterations in his house were being fast completed, and he walked through the
rooms, and went up and down the stairs and rambled through the garden; but he could not wake
himself to much interest about them. He stood still at every window to look out and think upon
Mr Slope. At almost every window he had before stood and chatted with Eleanor. She and Mrs
Grantly had been there continually, and while Mrs Grantly had been giving orders, and seeing
that orders had been complied with, he and Eleanor had conversed on all things appertaining
to a clergyman's profession. He thought how often he had laid down the law to her, and how
sweetly she had borne with somewhat dictatorial decrees. He remembered her listening intelligence,
her gentle but quick replies, her interest in all that concerned the church, in all that concerned
him; and then he struck his riding whip against the window sill, and declared to himself that
it was impossible that Eleanor Bold should marry Mr Slope.

And yet he did not really believe, as he should have done, that it was impossible. He should
have known her well enough to feel that it was truly impossible. He should have been aware
that Eleanor had that within her which would surely protect her from such degradation. But
he, like so many others, was deficient in confidence in woman. He said to himself over and
over again that it was impossible that Eleanor Bold should become Mrs Slope, and yet he believed
that she would do so. And so he rambled about, and could do and think of nothing. He was thoroughly
uncomfortable, thoroughly ill at ease, cross with himself and every body else, and feeding
in his heart on animosity towards Mr Slope. This was not as it should be, as he knew and felt;
but he could not help himself. In truth Mr Arabin was now in love with Mrs Bold, though ignorant
of the fact himself. He was in love, and, though forty years old, was in love without being
aware of it. He fumed and fretted, and did not know what was the matter, as a youth might do
at one-and-twenty. And so having done no good at St Ewold's, he rode back much earlier than
was usual with him, instigated, by some inward unacknowledged hope that he might see Mrs Bold
before she left.

Eleanor had not passed a pleasant morning. She was irritated with every one, and not least
with herself. She felt that she had been hardly used, but she felt also that she had not played
her own cards well. She should have held herself so far above suspicion as to have received
her sister's innuendoes and the archdeacon's lecture with indifference. She had not done this,
but had shown herself angry and sore, and was now ashamed of her own petulance, and yet unable
to discontinue it.

The greater part of the morning she had spent alone; but after a while her father joined her.
He had fully made up his mind that, come what might, nothing should separate him from his youngest
daughter. It was a hard task for him to reconcile himself to the idea of seeing her at the
head of Mr Slope's table; but he got through it. Mr Slope, as he argued to himself, was a respectable
man and a clergyman; and he, as Eleanor's father, had no right even to endeavour to prevent
her from marrying such a one. He longed to tell her how he had determined to prefer her to
all the world, how he was prepared to admit that she was not wrong, how thoroughly he differed
from Dr Grantly; but he could not bring himself to mention Mr Slope's name. There was yet a
chance that they were all wrong in their surmise; and, being thus in doubt, he could not bring
himself to speak openly to her on the subject.

He was sitting with her in the drawing-room, with his arm round her waist, saying now and then
some little soft words of affection, and working hard with his imaginary little fiddle-bow,
when Mr Arabin entered the room. He immediately got up, and the two made some trifle remarks
to each other, neither thinking of what he was saying, and Eleanor kept her seat on the sofa
mute and moody. Mr Arabin was included in the list of those against whom her anger was excited.
He, too, had dared to talk about her acquaintance with Mr Slope; he, too, had dared to blame
her for not making an enemy of his enemy. She had not intended to see him before her departure,
and was now but little inclined to be gracious.

There was a feeling through the whole house that something was wrong. Mr Arabin, when he saw
Eleanor, could not succeed in looking or in speaking as though he knew nothing of all this.
He could not be cheerful and positive and contradictory with her, as was his wont. He had not
been two minutes in the room before he felt that he had done wrong in return; and the moment
he heard her voice, he thoroughly wished himself back at St Ewold's. Why, indeed, should he
have wished to have aught further to say to the future wife of Mr Slope?

'I am sorry to hear that you are too leave so soon,' said he, striving in vain to use his ordinary
voice. In answer to this she muttered something about the necessity of her being in Barchester,
and betook herself industriously to her crochet work.

Then there was a little more trite conversation between Mr Arabin and Mr Harding; trite, and
hard, and vapid, and senseless. Neither of them had anything to say to the other, and yet neither
at such a moment liked to remain silent. At last Mr Harding, taking advantage of a pause, escaped
from the room, and Eleanor and Mr Arabin were left together.

'Your going will be a great break-up to our party,' said he.

She again muttered something which was all but inaudible; but kept her eyes fixed upon her work.

'We have had a very pleasant month her,' said he; 'at least I have; and I am sorry it should
be so soon over.'

'I have already been from home longer than I intended,' she said; 'and it is time that I should
return.'

'Well, pleasant hours and pleasant days must come to an end. It is a pity that so few of them
are pleasant; or perhaps rather--'

'It is a pity, certainly, that men and women do so much to destroy the pleasantness of their
days,' said she, interrupting him. 'It is a pity that there should be so little charity abroad.'

'Charity should begin at home,' said he; and he was proceeding to explain that he as a clergyman
could not be what she would call charitable at the expense of those principles which he considered
it his duty to teach, when he remembered that it would be worse than vain to argue on such
a matter with the future wife of Mr Slope. 'But you are just leaving us,' he continued, 'and
I will not weary your last hour with another lecture. As it is, I fear I have given you too many.'

'You should practise as well as preach, Mr Arabin?'

'Undoubtedly I should. So should we all. All of us who presume to teach are bound to do our
utmost towards fulfilling our own lessons. I thoroughly allow my deficiency in doing so; but
I do not quite know now to what you allude. Have you any special reason for telling me now
that I should practise as well as preach?'

Eleanor made no answer. She longed to let him know the cause of her anger, to upbraid him for
speaking of her disrespectfully, and then at last forgive him, and so part friends. She felt
that she would be unhappy to leave him in her present frame of mind; but yet she could hardly
bring herself to speak to him of Mr Slope. And how could she allude to the innuendo thrown
out by the archdeacon, and thrown out, as she believed, at the instigation of Mr Arabin? She
wanted to make him know that he was wrong, to make him aware that he had ill-treated her, in
order that the sweetness of her forgiveness might be enhanced. She felt that she liked him
too well to be contented to part with him in displeasure; and yet she could not get over her
deep displeasure without some explanation, some acknowledgement, on his part, some assurance
that he would never again so sin against her.

'Why do you tell me that I should practise what I preach?' continued he.

'All men should do so.'

'Certainly. That is as it were understood and acknowledged. But you do not say so to all men,
or to all clergymen. The advice, good as it is, is not given except in allusion to some special
deficiency. If you will tell me my special deficiency, I will endeavour to profit by the advice.'

She paused for a while, and then looking full in his face, she said, 'You are not bold enough,
Mr Arabin, to speak out to me openly and plainly, and yet you expect me, a woman, to speak
openly to you. Why did you speak calumny of me to Dr Grantly behind my back?'

'Calumny!' said he, and his whole face became suffused with blood; 'what calumny? If I have
spoken calumny of you, I will beg your pardon, and his to whom I spoke it, and God's pardon
also. But what calumny have I spoken of you to Dr Grantly?'

She also blushed deeply. She could not bring herself to ask him whether he had not spoken of
her as another man's wife. 'You know that best yourself,' said she; 'but I ask you as a man
of honour, if you have not spoken of me as you would not have spoken of your own sister; or
rather I will not ask you,' she continued, finding that he did not immediately answer her.
'I will not put you to the necessity of answering such a question. Dr Grantly has told me what
you said.'

'Dr Grantly certainly asked me for my advice, and I gave it. He asked me--'

'I know he did, Mr Arabin. He asked you whether he would be doing right to receive me at Plumstead,
if I continued my acquaintance with a gentleman who happens to be personally disagreeable to
yourself and to him?'

'You are mistaken, Mrs Bold. I have no personal knowledge of Mr Slope; I have never met him
in my life.'

'You are not the less individually hostile to him. It is not for me to question the propriety
of your enmity; but I had a right to expect that my name should not have been mixed up in your
hostilities. This has been done, and been done by you in a manner the most injurious and the
most distressing to a woman. I must confess, Mr Arabin, that from you I expected a different
sort of usage.'

As she spoke she with difficulty restrained her tears; but she did restrain them. Had she given
way and sobbed about, as in such cases a woman should do, he would have melted at once, implored
her pardon, perhaps knelt at her feet and declared his love. Everything would have been explained,
and Eleanor would have gone back to Barchester with a contented mind. How easily would she
have forgiven and forgotten the archdeacon's suspicions had she but heard the whole truth of
it from Mr Arabin. But then where would have been my novel? She did not cry, and Mr Arabin
did not melt.

'You do me an injustice,' said he. 'My advice was asked by Dr Grantly, and I was obliged to
give it.'

'Dr Grantly has been most officious, most impertinent. I have as complete a right to form my
acquaintance as he has to form his. What would you have said, had I consulted you as to the
propriety of banishing Dr Grantly from my house because he knows Lord Tattenham Corner? I am
sure Lord Tattenham is quite as objectionable an acquaintance for a clergyman as Mr Slope is
for a clergyman's daughter.'

'I do not know Lord Tattenham Corner.'

'No; but Dr Grantly does. It is nothing to me if he knows all the young lords on every racecourse
in England. I shall not interfere with him; nor shall he with me.'

'I am sorry to differ with you, Mrs Bold; but as you have spoken to me on this matter, and
especially as you blame me for what little I said on the subject, I must tell you that I do
differ from you. Dr Grantly's position as a man in the world gives him a right to choose his
own acquaintances, subject to certain influences. If he chooses them badly, those influences
will be used. If he consorts with persons unsuitable to him, his bishop will interfere. What
the bishop is to Dr Grantly, Dr Grantly is to you.'

'I deny it. I utterly deny it,' said Eleanor, jumping from her seat, and literally flashing
before Mr Arabin, as she stood on the drawing-room floor. He had never seen her so excited,
he had never seen her look so beautiful.

'I utterly deny it,' said she. 'Dr Grantly has no sort of jurisdiction over me whatsoever.
Do you and he forget that I am not altogether alone in this world? Do you forget that I have
a father? Dr Grantly, I believe, always has forgotten it.'

'From you, Mr Arabin,' she continued, 'I would have listened to advice because I should have
expected it to have been given as one friend may advise another; not as a schoolmaster gives
an order to a pupil. I might have differed from you; on this matter I should have done so;
but had you spoken to me in your usual manner and with your usual freedom I should not have
been angry. But now--was it manly of you, Mr Arabin, to speak of me in this way--, so disrespectful--so--?
I cannot bring myself to repeat what you said. You must understand what I feel. Was it just
of you to speak of me in such a way, and to advise my sister's husband to turn me out of my
sister's house because I chose to know a man of whose doctrine you disapprove?'

'I have no alternative left to me, Mrs Bold,' said he, standing with his back to the fire-place,
looking down intently at the carpet pattern and speaking with a slow measured voice, 'but to
tell you plainly what did take place between me and Dr Grantly.'

'Well,' said she, finding that he paused for a moment.

'I am afraid that what I may say may pain you.'

'It cannot well do so more than what you have already done,' said she.

'Dr Grantly asked me whether I thought it would be prudent for him to receive you in his house
as the wife of Mr Slope, and I told him that I thought it would be imprudent. Believing it
to be utterly impossible that Mr Slope and--'

'Thank you, Mr Arabin, that is sufficient. I do not want to know your reasons,' said she, speaking
with a terribly calm voice. 'I have shown to this gentleman the common-place civility of a
neighbour; and because I have done so, because I have not indulged against him in all the rancour
and hatred which you and Dr Grantly consider due to all clergymen who do not agree with yourselves,
you conclude that I am to marry him;--or rather you do not conclude so--no rational man could
really come to such an outrageous conclusion without better ground;--you have not thought so--but,
as I am in a position in which such an accusation must be peculiarly painful, it is made in
order that I may be terrified into hostility against this enemy of yours.'

As she finished speaking, she walked to the drawing-room window, and stepped out into the garden.
Mr Arabin was left in the room, still occupied in counting the pattern on the carpet. He had,
however, distinctly heard and accurately marked every word that she had spoken. Was it not
clear from what she had said, that the archdeacon had been wrong in imputing to her any attachment
to Mr Slope? Was it not clear that Eleanor was still free to make another choice? It may seem
strange that he should for a moment have had a doubt; and yet he did doubt. She had not absolutely
denied the charge; she had not expressly said that it was untrue. Mr Arabin understood little
of the nature of a woman's feelings, or he would have known how improbable it was that she
should make any clearer declarations than she had done. Few men do understand the nature of
a woman's heart, till years have robbed such understanding of its value. And it is well that
it should be so, or men would triumph too easily.

Mr Arabin stood counting the carpet, unhappy, wretchedly unhappy, at the hard words that had
been spoken to him; and yet happy, exquisitely happy, as he thought that after all the woman
whom he so regarded was not to become the wife of the man whom he so much disliked. As he stood
there he began to be aware that he was himself in love. Forty years had passed over his head,
and as yet woman's beauty had never given him an uneasy hour. His present hour was very uneasy.

Not that he remained there for half or a quarter of that time. In spite of what Eleanor had
said, Mr Arabin was, in truth, a manly man. Having ascertained that he loved this woman, and
having now reason to believe that she was free to receive his love, at least if she pleased
to do so, he followed her into the garden to make such wooing as he could.

He was not long in finding her. She was walking to and fro beneath the avenue of elms that
stood in the archdeacon's grounds, skirting the churchyard. What had passed between her and
Mr Arabin, had not, alas, tended to lessen the acerbity of her spirit. She was very angry;
more angry with him than with any one. How could he have so misunderstood her? She had been
so intimate with him, had allowed him such latitude in what he had chosen to say to her, had
complied with his ideas, cherished his views, fostered his precepts, cared for his comforts,
made much of him in every way in which a pretty woman can make much of an unmarried man without
committing herself or her feelings! She had been doing this, and while she had been doing it
he had regarded her as the affianced wife of another man.

As she passed along the avenue, every now and then an unbidden tear would force itself on her
cheek, and as she raised her hand to brush it away, she stamped with her little foot upon the
sward with very spite to think that she had been so treated.

Mr Arabin was very near to her when she first saw him, that she turned short round and retraced
her steps down the avenue, trying to rid her cheeks of all trace of the tell-tale tears. It
was a needless endeavour, for Mr Arabin was in a state of mind that hardly allowed him to observe
such trifles. He followed her down the walk, and overtook her just as she reached the end of it.

He had not considered how he would address her; he had not thought what he would say. He had
only felt that it was wretchedness to him to quarrel with her, and that it would be happiness
to be allowed to love her. And that he could not lower himself by asking for her pardon. He
had done no wrong. He had not calumniated her, not injured her, as she had accused him of doing.
He could not confess sins of which had not been guilty. He could only let the past be past,
and ask her as to her and his hopes for the future.

'I hope we are not to part as enemies?' said he.

'There shall be no enmity on my part,' said Eleanor; 'I endeavour to avoid all enmities. It
would be a hollow pretence were I to say that there can be a true friendship between us after
what has just past. People cannot make their friends of those whom they despise.'

'And am I despised?'

'I must have been so before you could have spoken of me as you did. And I was deceived, cruelly
deceived. I believed that you thought well of me; I believed that you esteemed me.'

'Thought of you well and esteemed you!' said he. 'In justifying myself before you, I must use
stronger words than those.' He paused for a moment, and Eleanor's heart beat with painful violence
within her bosom as she waited for him to go on. 'I have esteemed, do esteem you, as I never
esteemed any woman. Think well of you! I never thought to think so well, so much of any human
creature. Speak calumny of you! Insult you! Wilfully injure you! I wish it were my privilege
to shield you from calumny, insult, and injury. Calumny! Ah, me. 'Twere almost better that
it were so. Better than to worship with a sinful worship; sinful and vain also.' And then he
walked along beside her, with his hands clasped behind his back, looking down on the grass
beneath his feet, and utterly at a loss to express his meaning. And Eleanor walked beside him
determined at least to give him no assistance.

'Ah, me!' he uttered at last, speaking rather to himself than to her. 'Ah, me! These Plumstead
walks were pleasant enough, if one could have but heart's ease; but without that, the dull
dead stones of Oxford were far preferable; and St Ewold's too; Mrs Bold, I am beginning to
think that I mistook myself when I came hither. A Romish priest now would have escaped all
this. Of, Father of heaven! How good for us would it be, if thou couldest vouchsafe to us a
certain rule.'

'And have we not got a certain rule, Mr Arabin?'

'Yes--yes, surely; "Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil." But what is temptation?
what is evil? Is this evil--is this temptation?'

Poor Mr Arabin! It would not come out of him, that deep true love of his. He could not bring
himself to utter it in plain language that would require and demand an answer. He knew not
how to say to the woman at his side, 'Since the fact is that you do not love that other man,
that you are not to be his wife, can you love me, will you be my wife?' These were the words
which were in his heart, but with all his sighs he could not draw them to his lips. He would
have given anything, everything for power to ask this simple question; but glib as was his
tongue in pulpits and on platforms, now he could not find a word wherewith to express the plain
wish of his heart.

And yet Eleanor understood him as thoroughly as though he had declared his passion with all
the elegant fluency of a practised Lothario. With a woman's instinct she followed every bend
of his mind, as he spoke of the pleasantness of Plumstead and the stones of Oxford, as he alluded
to the safety of the Romish priest and the hidden perils of temptation. She knew that it all
meant love. She knew that this man at her side, this accomplished scholar, this practised orator,
this great polemical combatant, was striving and striving in vain to tell her that his heart
was no longer his own.

She knew this, and felt the joy of knowing it; and yet she would not come to his aid. He had
offended her deeply, had treated her unworthily, the more unworthily seeing that he had learnt
to love her, and Eleanor could not bring herself to abandon her revenge. She did not ask herself
whether or no she would ultimately accept his love. She did not even acknowledge to herself
that she now perceived it with pleasure. At the present moment it did not touch her heart;
it merely appeased her pride and flattered her vanity. Mr Arabin had dared to associate her
name with that of Mr Slope, and now her spirit was soothed by finding that he would fain associate
it with his own. And so she walked on beside him inhaling incense, but giving out no sweetness
in return.

'Answer me this,' said Mr Arabin, stopping suddenly in his walk, and stepping forward so that
he faced his companion. 'Answer me this question. You do not love Mr Slope? You do not intend
to be his wife?'

Mr Arabin certainly did not go the right way to win such a woman as Eleanor Bold. Just as her
wrath was evaporating, as it was disappearing before the true warmth of his untold love, he
re-kindled it by a most useless repetition of his original sin. Had he known what he was about
he should never have mentioned Mr Slope's name before Eleanor Bold, till he had made her all
his own. Then, and not till then, he might have talked of Mr Slope with as much triumph as
he chose.

'I shall answer no such question,' said she; 'and what is more, I must tell you that nothing
can justify your asking it. Good morning!'

And so saying she stepped proudly across the lawn, and passing through the drawing-room window
joined her father and sister at lunch in the dining-room. Half an hour afterwards she was in
the carriage, and so she left Plumstead without again seeing Mr Arabin.

His walk was long and sad among the sombre trees that overshadowed the churchyard. He left
the archdeacon's grounds that he might escape attention, and sauntered among the green hillocks
under which lay at rest so many of the once loving swains and forgotten beauties of Plumstead.
To his ears Eleanor's last words sounded like a knell never to be reversed. He could not comprehend
that she might be angry with him, indignant with him, remorseless with him, and yet love him.
He could not make up his mind whether or no Mr Slope was in truth a favoured rival. If not,
why should she not have answered his question?

Poor Mr Arabin--untaught, illiterate, boorish, ignorant man! That at forty years of age you
should know so little of the workings of a woman's heart!

CHAPTER XXXI

THE BISHOP'S LIBRARY

And thus the pleasant party of Plumstead was broken up. It had been a very pleasant party as
long as they had all remained in good humour with one another. Mrs Grantly had felt her house
to be gayer and brighter than it had been for many a long day, and the archdeacon had been
aware that the month had passed pleasantly without attributing the pleasure to any other special
merits than those of his own hospitality. Within three or four days of Eleanor's departure,
Mr Harding had also returned, and Mr Arabin had gone to Oxford to spend one week there previous
to his settling at the vicarage of St Ewold's. He had gone laden with many messages to Dr Gwynne
touching the iniquity of the doings in Barchester palace, and the peril in which it was believed
the hospital still stood in spite of the assurances contained in Mr Slope's inauspicious letter.

During Eleanor's drive into Barchester she had not much opportunity of reflecting on Mr Arabin.
She had been constrained to divert her mind both from his sins and his love by the necessity
of conversing with her sister, and maintaining the appearance of parting with her on good terms.

When the carriage reached her own door, and while she was in the act of giving her last kiss
to her sister and nieces, Mary Bold ran out and exclaimed:

'Oh! Eleanor,--have you heard?--oh! Mrs Grantly, have you heard what has happened? The poor dean!'

'Good heavens,' said Mrs Grantly; 'what--what has happened?'

'This morning at nine he had a fit of apoplexy, and he has not spoken since. I very much fear
that by this time he is no more.'

Mrs Grantly had been very intimate with the dean, and was therefore much shocked. Eleanor had
not known him so well; nevertheless she was sufficiently acquainted with his person and manners
to feel startled and grieved also at the tidings she now received. 'I will go at once to the
deanery,' said Mrs Grantly, 'the archdeacon, I am sure, will be there. If there is any news
to send you I will let Thomas call before he leaves town.' And so the carriage drove off, leaving
Eleanor and her baby with Mary Bold.

Mrs Grantly had been quite right. The archdeacon was at the deanery. He had come into Barchester
that morning by himself, not caring to intrude himself upon Eleanor, and he also immediately
on his arrival had heard of the dean's fit. There was, as we have before said, a library or
reading room connecting the cathedral with the dean's home. This was generally called the bishop's
library, because a certain bishop of Barchester was supposed to have added it to the cathedral.
It was built immediately over a portion of the cloisters, and a flight of stairs descended
from it into the room in which the cathedral clergymen put their surplices on and off. As it
also opened directly into the dean's house, it was the passage through which that dignitary
usually went to his public devotions. Who had or had not the right of entry into it, might
be difficult to say; but the people of Barchester believed that it belonged to the dean, and
the clergymen of Barchester believed that it belonged to the chapter.

On the morning in question most of the resident clergymen who constituted the chapter, and
some few others, were here assembled, and among them as usual the archdeacon towered with high
authority. He had heard of the dean's fit before he was over the bridge which led into the
town, and had at once come to the well known clerical trysting place. He had been there by
eleven o'clock, and had remained ever since. From time to time the medical men who had been
called in came through from the deanery into the library, uttered little bulletins, and then
returned. There was it appears very little hope of the old man's rallying, indeed no hope of
any thing like a final recovery. The only question was whether he must die at once speechless,
unconscious, stricken to death by his first heavy fit; or whether by due aid of medical skill
he might not be so far brought back to this world as to become conscious of his state, and
enabled to address one prayer to his Maker before he was called to meet Him face to face at
the judgement seat.

Sir Omicron Pie had been sent for from London. That great man had shown himself a wonderful
adept at keeping life still moving within an old man's heart in the case of good old Bishop
Grantly, and it might be reasonably expected that he would be equally successful with a dean.
In the mean time, Dr Fillgrave and Mr Rerechild were doing their best; and poor Miss Trefoil
sat at the head of her father's bed, longing, as in such cases daughters do long, to be allowed
to do something to show her love; if it were only to chafe his feet with her hands, or wait
in menial offices on those autocratic doctors; anything so that now in the time of need she
might be of use.

The archdeacon alone of the attendant clergy had been admitted for a moment into the sick man's
chamber. He had crept in with creaking shoes, had said with smothered voice a word of consolation
to the sorrowing daughter, had looked on the distorted face of his old friend with solemn but
yet eager scrutinising eye, as though he said in his heart, 'and so some day it will probably
be with me;' and then, having whispered an unmeaning word or two to the doctors, had creaked
his way back again into the library.

'He'll never speak again, I fear,' said the archdeacon as he noiselessly closed the door, as
though the unconscious dying man, from whom all sense had fled, would have heard in his distant
chamber the spring of the lock which was now so carefully handled.

'Indeed! Indeed! Is he so bad?' said the meagre little prebendary, turning over in his own
mind all the probable candidates for the deanery, and wondering whether the archdeacon would
think it worth his while to accept it. 'The fit must have been very violent.'

'When a man over seventy has a stroke of apoplexy, it seldom comes very lightly,' said the
burly chancellor.

'He was an excellent, sweet-tempered man,' said one of the vicars choral. 'Heaven knows how
we shall repair his loss.'

'He was indeed,' said a minor canon; 'and a great blessing to all those privileged to take
a share of the services of our cathedral. I suppose the government will appoint, Mr Archdeacon.
I trust that we may have no stranger.'

'We will not talk about his successor,' said the archdeacon, 'while there is yet hope.'

'Oh no, of course not,' said the minor canon. 'It would be extraordinarily indecorous; but--'

'I know of no man,' said the meagre little prebendary, 'who has better interest with the present
government than Mr Slope.'

'Mr Slope!' said two or three at once almost sotto voce. 'Mr Slope dean of Barchester!'

'Pooh!' exclaimed the burly chancellor.

'The bishop would do anything for him,' said the little prebendary.

'And so would Mrs Proudie,' said the vicar choral.

'Pooh!' said the chancellor.

The archdeacon had almost turned pale at the idea. What if Mr Slope should become dean of Barchester?
To be sure there was no adequate ground, indeed no ground at all, for presuming that such a
desecration could even be contemplated. But nevertheless it was on the cards. Dr Proudie had
interest with the government, and the man carried as it were Dr Proudie in his pocket. How
should they all conduct themselves if Mr Slope were to become dean of Barchester? The bare
idea for a moment struck even Dr Grantly dumb.

'It would certainly not be very pleasant for us to have Mr Slope in the deanery,' said the
little prebendary, chuckling inwardly at the evident consternation which his surmise had created.

'About as pleasant and as probably as having you in the palace,' said the chancellor.

'I should think such an appointment highly improbable,' said the minor canon, 'and, moreover,
extremely injudicious. Should not you, Mr Archdeacon?'

'I should presume such a thing to be quite out of the question,' said the archdeacon; 'but
at the present moment I am thinking rather of our poor friend who is lying so near us than
of Mr Slope.'

'Of course, of course,' said the vicar choral with a very solemn air; 'of course you are. So
are we all. Poor Dr Trefoil; the best of men but--'

'It's the most comfortable dean's residence in England,' said a second prebendary. 'Fifteen
acres in the grounds. 'It is better than many of the bishops' palaces.'

'And full two thousand a year,' said the meagre doctor.

'It is cut down to L 1200,' said the chancellor.

'No,' said the second prebendary. 'It is to be fifteen. A special case was made.'

'No such thing,' said the chancellor.

'You'll find I'm right,' said the prebendary.

'I'm sure I read it in the report,' said the minor canon.

'Nonsense,' said the chancellor. 'They couldn't do it. There were to be no exceptions but London
and Durham.'

'And Canterbury and York,' said the vicar choral, modestly.

'What say you, Grantly?' said the meagre little doctor.

'Say about what?' said the archdeacon, who had been looking as though he were thinking about
his friend the dean, but who had in reality been thinking about Mr Slope.

'What is the next dean to have, twelve or fifteen?'

'Twelve,' said the archdeacon authoritatively, thereby putting an end at once to all doubt
and dispute among the subordinates as far as that subject was concerned.

'Well I certainly thought it was fifteen,' said the minor canon.

'Pooh!' said the burly chancellor. At this moment the door opened, and in came Dr Fillgrave.

'How is he?' 'Is he conscious?' 'Can he speak?' 'I hope, I trust, something better, doctor?'
said half a dozen voices all at once, each in a tone of extremest anxiety. It was pleasant
to see how popular the good old dean was among his clergy.

'No change, gentlemen; not the slightest change--but a telegraphic message has arrived,--Sir
Omicron Pie will be here by the 9.15pm train. If any man can do anything Sir Omicron will do
it. But all that skill can do has been done.'

'We are sure of that, Dr Fillgrave,' said the archdeacon; 'we are quite sure of that. But yet
you know--'

'Oh, quite right,' said the doctor, 'quite right--I should have done just the same--I advised
it at once. I said to Rerechild at once that with such a life and such a man, Sir Omicron should
be summoned--of course I knew that the expense was nothing--so distinguished, you know, and
so popular. Nevertheless, all that human skill can do has been done.'

Just at this period Mrs Grantly's carriage drove into the close, and the archdeacon went down
to confirm the news which she had heard before.

By the 9.15pm train Sir Omicron Pie did arrive. And in the course of the night a sort of consciousness
returned to the poor old dean. Whether this was due to Sir Omicron Pie is a question on which
it may be well not to offer an opinion. Dr Fillgrave was very clear in his own mind, but Sir
Omicron himself is thought to have differed from that learned doctor.

At any rate, Sir Omicron expressed an opinion that the dean had yet some days to live.

For the eight or ten next days, accordingly, the poor dean remained in the same state, half
conscious and half comatose, and the attendant clergy began to think that no new appointment
would be necessary for some few months to come.

CHAPTER XXXII

A NEW CANDIDATE FOR ECCLESIASTICAL HONOURS

The dean's illness occasioned much mental turmoil in other places besides the deanery and adjoining
library, and the idea which occurred to the meagre little prebendary about Mr Slope did not
occur to him alone.

The bishop was sitting listlessly in his study when the news reached him of the dean's illness.
It was brought to him by Mr Slope, who of course was not the last person in Barchester to hear
it. It was also not slow in finding its way to Mrs Proudie's ears. It may be presumed that
there was not just much friendly intercourse between these two rival claimants for his lordship's
obedience. Indeed, though living in the same house, they had not met since the stormy interview
between them in the bishop's study on the preceding day.

On that occasion, Mrs Proudie had been defeated. That from her standards was a subject of great
sorrow to that militant lady; but though defeated, she was not overcome. She felt that she
might yet recover her lost ground, that she might yet hurl Mr Slope down to the dust from which
she had picked him, and force her sinning lord to sue for pardon in sackcloth and ashes.

On that memorable day, memorable for his mutiny and rebellion against her high behests, he
had carried his way with a high hand, and had really begun to think it possible that the days
of his slavery were counted. He had begun to hope that he was now about to enter into a free
land, a land delicious with milk which he himself might quaff, and honey which would not tantalise
him by being only honey to the eye. When Mrs Proudie banged the door, as she left his room,
he felt himself every inch a bishop. To be sure his spirit had been a little cowed by his chaplain's
subsequent lecture; but on the whole he was highly pleased with himself, and flattered himself
that the worst was over. 'Ce n'est que le premier pas qui coute', he reflected; and now that
his first step had been so magnanimously taken, all the rest would follow easily.

He met his wife as a matter of course at dinner, where little or nothing was said that could
ruffle the bishop's happiness. His daughters and the servants were present and protected him.

He made one or two trifling remarks on the subject of his projected visit to the archbishop,
in order to show to all concerned that he intended to have his own way; and the very servants
perceiving the change transferred a little of their reverence from their mistress to their
master. All which the master perceived; and so also did the mistress. But Mrs Proudie bided
her time.

After dinner he returned to his study where Mr Slope soon found him, and there they had tea
together and planned many things. For some few minutes the bishop was really happy; but as
the clock on the chimney piece warned him that the stilly hours of night were drawing on, as
he looked at his chamber candlestick and knew that he must use it, his heart sank within him
again. He was as a ghost, all whose power of wandering free through these upper regions ceases
at cock-crow; or rather he was the opposite of the ghost, for till cock-crow he must again
be a serf. And would that be all? Could he trust himself to come down to breakfast a free man
in the morning?

He was nearly an hour later than usual, when he betook himself to his rest. Rest! What rest?
However, he took a couple of glasses of sherry, and mounted the stairs. Far be it from us to
follow him thither. There are some things which no novelist, no historian, should attempt;
some few scenes in life's drama which even no poet should dare to paint. Let that which passed
between Dr Proudie and his wife on this night be understood to be among them.

He came down the following morning a sad and thoughtful man. He was attenuated in appearance;
one might almost say emaciated. I doubt whether his now grizzled looks had not palpably become
more grey than on the preceding evening. At any rate he had aged materially. Years do not make
a man old gradually and at an even pace. Look through the world and see if this is not so always,
except in those rare cases in which the human being lives and dies without joys and without
sorrows, like a vegetable. A man shall be possessed of florid youthful blooming health till
it matters not what age. Thirty--forty--fifty, then comes some nipping frost, some period of
agony, that robs the fibres of the body of their succulence, and the hale and hearty man is
counted among the old.

He came down and breakfasted alone; Mrs Proudie being indisposed took her coffee in her bed-room,
and her daughters waited upon her there. He ate his breakfast alone, and then, hardly knowing
what he did, he betook himself to his usual seat in his study. He tried to solace himself with
his coming visit to the archbishop. That effort of his own free will at any rate remained to
him as an enduring triumph. But somehow, now that he had achieved it, he did not seem to care
so much about it. It was his ambition that had prompted him to take his place at the arch-episcopal
table, and his ambition was now quite dead within him.

He was thus seated when Mr Slope made his appearance with breathless impatience.

'My lord, the dean is dead.'

'Good heavens,' exclaimed the bishop, startled out of his apathy by an announcement so sad
and so sudden.

'He is either dead or now dying. He has had an apoplectic fit, and I am told that there is
not the slightest hope; indeed, I do not doubt that by this time he is no more.'

Bells were rung, and servants were immediately sent to inquire. In the course of the morning,
the bishop, leaning on his chaplain's arm, himself called at the deanery door. Mrs Proudie
sent to Miss Trefoil all manner of offers of assistance. The Miss Proudies sent also, and there
was immense sympathy between the palace and the deanery. The answer to all inquiries was unvaried.
The dean was just the same; and Sir Omicron Pie was expected there by the 9.15pm train.

And then Mr Slope began to meditate, as others also had done, as to who might possibly be the
new dean; and it occurred to him, as it had also occurred to others, that it might be possible
that he should be the new dean himself. And then the question as to the twelve hundred, or
fifteen hundred, or two thousand, ran in his mind, as it had run through those of the other
clergymen in the cathedral library.

Whether it might be two thousand, of fifteen, or twelve hundred, it would in any case undoubtedly
be a great thing for him, if he could get it. The gratification to his ambition would be greater
even than that of his covetousness.

How glorious to out-top the archdeacon in his own cathedral city; to sit above prebendaries
and canons, and have the cathedral pulpit and all the cathedral services altogether at his
own disposal!

But it might be easier to wish for this than to obtain it. Mr Slope, however, was not without
some means of forwarding his views, and he at any rate did not let the grass grow under his
feet. In the first place he thought--and not vainly--that he could count upon what assistance
the bishop could give him. He immediately changed his views with regard to his patron; he made
up his mind that if he became dean, he would hand his lordship back to his wife's vassalage;
and he thought it possible that his lordship might not be sorry to rid himself of one of his
mentors. Mr Slope had also taken some steps towards making his name known to other men in power.
There was a certain chief-commissioner of national schools who at the present moment was presumed
to stand especially high in the good graces of the government big wigs, and with him Mr Slope
had contrived to establish a sort of epistolary intimacy. He thought that he might safely apply
to Sir Nicholas Fitzhiggin; and he felt sure that if Sir Nicholas chose to exert himself, the
promise of such a piece of preferment would be had for the asking for.

Then he also had the press at his bidding, or flattered himself that he had so. The daily Jupiter
had taken his part in a very thorough manner in those polemical contests of his with Mr Arabin;
he had on more than one occasion absolutely had an interview with a gentleman on the staff
of the paper, who, if not the editor, was as good as the editor; and had long been in the habit
of writing telling letters with his initials, and sent to his editorial friend with private
notes signed in his own name. Indeed, he and Mr Towers--such was the name of the powerful gentleman
of the press with whom he was connected--were generally very amiable with each other. Mr Slope's
little productions were always printed and occasionally commented upon; and thus, in a small
sort of way, he had become a literary celebrity. This public life had great charms for him,
though it certainly also had its drawbacks. On one occasion, when speaking in the presence
of reporters, he had failed to uphold and praise and swear by that special line of conduct
which had been upheld and praised and sworn by in the Jupiter, and then he had been much surprised
and at the moment not a little irritated to find himself lacerated most unmercifully by his
old ally. He was quizzed and bespattered and made a fool of, just as though, or rather than
if, he had been a constant enemy instead of a constant friend. He had hitherto not learnt that
a man who aspires to be on the staff of the Jupiter must surrender all individuality. But ultimately
this little castigation had broken no bones between him and his friend Mr Towers. Mr Slope
was one of those who understood the world too well to show himself angry with such a potentate
as the Jupiter. He had kissed the rod that scourged him, and now thought that he might fairly
look for his reward. He determined that he would at once let Mr Towers know that he was a candidate
for the place which was about to be become vacant. More than one place of preferment had lately
been given away much in accordance with advice tendered to the government in the columns of
the Jupiter.

But it was in incumbent on Mr Slope first to secure the bishop. He specially felt that it behoved
him to do this before the visit to the archbishop was made. It was really quite providential
that the dean should have fallen ill just at the very nick of time. If Dr Proudie could be
instigated to take the matter up warmly, he might manage a good deal while staying at the archbishop's
palace. Feeling this very strongly Mr Slope determined to sound the bishop out that very afternoon.
He was to start on the following morning to London, and therefore not a moment could be lost
with safety.

He went into the bishop's study about five o'clock, and found him still sitting alone. It might
have been supposed that he had hardly moved since the little excitement occasioned by the walk
to the dean's door. He still wore on his face that dull dead look of half unconscious suffering.
He was doing nothing, reading nothing, thinking of nothing, but simply gazing on vacancy when
Mr Slope for the second time that day entered his room.

'Well, Slope,' said he, somewhat impatiently; for, to tell the truth, he was not anxious just
at present to have much conversation with Mr Slope.

'Your lordship will be sorry to hear that as yet the poor dean has shown no signs of amendment.'

'Oh--ah--hasn't he? Poor man! I'm sure I'm very sorry. I suppose Sir Omicron has not arrived yet?'

'No; not till the 9.15pm train.'

'I wonder they didn't have a special. They say Dr Trefoil is very rich.'

'Very rich, I believe,' said Mr Slope. 'But the truth is, all the doctors in London can do
no good; no other good than to show that every possible care has been taken. Poor Dr Trefoil
is not long for this world, my lord.'

'I suppose not--I suppose not.'

'Oh no; indeed, his best friends could not wish that he should outlive such a shock, for his
intellect cannot possibly survive it.'

'Poor man, poor man!' said the bishop.

'It will naturally be a matter of much moment to your lordship who is to succeed him,' said
Mr Slope. 'It would be a great thing if you could secure the appointment for some person of
your own way of thinking on important points. The party hostile to us are very strong here
in Barchester--much too strong.'

'Yes, yes. If poor Dr Trefoil is to go, it will be a great thing to get a good man in his place.'

'It will be everything to your lordship to get a man on whose co-operation you can reckon.
Only think what trouble we might have if Dr Grantly, or Dr Hyandry, or any of that way of thinking,
were to get it.'

'It is not very probable that Lord--will give it to any of that school; why should he?'

'No. Not probable; certainly not; but it's possible. Great interest will probably be made.
If I might venture to advise your lordship, I would suggest that you should discuss the matter
with his grace next week. I have no doubt that your wishes, if made known and backed by his
grace, would be paramount with Lord--'

'Well, I don't know that; Lord - has always been very kind to me, very kind. But I am unwilling
to interfere in such matters unless asked. And indeed, if asked, I don't know whom, at this
moment, I should recommend.'

Mr Slope, even Mr Slope, felt at present rather abashed. He hardly knew how to frame his little
request in language sufficiently modest. He had recognised and acknowledged, to himself the
necessity of shocking the bishop in the first instance by the temerity of his application,
and his difficulty was how best to remedy that by his adroitness and eloquence. 'I doubted
myself,' said he, 'whether your lordship would have any one immediately in your eye, and it
is on this account that I venture to submit to you an idea that I have been turning over in
my own mind. If poor Dr Trefoil must go, I really do not see why, with your lordship's assistance,
I should not hold the preferment myself.'

'You!' exclaimed the bishop, in a manner that Mr Slope could hardly have considered complimentary.

The ice was now broken, and Mr Slope became fluent enough. 'I have been thinking of looking
for it. If your lordship will press the matter on the archbishop, I do not doubt but that I
shall succeed. You see I shall count upon assistance from the public press; my name is known,
I may say, somewhat favourably known to that portion of the press which is now most influential
with the government, and I have friends also in the government. But, it is from your hands
that I would most willingly receive the benefit. And, which should ever be the chief consideration
in such matters, you must know better than any other person whatsoever what qualifications
I possess.'

The bishop sat for a while dumfounded. Mr Slope dean of Barchester! The idea of such a transformation
of character would never have occurred to his own unaided intellect. At first he went on thinking
why, for what reasons, on what account, Mr Slope should be dean of Barchester. But by degrees
the direction of his thoughts changed, and he began to think why, for what reasons, on what
account, Mr Slope should not be dean of Barchester. As far as he himself, the bishop, was concerned,
he could well spare the services of his chaplain. The little idea of using Mr Slope as a counterpoise
to his wife had well nigh evaporated. He had all but acknowledged the futility of the scheme.
If indeed he could have slept in his chaplain's bed-room instead of his wife's there might
have been something in it. But---. And thus as Mr Slope as speaking, the bishop began to recognise
the idea that that gentleman might become dean of Barchester without impropriety; not moved,
indeed, by Mr Slope's eloquence, for he did not follow the tenor of his speech; but led thereto
by his own cogitation.

'I need not say,' continued Mr Slope, 'that it would be my chief desire to act in all matters
connected with cathedral as far as possible in accordance with your views. I know your lordship
so well (and I hope you know me well enough to have the same feelings), that I am satisfied
that my being in that position would add materially to your own comfort, and enable you to
extend the sphere of your useful influence. As I said before, it is not desirable that there
should be but one opinion among the dignitaries in the same diocese. I doubt much whether I
would accept such an appointment in any diocese in which I should be constrained to differ
much from the bishop. In this case there would be a delightful uniformity of opinion.'

Mr Slope perfectly well perceived that the bishop did not follow a word that he said, but nevertheless
he went on talking. He knew it was necessary that Dr Proudie should recover from his surprise,
and he knew also that he must give him the opportunity of appearing to have been persuaded
by argument. So he went on, and produced a multitude of fitting reasons all tending to show
that no one on earth could make so good a dean of Barchester as himself, that the government
and the public would assuredly coincide in desiring that he, Mr Slope, should be dean of Barchester;
but that for high considerations of ecclesiastical polity, it would be especially desirable
that this piece of preferment should be so bestowed through the instrumentality of the bishop
of the diocese.

'But I really don't know what I could do in the matter,' said the bishop.

'If you would mention it to the archbishop; if you would tell his grace that you consider such
an appointment very desirable, that you have it much at heart with a view of putting an end
to the schism in the diocese; if you did this with your usual energy, you would probably find
no difficulty in inducing his grace to promise that he would mention it to Lord -. Of course
you would let the archbishop know that I am not looking for the preferment solely through his
intervention; that you do not exactly require him to ask it as a favour; that you expect I
shall get it through other sources, as is indeed the case; but that you are very anxious that
his grace should express his approval of such an arrangement to Lord--'

It ended by the bishop promising to do as he was told. Not that he so promised without a stipulation.
'About that hospital,' he said, in the middle of the conference. 'I was never so troubled in
my life;' which was about the truth. 'You haven't spoken to Mr Harding since I saw you?'

Mr Slope assured his patron that he had not.

'Ah well then--I think upon the whole it will be better to let Mr Quiverful have it. It has
been half promised to him, and he has a large family and is very poor. I think on the whole
it will be better to make out the nomination for Mr Quiverful.'

'But, my lord,' said Mr Slope, still thinking that was bound to make a fight for his own view
on this matter, and remembering that it still behoved him to maintain his lately acquired supremacy
over Mrs Proudie, lest he should fail in his views regarding the deanery, 'but, my lord, I
am really much afraid--'

'Remember, Mr Slope, 'I can hold out not sort of hope to you in this matter of succeeding poor
Dr Trefoil. I will certainly speak to the archbishop, as you wish it, but I cannot think--'

'Well, my lord,' said Mr Slope, fully understanding the bishop, and in his turn interrupting
him, 'perhaps your lordship is right about Mr Quiverful. I have no doubt I can easily arrange
matters with Mr Harding, and I will make out the nomination for your signature as you direct.'

'Yes, Slope, I think that will be best; and you may be sure that any little that I can do to
forward your views shall be done.'

And so they parted.

Mr Slope had now much business to handle. He had to make his daily visit to the signora. This
common prudence should have now induced him to omit, but he was infatuated; and could not bring
himself to be commonly prudent. He determined therefore that he would drink tea at the Stanhope's;
and he determined also, or thought that he determined, that having done so he would go thither
no more. He had also to arrange his matters with Mrs Bold. He was of the opinion that Eleanor
would grace the deanery as perfectly as she would the chaplain's cottage; and he thought, moreover,
that Eleanor's fortune would excellently repair and dilapidations and curtailments in the dean's
stipend which might have been made by that ruthless ecclesiastical commission.

Touching Mrs Bold his hopes now soared high. Mr Slope was one of the numerous multitude of
swains who think that all is fair in love, and he had accordingly not refrained from using
the services of Mrs Bold's own maid. From her he had learnt much of what had taken place at
Plumstead; not exactly with truth, for the 'own maid' had not been able to divine the exact
truth, but with some sort of similitude to it. He had been told that the archdeacon and Mrs
Grantly and Mr Harding and Mr Arabin had all quarrelled with 'missus' for having received a
letter from Mr Slope; that 'missus' had positively refused to give the letter up; that she
had received from the archdeacon the option of giving up either Mr Slope and his letter, or
the society of Plumstead rectory; and that 'missus' had declared with much indignation, that
'she didn't care a straw for the society of Plumstead rectory,' and that she wouldn't give
up Mr Slope for any of them.

Considering the source from whence this came, it was not quite so untrue as might have been
expected. It showed pretty plainly what had been the nature of the conversation in the servants'
hall; and coupled as it was with the certainty of Eleanor's sudden return, it appeared to Mr
Slope to be so far worthy of credit as to justify him in thinking that the fair widow would
in all human probability accept his offer.

All this work had therefore to be done. It was desirable he thought that he should make his
offer before it was known that Mr Quiverful was finally appointed to the hospital. In his letter
to Eleanor he had plainly declared that Mr Harding was to have the appointment. It would be
very difficult to explain this away; and were he to write another letter to Eleanor, telling
the truth and throwing the blame on the bishop, it would naturally injure him in her estimation.
He determined therefore to let that matter disclose itself as it would, and to lose no time
in throwing himself at her feet.

Then he had to solicit the assistance of Sir Nicholas Fitzwhiggin and Mr Towers, and he went
directly from the bishop's presence to compose his letters to those gentlemen. As Mr Slope
was esteemed as an adept at letter writing, they shall be given in full.

'Palace, Barchester, Sept 185-, '(Private)

'My dear Sir Nicholas,--I hope that the intercourse which has been between us will preclude
you from regarding my present application as an intrusion. You cannot I imagine have yet heard
that poor dear old Dr Trefoil has been seized with apoplexy. It is a subject of profound grief
to every one in Barchester, for he has always been an excellent man--excellent as man and as
a clergyman. He is, however, full of years, and his life could not under any circumstances
have been much longer spared. You may probably have known him.

'There is, it appears, no probable chance of his recovery. Sir Omicron Pie is, I believe, at
present with him. At any rate the medical men here have declared that one or two days more
must limit the tether of his mortal coil. I sincerely trust that his soul may wing its flight
to that haven where it may for ever be at rest and for ever be happy.

'The bishop has been speaking to me about the preferment, and he is anxious that it should
be conferred on me. I confess that I can hardly venture, at my age, to look for such advancement;
but I am so far encouraged by his lordship, that I believe I shall be induced to do so. His
lordship goes to London tomorrow, and is intent on mentioning the subject to the archbishop.

'I know well how deservedly great is your weight with the present government. In any matter
touching church preferment you would of course be listened to. Now that the matter has been
put into my head, I am of course anxious to be successful. If you can assist me by your good
word, you will confer on me one additional favour.

'I had better add, that Lord - cannot as yet know of this piece of preferment having fallen
in, or rather of the certainty of falling (for poor dear Dr Trefoil is past hope). Should Lord
- first hear it from you, that might probably bee thought to give you a fair claim to express
your opinion.

'Of course our grand object is, that we should all be of one opinion in church matters. This
is most desirable at Barchester; it is this that makes our good bishop so anxious about it.
You may probably think it expedient to point this out to Lord - if it shall be in your power
to oblige me by mentioning the subject to his lordship.

'Believe me, my dear Sir Nicholas, 'Your most faithful servant, OBADIAH SLOPE.'

His letter to Mr Towers was written in quite a different strain. Mr Slope conceived that he
completely understood the difference in character and position of the two men whom he addressed.
He knew that for such a man as Sir Nicholas Fitzwhiggin a little flummery was necessary, and
that it might be of the easy everyday description. Accordingly, his letter to Sir Nicholas
was written currente calamo, with very little trouble. But to such a man as Mr Towers it was
not so easy to write a letter that should be effective and yet not offensive, that should carry
its point without undue interference. It was not difficult to flatter Dr Proudie, or Sir Nicholas
Fitzwhiggin, but very difficult to flatter Mr Towers without letting the flattery declare itself.
This, however, had to be done. Moreover, this letter must in appearance at least, be written
without effort, and be fluent, unconstrained, and demonstrative of no doubt or fear on the
part of the writer. Therefor the epistle to Mr Towers was studied, and recopied, and elaborated
at the cost of so many minutes, that Mr Slope had hardly time to dress himself and reach Dr
Stanhope's that evening.

When dispatched it ran as follows:-

'Barchester, Sept 185- (He purposely omitted any allusion to the 'palace', thinking that Mr
Towers might not like it. A great man, he remembered, had been once much condemned for dating
a letter from Windsor Castle.)

'(Private)

'My dear Sir,--We were all a good deal shocked here this morning by hearing that poor old Dean
Trefoil had been stricken with apoplexy. The fit took him about 9am. I am writing now to save
the post, and he is still alive, but past all hope, or possibility, I believe, of living. Sir
Omicron Pie is here, or will be very shortly; but all that even Sir Omicron can do, is to ratify
the sentence of his less distinguished brethren that nothing can be done. Poor Dr Trefoil's
race on this side of the grave is run. I do not know whether you knew him. He was a good, quiet,
charitable man, of the old school of course, as any clergyman over seventy years of age must
necessarily be.

'But I do not write merely with the object of sending you such news as this: doubtless some
one of your Mercuries will have seen and heard and reported so much; I write, as you usually
do yourself, rather with a view to the future than to the past.

'Rumour is already rife her as to Dr Trefoil's successor, and among those named as possible
future deans your humble servant is, I believe, not the least frequently spoken of; in short,
I am looking for the preferment. You may probably know that since Bishop Proudie came to this
diocese, I have exerted myself a good deal; and I may certainly say not without some success.
He and I are nearly always of the same opinion on points of doctrine as well as church discipline,
and therefore I have had, as his confidential chaplain, very much in my own hands; but I confess
to you that I have a higher ambition than to remain the chaplain of any bishop.

'There are no positions in which more energy is now needed than in those of our deans. The
whole of our enormous cathedral establishments have been allowed to go to sleep,--nay, they
are all but dead and ready for the sepulchre! And yet of what prodigious moment they might
be made, if, as we intend, they were so managed as to lead the way and show an example for
all our parochial clergy!

'The bishop here is most anxious for my success; indeed, he goes to-morrow to press the matter
on the archbishop. I believe also I may count on the support of at least one of the most effective
member of the government. But I confess the support of the Jupiter, if I be thought worthy
of it, would be more gratifying to me than any other; more gratifying if by it I should be
successful; and more gratifying also, if, although, so supported, I should be unsuccessful.

'The time has, in fact, come in which no government can venture to fill up the high places
of the Church in defiance of the public press. The age of honourable bishops and noble deans
has gone by; and any clergyman however humbly born can now hope for success, if his industry,
talent, and character, be sufficient to call forth the manifest opinion of the public in his
favour.

'At the present moment we all feel that any counsel given in such matters by the Jupiter has
the greatest weight,--is, indeed, generally followed; and we feel also--I am speaking of clergymen
of my own age and standing--that it should be so. There can be no patron less interested than
the Jupiter, and none that more thoroughly understands the wants of the people.

'I am sure you will not suspect me of asking from you any support which the paper with which
you are connected cannot conscientiously give me. My object in writing is to let you know that
I am a candidate for the appointment. It is for you to judge whether or no you can assist my
views. I should not, of course, have written to you on such a matter had I not believed (and
I have had good reason so to believe) that the Jupiter approves of my views on ecclesiastical
polity.

'The bishop expresses a fear that I may be considered too young for such a station, my age
being thirty-six. I cannot think that at the present day any hesitation need be felt on such
a point. The public has lost its love for antiquated servants. If a man will ever be fit to
do good work he will be fit at thirty-six years of age.

'Believe me very faithfully yours, OBADIAH SLOPE

'T. TOWERS, Esq., 'Middle Temple.'

Having thus exerted himself, Mr Slope posted his letters, and passed the remainder of the evening
at the feet of his mistress.

Mr Slope will be accused of deceit in his mode of canvassing. It will be said that he lied
in the application he made to each of his three patrons. I believe it must be owned that he
did so. He could not hesitate on account of his youth, and yet, be quite assured that he was
not too young. He could not count chiefly on the bishop's support, and chiefly also on that
of the newspaper. He did not think that the bishop was going to press the matter on the archbishop.
It must be owned that in his canvassing Mr Slope was as false as he well could be.

Let it, however, be asked of those who are conversant with such matters, whether he was more
false than men usually are on such occasions. We English gentlemen hate the name of a lie;
but how often do we find public men who believe each other's words?

CHAPTER XXXIII

MRS PROUDIE VICTRIX

The next week passed over at Barchester with much apparent tranquillity. The hearts, however,
of some of the inhabitants were not so tranquil as the streets of the city. The poor old dean
still continued to live, just as Sir Omicron had prophesied that he would do, much to amazement,
and some thought, disgust, of Dr Fillgrave. The bishop still remained away. He had stayed a
day or two in town, and had also remained longer at the archbishop's than he had intended.
Mr Slope had as yet received no line in answer to either of his letters; but he had learnt
the cause of this. Sir Nicholas was stalking a deer, or attending the Queen, in the Highlands;
and even the indefatigable Mr Towers had stolen an autumn holiday, and had made one of the
yearly tribe who now ascend Mont Blanc. Mr Slope learnt that he was not expected back till
the last day of September.

Mrs Bold was thrown much with the Stanhopes, of whom she became fonder and fonder. If asked,
she would have said that Charlotte Stanhope was her special friend, and so she would have thought.
But, to tell the truth, she liked Bertie nearly as well; she had no more idea of regarding
him as a lover than she would have had of looking at a big tame dog in such a light. Bertie
had become very intimate with her, and made little speeches to her, and said little things
of sort very different from the speeches and sayings of other men. But then this was almost
always done before his sisters; and he, with his long silken beard, his light blue eyes and
strange dress, was so unlike other men. She admitted him to a kind of familiarity which she
had never known with any one else, and of which she by no means understood the danger. She
blushed once at finding that she had called him Bertie, and on the same day only barely remembered
her position in time to check herself from playing upon him some personal practical joke to
which she was instigated by Charlotte.

In all this Eleanor was perfectly innocent, and Bertie Stanhope could hardly be called guilty.
But every familiarity into which Eleanor was entrapped was deliberately planned by his sister.
She knew well how to play her game, and played it without mercy; she knew, none so well, what
was her brother's character, and she would have handed over to him the young widow, and the
young widow's money, and the money of the widow's child, without remorse. With her pretended
friendship and warm cordiality, she strove to connect Eleanor so closely with her brother as
to make it impossible that she should go back even if she wished it. But Charlotte Stanhope
knew really nothing of Eleanor's character; did not even understand that there were such characters.
She did not comprehend that a young and pretty woman could be playful and familiar with a man
such as Bertie Stanhope, and yet have no idea in her head, no feeling in her heart that she
would have been ashamed to own to all the world. Charlotte Stanhope did not in the least conceive
that her new friend was a woman whom nothing could entrap into an inconsiderate marriage, whose
mind would have revolted from the slightest impropriety had she been aware that any impropriety
existed.

Miss Stanhope, however, had tact enough to make herself and her father's house very agreeable
to Mrs Bold. There was with them all an absence of stiffness and formality which was peculiarly
agreeable to Eleanor after the great dose of clerical arrogance which she had lately been constrained
to take. She played chess with them, walked with them, and drank tea with them; studied or
pretended to study astronomy; assisted them in writing stories in rhyme, in turning prose tragedy
into comic verse, or comic stories into would-be tragic poetry. She had no idea before that
she had any such talents. She had not conceived the possibility of her doing such things as
she now did. She found with the Stanshopes new amusements and employments, new pursuits, which
in themselves could not be wrong, and which were exceedingly alluring.

Is it not a pity that people who are bright and clever should so often be exceedingly improper?
And that those who are never improper should so often be dull and heavy? Now Charlotte Stanhope
was always bright, and never heavy: but her propriety was doubtful.

But during all this time Eleanor by no means forgot Mr Arabin, nor did she forget Mr Slope.
She had parted from Mr Arabin in her anger. She was still angry at what she regarded as his
impertinent interference; but nevertheless she looked forward to meeting him again; and also
looked forward to forgiving him. The words that Mr Arabin had uttered still sounded in her
ears. She knew that if not intended for a declaration of love, they did signify that he loved
her; and she felt also that if he ever did make such a declaration, it might be that she should
not receive it unkindly. She was still angry with him, very angry with him; so angry that she
would bit her lip and stamp her foot as she thought of what he had said and done. But nevertheless
she yearned to let him know that he was forgiven; all that she required was that he should
own that he had sinned.

She was to meet him at Ullathorne on the last day of the present month. Miss Thorne had invited
all the country round to a breakfast on the lawn. There were to be tents and archery, and dancing
for the ladies on the lawn, and for the swains and girls in the paddock. There were to be fiddlers
and fifers, races for the boys, poles to be climbed, ditches full of water to be jumped over,
horse-collars to be grinned through (this latter amusement was an addition of the stewards,
and not arranged by Miss Thorne in the original programme), and every game to be played which,
in a long course of reading, Miss Thorne could ascertain to have been played in the good days
of Queen Elizabeth. Everything of more modern growth was to be tabooed, if possible. On one
subject Miss Thorne was very unhappy. She had been turning in her mind the matter of the bull-ring,
but could not succeed in making anything of it. She would not for the world have done, or allowed
to be done, anything that was cruel; as to the promoting the torture of a bull for the amusement
of her young neighbours, it need hardly be said that Miss Thorne would be the last to think
of it. And yet, there was something so charming in the name. A bull-ring, however, without
a bull would only be a memento of the decadence of the times, and she felt herself constrained
to abandon the idea. Quintains, however, she was determined to have, and had poles and swivels
and bags of flour prepared accordingly. She would no doubt have been anxious for something
small in the way of a tournament; but, as she said to her brother, that had been tried, and
the age had proved itself too decidedly inferior to its fore-runners to admit of such a pastime.
Mr Thorne did not seem to participate in her regret, feeling perhaps that a full suit of chain-armour
would have added but little to his own personal comfort.

This party at Ullathorne had been planned in the first place as a sort of welcoming to Mr Arabin
on his entrance into St Ewold's parsonage; an intended harvest-home gala for the labourers
and their wives and children had subsequently been amalgamated with it, and thus it had grown
into its present dimensions. All the Plumstead party had of course been asked, at the time
of the invitation Eleanor had intended to have gone with her sister. Now her plans were altered,
and she was going with the Stanhopes. The Proudies were also to be there; and as Mr Slope had
not been included in the invitation to the palace, the signora, whose impudence never deserted
her, asked permission of Miss Thorne to bring him.

This permission Miss Thorne gave, having no other alternative; but she did so with a trembling
heart, fearing Mr Arabin would be offended. Immediately on his return she apologised, almost
with tears, so dire an enmity was presumed to rage between the two gentlemen. But Mr Arabin
comforted by an assurance that he should meet Mr Slope with the greatest pleasure imaginable,
and made her promise that she would introduce them to each other.

But this triumph of Mr Slope's was not so agreeable to Eleanor, who since her return to Barchester
had done her best to avoid him. She would not give way to the Plumstead folk when they so ungenerously
accused her of being in love with this odious man; but, nevertheless, knowing that she was
so accused, she was fully alive to the expediency of keeping out of his way and dropping him
by degrees. She had seen very little of him since her return. Her servants had been instructed
to say to all visitors that she was out. She could not bring herself to specify Mr Slope particularly,
and in order to order to avoid him she had thus debarred herself from all her friends. She
had excepted Charlotte Stanhope, and, by degrees, a few others also. Once she had met him at
the Stanhope's; but, as a rule, Mr Slope's visits there had been made in the morning, and hers
in the evening. On that one occasion Charlotte had managed to preserve her from any annoyance.
This was very good-natured on the part of Charlotte, as Eleanor thought, and also very sharp-witted,
as Eleanor had told her friend nothing of her reasons for wishing to avoid that gentleman.
The fact, however, was, that Charlotte had learnt from her sister that Mr Slope would probably
put himself forward as a suitor for the widow's hand, and she was consequently sufficiently
alive to the expediency of guarding Bertie's future wife from any danger in that quarter.

Nevertheless the Stanhopes were pledged to take Mr Slope with them to Ullathorne. An arrangement
was therefore necessarily made, which was very disagreeable to Eleanor. Dr Stanhope, with herself,
Charlotte, and Mr Slope, were to go together, and Bertie was to follow with his sister Madeline.
It was clearly visible to Eleanor's face that this assortment was very disagreeable to her;
and Charlotte, who was much encouraged thereby in her own little plan, made a thousand apologies.

'I see you don't like it, dear,' said she, 'but we could not manage it otherwise. Bertie would
give his eyes to go with you, but Madeline cannot possibly go without him. Nor could we possibly
put Mr Slope and Madeline in the same carriage without anyone else. They'd both be ruined for
ever, you know, and not admitted inside Ullathorne gates, I should imagine, after such an impropriety.'

'Of course that wouldn't do,' said Eleanor; 'but couldn't I go in the carriage with the signora
and your brother?'

'Impossible!' said Charlotte. 'When she is there, there is only room for two.' The signora,
in truth, did not care to do her travelling in the presence of strangers.

'Well, then,' said Eleanor, 'you are all so kind, Charlotte, and so good to me, that I am sure
you won't be offended; but I think I shall not go at all.'

'Not go at all!--what nonsense!--indeed you shall.' it had been absolutely determined in family
council that Bertie should propose on that very occasion.

'Or I can take a fly,' said Eleanor. 'You know that I am not embarrassed by so many difficulties
as you young ladies. I can go alone.'

'Nonsense, my dear. Don't think of such a thing; after all it is only for an hour or so, and
to tell the truth, I don't know what it is you dislike so. I thought you and Mr Slope were
great friends. What is it you dislike?'

'Oh; nothing particular,' said Eleanor; 'only I thought it would be a family party.'

'Of course it would be much nicer, much more snug, if Bertie would go with us. It is he that
is badly treated. I can assure you he is much more afraid of Mr Slope than you are. But you
see Madeline cannot go without him,--and she, poor creature, goes out so seldom! I am sure
you don't begrudge her this, though her vagary does knock about our own party a little.'

Of course Eleanor made a thousand protestations, a uttered a thousand hopes that Madeline would
enjoy herself. And of course she had to give way, and undertake to go in the carriage with
Mr Slope. In fact, she was driven either to so this, or to explain why she would not do so.
Now she could not bring herself to explain to Charlotte Stanhope all that had passed at Plumstead.

But it was to her a sore necessity. She thought of a thousand little schemes for avoiding it;
she would plead illness, and not go at all; she would persuade Mary Bold to go although not
asked, and then make a necessity of having a carriage of her own to take her sister-in-law;
anything, in fact, she could do rather than be seen in the same carriage with Mr Slope. However,
when the momentous morning came she had no scheme matured, and then Mr Slope handed her into
Dr Stanhope's carriage, and following her steps, sat opposite to her.

The bishop returned on the eve of the Ullathorne party, and was received at home with radiant
smiles by the partner of all his cares. On his arrival he crept up to his dressing-room with
somewhat of a palpitating heart; he had overstayed his allotted time by three days, and was
not without fear of penalties. Nothing, however, could be more affectionately cordial than
the greeting he received; the girls came out and kissed him in a manner that was quite soothing
to his spirit; and Mrs Proudie, arms, and almost in words called him her dear, darling, good,
pet, little bishop. All this was a very pleasant surprise.

Mrs Proudie had somewhat changed her tactics; not that she had seen any cause to disapprove
of her former line of conduct, but she had now brought matters to such a point that she calculated
that she might safely do so. She had got the better of Mr Slope, and she now thought well to
show her husband that when allowed to get the better of everybody, when obeyed by him and permitted
to rule over others, she would take care that he should have his reward. Mr Slope had not a
chance against her; not only could she stun the poor bishop by her midnight anger, but she
could assuage and soothe him, if she so willed by daily indulgences. She could furnish his
room for him, turn him out as smart a bishop as any on the bench, give him good dinners, warm
fires, and an easy life; all this she would do if he would but be quietly obedient. But if
not--! To speak sooth, however, his sufferings on that dreadful night had been as poignant,
as to leave him little spirit for further rebellion.

As soon as he had dressed himself she returned to his room. 'I hope you enjoyed yourself at--'
said she, seating herself on one side of the fire while he remained in his arm-chair on the
other, stroking the calves of his legs. It was the first time he had had a fire in his room
since the summer, and it pleased him; for the good bishop loved to be warm and cosy. Nothing
could be more polite than the archbishop; and Mrs Archbishop had been equally charming.

Mrs Proudie was delighted to hear it; nothing, she declared, pleased her so much as to think

      Her bairn respectit like the lave.

