"It seems, dear," said she, despondingly, "as if Providence looked unfavourably on our design;
for every time you have attempted it, we have been in some way thwarted;" and the tears chased
one another down her face, which had grown pale in the excitement of the moment.

"Oh, don't grieve about it, dear; it is only a temporary disappointment. I can't think all
the clergymen in the city are like Dr. Blackly. Some one amongst them will certainly oblige
us. We won't despair; at least not until Ellis comes back."

They had not very long to wait; for soon after this conversation footsteps were heard in the
garden, and Mr. Ellis entered, followed by the clergyman.

In a very short space of time they were united by Father Banks, who seemed much affected as
he pronounced his blessing upon them.

"My children," he said, tremulously, "you are entering upon a path which, to the most favoured,
is full of disappointment, care, and anxieties; but to you who have come together under such
peculiar circumstances, in the face of so many difficulties, and in direct opposition to the
prejudices of society, it will be fraught with more danger, and open to more annoyances, than
if you were both of one race. But if men revile you, revile not again; bear it patiently for
the sake of Him who has borne so much for you. God bless you, my children," said he, and after
shaking hands with them all, he departed.

Mr. and Mrs. Ellis took their leave soon after, and then Mrs. Garie stole upstairs alone into
the room where the children were sleeping. It seemed to her that night that they were more
beautiful than ever, as they lay in their little beds quietly slumbering. She knelt beside
them, and earnestly prayed their heavenly Father that the union which had just been consummated
in the face of so many difficulties might prove a boon to them all.

"Where have you been, you runaway?" exclaimed her husband as she re-entered the parlour. "You
stayed away so long, I began to have all sorts of frightful ideas--I thought of the 'mistletoe
hung in the castle hall,' and of old oak chests, and all kind of terrible things. I've been
sitting here alone ever since the Ellises went: where have you been?"

"Oh, I've been upstairs looking at the children. Bless their young hearts! they looked so sweet
and happy--and how they grow! Clarence is getting to be quite a little man; don't you think
it time, dear, that he was sent to school? I have so much more to occupy my mind here than
I had in Georgia, so many household duties to attend to, that I am unable to give that attention
to his lessons which I feel is requisite. Besides, being so much at home, he has associated
with that wretched boy of the Stevens's, and is growing rude and noisy; don't you think he
had better be sent to school?"

"Oh yes, Emily, if you wish it," was Mr. Garie's reply. "I will search out a school to-morrow,
or next day;" and taking out his watch, he continued, "it is near twelve o'clock--how the night
has flown away--we must be off to bed. After the excitement of the evening, and your exertions
of to-day, I fear that you will be indisposed to-morrow."

Clarence, although over nine years old, was so backward in learning, that they were obliged
to send him to a small primary school which had recently been opened in the neighbourhood;
and as it was one for children of both sexes, it was deemed advisable to send little Em with him.

"I do so dislike to have her go," said her mother, as her husband proposed that she should
accompany Clarence; "she seems so small to be sent to school. I'm afraid she won't be happy."

"Oh! don't give yourself the least uneasiness about her not being happy there, for a more cheerful
set of little folks I never beheld. You would be astonished to see how exceedingly young some
of them are."

"What kind of a person is the teacher?" asked Mrs. Garie.

"Oh! she's a charming little creature; the very embodiment of cheerfulness and good humour.
She has sparkling black eyes, a round rosy face, and can't be more than sixteen, if she is
that old. Had I had such a teacher when a boy, I should have got on charmingly; but mine was
a cross old widow, who wore spectacles and took an amazing quantity of snuff, and used to flog
upon the slightest pretence. I went into her presence with fear and trembling. I could never
learn anything from her, and that must be my excuse for my present literary short-comings.
But you need have no fear respecting Em getting on with Miss Jordan: I don't believe she could
be unkind to any one, least of all to our little darling."

"Then you will take them down in the morning," suggested Mrs. Garie; "but on no account leave
Emily unless she wishes to stay."

CHAPTER XIV.

Charlie at Warmouth.

After the departure of Mrs. Bird to visit her sick friend, Betsey turned to Charlie and bid
him follow her into the kitchen. "I suppose you haven't been to breakfast," said she, in a
patronizing manner; "if you haven't, you are just in time, as we will be done ours in a little
while, and then you can have yours."

Charlie silently followed her down into the kitchen, where a man-servant and the younger maid
were already at breakfast; the latter arose, and was placing another plate upon the table,
when Betsey frowned and nodded disapprovingly to her. "Let him wait," whispered she; "I'm not
going to eat with niggers."

"Oh! he's such a nice little fellow," replied Eliza, in an undertone; "let him eat with us."

Betsey here suggested to Charlie that he had better go up to the maple chamber, wash his face,
and take his things out of his trunk, and that when his breakfast was ready she would call him.

"What on earth can induce you to want to eat with a nigger?" asked Betsey, as soon as Charlie
was out of hearing. "I couldn't do it; my victuals would turn on my stomach. I never ate at
the same table with a nigger in my life."

"Nor I neither," rejoined Eliza; "but I see no reason why I should not. The child appears to
have good manners, he is neat and good-looking, and because God has curled his hair more than
he has ours, and made his skin a little darker than yours or mine, that is no reason we should
treat him as if he was not a human being." Alfred, the gardener, had set down his saucer and
appeared very much astonished at this declaration of sentiment on the part of Eliza, and sneeringly
remarked, "You're an Abolitionist, I suppose."

"No, I am not," replied she, reddening; "but I've been taught that God made all alike; one
no better than the other. You know the Bible says God is no respecter of persons."

"Well, if it does," rejoined Alfred, with a stolid-look, "it don't say that man isn't to be
either, does it? When I see anything in my Bible that tells me I'm to eat and drink with niggers,
I'll do it, and not before. I suppose you think that all the slaves ought to be free, and all
the rest of the darned stuff these Abolitionists are preaching. Now if you want to eat with
the nigger, you can; nobody wants to hinder you. Perhaps he may marry you when he grows up--don't
you think you had better set your cap at him?"

Eliza made no reply to this low taunt, but ate her breakfast in silence.

"I don't see what Mrs. Bird brought him here for; she says he is sick,--had a broken arm or
something; I can't imagine what use she intends to make of him," remarked Betsey.

"I don't think she intends him to be a servant here, at any rate," said Eliza; "or why should
she have him put in the maple chamber, when there are empty rooms enough in the garret?"

"Well, I guess I know what she brought him for," interposed Alfred. "I asked her before she
went away to get a little boy to help me do odd jobs, now that Reuben is about to leave; we
shall want a boy to clean the boots, run on errands, drive up the cows, and do other little
chores.[*] I'm glad he's a black boy; I can order him round more, you know, than if he was
white, and he won't get his back up half as often either. You may depend upon it, that's what
Mrs. Bird has brought him here for." The gardener, having convinced himself that his view of
the matter was the correct one, went into the garden for his day's labour, and two or three
things that he had intended doing he left unfinished, with the benevolent intention of setting
Charlie at them the next morning.

[Footnote *: A Yankeeism, meaning little jobs about a farm.]

Charlie, after bathing his face and arranging his hair, looked from the window at the wide
expanse of country spread out before him, all bright and glowing in the warm summer sunlight.
Broad well-cultivated fields stretched away from the foot of the garden to the river beyond,
and the noise of the waterfall, which was but a short distance off, was distinctly heard, and
the sparkling spray was clearly visible through the openings of the trees. "What a beautiful
place,--what grand fields to run in; an orchard, too, full of blossoming fruit-trees! Well,
this is nice," exclaimed Charlie, as his eye ran over the prospect; but in the midst of his
rapture came rushing back upon him the remembrance of the cavalier treatment he had met with
below-stairs, and he said with a sigh, as the tears sprang to his eyes, "But it is not home,
after all." Just at this moment he heard his name called by Betsey, and he hastily descended
into the kitchen. At one end of the partially-cleared table a clean plate and knife and fork
had been placed, and he was speedily helped to the remains of what the servants had been eating.

"You mustn't be long," said Betsey, "for to-day is ironing day, and we want the table as soon
as possible."

The food was plentiful and good, but Charlie could not eat; his heart was full and heavy,--the
child felt his degradation. "Even the servants refuse to eat with me because I am coloured,"
thought he. "Oh! I wish I was at home!"

"Why don't you eat?" asked Betsey.

"I don't think I want any breakfast; I'm not hungry," was the reply.

"I hope you are not sulky," she rejoined; "we don't like sulky boys here; why don't you eat?"
she repeated.

The sharp, cold tones of her voice struck a chill into the child's heart, and his lip quivered
as he stammered something farther about not being hungry; and he hurried away into the garden,
where he calmed his feelings and allayed his home-sickness by a hearty burst of tears. After
this was over, he wandered through the garden and fields until dinner; then, by reading his
book and by another walk, he managed to get through the day.

The following morning, as he was coming down stairs, he was met by Alfred, who accosted him
with, "Oh! you're up, are you; I was just going to call you." And looking at Charlie from head
to foot, he inquired, "Is that your best suit?"

"No, it's my worst," replied Charlie. "I have two suits better than this;" and thinking that
Mrs. Bird had arrived, he continued, "I'll put on my best if Mrs. Bird wants me."

"No, she ain't home," was the reply; "it's me that wants you; come down here; I've got a little
job for you. Take this," said he, handing him a dirty tow apron, "and tie it around your neck;
it will keep the blacking off your clothes, you know. Now," continued he, "I want you to clean
these boots; these two pairs are Mr. Tyndall's--them you need not be particular with; but this
pair is mine, and I want 'em polished up high,--now mind, I tell you. I'm going to wear a new
pair of pants to meetin' to-morrow, and I expect to cut a dash, so you'll do 'em up slick,
now won't you?"

"I'll do my best," said Charlie, who, although he did not dislike work, could not relish the
idea of cleaning the servants' boots. "I'm afraid I shall find this a queer place," thought
he. "I shall not like living here, I know--wait for my meals until the servants have finished,
and clean their boots into the bargain. This is worse than being with Mrs. Thomas."

Charlie, however, went at it with a will, and was busily engaged in putting the finishing touches
on Alfred's boots, when he heard his name called, and on looking up, saw Mrs. Bird upon the
piazza above. "Why, bless me! child, what are you about?--whose boots are those, and why are
you cleaning them?"

"Oh!" he replied, his face brightening up at the sight of Mrs. Bird, "I'm so glad you're come;
those are Mr. Tyndall's boots, and these," he continued, holding up the boots on which he was
engaged, "are the gardener's."

"And who, pray, instructed you to clean them?"

"The gardener," replied Charlie.

"He did, did he?" said Mrs. Bird, indignantly. "Very well; now do you take off that apron and
come to me immediately; before you do, however, tell Alfred I want him."

Charlie quickly divested himself of the tow apron, and after having informed the gardener that
Mrs. Bird desired his presence in the parlour, he ran up there himself. Alfred came lumbering
up stairs, after giving his boots an unusual scraping and cleansing preparatory to entering
upon that part of the premises which to him was generally forbidden ground.

"By whose direction did you set the child at that dirty work?" asked Mrs. Bird, after he had
entered the room.

"I hadn't anybody's direction to set him to work, but I thought you brought him here to do
odd jobs. You know, ma'am, I asked you some time ago to get a boy, and I thought this was the one."

"And if he had been, you would have taken a great liberty in assigning him any duties without
first consulting me. But he is not a servant here, nor do I intend him to be such; and let
me inform you, that instead of his cleaning your boots, it will be your duty henceforth to
clean his. Now," continued she, "you know his position here, let me see that you remember yours.
You can go." This was said in so peremptory a manner, as to leave no room for discussion or
rejoinder, and Alfred, with a chagrined look, went muttering down stairs.

"Things have come to a pretty pass," grumbled he. "I'm to wait on niggers, black their boots,
and drive them out, too, I suppose. I'd leave at once if it wasn't such a good situation. Drat
the old picture--what has come over her I wonder--she'll be asking old Aunt Charity, the black
washerwoman to dine with her next. She has either gone crazy or turned abolitionist, I don't
know which; something has happened to her, that's certain."

"Now, Charlie," said Mrs. Bird, as the door closed upon the crest-fallen gardener, "go to your
room and dress yourself nicely. After I've eaten my breakfast, I am going to visit a friend,
and I want you to accompany me; don't be long."

"Can't I eat mine first, Mrs. Bird?" he asked, in reply.

"I thought you had had yours, long ago," rejoined she.

"The others hadn't finished theirs when you called me, and I don't get mine until they have
done," said Charlie.

"Until they have done; how happens that?" asked Mrs. Bird.

"I think they don't like to eat with me, because I'm coloured," was Charlie's hesitating reply.

"That is too much," exclaimed Mrs. Bird; "if it were not so very ridiculous, I should be angry.
It remains for me, then," continued she, "to set them an example. I've not eaten my breakfast
yet--come, sit down with me, and we'll have it together."

Charlie followed Mrs. Bird into the breakfast-room, and took the seat pointed out by her. Eliza,
when she entered with the tea-urn, opened her eyes wide with astonishment at the singular spectacle
she beheld. Her mistress sitting down to breakfast vis-a-vis to a little coloured boy! Depositing
the urn upon the table, she hastened back to the kitchen to report upon the startling events
that were occurring in the breakfast-room.

"Well, I never," said she; "that beats anything I ever did see; why, Mrs. Bird must have turned
abolitionist. Charlie is actually sitting at the same table with her, eating his breakfast
as natural and unconcerned as if he was as white as snow! Wonders never will cease. You see
I'm right though. I said that child wasn't brought here for a servant--we've done it for ourselves
now--only think how mad she'll be when she finds he was made to wait for his meals until we
have done. I'm glad I wasn't the one who refused to eat with him."

"I guess she has been giving Alfred a blowing up," said Betsy, "for setting him at boot cleaning;
for he looked like a thunder-cloud when he came down stairs, and was muttering something about
a consarned pet-nigger--he looked anything but pleased."

Whilst the lower powers were discussing what they were pleased to regard as an evidence of
some mental derangement on the part of Mrs. Bird, that lady was questioning Charlie respecting
his studies, and inquired if he would like to go to school in Warmouth.

"After a while, I think I should," he replied; "but for a week I'd like to be free to run about
the fields and go fishing, and do lots of things. This is such a pretty place; and now that
you have come I shall have nice times--I know I shall."

"You seem to have great confidence in my ability to make you happy. How do you know that I
am as kind as you seem to suppose?" asked Mrs. Bird, with a smile.

"I know you are," answered Charlie, confidently; "you speak so pleasantly to me. And do you
know, Mrs. Bird," continued he, "that I liked you from the first day, when you praised me so
kindly when I recited my lessons before you. Did you ever have any little boys of your own?"

A change immediately came over the countenance of Mrs. Bird, as she replied: "Oh, yes, Charlie;
a sweet, good boy about your own age:" and the tears stood in her eyes as she continued. "He
accompanied his father to England years ago--the ship in which they sailed was never heard
of--his name was Charlie too."

"I didn't know that, or I should not have asked," said Charlie, with some embarrassment of
manner caused by the pain he saw he had inflicted. "I am very sorry," he continued.

Mrs. Bird motioned him to finish his breakfast, and left the table without drinking the tea
she had poured out for herself.

There were but one or two families of coloured people living in the small town of Warmouth,
and they of a very humble description; their faces were familiar to all the inhabitants, and
their appearance was in accordance with their humble condition. Therefore, when Charlie made
his debut, in company with Mrs. Bird, his dress and manners differed so greatly from what they
were accustomed to associate with persons of his complexion, that he created quite a sensation
in the streets of the usually quiet and obscure little town.

He was attired with great neatness; and not having an opportunity of playing marbles in his
new suit, it still maintained its spotless appearance. The fine grey broadcloth coat and pants
fitted him to a nicety, the jaunty cap was set slightly on one side of his head giving him,
a somewhat saucy look, and the fresh colour now returning to his cheeks imparted to his face
a much healthier appearance than it had worn for months.

He and his kind friend walked on together for some time, chatting about the various things
that attracted their attention on the way, until they reached a cottage in the garden of which
a gentleman was busily engaged in training a rosebush upon a new trellis.

So completely was he occupied with his pursuit that he did not observe the entrance of visitors,
and quite started when he was gently tapped upon the shoulder by Mrs. Bird.

"How busy we are," said she, gaily, at the same time extending her hand--"so deeply engaged,
that we can scarcely notice old friends that we have not seen for months."

"Indeed, this is a pleasant surprise," he remarked, when he saw by whom he had been interrupted.
"When did you arrive?"

"Only this morning; and, as usual, I have already found something with which to bore you--you
know, Mr. Whately, I always have something to trouble you about."

"Don't say trouble, my dear Mrs. Bird; if you will say 'give me something to occupy my time
usefully and agreeably,' you will come much nearer the mark. But who is this you have with you?"

"Oh, a little protege of mine, poor little fellow--he met with a sad accident recently--he
broke his arm; and I have brought him down here to recruit. Charlie, walk around and look at
the garden--I have a little matter of business to discuss with Mr. Whately, and when we shall
have finished I will call you."

Mr. Whately led the way into his library, and placing a seat for Mrs. Bird, awaited her communication.

"You have great influence with the teacher of the academy, I believe," said she.

"A little," replied Mr. Whately, smiling.

"Not a little," rejoined Mrs. Bird, "but a great deal; and, my dear Mr. Whately, I want you
to exercise it in my behalf. I wish to enter as a scholar that little boy I brought with me
this morning."

"Impossible!" said Mr. Whately. "My good friend, the boy is coloured!"

"I am well aware of that," continued Mrs. Bird; "if he were not there would not be the least
trouble about his admission; nor am I sure there will be as it is, if you espouse his cause.
One who has been such a benefactor to the academy as yourself, could, I suppose, accomplish
anything."

"Yes; but that is stretching my influence unduly. I would be willing to oblige you in almost
anything else, but I hesitate to attempt this. Why not send him to the public school?--they
have a separate bench for black children; he can be taught there all that is necessary for
him to know."

"He is far in advance of any of the scholars there. I attended the examination of the school
to which he was attached," said Mrs. Bird, "and I was very much surprised at the acquirements
of the pupils; this lad was distinguished above all the rest--he answered questions that would
have puzzled older heads, with the greatest facility. I am exceedingly anxious to get him admitted
to the academy, as I am confident he will do honour to the interest I take in him."

"And a very warm interest it must be, my dear Mrs. Bird, to induce you to attempt placing him
in such an expensive and exclusive school. I am very much afraid you will have to give it up:
many of the scholars' parents, I am sure, will object strenuously to the admission of a coloured
boy as a scholar."

"Only tell me that you will propose him, and I will risk the refusal," replied Mrs. Bird--"it
can be tried at all events; and if you will make the effort I shall be under deep obligations
to you."

"Well, Mrs. Bird, let us grant him admitted--what benefit can accrue to the lad from an education
beyond his station? He cannot enter into any of the learned professions: both whilst he is
there, and after his education is finished, he will be like a fish out of water. You must pardon
me if I say I think, in this case, your benevolence misdirected. The boy's parents are poor,
I presume?"

"They certainly are not rich," rejoined Mrs. Bird; "and it is for that reason I wish to do
all that I can for him. If I can keep him with me, and give him a good education, it may be
greatly for his advantage; there may be a great change in public sentiment before he is a man--we
cannot say what opening there may be for him in the future."

