Such an alarm was given in the afternoon of the 15th. Four scouts were seen crossing and recrossing
each other at full gallop, on the summit of a hill about two miles distant down the river.
The cry was up that the Sioux were coming. In an instant the village was in an uproar. Men,
women, and children were all brawling and shouting; dogs barking, yelping, and howling. Some
of the warriors ran for the horses to gather and drive them in from the prairie, some for their
weapons. As fast as they could arm and equip they sallied forth; some on horseback, some on
foot; some hastily arrayed in their war dress, with coronets of fluttering feathers, and their
bodies smeared with paint; others naked and only furnished with the weapons they had snatched
up. The women and children gathered on the tops of the lodges and heightened the confusion
of the scene by their vociferation. Old men who could no longer bear arms took similar stations,
and harangued the warriors as they passed, exhorting them to valorous deeds. Some of the veterans
took arms themselves, and sallied forth with tottering steps. In this way, the savage chivalry
of the village to the number of five hundred, poured forth, helter-skelter, riding and running,
with hideous yells and war-whoops, like so many bedlamites or demoniacs let loose.

After a while the tide of war rolled back, but with far less uproar. Either it had been a false
alarm, or the enemy had retreated on finding themselves discovered, and quiet was restored
to the village. The white hunters continuing to be fearful of ranging this dangerous neighborhood,
fresh provisions began to be scarce in the camp. As a substitute, therefore, for venison and
buffalo meat, the travellers had to purchase a number of dogs to be shot and cooked for the
supply of the camp. Fortunately, however chary the Indians might be of their horses, they were
liberal of their dogs. In fact, these animals swarm about an Indian village as they do about
a Turkish town. Not a family but has two or three dozen belonging to it of all sizes and colors;
some, of a superior breed, are used for hunting; others, to draw the sledge, while others,
of a mongrel breed, and idle vagabond nature, are fattened for food. They are supposed to be
descended from the wolf, and retain something of his savage but cowardly temper, howling rather
than barking, showing their teeth and snarling on the slightest provocation, but sneaking away
on the least attack.

The excitement of the village continued from day to day. On the day following the alarm just
mentioned, several parties arrived from different directions, and were met and conducted by
some of the braves to the council lodge, where they reported the events and success of their
expeditions, whether of war or hunting; which news was afterward promulgated throughout the
village, by certain old men who acted as heralds or town criers. Among the parties which arrived
was one that had been among the Snake nation stealing horses, and returned crowned with success.
As they passed in triumph through the village they were cheered by the men, women, and children,
collected as usual on the tops of the lodges, and were exhorted by the Nestors of the village
to be generous in their dealings with the white men.

The evening was spent in feasting and rejoicing among the relations of the successful warriors;
but sounds of grief and wailing were heard from the hills adjacent to the village: the lamentations
of women who had lost some relative in the foray.

An Indian village is subject to continual agitations and excitements. The next day arrived
a deputation of braves from the Cheyenne or Shienne nation; a broken tribe, cut up, like the
Arickaras, by wars with the Sioux, and driven to take refuge among the Black Hills, near the
sources of the Cheyenne River, from which they derive their name. One of these deputies was
magnificently arrayed in a buffalo robe, on which various figures were fancifully embroidered
with split quills dyed red and yellow; and the whole was fringed with the slender hoofs of
young fawns, and rattled as he walked.

The arrival of this deputation was the signal for another of those ceremonies which occupy
so much of Indian life; for no being is more courtly and punctilious, and more observing of
etiquette and formality than an American savage.

The object of the deputation was to give notice of an intended visit of the Shienne (or Cheyenne)
tribe to the Arickara village in the course of fifteen days. To this visit Mr. Hunt looked
forward, to procure additional horses for his journey; all his bargaining being ineffectual
in obtaining a sufficient supply from the Arickaras. Indeed nothing could prevail upon the
latter to part with their prime horses, which had been trained to buffalo hunting.

On the 9th of July, just before daybreak, a great noise and vociferation was heard in the village.
This being the usual Indian hour of attack and surprise, and the Sioux being known to be in
the neighborhood, the camp was instantly on the alert. As the day broke Indians were descried
in considerable numbers on the bluffs, three or four miles down the river. The noise and agitation
in the village continued. The tops of the lodges were crowded with the inhabitants, all earnestly
looking toward the hills, and keeping up a vehement chattering. Presently an Indian warrior
galloped past the camp toward the village, and in a little while the legions began to pour forth.

The truth of the matter was now ascertained. The Indians upon the distant hills were three
hundred Arickara braves returning from a foray. They had met the war party of Sioux who had
been so long hovering about the neighborhood, had fought them the day before, killed several,
and defeated the rest with the loss of but two or three of their own men and about a dozen
wounded; and they were now halting at a distance until their comrades in the village should
come forth to meet them, and swell the parade of their triumphal entry. The warrior who had
galloped past the camp was the leader of the party hastening home to give tidings of his victory.

Preparations were now made for this great martial ceremony. All the finery and equipments of
the warriors were sent forth to them, that they might appear to the greatest advantage. Those,
too, who had remained at home, tasked their wardrobes and toilets to do honor to the procession.

The Arickaras generally go naked, but, like all savages, they have their gala dress, of which
they are not a little vain. This usually consists of a gray surcoat and leggins of the dressed
skin of the antelope, resembling chamois leather, and embroidered with porcupine quills brilliantly
dyed. A buffalo robe is thrown over the right shoulder, and across the left is slung a quiver
of arrows. They wear gay coronets of plumes, particularly those of the swan; but the feathers
of the black eagle are considered the most worthy, being a sacred bird among the Indian warriors.
He who has killed an enemy in his own land is entitled to drag at his heels a fox-skin attached
to each moccasin; and he who has slain a grizzly bear wears a necklace of his claws, the most
glorious trophy that a hunter can exhibit.

An Indian toilet is an operation of some toil and trouble; the warrior often has to paint himself
from head to foot, and is extremely capricious and difficult to please, as to the hideous distribution
of streaks and colors. A great part of the morning, therefore, passed away before there were
any signs of the distant pageant. In the mean time a profound stillness reigned over the village.
Most of the inhabitants had gone forth; others remained in mute expectation. All sports and
occupations were suspended, excepting that in the lodges the painstaking squaws were silently
busied in preparing the repasts for the warriors.

It was near noon that a mingled sound of voices and rude music, faintly heard from a distance,
gave notice that the procession was on the march. The old men and such of the squaws as could
leave their employments hastened forth to meet it. In a little while it emerged from behind
a hill, and had a wild and picturesque appearance as it came moving over the summit in measured
step, and to the cadence of songs and savage instruments; the warlike standards and trophies
flaunting aloft, and the feathers, and paint, and silver ornaments of the warriors glaring
and glittering in the sunshine.

The pageant had really something chivalrous in its arrangement. The Arickaras are divided into
several bands, each bearing the name of some animal or bird, as the buffalo, the bear, the
dog, the pheasant. The present party consisted of four of these bands, one of which was the
dog, the most esteemed in war, being composed of young men under thirty, and noted for prowess.
It is engaged on the most desperate occasions. The bands marched in separate bodies under their
several leaders. The warriors on foot came first, in platoons of ten or twelve abreast; then
the horsemen. Each band bore as an ensign a spear or bow decorated with beads, porcupine quills
and painted feathers. Each bore its trophies of scalps, elevated on poles, their long black
locks streaming in the wind. Each was accompanied by its rude music and minstrelsy. In this
way the procession extended nearly a quarter of a mile. The warriors were variously armed,
some few with guns, others with bows and arrows, and war clubs; all had shields of buffalo
hide, a kind of defence generally used by the Indians of the open prairies, who have not the
covert of trees and forests to protect them. They were painted in the most savage style. Some
had the stamp of a red hand across their mouths, a sign that they had drunk the life-blood
of a foe!

As they drew near to the village the old men and the women began to meet them, and now a scene
ensued that proved the fallacy of the old fable of Indian apathy and stoicism. Parents and
children, husbands and wives, brothers and sisters met with the most rapturous expressions
of joy; while wailings and lamentations were heard from the relatives of the killed and wounded.
The procession, however, continued on with slow and measured step, in cadence to the solemn
chant, and the warriors maintained their fixed and stern demeanor.

Between two of the principal chiefs rode a young warrior who had distinguished himself in the
battle. He was severely wounded, so as with difficulty to keep on his horse; but he preserved
a serene and steadfast countenance, as if perfectly unharmed. His mother had heard of his condition.
She broke through the throng, and rushing up, threw her arms around him and wept aloud. He
kept up the spirit and demeanor of a warrior to the last, but expired shortly after he had
reached his home.

The village was now a scene of the utmost festivity and triumph. The banners, and trophies,
and scalps, and painted shields were elevated on poles near the lodges. There were war-feasts
and scalp-dances, with warlike songs and savage music; all the inhabitants were arrayed in
their festal dresses; while the old heralds went round from lodge to lodge, promulgating with
loud voices the events of the battle and the exploits of the various warriors.

Such was the boisterous revelry of the village; but sounds of another kind were heard on the
surrounding hills; piteous wailings of the women, who had retired thither to mourn in darkness
and solitude for those who had fallen in battle. There the poor mother of the youthful warrior
who had returned home in triumph but to die, gave full vent to the anguish of a mother's heart.