At the commencement of the troubles in Judea, during the reign of Vespasian, the Christians
of Jerusalem withdrew to Pella, and as soon as their metropolis was demolished they returned
to dwell among its ruins. In the space of a few months they could not have forgotten the position
of their sanctuaries, which, generally speaking, being situated outside the walls, could not
have suffered so much from the siege as the more lofty edifices within. That the holy places
were known to all men in the time of Adrian is demonstrated by an undeniable fact. This emperor,
when he rebuilt the city, erected a statue of Venus on Mount Calvary, and another of Jupiter
on the sacred sepulchre. The grotto of Bethlehem was given up to the rites of Adonis, the jealousy
of the idolaters thus publishing by their abominable profanations, the sublime doctrines of
the Cross, which it was their object to conceal or calumniate.

But Adrian, although actuated by an ardent zeal in behalf of his own deities, did not persecute
the Christians at large. His resentment seems to have been confined to the Nazarenes in Jerusalem,
whom he could not help regarding as a portion of the Jewish nation,--the irreconcilable enemies
of Rome. We accordingly perceive, that he had no sooner dispersed the church of the Circumcision
established in the holy city, than he permitted within its walls the formation of a Christian
community, composed of Gentile converts, whose political principles, he imagined, were less
inimical to the sovereignty of the empire. At the same time he wrote to the governors of his
Asiatic provinces, instructing them not to molest the believers in Christ, merely on account
of their creed, but to reserve all punishment for crimes committed against the laws and the
public tranquillity. It has therefore been very generally admitted; that during this period
of repose, and even down to the reign of Dioclesian, the faithful at Jerusalem, now called
Aelia, celebrated the mysteries of their religion in public, and consequently had altars consecrated
to their worship. If, indeed, they were not allowed the possession of Calvary, the Holy Sepulchre,
and of Bethlehem, where they might solemnize their sacred rites, it is not to be imagined that
the memory of these holy sanctuaries could be effaced from their affectionate recollection.
The very idols served to mark the places where the Christian redemption was begun and completed.
Nay, the pagans themselves cherished the expectation that the temple of Venus, erected on the
summit of Calvary, would not prevent the Christians from visiting that holy mount; rejoicing
in the idea, as the historian Sozomen expresses it, that the Nazarenes, when they repaired
to Golgotha to pray, would appear to the public eye to be offering up their adoration to the
daughter of Jupiter. This is a striking proof that a perfect knowledge of the sacred places
was retained by the church of Jerusalem in the middle of the second century. At a somewhat
later period, when exposed to persecution, if they were not allowed to build their altars at
the Sepulchre, or proceed without apprehension to the scene of the Nativity, they enjoyed at
least the consolation of keeping alive the remembrance of the great events connected with these
interesting monuments of their faith; anticipating, at the same time, the approaching ruin
of that proud superstition by which they had been so long oppressed.

The conversion of Constantine gave a new vigour to these local reminiscences of the evangelical
history. That celebrated ruler wrote to Macarius, bishop of Jerusalem, to cover the tomb of
Jesus Christ with a magnificent church; while his mother, the Empress Helena, repaired in person
to Palestine, in order to glue a proper efficacy to the zeal which animated the throne, and
to assist in searching for the venerable remains of the first age of the gospel. To this illustrious
female is ascribed the glory of restoring to religion some of its most valued memorials. Not
satisfied with the splendid temple erected at the Holy Sepulchre, she ordered two similar edifices
to be reared under her own auspices; one over the manger of the Messiah at Bethlehem, and the
other on the Mount of Olives, to commemorate his ascension into heaven. Chapels, altars, and
houses of prayer gradually marked all the places consecrated by the acts of the Son of Man;
the oral traditions were forthwith committed to writing, and thereby secured for ever from
the treachery of individual recollection.[4]

These considerations gave great probability to the conjectures of those pious persons who,
in the fourth century of our era, assisted the mother of Constantine in fixing the locality
of holy scenes. From that period down to the present day, the devotion of the Christian and
the avarice of the Mohammedan have sufficiently secured the remembrance both of the places
and of the events with which they are associated. But no length of time can wear out the impression
of deep reverence and respect which are excited by an actual examination of those interesting
spots that witnessed the stupendous occurrences recorded in the inspired volume. Or, if there
be in existence any cause which could effectually counteract such natural and laudable feelings,
it is the excessive minuteness of detail and fanciful description usually found to accompany
the exhibition of sacred relics. The Christian traveller is delighted when he obtains the first
glance of Carmel, of Tabor, of Libanus, and of Olivet; his heart opens to many touching recollections
at the moment when the Jordan, the Lake of Tiberias, and even the waters of the Dead Sea spread
themselves out before his eyes; but neither his piety nor his belief is strengthened when he
has presented to him a portion of the cross whereon our Saviour was suspended, the nails that
pierced his hands and feet, the linen in which his body was wrapped, the stone on which his
corpse reposed in the sepulchre, as well as that occupied by the ministering angel on the morning
of the resurrection. The skepticism with which such doubtful remains cannot fail to be examined
is turned into positive disgust when, the guardians of the grotto at Bethlehem undertake to
show the water wherein the infant Messiah was washed, the milk of the blessed Virgin his mother,
the swaddling-clothes, the manger, and other particulars neither less minute nor less improbable.

But such abuses, the fruit of many ages of credulity and ignorance, do not materially diminish
the force of the impression produced by scenes which no art can change, and hardly any description
can disguise. The hills still stand round about Jerusalem, as they stood in the days of David
and of Solomon. The dew falls on Hermon, the cedars grow on Libanus, and Kishon, that ancient
river, draws its stream from Tabor as in the times of old. The Sea of Galilee still presents
the same natural accompaniments, the fig-tree springs up by the wayside, the sycamore spreads
its branches, and the vines and olives still climb the sides of the mountains. The desolation
which covered the Cities of the Plain is not less striking at the present hour than when Moses
with an inspired pen recorded the judgment of God; the swellings of Jordan are not less regular
in their rise than when the Hebrews first approached its banks; and he who goes down from Jerusalem
to Jericho still incurs the greatest hazard of falling among thieves. There is, in fact, in
the scenery and manners of Palestine, a perpetuity that accords well with the everlasting import
of its historical records, and which enables us to identify with the utmost readiness the local
imagery of every great transaction.

The extent of this remarkable country has varied at different times, according to the nature
of the government which it has either enjoyed or been compelled to acknowledge. When it was
first occupied by the Israelites, the land of Canaan, properly so called, was confined between
the shores of the Mediterranean and the western bank of the Jordan; the breadth at no part
exceeding fifty miles, while the length hardly amounted to three times that space. At a later
period, the arms of David and of his immediate successor carried the boundaries of the kingdom
to the Euphrates and Orontes on the one hand, an in an opposite direction to the remotest confines
of Edom and Moab. The population, as might be expected, has undergone a similar variation.
It is true that no particular in ancient history is liable to a better-founded suspicion than
the numerical statements which respect nations and armies; for pride and fear have, in their
turn, contributed not a little to exaggerate, in rival countries, the amount of the persons
capable of taking a share in the field of battle. Proceeding on the usual grounds of calculation,
we must infer, from the number of warriors whom Moses conducted through the desert, that the
Hebrew people, when they crossed the Jordan, did not fall short of two millions; while, from
facts recorded in the book of Samuel, we may conclude with greater confidence that the enrolment
made under the direction of Joab must have returned a gross population of five millions and a half.

The present aspect of Palestine, under an administration where every thing decays and nothing
is renewed, can afford no just criterion of the accuracy of such statements. Hasty observers
have indeed pronounced that a hilly country destitute of great rivers, could not, even under
the most skilful management, supply food for so many mouths. But this precipitate conclusion
has been vigorously combated by the most competent judges, who have taken pains to estimate
the produce of a soil under the fertilizing influence of a sun which may be regarded as almost
tropical, and of a well-regulated irrigation which the Syrians knew how to practise with the
greatest success. Canaan, it must be admitted, could not be compared to Egypt in respect to
corn. There is no Nile to scatter the riches of an inexhaustible fecundity over its valleys
and plains. Near Jericho the wild olives continue to bear berries of a large size, which give
the finest oil. In places subjected to irrigation, the same field, after a crop of wheat in
May, produces pulse in autumn. Several of the trees are continually bearing flowers and fruit
at the same time, in all their stages. The mulberry, planted in straight rows in the open field,
is festooned by the tendrils of the vine. If this vegetation seems to languish or become extinct
during the extreme heats,--if in the mountains it is at all seasons detached and interrupted,--such
exceptions to the general luxuriance are not to be ascribed simply to the general character
of all hot climates, but also to the state of barbarism in which the great mass of the present
population is immersed.

Even in our day, some remains are to be found of the walls which the ancient cultivators built
to support the soil on the declivities of the mountains; the form of the cisterns in which
they collected the rain-water; and traces of the canals by which this water was distributed
over the fields. These labours necessarily created a prodigious fertility under an ardent sun,
where a little moisture was the only requisite to revive the vegetable world. The accounts
given by native writers respecting the productive qualities of Judea are not in any degree
opposed even by the present aspect of the country. The case is exactly the same with some islands
in the Archipelago; a tract, from which a hundred individuals can hardly draw a scanty subsistence,
formerly maintained thousands in affluence. Moses might justly say that Canaan abounded in
milk and honey. The flocks of the Arabs still find in it a luxuriant pasture, while the bees
deposite in the holes of the rocks their delicious stores, which are sometimes seen flowing
down the surface.

The opinions just stated in regard to the fertility of ancient Palestine receive an ample confirmation
from the Roman historians, to whom, as a part of their extensive empire, it was intimately
known. Tacitus, especially, in language which he appears to have formed for his own use, describes
its natural qualities with the utmost precision, and, as is his manner, suggests rather than
specifies a catalogue of productions, the accuracy of which is verified by the latest observations.
The soil is rich, and the atmosphere dry; the country yields all the fruits which are known
in Italy, besides balm and dates.[6]

But it has never been denied that there is a remarkable difference between the two sides of
the ridge which forms the central chain of Judea. On the western acclivity, the soil rises
from the sea towards the elevated ground in four distinct terraces, which are covered with
an unfading verdure. The shore is lined with mastic-trees; palms, and prickly pears. Higher
up, the vines, the olives, and the sycamores amply repay the labour of the cultivator; natural
groves arise, consisting of evergreen oaks, cypresses, andrachnes, and turpentines. The face
of the earth is embellished with the rosemary, the cytisus, and the hyacinth. In a word, the
vegetation of these mountains has been compared to that of Crete. European visitors have dined
under the shade of a lemon-tree as large as one of our strongest oaks, and have seen sycamores,
the foliage of which was sufficient to cover thirty persons along with their horses and camels.

On the eastern side, however, the scanty coating of mould yields a less magnificent crop. From
the summit of the hills a desert stretches along to the Lake Asphaltites, presenting nothing
but stones and ashes, and a few thorny shrubs. The sides of the mountains enlarge, and assume
an aspect at once more grand and more barren. By little and little the scanty vegetation languishes
and dies; even mosses disappear, and a red burning hue succeeds to the whiteness of the rocks.
In the centre of this amphitheatre there is an arid basin, enclosed on all sides with summits
scattered over with a yellow-coloured pebble, and affording a single aperture to the east through
which the surface of the Dead Sea and the distant hills of Arabia present themselves to the
eye. In the midst of this country of stones, encircled by a wall, we perceive extensive ruins;
stunted cypresses, bushes of the aloe and prickly pear, while some huts of the meanest order,
resembling whitewashed sepulchres, are spread over the desolated mass. This spot is Jerusalem.[7]

This melancholy delineation, which was suggested by the state of the Jewish metropolis in the
third century, is not quite inapplicable at the present hour. The scenery of external nature
is the same, and the general aspect of the venerable city is very little changed. But as beauty
is strictly a relative term, and is everywhere greatly affected by association, we must not
be surprised when we read in the works of eastern authors the high encomiums which are lavished
upon the vicinity of the holy capital. Abulfeda, for example, maintains, not only that Palestine
is the most fertile part of Syria, but also that the neighbourhood of Jerusalem is one of the
most fertile districts of Palestine. In his eye, the vines, the fig-trees, and the olive-groves,
with which the limestone cliffs of Judea were once covered, identified themselves with the
richest returns of agricultural wealth, and more than compensated for the absence of those
spreading fields waving with corn which are necessary to convey to the mind of a European the
ideas of fruitfulness, comfort, and abundance.

Following the enlightened narrative of Malte Brun, the reader will find that southward of Damascus,
the point where the modern Palestine may be said to begin, are the countries called by the
Romans Auranitis and Gaulonitis, consisting of one extensive and noble plain, bounded on the
north by Hermon or Djibel-el-Sheik, on the south-west by Djibel-Edjlan, and on the east by
Haouran. In all these countries there is not a single stream which retains its water in summer.
The most of the villages have their pond or reservoir, which they fill from one of the wadi,
or brooks, during the rainy season. Of all these districts, Haouran is the most celebrated
for the culture of wheat. Nothing can exceed in grandeur the extensive undulations of their
fields, moving like the waves of the ocean in the wind. Bothin or Batanea, on the other hand,
contains nothing except calcareous mountains, where there are vast caverns, in which the Arabian
shepherds live like the ancient Troglodytes. Here a modern traveller, Dr. Seetzen, discovered,
in the year 1816, the magnificent ruins of Gerasa, now called Djerash, where three temples,
two superb amphitheatres of marble, and hundreds of columns still remain among other monuments
of Roman power. But by far the finest thing that he saw was a long street, bordered on each
side with a splendid colonnade of Corinthian architecture, and terminating in an open space
of a semicircular form, surrounded with sixty Ionic pillars. In the same neighbourhood the
ancient Gilead is distinguished by a forest of stately oaks, which supply wealth and employment
to the inhabitants. Peraea presents on its numerous terraces a mixture of vines, olives, and
pomegranates. Karak-Moab, the capital of a district corresponding to that of the primitive
Moabites, still meets the eye, but is not to be confounded with another town of a similar name
in the Stony Arabia.[8]

The countries now described lie on the eastern side of the river Jordan. But the same stream,
in the upper part of its course, forms the boundary between Gaulonitis and the fertile Galilee,
which is identical with the modern district of Szaffad. This town, which is remarkable for
the beauty of its situation amid groves of myrtle, is supposed to be the ancient Bethulia,
which was besieged by Holofernes. Tabara, an insignificant place, occupies the site of Tiberias,
which gave its name to the lake more generally known by that of Genesareth, or the Sea of Galilee;
but industry has now deserted its borders, and the fisherman with his skiff and his nets no
longer animates the surface of its waters. Nazareth still retains some portion of its former
consequence. Six miles farther south stands the hill of Tabor, sometimes denominated Itabyrius,
presenting a pyramid of verdure crowned with olives and sycamores. From the top of this mountain,
the modern Tor and scene of the transfiguration, we look down on the river Jordan, the Lake
of Genesareth, and the Mediterranean Sea.[9]

Galilee, says a learned writer, would be a paradise were it inhabited by an industrious people
under an enlightened government. Vine stocks are to be seen here a foot and a half in diameter,
forming, by their twining branches, vast arches and extensive ceilings of verdure. A cluster
of grapes, two or three feet in length, will give an abundant supper to a whole family. The
plains of Esdraelon are occupied by Arab tribes, around whose brown tents the sheep and lambs
gambol to the sound of the reed, which at nightfall calls them home.[10]

For some years this fine country has groaned and bled under the malignant genius of Turkish
despotism. The fields are left without cultivation, and the towns and villages are reduced
to beggary; but the latest accounts from the holy Land encourage us to entertain the hope,
that a milder administration will soon change the aspect of affairs, and bestow upon the Syrian
provinces at large some of the benefits which the more liberal policy of Mohammed Ali has conferred
upon the pashalic of Egypt.

Proceeding from Galilee towards the metropolis, we enter the land of Samaria, comprehending
the modern districts of Areta and Nablous. In the former we find the remains of Cesarea; and
on the Gulf of St. Jean d'Acre stands the town of Caypha, where there is a good anchorage for
ships. On the south-west of this gulf extends a chain of mountains, which terminates in the
promontory of Carmel, a name famous in the annals of our religion. There Elijah proved by miracles
the divinity of his mission; and there, in the middle ages of the church, resided thousands
of Christian devotees, who sought a refuge for their piety in the caves of the rocks. Then
the mountain was wholly covered with chapels and gardens, whereas at the present day nothing
is to be seen but scattered ruins amid forests of oak and olives, the bright verdure being
only relieved by the whiteness of the calcareous cliffs over which they are suspended. The
heights of Carmel, it has been frequently remarked, enjoy a pure and enlivening atmosphere,
while the lower grounds of Samaria and Galileo are obscured by the densest fogs.

The Shechem of the Scriptures, successively known by the names of Neapolis and Nablous, still
contains a considerable population, although its dwellings are mean and its inhabitants poor.
The ruins of Samaria itself are now covered with orchards; and the people of the district,
who have forgotten their native dialect, as well perhaps as their angry disputes with the Jews,
continue to worship the Deity on the verdant slopes of Gerizim.

Palestine, agreeably to the modern acceptation of the term, embraces the country of the ancient
Philistines, the most formidable enemies of the Hebrew tribes prior to the reign of David.
Besides Gaza, the chief town, we recognise the celebrated port of Jaffa or Yaffa, corresponding
to the Joppa mentioned in the Sacred Writings. Repeatedly fortified and dismantled, this famous
harbour has presented such a variety of appearances, that the description given of it in one
age has hardly ever been found to apply to its condition in the very next.

Bethlehem, where the divine Messias was born, is a large village inhabited promiscuously by
Christians and Mussulmans, who agree in nothing but their detestation of the tyranny by which
they are both unmercifully oppressed. The locality of the sacred manger is occupied by an elegant
church, ornamented by the pious offerings of all the nations of Europe. It is not our intention
to enter into a more minute discussion of those old traditions, by which the particular places
rendered sacred by the Redeemer's presence are still marked out for the veneration of the faithful.
They present much vagueness, mingled with no small portion of unquestionable truth. At all
events, we must not regard them in the same light in which we are compelled to view the story
that claims for Hebron the possession of Abraham's tomb, and attracts on this account the veneration
both of Nazarenes and Moslems.

