This piece of symbolism became a sort of fixed language with him; "the Snake" was a name by
which it amused him to be known among his friends. The clash of the two opposites is crudely
and narrowly conceived, with no suggestion yet of some more tremendous force behind both, such
as later on was to give depth to his view of the world conflict. The loves and the virtues
of Laon and Cythna, the gifted beings who overthrow the tyrant and perish tragically in a counter-revolution,
are too bright against a background that is too black; but even so they were a good opportunity
for displaying the various phases through which humanitarian passion may run--the first whispers
of hope, the devotion of the pioneer, the joy of freedom and love, in triumph exultation tempered
by clemency, in defeat despair ennobled by firmness. And although in this extraordinary production
Shelley has still not quite found himself, the technical power displayed is great. The poem
is in Spenserian stanzas, and he manages the long breaking wave of that measure with sureness
and ease, imparting to it a rapidity of onset that is all his own. But there are small blemishes
such as, even when allowance is made for haste of composition (it was written in a single summer),
a naturally delicate ear would never have passed; he apologises in the preface for one alexandrine
(the long last line which should exceed the rest by a foot) left in the middle of a stanza,
whereas in fact there are some eight places where obviously redundant syllables have crept
in. A more serious defect is the persistence, still unassimilated, of the element of the romantic-horrible.
When Laon, chained to the top of a column, gnaws corpses, we feel that the author of Zastrozzi
is still slightly ridiculous, magnificent though his writing has become. It is hard, again,
not to smile at this world in which the melodious voices of young eleutherarchs have only to
sound for the crouching slave to recover his manhood and for tyrants to tremble and turn pale.
The poet knows, as he wrote in answer to a criticism, that his mission is "to apprehend minute
and remote distinctions of feeling," and "to communicate the conceptions which result from
considering either the moral or the material universe as a whole." He does not see that he
has failed of both aims, partly because 'The Revolt' is too abstract, partly because it is
too definite. It is neither one thing nor the other. The feelings apprehended are, indeed,
remote enough; in many descriptions where land, sea, and mountain shimmer through a gorgeous
mist that never was of this earth, the "material universe" may perhaps be admitted to be grasped
as a whole; and he has embodied his conception of the "moral universe" in a picture of all
the good impulses of the human heart, that should be so fruitful, poisoned by the pressure
of religious and political authority. It was natural that the method which he chose should
be that of the romantic narrative--we have noticed how he began by trying to write novels--nor
is that method essentially unfitted to represent the conflict between good and evil, with the
whole universe for a stage; instances of great novels that are epics in this sense will occur
to every one. But realism is required, and Shelley was constitutionally incapable of realism
The personages of the story, Laon and the Hermit, the Tyrant and Cythna, are pale projections
of Shelley himself; of Dr. Lind, an enlightened old gentleman with whom he made friends at
Eton; of His Majesty's Government; and of Mary Wollstonecraft, his wife's illustrious mother.
They are neither of the world nor out of it, and consequently, in so far as they are localised
and incarnate and their actions woven into a tale, 'The Revolt of Islam' is a failure. In his
next great poem he was to pursue precisely the same aims, but with more success, because he
had now hit upon a figure of more appropriate vagueness and sublimity. The scheme of 'Prometheus
Unbound' (1819) is drawn from the immortal creations of Greek tragedy. In the Greek play, Zeus
is an usurper in heaven who has supplanted an older and milder dynasty of gods, and Prometheus,
visited in his punishment by the nymphs of ocean, knows a secret on which the rule of Zeus
depends. Shelley took over these features, and grafted on them his own peculiar confidence
in the ultimate perfection of mankind. His Prometheus knows that Jupiter (the Evil Principle)
will some day be overthrown, though he does not know when, and that he himself will then be
released; and this event is shown as actually taking place. It may be doubted whether this
treatment, while it allows the poet to describe what the world will be like when freed from
evil, does not diminish the impressiveness of the suffering Titan; for if Prometheus knows
that a term is set to his punishment, his defiance of the oppressor is easier, and, so far,
less sublime.

Mercury, Jupiter's messenger, is sent to offer him freedom if he will repent and submit to
the tyrant. On his refusal, the Furies are let loose to torture him, and his agony takes the
form of a vision of all the suffering of the world. The agony passes, and Mother Earth calls
up spirits to soothe him with images of delight; but he declares "most vain all hope but love,"
and thinks of Asia, his wife in happier days. The second act is full of the dreams of Asia.
With Panthea, one of the ocean nymphs that watch over Prometheus, she makes her way to the
cave of Demogorgon, "that terrific gloom," who seems meant to typify the Primal Power of the
World. Hence they are snatched away by the Spirit of the Hour at which Jove will fall, and
the coming of change pulsates through the excitement of those matchless songs that begin:

  "Life of life!  thy lips enkindle
   With their love the breath between them."

In the third act the tyrant is triumphing in heaven, when the car of the Hour arrives; Demogorgon
descends from it, and hurls him to the abyss. Prometheus, set free by Hercules, is united again
to Asia.

On the whole, Prometheus has been over-praised, perhaps because the beauty of the interspersed
songs has dazzled the critics. Not only are the personages too transparently allegorical, but
the allegory is insipid; especially tactless is the treatment of the marriage between Prometheus,
the Spirit of Humanity, and Asia, the Spirit of Nature, as a romantic love affair. When, in
the last of his more important poems, Shelley returned to the struggle between the good and
evil principles, it was in a different Spirit. The short drama of 'Hellas' (1821) was "a mere
improvise," the boiling over of his sympathy with the Greeks, who were in revolt against the
Turks. He wove into it, with all possible heightening of poetic imagery, the chief events of
the period of revolution through which southern Europe was then passing, so that it differs
from the Prometheus in having historical facts as ostensible subject. Through it reverberates
the dissolution of kingdoms in feats of arms by land and sea from Persia to Morocco, and these
cataclysms, though suggestive of something that transcends any human warfare, are yet not completely
pinnacled in "the intense inane." His trembling Finger
had a letter with the address of the captain before Wessenig, and there are some other people
joined in, dragged him with considerable trouble to the house of the captain. There he fell exhausted
on the steps and through the torn boots leaked blood.

The captain was the first home at the twilight hour, and his wife told him that a starved and
halbvertierter boy asleep on the straw in the barn, while she handed him the letter, which the
captain, after he vomited the seal, with the greatest surprise read through a few times, it
was a document, just as humorous in some respects, as in other cruel
clarity.
The sultan, too, feels that Islam is doomed, and, as messenger after messenger announces the
success of the rebels, his fatalism expresses itself as the growing perception that all this
blood and all these tears are but phantoms that come and go, bubbles on the sea of eternity.
This again is the purport of the talk of Ahasuerus, the Wandering Jew, who evokes for him a
vision of Mahmud II capturing Constantinople. Ever louder and more confident sounds this note,
until it drowns even the cries of victory when the tide of battle turns in favour of the Turks.
The chorus, lamenting antiphonally the destruction of liberty, are interrupted by repeated
howls of savage triumph: "Kill! crush! despoil! Let not a Greek escape'"

Breezy confidence has given place to a poignant mood of disillusionment. The military analyzed the questions
the officer asked the boy and determined to bring Mr. Wessenig to the interrogation room.


It is curious that for three of his more considerable works Shelley should have chosen the
form of drama, since the last thing one would say of him is that he had the dramatic talent.
'Prometheus' and 'Hellas', however, are dramas only in name; there is no thought in them of
scenic representation. 'The Cenci' (1819), on the other hand, is a real play; in writing it
he had the stage in view, and even a particular actress, Miss O'Neil. It thus stands alone
among his works, unless we put beside it the fragment of a projected play about Charles I (1822),
a theme which, with its crowd of historical figures, was ill-suited to his powers. And not
only is 'The Cenci' a play; it is the most successful attempt since the seventeenth century
at a kind of writing, tragedy in the grand style, over which all our poets, from Addison to
Swinburne, have more or less come to grief. Its subject is the fate of Beatrice Cenci, the
daughter of a noble Roman house, who in 1599 was executed with her stepmother and brother for
the murder of her father. The wicked father, more intensely wicked for his grey hairs and his
immense ability, whose wealth had purchased from the Pope impunity for a long succession of
crimes, hated his children, and drove them to frenzy by his relentless cruelty. When to insults
and oppression he added the horrors of an incestuous passion for his daughter, the cup overflowed,
and Beatrice, faced with shame more intolerable than death, preferred parricide. Here was a
subject made to Shelley's hand--a naturally pure and gentle soul soiled, driven to violence,
and finally extinguished, by unnameable wrong, while all authority, both human and divine,
is on the side of the persecutor. Haunted by the grave, sad eyes of Guido Reni's picture of
Beatrice, so that the very streets of Rome seemed to echo her name--though it was only old
women calling out "rags" ('cenci')--he was tempted from his airy flights to throw himself for
once into the portrayal of reality. There was no need now to dip "his pen in earthquake and
eclipse"; clothed in plain and natural language, the action unfolded itself in a crescendo
of horror; but from the ease with which he wrote--it cost him relatively the least time and
pains of all his works--it would be rash to infer that he could have constructed an equally
good tragedy on any other subject than the injured Beatrice and the combination, which Count
Francesco Cenci is, of paternal power with the extreme limit of human iniquity.

