This is all very true. None knows better the value of money than Rome; but she knows, too,
the infinite hazard of acquiring it in the way of allowing trade and industry to enter the
Papal States. Indeed, to do so would be to record sentence of banishment against herself. Every
one must have remarked the difference betwixt the artizan of Birmingham and the peasant of
Ireland. They seem to belong to two different races of men almost. The former is employed in
making a certain piece of mechanism, or in superintending its working. He is compelled to calculate,
to trace effects to their causes, and to study the relations of the various parts before him
to the whole. In short, he is taught to think; and that thinking power he applies to all other
subjects. His habits of life teach him to ask for reasons, and to accept of opinions only on
evidence. The mind of the latter lies dead. Were Italy filled with a race of men like the first,
the papacy could not live a day. Were trade, and machinery, and wealth to come in, the torpor
of Italy would be broken up; and--terrible event to the papacy!--mind would awaken. What though
the Pope reigns over a wasted land and a nation of beggars? he does reign; he counts for a
European sovereign; and his system continues to exist as a power. As men in shipwreck throw
overboard food, jewels, all, to save life, so Romanism has thrown all overboard to save itself.
Nothing could be a stronger proof of this than the fact that, as the effects and benefits of
trade become the more developed, the pontifical Government tightens its restrictions. The note
of Antonelli, the present ruling spirit of the papacy, was the most prohibitive ever framed
against the introduction of iron, in other words, of civilization. This is the price which
Italy must pay for the Pope and his religion. She cannot participate in the advantages of foreign
trade; she cannot enjoy the facilities and improvements of modern times; because, were she
to enjoy these, she would lose the papacy. She must be content to remain in the barbarism of
the middle ages, covered with that moral malaria which has smitten all things in that doomed
land, and under the influence of which, the cities, the earth itself, and man, for whom it
was made, are all sinking into one common ruin.[3]

We have yet other illustrations of the pestiferous influence of Romanism on the temporal happiness
of its subjects. We have already alluded to the determined manner in which the Pontifical Government
has hitherto withstood the introduction of railways. And yet, if there be a country in Europe
where railways are indispensable, it is the Papal States. The roads in the territory blessed
by the Government of Christ's vicar, are more like canals than roads, with this difference,
that there is too little water in them for floating a boat, and far too much for comfortable
travelling. Besides, they are infested by brigands, whose pursuit a railway might enable you
to distance. But a railway the subjects of the Pontifical Government cannot have. And why?

One would think that the mere mode of conveyance is a very harmless affair. What is it to the
Pontifical Government whether the peasant of the Alban hills, or the citizen of Bologna, or
the merchant of Ancona, visit Rome on foot, or in his waggon, or by rail? Is he not the same
man? Will his ride convert him into a heretic, or shake his faith in Peter's successor? or
will the laying down of a few miles of railroad weaken the foundations of that Church which
boasts that she is founded on a rock, and that the gates of hell themselves shall not prevail
against her? Or if it be said that it is not the mode of the journey, but the length of the
journey, what difference can it make whether the man travel twenty miles or two hundred miles?
The stability of the Church cannot be seriously endangered by a few miles less or more. Is
the Pope's system of so peculiar a kind, that though it is possible for the man who walks twenty
miles on foot to believe in it, it is wholly impossible for the man who rides two hundred miles
by rail to do so? We know of no Roman doctor who has attempted to fix the precise number of
miles which a good Catholic may travel from home without endangering his salvation. One would
think that all this is plain enough; that there is no element of danger here; and yet the sharper
instincts of the papacy have discovered that herein lies danger, and great danger, to its power.
If the influence of Rome is to be preserved, it is not enough that the Bible be put out of
existence, that the missionary be banished, and that the art of printing, and all means of
diffusing ideas, be proscribed and exterminated: the very right of moving over the earth must
be taken from man. Even motion must be placed under anathema.

We have a saying that knowledge is power. I would say that motion is liberty. The serfdom of
the middle ages was in good degree maintained by binding man to the soil. Astriction to the
soil was at once the foundation and the symbol of that serfdom. The baron became the master
of the body of the man; he became also the master of his mental ideas. But when the serf acquired
the power of locomotion, he laid the foundation of his emancipation; and from that hour feudalism
began to crumble. As the serfs' power of motion enlarged, their liberty enlarged. As formerly
they had known slavery by its symbol immovability, so now they tasted freedom by its symbol
motion. The serf travelled beyond the valley in which he was born; he saw new objects; he met
his fellow-men; and learned to think. At last motion was perfected; the steam-engine hissed
past him, and he felt that now he was completely unchained. I do not give this as a theory
of the rise and progress of modern liberty; but unquestionably there is a close and intimate
connection between motion and liberty.

The Popes are shrewd enough to see this connection; and herein lies their opposition to railroads.
They have attempted, and still do attempt, to perpetuate papal serfdom, by tying their subjects
to their paternal acres and their native town. Were my reader living in London or in Edinburgh,
and wished to visit Chelsea or Portobello, how would he proceed? Go to the railway station
and buy a ticket, and his journey is made. But were the country under the Pontifical Government,
he would find it impossible to manage the matter quite so expeditiously. He must first present
himself at the office of the prefect of police. He must state where he wishes to go to; what
business he has there; how long he intends remaining. He must give his name, his age, his residence,
and a certificate, if required, from his parish priest; and then, should the object of his
journey be approved of, a description of his person will be taken down, a passport will be
made out, for which he must pay some six or eight pauls; and after this process has been gone
through, but not sooner, he may set out on his little journey. Very few of those who live in
Rome were ever more than outside its walls. Even the nobles have the utmost difficulty in getting
so far as Civita Vecchia; very few of them ever saw the sea. The Popes know that ideas as well
as merchandise travel by rail; and that if the Romans are allowed to go from home, and to see
new objects, new faces, and to hear new ideas, a process will be commenced which will ultimately,
and at no distant day, undermine the papacy. But among men of ordinary intelligence there will
be but one opinion regarding a system that sees an enemy not only in the Bible, but in the
most necessary and useful arts,--in the steam-ship, in the railroad, in the electric telegraph;
in short, in all the improvements and usages of civilized life. Such a system assuredly has
perdition written upon its forehead.

The late Pope Gregory XVI. would not allow even an iron bridge to be thrown across the Tiber.
The Romans solicited this, to get rid of a ferry-boat by which the Tiber is crossed at the
point in question; but no; an iron bridge there could not be. And why? Ah, said Gregory, if
we have an iron bridge in Rome, we shall next have an iron road; and if we have an iron road,
"adio," the papacy will take its departure, and that by steam.

But the Pope had another reason for withholding his sanction from the iron bridge; and as that
reason shows how some wretched crotchet, springing from their miserable system, is sure to
start up on all occasions, and defeat the most needed improvement, I shall here state what
it was. At the point where it was wished to have the bridge erected, the Tiber flows between
two populous regions of the city. There is in consequence a considerable concourse, and the
passengers are carried over, as I have said, in a ferry-boat, for which a couple of baiocchi
is paid by each person to the ferryman. The money thus collected forms part of the revenues
of a certain church in Rome, where the priests who receive it sing masses for the souls in
purgatory. If you abolish the ferry-boat, it was argued, you will abolish the penny; and if
you abolish the penny, what is to become of the poor souls in purgatory? and for the sake of
the souls, the living were forced to do without the bridge.

I need scarcely say that there is no gas in Rome. And sure I am, if there be a dark spot in
all the universe,--a place above all others needing light of all kinds, moral, mental, and
physical,--it is this dark dungeon termed Rome. It has a few oil-lamps, swung on cords, at
most respectable distances from one another; and you see their hazy, sickly, dying gleam far
above you, making themselves visible, but nothing besides; and after sunset, Rome is plunged
in darkness, affording ample opportunity for assassinations, robberies, and evil deeds of all
kinds. I know not how many companies have been formed to light Rome with gas. An attempt was
made to light in this way the Eternal City during the pontificate of Gregory XVI. A deputation
went to the Vatican, and told the Pope that they would light his capital with gas. "Gas!" exclaimed
Gregory, who had an owl-like dread of light of all kinds; "there shan't be gas in Rome while
I am in Rome." Gregory is not in Rome now; Pio Nono is in the Vatican: but the same oil-lamps
which lighted the Rome of Gregory XVI. still flourish in the Rome of Pio Nono.[4]

All have heard of the Pontine Marshes,--a chain of swamps which run along the foot of the Volscian
Mountains, and are the birthplace of the malaria,--a white vapour, which creeps snake-like
over the country, and smites with deadly fever whoever is so foolhardy as to sleep on the Campagna
during its continuance. These marshes, I understand, are increasing; and the malaria is increasing
in consequence. That fatal vapour now comes every summer to the gates of Rome: it covers a
certain quarter of the city, which, I was told, is uninhabitable during its continuance; and
if nothing be done to lessen the malaria at its source, it will, some century or half century
after this, envelope in its pestilential folds the whole of the Eternal City, and the traveller
will gaze with awe on the blackened ruins of Rome, as he does on those of Babylon on the plain
of Chaldea: so, I say, will he see the heaps of Rome on the wasted bosom of the Campagna deserted
by man, and become the dwelling-place of the dragons and satyrs of the wilderness. But matters
are not come to this yet. An English company (for every attempted improvement in Rome has originated
with English skill and capital) was formed some years ago, to drain the Pontine Marshes. They
went to the Vatican; and Sir Humphrey Davy being then in Rome, they induced him to accompany
them, in the hope that his high scientific authority would have some weight with the Pontiff.
They stated their object, which was to drain the Pontine Marshes. They assured the Pontiff
it was practicable to a very large extent; and they pointed out its manifold advantages, as
regarded the health of the country, and other things. "Drain the Pontine Marshes!" exclaimed
Pope Gregory, in a tone of surprise and horror at this new project of these everlastingly scheming
English heretics,--"Drain the Pontine Marshes! God made the Pontine Marshes; and if He had
intended them to be drained, He would have drained them himself."

The barrenness that afflicts all countries which are the seat of a false religion is a public
testimony of the Divine indignation against idolatry. For the sin of man the earth was originally
cursed: and wherever wicked systems exist, there a manifest curse rests upon the earth. The
Mohammedan apostacy and the Roman apostacy are now seated in the midst of wildernesses. And,
to make the fact more striking, these lands, which are deserts now, were anciently the best
cultivated on the globe. There stood the proudest of earth's cities,--there the arts flourished,--and
there men were free after the measure of ancient freedom. All this is at an end long since.
Ruins, silence, and a sickly and sinking population, are the mournful spectacles which greet
the eye of the traveller in Papal and Mohammedan countries. Thus God bears outward testimony
against the Papal and Mohammedan systems. He has cursed the ground for their sakes; not in
the way of miracle,--not by sending an angel to smite it, or by raining brimstone upon it,
as he did on Sodom: the angel that has smitten the dominions of the Pope and of the False Prophet,--the
brimstone and fire which have been rained upon them,--are the wicked systems which have there
grown up, and by which Government has been rendered blind, infatuated, and tyrannical, and
man stupid, indolent, and vicious. But the laws the Almighty has established, according to
which idolatry necessarily and uniformly blights the earth and the men who live upon it, only
show that his indignation against these evil systems is unchangeable and eternal, and will
pursue them till they perish. Of this the state of the plain around Rome, the Agro Romano,
forms a terrible example.

I have endeavoured in former chapters to exhibit a picture of the frightful desolation of this
once magnificent plain. He that set his mark on the brow of the first murderer has set his
mark on this plain, where so much blood has been shed. But God has cursed this plain through
the instrumentality of this evil system the Papacy, and I shall show you how.

I have already shown that there is not, and cannot be, anything like trade in Rome, beyond
what is necessary to repair the consumpt of articles in daily use. In the absence of trade
there is a proportionate amount of idleness; and that idleness, in its turn, breeds beggary,
vagabondism, and crime. The French Prefect, Mr Whiteside tells us, published a statistical
account of Rome; and how many paupers does he say there are in it? Why, not fewer than thirty
thousand. Thirty thousand paupers in one city, and that city, in its usual state, of but about
a hundred and twenty thousand inhabitants! Subtract the priests, the English residents, and
the French soldiers, and every third man is a beggar. I was fortunate enough one evening to
meet, in a certain shop in Rome, an intelligent Roman, willing to talk with me on the state
of the country. The shopkeeper, as soon as he found the turn the conversation had taken, discreetly
stepped out, and left it all to ourselves. "I never in all my life," I remarked, "saw a city
in which I found so many beggars. The people seem to have nothing to do, and nothing to eat.
There are here some hundred thousand of you cooped up within these old walls, and one half
the population do nothing all day long but whine at the heels of English travellers, or hang
on at the doors of the convents, waiting their one meal a-day. Why is this? Outside the walls
is a magnificent plain, which, were it cultivated, would feed ten Romes, instead of one. Why
don't you take picks, or spades, or ploughs,--anything you can lay hands on,--and go out to
that plain, and dig it, and plant it, and sow it, and reap it, and eat and drink, and be merry?"
"Ah! so we would," said he. "Then, why don't you?" "We dare not," he replied. "Dare not! Dare
not till the earth God has given you?" "It is the Church's," he said. "But come now," said
he, "and I will explain how it comes to be so." He went on to say, that one portion of the
Campagna was gifted to the convents in Rome, another portion was gifted to the nunneries, another
to the hospitals, and another to the pontifical families,--that is, to the sons and daughters,
or, as they more politely speak in Rome, the nephews and nieces, of the Popes. These were the
owners of the great Roman plain; and in their hands almost every acre of it was locked up,
inaccessible to the plough, and inaccessible to the people. Even in our country it is found
that corporations make the worst possible landlords, and that lands in the possession of such
bodies are always less productive than estates managed in the ordinary way. But what sort of
farming are we to expect from such corporations as we find in the city of Rome? What skill
or capital have a brotherhood of lazy monks, to enable them to cultivate their lands? What
enterprise or interest have a sisterhood of nuns to farm their property? They know they shall
have their lifetime of it, and that is all they care for. Accordingly, they let their lands
for grazing, on payment of a mere trifle of annual rent; and so the Campagna lies unploughed
and unsown. A tract of land extending from Civita Vecchia to well nigh the gates of Rome,--which
would make a Scotch dukedom or a German principality,--belonging to the San Spirito, does little
more, I was told, than pay its working. The land labours under an eternal entail, which binds
it over to perpetual sterility. It is God's, i.e. it is the Church's; and no one,--no, not
even the Pope,--dare alienate a single acre of it. No Pope would set his face to such a piece
of reformation, well knowing that every brotherhood and sisterhood in Rome would rise in arms
against him. And even though he should screw his courage to such an encounter, he is met by
the canon law. The Pope who shall dare to secularize a foot-breadth of land which has been
gifted to the Church is by that law accursed. Here, then, is the price which the Romans pay
for the Papacy. Outside the walls of the city lie the estates of the Church, depastured at
certain seasons by a few herds, tended by men clad in skins, and looking as savage as the animals
they tend; while inside the walls are some hundred thousand Romans, enduring from one year's
end to another all the miseries of a partial famine. Nor is there the least hope that matters
will mend so long as the Papacy lasts. For while the Papacy is in Italy, the Campagna, once
so populous and rich, will be what it now is,--a desert.

And the Papal States, lapsed into more than primeval sterility, overrun by brigandage and beggary,
are the picture of what Britain would be under the Papacy. Let the Roman Church get the upper
hand in this country, and, be assured, the first thing it will do will be to demand back every
acre of land that once belonged to it. Before the Reformation, half the lands of England, and
a third of the lands of Scotland, were in the possession of the Church. She keeps a chart of
them to this hour: she knows every foot-breadth of British soil that at any time belonged to
her: she holds its present possessors to be robbers and sacrilegious men; and the first moment
she has the power, she will compel them to disgorge what she holds to be ill-gotten wealth,
and endow her with the broad acres she once possessed. Nor will she stop here. By haunting
death-beds,--by putting in motion the machinery of the confessional,--by the threat of purgatory
in this case, and the lure of paradise in that,--she will speedily add to her former ample
domain. And what will our country then become? We shall have Mother Church for landlord; and
while she feasts daily at her sumptuous board, we shall have what the Romans now have,--the
crumbs. We shall have monks and nuns for our farmers; and under their management, farewell
to the smiling fields, the golden harvests, and the opulent cities, of Scotland and England.
Our country will again become what it was before the Reformation,--a land of moors, and swamps,
and forests, with a few patches of indifferent cultivation around our convents and abbacies.
Vagabondism, lay and sacerdotal, will flourish once more in Britain; trade and commerce will
be put down, as savouring of independence and intelligence; indolence and beggary will be sanctified;
and troops of friars, with wallets on their backs, impudence on their brows, and profanity
and filthiness on their tongues, will scour the country, demanding that every threshold and
every purse shall be open to them. This result will come as surely as to-morrow will come,
provided we permit the Papacy to raise its head once more among us.

Let no one imagine that this terrible wreck of man, and of all his interests,--of civilization,
of industry, of trade and commerce,--has happened of chance, and that there is no connection
between this deplorable state of matters and the system which has prevailed in Italy. On the
contrary, it is the direct, the necessary, and the uniform result of that system. The barbarian
hates art because he does not understand its uses, and dreads its power. But the hatred the
Pope bears to the useful arts is not that of the barbarian. It is the intelligent, the consistent
hatred of a man who knows what he is about. It is the hatred of a man who comprehends both
the character of his own system, and the tendency of modern improvements, and who sees right
well, that if these improvements are introduced, the Papacy must fall. Self-preservation is
the first law of systems, as of individuals; and the Papacy, feeling the antagonism between
itself and these things, ever has and ever will resist them. It cannot tolerate them though
it would. Speculatists and sentimentalists may talk as they please; but the destruction of
that system is the first requisite to the regeneration of Italy.

Such, then, is the condition of Italy at this day. Were we to find a state of things like this
in the centre of Africa, or in some barbarous region thousands and thousands of miles away
from European literature, arts, and influences, where the plough and the loom had yet to be
invented, it would by no means surprise us. But to find a state of matters like this in the
centre of Europe,--in Italy, once the head of civilization and influence, the birthplace of
modern art and letters,--is certainly wonderful. But the wonder is completed when we reflect
that this state of things obtains under a Government claiming to be guided by a higher than
mortal sagacity,--a Government which says that it never did, and never can, err,--a Government
that is supernatural and infallible. Supernatural and infallible! Why, I say, go out into the
street,--stop the first old woman you meet,--carry her to Rome,--put a three-storied cap on
her head,--enthrone her on the high altar in St Peter's,--burn incense before her, and call
her infallible,--I say that old woman will be a more enlightened ruler that Pio Nono. The old
Scotch woman or English woman would beat the old Roman woman hollow.

The facts I have stated are sad enough; but the more harrowing picture of the working of the
papal system has yet to be shown.

CHAPTER XXVI.

JUSTICE AND LIBERTY IN THE PAPAL STATES.

     Justice the Pillar of the State--Claim implied in being God's
     Vicar, namely, that the Pope governs the World as God would govern
     it, were He personally present in it--No Civil Code in the Papal
     States--Citizens have no Rights save as Church Members--No Lay
     Judges--The Pontifical Government simply the Embodiment of the
     Papacy--Courts of Justice visited--Papal Tribunals--The
     Rota--Signatura--Cassation--Exceptional Tribunals--Apostolical
     Chamber--House of Peter--Justice bought and sold at Rome--POLITICAL
     JUSTICE--Gregorian Code--Case of Pietro Leoni--Accession of Pius
     IX.--His Popularity at first--Re-action--Case of Colonel
     Calendrelli--The Three Citizens of Macarata--The Hundred Young Men
     of Faenza--Butchery at Sinigaglia--Horrible Executions at
     Ancona--Estimated Number of Political Prisoners 30,000--Pope's
     Prisons described--Horrible Treatment of Prisoners--The Sbirri--The
     Spies--Domiciliary Restraint--Expulsions from Rome--Imprisonment
     without reason assigned--Manner in which Apprehensions are
     made--Condemnations without Evidence or Trial--Misery of Rome--The
     Pope's Jubilee.

We turn now to the JUSTICE of the Papal States. Alas! if in the preceding chapters on Trade
we were discoursing on what does not exist, we are now emphatically to speak of what is but
a shadow, a mockery. To say that in the Papal States Justice is not,--that it is a negation,--is
only to state half the truth. Were that all, thankful indeed would the Romans be. But, alas!
in the seat of Justice there sits a stern, irresponsible, lawless power, before which virtue
is confounded and dumb, and wickedness only can stand erect.

On the importance of justice to the welfare of society I need not enlarge. It is the main pillar
of the State. But where are you to look for justice,--justice in its unmixed, eternal purity,--if
not at Rome? Rome is the seat of the Vicar of God. Ponder, I pray you, all that this title
imports. The Vicar of God is just God on earth; and the government of God's Vicar is just the
government of God. It is the possession and exercise of the same authority, the same attributes,
the same moral infallibility, and the same moral omnipotence, in the government of mankind,
which God possesses and exercises in the government of the universe. The government of the
Pope is a model set up on the earth, before kings and nations, of God's righteous and holy
government in the heavens. As I, the Vicar of Christ, govern men, so would Christ himself,
were he here in the Vatican, govern them. If the claim advanced by the Pope, when he takes
to himself the title of God's Vicar, amounts to anything, it amounts to this,--to all this,
and nothing less than this.

The case being so, where, I ask, are you entitled to look for justice, if not at Rome? This
is her throne: here she sits, or should, according to the theory of the popedom, high above
the disturbing and blinding passions of earth, serenely calm and inexorably true, weighing
all actions in her awful scales, and giving forth those solemn awards which find their response
in the universal reason and conscience of mankind. If so, what mean these dungeons? Why these
trials shrouded in secrecy? Why this clanking of chains, and that cry which has gone up to
heaven, and which pleads for justice there? Come near, I pray you, and look at the Pope's justice;
enter his tribunals, and see the working of his courts; listen to the evidence which is there
received, and the sentences which are there pronounced; visit his dungeons and galleys; and
then tell me what you think of the administration of this man who styles himself God's Vicar.

Let me first of all give prominence to the fact that in the Papal States there is no civil
code. It is a purely spiritually governed region. The Church sustains herself as judge in all
causes, and holds her law as sufficiently comprehensive in its principles, and sufficiently
flexible and practical in its special provisions, to determine all questions that can arise,
of whatever nature,--whether relating to the body or the soul of man, to his property or his
conscience. By what is strictly and purely church law are all things here adjudicated, for
other law there is none. That law is the decretals and bulls of the popes. Only think of such
a code! The Roman jurisprudence amounts to many hundreds of volumes, and its precedents range
over many centuries, so that the most plodding lawyer and the most industrious judge may well
despair of ever being able to tell exactly what the law says on any particular case, or of
being able to find a clue to the true interpretation, granting that he sincerely wishes to
do so, through the inextricable labyrinth of decisions by which he is to be guided. This law
was made by the Church and for the Church, and gives to the citizen, as such, no right or privilege
of any kind. Whatever rights the Roman possesses, he possesses solely in his character of Church
member; he has a right to absolution when he confesses; a right to the undisturbed possession
of his goods when he takes the sacrament; but he has no rights in his character of citizen;
and when he falls out of communion with the Church, he falls at the same time from all rights
whatever. He is beyond the pale of the Church, and beyond the pale of the law. Our freethinkers,
who are so ready to fraternise with the Romanists, would do well to consider how they would
like this sort of regimen.

Let me, in the second place, give prominence to the fact, that in the Papal States there are
no lay judges. There all are "anointed prelates." This applies to all the tribunals, from the
highest to the lowest. In short, the whole machinery of the Government is priestly. Its head
is a priest,--the Pope; its Prime Minister is a priest; its Chancellor of the Exchequer is
a priest; its Secretary at War is a priest; all are priests. These functionaries cannot be
impeached. However gross their blunders, or glaring their malversations, they are secure from
censure; because to punish them would be to say that they had erred, and to say that they had
erred would be to impeach the infallibility of the Pontifical Government. A treasurer who enriches
himself and robs the exchequer may be promoted to the cardinalate, but cannot be censured.
The highest mark of displeasure on which the popes have ventured in such cases has been, to
appoint to a dignity with a very inadequate salary. The Government of the Papal States, both
in its law and in its administration, being strictly sacerdotal, the great fairness of the
test we are now applying to the Papacy is undeniable. It would be very unfair to try the religion
of Britain by the government of Britain, or to charge on Christianity the errors, the injustice,
and the oppression which our rulers may commit, because our religion is one thing, and our
Government is another. But it is not so in the Papal States. There the Church is the Government.
The papal Government is simply the embodiment of the papal religion. And I cannot conceive
a fairer, a more accurate, or a more comprehensive test of the genius and tendency of a religion,
than simply the condition of that country where the making of the law, the administration of
the law, the control of all persons, the regulation of all affairs, and the adjudication of
all questions, are done by that religion; and where, with no one impediment to obstruct it,
and with every conceivable advantage to aid it, it can exhibit all its principles and accomplish
all its objects. If that religion be true, the condition of such country ought to be the most
blessed on the face of the earth.

One day I visited the courts of justice, which are on Mount Citorio. We ascended a spacious
staircase (I say we, for Mr Stewart, the intelligent and obliging companion of my wanderings
in Rome, was with me), and entered a hall crowded with a number of shabby-looking people. We
turned off into a side-room, not larger than one's library, where the court was sitting. Behind
a table slightly raised, and covered with green cloth, sat two priests as judges. A counsel
sat with them, to assist occasionally. On the wall at their back hung a painting of Pont. Max.
Pius IX.; and on the table stood a crucifix. The judges wore the round cap of the Jesuits.
I saw men in coarse bombazeen gowns, which I took for macers: these, I soon discovered, were
the advocates. They were clownish-looking men, with great lumpish hands, and an unmistakeably
cowed look. They addressed the court in short occasional speeches in Latin; for it is one of
the privileges of the Roman people to have their suits argued in a tongue they don't understand.
There were some half-dozen people lounging in the place. There was an air of unconcern and
meanness on the court, and all its practitioners and attendants; but, being infallible, it
can dispense with the appearance of dignity. I asked Mr Stewart to conduct me to the criminal
court, which was sitting in another apartment under the same roof. He showed me the door within
which the assize is held, but told me at the same time, that neither myself nor any one in
Rome could cross that threshold,--the judge, the prisoner, his advocate, the public prosecutor,
and the guard, being the only exceptions. Let me now describe the machinery by which justice,
as it is called, is administered.

The judges, I have said, are prelates; and as in Rome the administration of justice is a low
occupation compared with the Church, priests which are incapable, or which have sinned against
their order, are placed on the tribunals. A prelate who has a knowledge of jurisprudence is
a phenomenon; hence the judges do not themselves examine the merits of causes, but cause them
to be investigated by a private auditor, whom they select from the practising counsel. According
to the report of this individual, the members of the tribunal pronounce their judgment, no
matter what objections may be pled, or arguments offered, to the contrary. This system gives
rise, as may well be conceived, to innumerable acts of partiality and injustice.

There is a tribunal of appeal for the Romagnias, another for the Marshes, and a third for the
Capitol. Besides these, there are tribunals of the third class throughout the States. The tribunal
of appeal for the Capitol is the ROMAN ROTA. Before this court our own Henry, and the other
kings of Europe, carried their causes, in those days when the Pope was really a grand authority,
and ruled Christendom. Having now little business as regards monarchs and the international
quarrels of kingdoms, it has been converted into a tribunal for private suits. It still shrouds
itself in its mediæval secresy, which, if it robs its decisions of public confidence, at least
screens the ignorance of its judges from public contempt. There are, besides, the tribunals
of the Signatura and of Cassation, in which partiality examines, incompetence pronounces judgment,
delays exhaust the patience and the money of the suitors, and the decent veil of a dead language
wraps up the illegality.

Besides these, there are the exceptional tribunals, which are very numerous. Among them the
chief is the ecclesiastical jurisdiction, so extensive, that it is sufficient that some very
trifling interest of a priest, or of some charity fund, or even of a Jew or a recent convert,
is concerned, to transfer the cause to the bar of the privileged tribunal. The jurisdiction
of the exceptional tribunal is exercised in the provinces by the vicar-general of the bishop;
and in Rome the suits are laid before the private auditors of the cardinal-vicar, and of the
bishop in partibus, his assistant. The auditors pronounce judgment in the name of the cardinal
or the bishop, who signs it without any examination on his part. The suits which concern the
public finances are decided by the exceptional tribunal, and a tribunal called the "Plena Camera"
(full chamber); and any private person who might chance to gain his cause is condemned, as
an invariable maxim, to pay the costs. Exceptional tribunals are to be found in very many parochial
places, especially in those parishes near Rome where the judges are named by, and are removable
at the will of, the baron. It can easily be imagined what sort of a chance any one may have
who should have a suit with the baron. Besides all these, we must not omit the Reverend Apostolical
Chamber, always on the brink of bankruptcy, which has been in the habit of exacting contributions,
that they may sell to speculators the revenues of succeeding years. Thus private families,
invested with iniquitous privileges, extort money from the unfortunate labourers, by royal
authority and the help of the bailiff.

There is another tribunal which should be styled monstrous, rather than by the milder term
of exceptional; this is the "Fabbrica di S. Petro" (house of St Peter.) To this was granted,
by the caprice of the Pope, the right to claim from the immediate or distant heirs of any testator,
even at remote epochs, the sum of unpaid legacies for pious purposes. The Cardinal Arch-Priest
and the Commons, who represent the pretended creditor, are judges between themselves and the
presumed debtor. They search the archives; they open and they close testamentary documents
not ever published; they arbitrarily burden the estates of the citizens with mortgages or charges;
and they commence their proceedings where other tribunals leave off,--that is, by an execution
and seizure, under the pretence of securing the credits not yet determined upon. To the commissaries
of this strange tribunal in the provinces is awarded the fifth of the sum claimed. Whosoever
desires to settle the question by a compromise is not permitted to attempt it, unless he shall
first have satisfied this fifth, and paid the expenses, besides the fees of the fiscal advocate.
If any one should have the rare luck to gain his suit, as, for instance, by producing the receipt
in full, he must nevertheless pay a sum for the judgment absolving him.

The presidents of the tribunals--the minor judges, comprising the private auditors of the Vicar
of Rome--have the power of legitimatizing all contracts for persons affected by legal incapacity.
This is generally done without examination, and merely in consideration of the fee which they
receive. It would take a long chapter to narrate the sums which have been, by a single stroke
of the pen, wrongfully taken from poor widows and orphans. Incapacity for the management of
one's affairs is sometimes pronounced by the tribunal, but very frequently is decreed by the
prelate-auditor of the Pope, without any judicial formality. Thus any citizen may at any moment
find himself deprived of the direction of his private affairs and business.

Such is the machinery employed for dispensing justice by a man who professes to be the infallible
fountain of equity, and the world's teacher as regards the eternal maxims of justice. Justice!
The word is a delusion,--a lie. It is a term which designates a tyranny worse than any under
which the populations of Asia groan.[5]

It would be wearisome to adduce individual cases, even were I able to do so. But, indeed, the
vast corruption of the civil justice of the Papal States must be evident from what I have said.
A law so inextricable!--judges so incompetent, who decide without examining!--tribunals which
sit in darkness! Why, justice is not dispensed in Rome; it is bought and sold; it is simply
a piece of merchandise; and if you wish to obtain it, you cannot, but by going to the market,
where it is openly put up for sale, and buying it with your money. Mr Whiteside, a most competent
witness in this case, who spent two winters in Rome, and made it his special business to investigate
the Roman jurisprudence, both in its theory and in its practice, tells us in effect, in his
able work on Italy, that if you are so unfortunate as to have a suit in the Roman courts, the
decision will have little or no reference to the merits of the cause, but will depend on whether
you or your opponent is willing to approach the judgment-seat with the largest bribe. Such,
in substance, is Mr Whiteside's testimony; and precisely similar was the evidence of every
one whom I met in Rome who had had any dealings with the papal tribunals.

But I turn to the political justice of the Papal States,--a department even more important
in the present state of Italy, and where the specific acts are better known. Let us look first
at the tribunal set up in Rome for the trial of all crimes against the State. And let the reader
bear in mind, that offences against the Church are crimes against the State, for there the
Church is the State. A secret, summary, and atrocious tribunal it is, differing in no essential
particular from that sanguinary tribunal in Paris where Robespierre passed sentence, and the
guillotine executed it. The Gregorian Code[6] enacts, that in cases of sedition or treason,
the trial may take place by a commission nominated by the Pope's Secretary; that the trial
shall be secret; that the prisoner shall not be confronted with the witnesses, or know their
names; that he may be examined in prison and by torture. The accused, according to this barbarous
code, has no means of proving his innocence, or defending his life, beyond the hasty observations
on the evidence which his advocate, who is appointed in all cases by the tribunal, may be able
to make on the spur of the moment. This tribunal is simply the Inquisition; and yet it is by
this tribunal that the Pope, who professes to be the first minister of justice on earth, governs
his kingdom. No man is safe at Rome. However innocent, his liberty and life hang by a single
thread, which the Government, by the help of such a tribunal as this, may snap at any moment.

This is the established, the legal course of papal justice. Let the reader lift his eyes, and
survey, if he have courage, the wide weltering mass of misery and despair which the Papal States
present. We cannot bring all into view; we must permit a few only to speak for the rest. Here
they come from a region of doom, to tell to the free people of Britain, if they will hear them,
the dread secrets of their prison-house; and, we may add, to warn them, "lest they also come
into this place of torment." I shall first of all take a case that occurred before the Revolution,
lest any one should affirm of the cases that are to follow, that the Pontifical Government
had been exascerbated by the insurrection, and hurried into measures of more than usual severity.
This case I give on the authority of Mr Whiteside, who, being curious to see a political process
in the Roman law, after some trouble procured the following, which, having been compiled under
the orders of Pius IX., may be relied on as strictly accurate. Pietro Leoni had acted as official
attorney to the poor. Well, in 1831, under the pontificate of Gregory XVI., he was arrested
on a charge of being a member of a political club. He was brought to trial, acquitted, set
free, but deprived of his office, though why I cannot say, unless it was for the crime of being
innocent. To sustain an aged father, a wife and children, Pietro had to work harder than ever.
In 1836 he was again arrested,--suddenly, without being told for what,--hurried to the Castle
of St Angelo, in the dungeons of which he had to undergo a rigorous examination, from which
nothing could be elicited. He was not released, however, but kept there, till witnesses could
be found or hired. At length a certain vine-dresser came forward to accuse Leoni. One day,
said the vine-dresser, Pietro Leoni, whom he had never seen till then, came to his door, and,
after a short conversation with him, in the presence of his sons, handed him a manuscript relating
to a reform society, of which, he said, he had been a member for years. The vine-dresser buried
this document at the bottom of a tree in his garden. The spot was searched, but nothing was
found; his strange story was contradicted by his wife and sons; and the Pontifical Government
could not for very shame condemn him on such evidence; but neither did they let him go. A full
year passed over him in the dungeons of St Angelo. At last three additional witnesses--(their
names never were known)--were produced against him. And what did they depose? Why, that they
had heard some one say that he had heard Pietro Leoni say, that he (Leoni) was a member of
a secret society; and on this hearsay evidence did the Pontifical Government condemn the poor
attorney to a life-long slavery in the galleys. We find him ten long years thereafter still
in the dungeons of the Castle of St Angelo, and writing the Pope in a strain which one would
think might have moved a heart of stone. The petition is printed in the process. It begins,--

     "Most holy father, divest yourself of the splendours of royalty,
     and, dressed in the garb of a private citizen, cause yourself to be
     conducted into these subterranean prisons, where there is buried,
     not an enemy of his country, not a violator of the laws, but an
     innocent citizen, whom a secret enemy has calumniated, and who has
     had the courage to sustain his innocence in presence of a judge
     prejudiced or corrupted.... Command this living tomb to be opened,
     and ask an unhappy man the cause of his misfortunes."

And concludes thus,--

     "But, holy father, neither the prolonged imprisonment of ten years,
     nor separation from my family, nor the total ruin of my earthly
     prospects, should ever reduce me to the baseness of admitting a
     crime which I did not commit. And I call God to witness that I am
     innocent of the accusation brought against me; and that the true
     cause of my unjust condemnation was, and is, a private pique and
     personal enmity.... Listen, therefore, to justice,--to the humble
     entreaties of an aged father,--a desolate wife,--unhappy
     children,--who exist in misery, and who with tears of anguish
     implore your mercy."

Did the heart of Gregory relent? Did he hasten to the prison, and beg his prisoner to come
forth? Ah, no: the petition was received, flung aside, and forgotten; and Pietro Leoni continued
to lie in the dungeons of St Angelo till death came to the Vatican, and Gregory went to his
account, and the prison-doors of St Angelo were opened, as a matter of course, not of right,
on the accession of a new Pope. No wonder that Lambruschini and Marini, the chief actors in
the atrocities committed under Gregory, resisted that amnesty by which Pietro Leoni, and hundreds
more, were raised from the grave, as it were, to proclaim their villanies. I give this case
because it occurred before the Revolution, and is a fair sample, as a Roman advocate assured
Mr Whiteside, of the calm, every-day working of the Pontifical Government under Gregory XVI.
I come now to relate other cases, if possible more affecting, which came under my own cognizance,
more or less, while in Rome.

But let me first glance at the rejoicings that filled Rome on the accession of Pius IX. A bright
but perfidious gleam heralded the night, which has since settled down so darkly on the Papal
States. The scene I describe in the words of Mr Stewart, who was an eye-witness of it:--"I
was at Rome when Pope Pius IX. made his formal triumphal entrance into the city by the Porta
del Popolo, where was a magnificent arch entering to the Corso. The arch was erected specially
for the occasion, and executed with much artistic skill. Banners were waving in profusion along
the Corso, bearing, some of them, very far-fetched epithets; while every balcony and window
was studded with gay and admiring citizens, all alike eager in demonstrating their attachment
to the Holy Father. Nothing, in fact, could exceed the gaiety of the scene: all and sundry
seemed bent on the one idea of displaying their loyalty. What with garlands of flowers, white
handkerchiefs, and vivas, the feelings were worked up to such a pitch, that the young nobles,
when the state carriage arrived at the Piazza Colonna, actually unyoked the horses, and scampered
off with carriage and Pope, to the Quirinal Palace, nearly a mile. This ebullition of feeling
was undoubtedly the result of the general amnesty, and the bright expectations then cherished
of a new era for Italy." Such an ebullition may appear absurd, and even childish, to us, who
have been so long accustomed to liberty; but we must bear in mind that the Romans had groaned
in fetters for centuries, and these, as they believed, had now been struck off for ever. "Was
there," asked Mr Whiteside of a sculptor in Rome, "really affecting yourself, any practical
oppression under old Gregory?" The artist started. "No man," said he, "could count on one hour's
security or happiness: I knew not but there might be a spy behind that block of marble: the
pleasure of life was spoiled. I had three friends, who, supping in a garden near this spot,
were suddenly arrested, flung into prison, and lay there, though innocent, till released by
Pio Nono." As regards the amnesty of Pio Nono, which so intoxicated the Romans, it is common
for popes to make political capital of the errors and crimes of their predecessors; and as
regards his reforming policy, which deluded others besides the Italians, it was a very transparent
dodge to restore the papacy to its old supremacy. The Cobra di Capella relaxed its folds on
Italy for a moment, to coil itself more firmly round the rest of the world. Of this none are
now better aware than the Romans.

The re-action,--the flight,--the Republic,--the bombardment,--the return to the Vatican on
a path deluged with his subjects' blood,--all I pass over. But how shall I describe or group
the horrors that have darkened and desolated the Papal States from that hour to this? What
has their history been since, but one terrible tale of apprehensions, proscriptions, banishments,
imprisonments, and executions, the full recital of which would make the ear of him that hears
it to tingle? Nero and Caligula were monsters of crime; but their capricious tyranny, while
it fell heavily on individuals, left the great body of the empire comparatively untouched.
But the tyranny of the Pope penetrates every home, and crushes every person and thing. There
was not under Nero a tenth part of the misery in Rome which there is now. Were the acts of
Nero and of Pio to be fully written, I have not a doubt,--I am certain,--that the government
of the imperial despot would be seen to be liberty itself, compared with the measureless, remorseless,
inappeasable, wide-wasting tyranny of the sacerdotal one. The diadem was light indeed, compared
with the tiara. The little finger of the Popes is thicker than the loins of the Cæsars. The
sights I saw, and the facts I heard, actually poisoned my enjoyment of Rome. What pleasure
could I take in statues and monuments, when I saw the wretched beings that lived beside them,
and marked the faces on which despair was painted, the forms that grief had bowed to the very
dust, the dead men who wandered in the streets and about the old ruins, as if they sought,
but could not find, their graves? Ah! there is not, there never was, on earth a tyranny like
the Papacy. But let me come to particulars.

I shall first narrate the story of Colonel Calendrelli. It was told me by our own consul in
Rome, Mr Freeborn, who knew intimately the colonel, and deeply interested himself in his case.
Colonel Calendrelli was treasurer at war during the Republic. The Republic came to an end;
the Pontifical Government returned; and Colonel Calendrelli, being unable to get away along
with the other agents and friends of the Republic, was, of course, apprehended by the restored
Government. It was necessary to find some pretext on which to condemn the colonel; and what,
does the reader think, was the charge preferred against Colonel Calendrelli? Why, it was this,
that the colonel had embezzled the public funds to the amount of twenty scudi. Twenty scudi!
How much is that? Only five pounds sterling! That Colonel Calendrelli, a gentleman, a scholar,
a man on whose honesty a breath had never been blown, should risk character and liberty for
five pounds sterling! Why, the Pontifical Government should have made it five hundred or five
thousand pounds, if they wished to have the accusation believed. Well, then, on the charge
of defrauding the public treasury to the extent of twenty Roman scudi was Colonel Calendrelli
brought to trial, and condemned! Condemned to what? To the galleys. Nor does that bring fully
out the iniquity of the sentence. Our consul in Rome assured me that he had investigated the
case, from his friendship for the colonel, and that the matter stood thus:--The colonel had
engaged a man to do a piece of work, for which he was to receive five pounds as wages. The
work was done, the wages were paid, the man's receipt was tendered, and the witnesses in whose
presence the money had been paid bore their testimony to the fact. All these proofs were before
Mr Freeborn. Nay, more; the papal tribunal that tried the case was told that all these witnesses
and documents were ready to be produced. And yet, in the teeth of this evidence, completely
establishing the innocence of Colonel Calendrelli, which, indeed, no one doubted, was the colonel
condemned to the galleys; and when I was in Rome, he was working as a galley-slave on the high-road
near Civita Vecchia, chained to another galley-slave. This is a sample of the pontifical justice.
Take another case.

The tragedy I am now to relate was consummated during my stay in the Eternal City. In the town
of Macerata, to the east of Rome, it happened one day that a priest was fired at as he was
passing along the street at dusk. He was not shot, happily;--the ball, missing the priest,
sank deep in a door on the other side of the way. This happened under the Republic; and the
police either could not or would not discover the perpetrator of the deed. The thing was the
talk of the town for a day or so, and was then forgotten for ever, as every one thought. But
no. The Republic came to an end; back came the pontifical police to Macerata; and then the
affair of the priest was brought up. The prefect had not been installed in his office many
days till a person presented himself before him, and said, "I am the man who shot at the priest."
"You!" exclaimed the prefect. "Yes; and I was hired to shoot him by----," naming three young
men of the town, who had been the most active supporters of the Republic. These were precisely
the three young men, of all others in Macerata, whom it was most for the interest of the Papacy
to get rid of. That very day these three young men were apprehended. They were at last brought
to trial; and will it be believed, that on the solitary and uncorroborated testimony of a man
who, according to his own confession, was a hired assassin,--and surely I do the man no injustice
if I suppose that, if he was willing for money to commit murder, he might be willing for money,
or some priestly consideration, to commit perjury,--on the single and unsupported evidence,
I say, of this man, a hired assassin according to his own confession, were these three young
men condemned? And to what? To death!--and while I was in Rome they were actually guillotined!
I saw their sentence placarded on the Piazza Colonna on the morning after my arrival in Rome.
This writing of doom was the first thing I read in that city. It bore the names of the accused,
the alleged crime, and an abstract of the evidence, or, I should say, volunteered statement,
of the would-be assassin. It had the terrible guillotine at the top, and the fisherman's ring
at the bottom; and though I had known nothing more of the case than the Government account
of it, as contained in that paper, I would have said that it was enough to cover any Government
with eternal infamy. Indeed, I don't believe that there is a Government under the sun, save
the Pope's, that would have done an atrocity like it. I had some talk with our consul, Mr Freeborn,
about that case too, and he assured me that, bad as these cases were, they were not worse than
scores, aye, hundreds, that to his knowledge had been perpetrated in Rome, and all over the
Papal States, since the return of the Pontifical Government. He added, that if Mr Gladstone
would come to Rome, and visit the prisons, and examine the state of the country generally,
he would have a more harrowing tale to unfold than that with which he had recently thrilled
the British public on the subject of Naples: that in Naples there was still something like
trade, but in Rome there was nothing but downright grinding misery.

There are few tales in any history more harrowing than the following. The events were posterior
to my visit to Rome, and were published at the time in the American Crusader. It happened that
several papal proconsuls were slain in the city of Faenza: all of them had served under Gregory
XVI., in the galleys, as felons and forgers. Being favoured by the papal power, they tried
to deserve it by becoming the tyrants of the unhappy population. When the gloomy news of their
tragical end reached the Holy Father, the answer returned to the governor of that city, as
to what he should do in such a case, as the true perpetrators could not be found, was, "Arrest
all the young men of Faenza!" and more than a hundred youths were immediately snatched away
from the bosom of their families, handcuffed and chained, thrown into the city prisons, and
distributed afterwards among the gangs of malefactors, whose lives had been a continual series
of robberies and murders! Thirty of these unfortunate victims were marched off to Rome, where
they were locked up in a dungeon. Innocent as well as unconscious of the crime of which they
were accused, they supplicated the President of the Sacred Consulta,--who is an anointed prelate,--asking
only for justice; not for mercy and forgiveness, but for a regular trial. All was useless;
the archbishop had neither ear nor heart, and the petition was forgotten. Thinking that, after
all, even at Rome, and even among the high dignitaries of the Church of Sodom and Gomorrah,
there might be found a man of human feeling, they wrote a second petition, which was this time
addressed to a different personage of the Church, his Excellency Mgr. Mertel, Minister of Grace
and Justice!

The prisoners asserted to the high papal functionary the illegality of their arrest,--their
sufferings without any imputation of guilt,--the painful condition of their families, increased
still more by the famine which now desolates the Roman States, and the want of their support.
The supplicants were brought before Mgr. Mertel, who, feigning pity and interest for the sufferers
(attention, reader!) offered them the choice of ten years in the chain-gang, or to be transported
to the United States, the refugium peccatorum! They protested; but of what benefit is a legal
and natural protest to thirty poor defenceless and guiltless young men, loaded with chains
by a papal bureaucrat, surrounded by fifty ruffians armed to the teeth?

On the night of the 5th of May 1853, the sepulchral silence of the subterranean prisons of
St Angelo was interrupted by the rattling of keys and muskets. The thirty young citizens of
Faenza were called out of their dens, and one by one, bending under his fetters, was escorted
to a steamer waiting on the muddy Tiber to carry them to a distant land! The beautiful moon
of Italy, as some call it, was shining benevolently over Rome and her iniquities; the streets,
deserted by the people, were trodden by French patrols; all was silent as the grave itself;
and not a friend was there to bid them adieu; not a relative to speak a consoling word to the
departing; and none to acquaint the unfortunates who remained behind with their terrible calamity!
This was their parting from Rome, at three o'clock, after midnight! But let us follow the victims
of papal fury over the wide waters. Cast into the steerage, always handcuffed, the vessel rolling
in a heavy and tempestuous sea, these wretched young men remained eighty hours in a painful
position, till they reached Leghorn, where they were conducted to the quarantine, as though
affected with leprosy and plague, and thence embarked for New York, where they arrived totally
destitute of clothes and means of subsistence.

The autumn of 1852 will be long remembered in the Papal States, from the occurrence of numerous
tragedies of a like deplorable character. Sixty-five citizens of Sinigaglia had been apprehended
on the charge of being concerned in the political disturbances of 1848,--an accusation on which
the Pope himself might have been apprehended. These citizens, however, had not been so prudent
as to turn when the Pope did. In the August of 1852 they were all brought to trial before the
Sacra Consulta of Rome, with the exception of thirteen who had made their escape. Twenty-eight
of these persons were condemned to the galleys for life, and twenty-four were sentenced to
be shot. These unhappy men displayed great unconcern at their execution,--some singing the
Marseillaise, others crying Viva Mazzini. The Swiss troops, not the Austrian soldiers, were
made the executioners in this case.

The Sinigaglia trials were followed by similar prosecutions at Ancona, Jesi, Pesaro, and Funa,
where unhappy groupes of citizens, indicted for political offences, waited the tender mercies
which the "Holy Father" dispenses to his figli by the hands of Swiss and Austrian carabiniers.
Let us state the result at Ancona.

The executions took place on the 25th of October 1852, and they may be reckoned amongst the
most appalling ever witnessed. The sentence was officially published at Rome after the execution,
and contained, as usual, simply the names of the judges and the prisoners, a summary of the
evidence unsupported by the names of any witnesses, and the penalty awarded--death. The victims
were nine in number. The sacerdotal Government gave them a priest as well as a scaffold, but
only one would accept the insulting mockery. The others, being hopelessly recusant, were allowed
to intoxicate themselves with rum. "The shooting of them was entrusted to a detachment of Roman
artillerymen, armed with short carbines, old-fashioned weapons, many of which missed fire,
so that at the first discharge some of the prisoners did not fall, but ran off, with the soldiers
pursuing and firing at them repeatedly; others crawled about; and one wretch, after being considered
dead, made a violent exertion to get up, rendering a final coup de grace necessary." The writer
who recorded these accounts added, that other executions were to follow, and that, if these
wholesale slaughters were necessary, they ought, in the dominions of a pontifical sovereign,
to be conducted with more delicacy, that is, in a more summary fashion. In truth, such executions
are a departure from the approved pontifical method of killing,--which is not by fusillades
and in open day, but in silence and night, by the help of the rack and the dungeon.

I cannot go into any minute detail of the imprisonments, banishments, and massacres by which
the Pope has signalized his return to his palace and the chair of Peter. But I may state a
few facts, from which some idea of their number may be gathered. When Pio Nono fled from Rome
to Gaeta, what was the amount of its population? Not less than a hundred and sixty thousand.
I conversed with a distinguished literary Englishman who chanced to visit Rome at the time
I speak of, and who assured me that there could not be fewer than two hundred thousand in Rome
then, for Italians had flocked thither from every country under heaven, expecting a new era
for their city and nation. But I shall give the Pope the benefit of the smaller number. When
he fled, there were, I shall suppose, only a hundred and sixty thousand human beings in his
city of Rome. Take the same Rome six months after his return, and how many do you find in it?
According to the most credible accounts, the population of the Eternal City had dwindled down
to little above a hundred thousand. Here are sixty thousand human beings lacking in this one
city. What has become of them? Where have they gone to? I shall suppose that some were fortunate
enough to escape to Malta, some to Belgium, some to England, and others to America. I shall
suppose that twenty thousand contrived to get away. And let me here do justice to Mr Freeborn,
the British consul, who saved much blood by issuing British passports to these unhappy men
when the French entered Rome. Twenty thousand, I shall suppose, made good their flight. But
thirty thousand and upwards are still lacking. Where are your subjects, Pio Nono? Were we to
put this interrogatory to the Pope, he would reply, I doubt not, as did another celebrated
personage in history, "Am I my brother's keeper?" But ah! might not the same response as of
old be made to this disclaimer, "The voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me from the ground?"
Again we say, Where are your subjects, Pio Nono? Ask any Roman, and he will tell you where
these men are. Ask our own consul, Mr Freeborn, and he will tell you where they are. They are,
those of them that have not been shot, rotting at this hour at the bottom of the Pope's dungeons.
That is where they are.

There is a singular unanimity in Rome amongst all parties, as to the number of political prisoners
now under confinement. This I had many opportunities of testing. I met a Roman one evening
in a book-shop, and, after a rather lengthened conversation, I said to him, "Can you tell me
how many prisoners there are at present in the Roman States?" "No," he replied, "I cannot."
"But," I rejoined, "have you no idea of their number?" He solemnly said, "God only knows."
I pressed him yet farther, when he stated, that the common estimate, which he believed to be
not above the truth, rather under, was, that there were not fewer than thirty thousand political
prisoners in the various fortresses and dungeons of the Papal States. Thirty thousand was the
estimate of Mr Freeborn. Thirty thousand was the estimate of Mr Stewart, who, mingling with
the Romans, knew well the prevailing opinion. Of course, precise accuracy is unattainable in
such a case. No one ever counted these prisoners. No list of them is kept,--none that is open
to the public eye at least; but it is well known, that there is scarce a family in Rome which
does not mourn some of its members lost to it, and scarce an individual who has not an acquaintance
in prison; and I have little doubt that the Roman estimate is not far from the truth, and that
it is just as likely to be below as above it. When I was in Rome, all the jails in the city
were crowded. The cells in the Castle of St Angelo,--those subterranean dungeons where day
never dawned, and where the captive's groan can never reach a human ear,--were filled. All
the great fortresses throughout the country,--the vast ranges of galley-prisons at Civita Vecchia,
the fortress of Ancona, the castle of Bologna, the fortress of Ferrara, and hundreds of minor
prisons over the country,--all were filled,--filled, do I say! they were crowded,--crowded
to suffocation with choking, despairing victims. In the midst of this congeries of dungeons,
surrounded by clanking chains and weeping captives, stands the chair of the "Holy Father."

Let us take a look into these prisons, as described to me by reputable and well-informed parties
in Rome. These prisons are of three classes. The first class consists of cells of from seven
to eight feet square. The space is little more than a man's height when he stands erect, and
a man's length when he stretches himself on the floor, and can contain only that amount of
atmospheric air necessary for the consumption of one person. These cells are now made to receive
two prisoners, who are compelled to divide betwixt them the air adequate for only one. The
second class consists of cells constructed to hold ten persons each. In the present great demand
for prison-room these are held to afford ample accommodation for a little crowd of twenty persons.
Their one window is so high in the wall, that the wretched men who are shut in here are obliged
to mount by turns on each other's shoulders, to obtain a breath of air. Last of all comes the
common prison. It is a spacious place, containing from forty to fifty persons, who lie day
and night on straw too foul for a stable. It matters not what the means of the prisoner may
be; he must wear the prison dress, and live on the prison diet. The jailor is empowered, should
the slightest provocation be offered, to flog the prisoner, or to load his limbs so heavily
with irons, that he scarce can move. And who are they who tenant these places? Violators of
the law,--brigands, murderers? No! Those who have been dragged thither are the very elite of
the Roman population. There many of them lie for years, without being brought to trial; and
if they thus escape the scaffold, they perish more slowly, but not less surely, and much more
miserably, by the pestilential air, the unwholesome food, and the horrible treatment of the
jail. Nor is this the worst of it. I was told by those in Rome who had the best opportunities
of knowing, but whose names I do not here choose to mention, that the sufferings of the prisoners
had been much aggravated,--indeed, made unendurable,--by the expedient of the Government which
confines malefactors and desperadoes along with them. These characters are permitted to have
their own way in the prisons; they lord it over the rest, compel them to do the most disgusting
offices, and attempt even outrages on their person, which propriety leaves without a name.
Their sufferings are indescribable. The consequence of this accumulation of horrors,--foul
air, insufficient food, and the fearful society with which the walls and chains of their prison
compel them to mingle,--is, that a great many of the prisoners have died, some have sought
to terminate their woe by suicide, while others have been carried raving to a madhouse. Mr
Freeborn assured me that several of his Roman acquaintances had been carried to these places
sane men, as well as innocent men, and, after a short confinement, they had been brought out
maniacs and madmen. He would have preferred to have seen them shot at once. It is a prelate
who has charge of these prisons.

I have described the higher machinery which the Pope employs,--the tribunals,--judges,--the
secret process,--the tyrannous Gregorian Code; let me next bring into view the inferior machinery
of the Pontifical Government. The Roman sbirri have an European reputation. One must be no
ordinary villain,--he must be, in short, a perfected and finished scoundrel,--to merit a place
in this honourable corps. The sbirri are chiefly from the kingdom of Naples. They dress in
plain clothes, go in twos and threes, are easily distinguished, and are permitted to carry
larger walking-sticks than the Romans, whom the French commandant has forbidden to come abroad
with any but the merest twig. Some of these spies wear spurs, the better to deceive and to
succeed in their fiendish work. No disguise, however, can conceal the sbirro. His look, so
unmistakeably villanous, proclaims the spy. These fellows will not be defeated in their purposes.
They carry, it is said, articles of conviction, that is, political papers, on their person,
which they use, in lack of other material, to compass the ruin of their victim. They can stop
any one they please on the street, compel him to produce his papers, and, when they choose
not to be satisfied with them, march him off to prison. When they visit a house where they
have resolved to make a seizure, they search it; and if they do not find what may criminate
the man, they drop the papers they have brought with them, and swear that they found them in
the house. What can solemn protestations do against armed ruffians, backed by hireling judges,
who, like Impaccianti and Belli, have been taken from the bagnio and the galleys, thrust into
orders, and elevated to the bench, to do the work of their patrons?[7] Such must show that
they deserve promotion. The people loathe and dread the sbirri, knowing that whatever they
do in their official capacity is done well, and speedily followed up by those in authority.

But there is a class in the service of the Pontifical Government yet more wicked and dangerous.
What! exclaims the reader, more wicked and dangerous than the sbirri! Yes, the sbirri profess
to be only what they are,--the base tools of a tyrannical Government, which seems to thirst
insatiably for vengeance; but there exists an invisible power, which the citizen feels to be
ever at his side, listening to his every word, penetrating his inmost thought, and ready at
any moment to effect his destruction. At noonday, at midnight, in society, in private, he feels
that its eye is upon him. He can neither see it nor avoid it. Would he flee from it, he but
throws himself into its jaws. I refer to a class of vile and abandoned men, entirely at the
service of the Government, whose position in society, agreeable manners, flexibility of disposition,
and thorough knowledge of affairs, which they study for base ends, and handle most adroitly
in conversation, enable them to penetrate the secret feelings of all classes. They now condemn
and now applaud the conduct of Government, as the subject and circumstances require, and all
to extract an unfriendly sentiment against those in authority, if such there be in the mind
of the man with whom they are conversing. If they succeed, the person is immediately denounced;
an arrest follows, or domiciliary restraint. The numbers that have found their way to prison
and to the galleys through this secret and mysterious agency are incredible. Nor can any man
imagine to himself the dreadful state of Rome under this terrible espionage. The Roman feels
that the air around him is full of eyes and ears; he dare not speak; he dreads even to think;
he knows that a thought or a look may convey him to prison.

The oppression is not of equal intensity in all cases. Some are subjected only to domiciliary
restraint. In this predicament are many respectably connected young men. They are told to consider
themselves as prisoners in their own houses, and not to appear beyond the threshold, but at
the penalty of exchanging their homes for the common jail. Others, again, whose apparent delinquency
has been less, are allowed the freedom of the open air during certain specified hours. At the
expiry of this time they must withdraw to their houses: Ave Maria is in many cases the retiring
hour.

Another tyrannical proceeding on the part of the Government, which was productive of wide-spread
misery, was the compelling hundreds of people, from the labourer to the man in business, to
leave Rome for their place of birth. These measures, which would have been oppressive under
any circumstances, were rendered still more oppressive by the shortness of the notice given
to those on whom this sentence of expulsion fell. Some had twenty-four hours, and others thirty-six,
to prepare for their departure. The labourer might plead that he had no money, and must beg
his way with wife and children. The man in business might justly represent that to eject him
in this summary fashion was just to ruin him; for his business could not be properly wound
up; it must be sacrificed. But no appeal was sustained; no remonstrance was listened to. The
stern mandate must be obeyed, though the poor man should die on the road. Go he must, or be
conveyed in irons. And, as regards those who were fortunate enough to reach their native villages,
alas! their sufferings did then but begin. These villages, in most cases, did not need them,
and could afford no opening in the line of business or of labour in which they had been trained.
They were houseless and workless in their native place; and, if they did not die of a broken
heart, which many of them did, they went "into the country," as they say in Italy,--that is,
they became brigands, or are at this hour dragging out the remainder of their lives in poverty
and wretchedness.

How atrociously, too, have many of the Romans been carried from their business to prison. Against
these men neither proof nor witness existed; but a spy had denounced them, or they had fallen
under the suspicions of the Government, and there they are in the dungeon. Their families might
starve, their business might go to the dogs, but the vengeance of the Government must be satiated.
Such persons are confined for a longer or shorter period, according to the view taken of their
character or associates; and if nothing be elicited by the secret ordeal of examination, the
prison-door is opened, and the prisoner is requested to go home. No apology is offered; no
redress is obtained.

Such cases, I was told, were numerous. One such came to my knowledge through Mr Stewart. An
acquaintance of his, a druggist, was one day dragged summarily from his business, and lodged
in jail, where he was detained a whole month, although to this hour he has not been told what
he had done, or said, or thought amiss. During the Constitution this man had been called in,
in his scientific capacity simply, to superintend an electric telegraph which ran, if I mistake
not, betwixt the Capitol and St Peter's. But beyond this he had taken no political action and
expressed no political sentiment whatever. He knew well that this would avail him nothing;
and glad he was to escape from incarceration with the remark, meno male, alias, it might have
been worse.

They say that the Inquisition was an affair of the sixteenth century; that its fires are cold;
its racks and screws are rusted; and that it would be just as impossible to bring back the
Inquisition as to bring back the centuries in which it flourished. That is fine talking; and
there are simpletons who believe it. But look at Rome. What is the Government of the Papal
States, but just the Government of the Inquisition? There there are midnight apprehensions,
secret trials, familiars, torture by flogging, by loading with irons, and other yet more refined
modes of cruelty,--in short, all the machinery of the Holy Office. The canon law, whose full
blessing Italy now enjoys, is the Inquisition; for wherever the one comes, there the other
will follow it. Let me describe the secresy and terror with which apprehensions are made at
Rome. The forms of the Inquisition are closely followed herein. The deed is one of darkness,
and the darkest hours of the twenty-four, namely, from twelve till two of the morning, are
taken for its perpetration. At midnight half a dozen sbirri proceed to the house of the unhappy
man marked out for arrest. Two take their place at the door, two at the windows, and two at
the back-door, to make all sure. They knock gently at the door. If it is opened, well; if not,
they knock a second time. If still it is not opened, it is driven in by force. The sbirri rush
in; they seize the man; they drag him from his bed; there is no time for parting adieus with
his family; they hurry him through the streets to prison. That very night, or the next, his
trial is proceeded with,--that is, when it is intended that there shall be further proceedings;
for many, as we have said, are imprisoned for long months, without either accusation or trial.
But what a mockery is the trial! The prisoner is never confronted with his accuser, or with
the impeaching witnesses. He is allowed no opportunity of disproving the charge; sometimes
he is not even informed what that charge is. He has no means of defending his life. He has
no doubt an advocate to defend him; but the advocate is always nominated by the court, and
is usually taken from the partizans of the Government; and nothing would astonish him more
than that he should succeed in bringing off his prisoner. And even when he honestly wishes
to serve him, what can he do? He has no exculpatory witnesses; he has had no time to expiscate
facts; the evidence for the prosecution is handed to him in court; and he can make only such
observations as occur at the moment, knowing all the while that the prisoner's fate is already
determined on. Sometimes the prisoner, I was told, is not even produced in court, but remains
in his cell while his liberty and life are hanging in the balance. At day-break his prison-door
opens, and the jailor enters, holding in his hand a little slip of paper. Ah! well does the
prisoner know what that is. He snatches it hastily from the jailor's hands, hurries with it
to his grated window, through which the day is breaking, holds it up with trembling hands,
and reads his doom. He is banished, it may be, or he is sentenced to the galleys; or, more
wretched still, he is doomed to the scaffold. Unhappy man! 'twas but last eve that he laid
him down in the midst of his little ones, not dreaming of the black cloud that hung above his
dwelling; and now by next dawn he is in the Pope's dungeons, parted from all he loves, most
probably for ever, and within a few hours of the galleys or the scaffold.

I saw these men taken out of Rome morning by morning,--that is, such of them as were banished.
They passed under the windows of my own apartment in the Via Babuino. I have seen as many as
twenty-four led away of a morning. They were put by half-dozens into carts, to which they were
tied by twos, and chained together, as if they had been brigands. Thus they moved on to the
Flaminian gate, each cart escorted by a couple of mounted gendarmes. The spectacle, alas! was
too common to find spectators; not a Roman followed it, or showed that he was conscious of
it, save by a mournful look at the melancholy cavalcade from his window, knowing that what
was their lot to-day might be his to-morrow. And what the appearance and apparent profession
of these men? Those I saw had much the air of intelligent and respectable artizans; for I believe
it is this class that are now bearing the brunt of the papal tyranny. The higher classes were
swept off before, and the rage of the Government is now venting itself in a lower and wider
sphere. An intelligent Scotchman, who had charge of the one iron-shop in the Corso, informed
me that now all the tolerably skilled workmen had been so weeded out of the city by the Pope,
that it was scarce possible to find hands to do the little work that requires to be done in
Rome. If there be among my readers a mechanic who has been indifferent to the question between
this country and the Papacy, as one the settlement of which could not affect his interests
either way, I tell him he never made a greater mistake all his life. If the Papacy succeed,
his interests will be the very first to suffer, in the ruin of trade. Nor will that suffice;
if a skilled man, he will be held to be a dangerous man; and, having taken from him his bread,
the Papacy will next take from him his liberty, as she is now doing to his brethren in Rome.

And what becomes of the families of these unhappy men? This is the most painful part of the
business. Their livelihood is gone; and nothing remains but to go out into the street and beg,--to
beg, alas! from beggars. It is not unfrequent in Rome to find families in competence this week,
and literally soliciting alms the next. You may see matrons deeply veiled, that they may not
be known by their acquaintances, hanging on at the doors of hotels, in the hope of receiving
the charity of English travellers. Shame on the tyranny that has reduced the Roman matrons
to this! Nor is even this the worst. Deprived of their protectors, moral ruin sometimes comes
in the wake of the physical privations and sufferings by which these families are overtaken.
Thus the misery of Rome is widening every day. Ah! could I bring before my readers the picture
of that doomed city;--could I show them Rome as it sits cowering beneath the shadow of this
terrible tyranny;--could I make them see the cloud that day and night hangs above it;--could
I paint the sorrow that darkens every face; the suspicion and fear that sadden the Roman's
every word and look;--could I tell the number of the broken hearts and the desolate hearths
which these old walls enclose;--ah, there is not one among my readers who would not give me
his tears as plenteously as ever the clouds of heaven gave their rain. And he who styles himself
God's Vicar sees all this misery! Sees it, do I say! he is the author of it. It is to uphold
his miserable throne that these prisons are filled, and that these widows and orphans cry in
the streets. And yet he tells us that his reign is a model of Christ's reign. 'Tis a fearful
blasphemy. When did Christ build dungeons, or gather sbirri about him, or send men to the galleys
and the scaffold? Is that the account which we have of his ministry? No; it is very different.
A few months ago, when the Pope proclaimed his newest invented dogma,--the Immaculate Conception,--he
gave, in honour of the occasion, a grand jubilee to the Roman Catholic world. We all know what
a jubilee is. There is a vast treasury above, filled with the merits of Pio Nono and of such
as he, out of which those who have not enough for their own salvation may supplement their
deficiencies. At the Pope's girdle hangs the key of this treasury; and when he chooses to open
it, straightway down there comes a shower of celestial blessings. Well, the Pope told his children
throughout the world that he meant to unlock this treasury; and bade his children be ready
to receive with open arms and open hearts, this vast beneficence of his. Ah! Pio Nono, this
is not the jubilee we wish. Draw your bolts; break the fetters of your thirty thousand captives;
open your dungeons, and give back the fathers, the husbands, the sons, the brothers, which
you have torn from their families. Put off your robe, quit your palace, take the Bible in your
hand, and go round the world preaching the gospel, as your Master did. Do this, and we shall
have had a jubilee such as the world has not seen for many a long year. But ah! you but mock
us,--bitterly, cruelly mock us,--when you deny us blessings which it is in your power to give,
and offer us those which are not yours to bestow. But it is a mockery which will return, and
at no distant day, in sevenfold vengeance upon, we say not Pio Nono, but the papal system.
Untie the fetters of these men; make them free for but a few hours; and with what terrible
emphasis will they demand back the friends whom the Papacy has buried in dungeons or murdered
on the open scaffold! They will seek their lost sons and brothers with an eye that will not
pity, and a hand that will not spare.

CHAPTER XXVII.

EDUCATION AND KNOWLEDGE IN THE PAPAL STATES.

     Education of a Roman Boy--Seldom taught his Letters--Majority of
     Romans unable to Read--Popular Literature of Italy--- Newspaper of
     the Roman States--Censorship of the Press--Studies in the Collegio
     Romano--Rome unknown at Rome--Schools spring up under the
     Republic--Extinguished on the Return of the Pope--Conversation with
     three Roman Boys--Their Ideas respecting the Creator of the World,
     Christ, the Virgin--Questions asked at them in the
     Confessional--Religion in the Roman States--Has no
     Existence--Ceremony mistaken for Devotion--Irreverence--The Six
     Commands of the Church--Contrast betwixt the Cost and the Fruits of
     the Papal Religion--Popular Hatred of the Papacy.

The influence of Romanism on trade, and industry, and justice, has been less frequently a theme
of discussion than its influence on knowledge. While, therefore, I have dwelt at considerable
length on the former, I shall be very brief under the present head. I shall here adduce only
a few facts which I had occasion to see or hear during my stay in the Papal States. The few
schoolmasters which are found in Italy are not a distinct class, as with us; they are priests,
and mostly Jesuits. There are three classes of catechisms used in the schools; the pupil beginning
with the lowest, and of course finishing off with the highest. But of what subjects do these
catechisms treat? A little history, one would say, that the pupil may have some notion of what
has been before him; and a little geography, that he may know there are such things as land
and sea, and cities beyond, which he cannot see, shut up in Rome. With us, the lowest amount
of education that ever receives the name comprises at least the three R's, as they are termed,--Reading,
Writing, and 'Rithmetic. But these are far too mundane matters for a Jesuit to occupy his time
in expounding. The education of the Italian youth is a thoroughly religious one, taking the
term in its Roman sense. The little catechisms I have spoken of are filled with the weightier
matters of their law,--the miracles wrought by the staff of this saint, the cloak of that other,
and the relics of a third; the exalted rank of the Virgin, and the homage thereto appertaining;
Transubstantiation, with all the uncouth and barbarous jargon of "substances" and "accidents"
in which that mystery is wrapped up. An initiation into these matters forms the education of
the Roman boy; and after he has been locked up in school for a certain length of time, he is
turned adrift, to begin the usual aimless life of the Italian. It does not follow, because
he has been at school, that he can read. He is seldom taught his letters; better not, lest
in after life he should come in contact with books. And, despite the vigilance of the censorship
and the Index, bad books, such as the Bible, are finding their way into the Roman States; and
it is better, therefore, not to entrust the people with the key of knowledge; for nothing is
so useless as knowledge under an infallible Church. The matters which the Italian youth are
taught they are taught by rote. "Ignorance is the mother of devotion,"--a maxim sometimes quoted
with a sneer, but one which embodies a profound truth as regards that kind of devotion which
is prevalent at Rome.

I have seen estimates by Gavazzi and other Italians, of the proportion who can read in the
Roman States. It is somewhere about one in a hundred. The reader will take the statement at
what it is worth. I had no means of testing its accuracy; but all my inquiries on the subject
led me to believe that the overwhelming majority cannot read. And where is the use of learning
one's letters in a land where there are no books; and there are none that deserve the name
in Rome. The book-stalls in Italy are heaped with the veriest rubbish: the "Book of Dreams,"
"Rules for Winning at the Lottery," "The Five Dolours of the Virgin," "Tracts on the Miracles
of the Saints," "Relations," professedly given by Christ about his sufferings, and said to
have been found in his sepulchre, and in other places equally likely. At Rome, on the streets
at least, where all other kinds of rubbish are tolerated, even this rubbish is not suffered
to exist; for there, book-stalls I saw none. There are, however, one or two miserable book-shops
where these things may be had.

There was but one newspaper (so called, I presume, because it contained no news) published
in Rome at the time of my visit,--the Giornale di Roma, which, I presume, still occupies the
field alone. It contains a daily list of the arrivals and departures (foreigners, of course,
for the gates of Rome never open to the Romans), the proclamations of the Government, the days
of the lottery, and such matters. Under the foreign head were chronicled the consecration of
Catholic temples, the visits of royal personages, a profound silence being observed on all
political facts and speculations. And this is all the Romans can know, through legitimate channels,
of what is going on beyond the walls of Rome. A daily paper was started during the Republic,
and admirably managed; but, of course, it was suppressed on the return of the Papal Government.
A few copies of the Times reach Rome every morning. They are not given out till towards mid-day,
for they must first be read; and if the "editorials" are not to the taste of the Sacred College,
they are not given out at all. The paper, during my short stay, was stopped for nearly a week
on end; and the disappointment was the greater, that rumours were then current in Rome that
something was on the tapis in Paris, and that the change in the constitution of France, whatever
it might be, would not be postponed till the May of 1852, as was then believed in the north
of Europe, but would be attempted in the beginning of December 1851. The tidings of the coup
d'etat, which met me on the morning of the 3d December in the south of France, brought the
full realization of these rumours. In the Giornale di Roma not a strayed dog can be advertised
without permission of the censor. In Brescia there is a censorship for gravestones; and in
Rome a strict watch is kept over the English burying-ground, lest any one should write a verse
of Scripture above a heretic's grave. The expression of thought is more dreaded than brigandage.

Those who aspire to the learned professions go to the Collegio Romano. But let the reader mark
how the Roman Church here, as everywhere else, contrives to keep up the show of educating,
and takes care all the while to impart the smallest possible amount of knowledge,--constructs
a machinery which, through some mischievous perversion, is without results. The Collegio Romano
has a numerous staff of professors, who prelect on theology, logic, history, mathematics, natural
philosophy, and other branches. This looks well; but observe its working. GIRLS: FAULTS AND
IDEALS.

A FAMILIAR TALK, WITH QUOTATIONS FROM LETTERS.

BY

J.R. MILLER, D.D.

NEW YORK 10 EAST FOURTEENTH ST.

THOMAS V. CROWELL & CO.

BOSTON: 100 PURCHASE STREET. GIRLS: FAULTS AND IDEALS.

"Cleanse thou me from secret faults." PSA. xix, 12. "The King's daughter is all glorious within: her
clothing is of wrought gold."--PSA. xiv. 13.

The religion of Christ has something to say to every man, woman, and child, in every relation, on
every day, in every experience of life. It is not something for Sundays, and for prayer-meetings,
and for sick-rooms, death-beds, and funerals: it is just as much for the school-room, the
play-ground, the store, the kitchen, the street. Wherever you may chance to be, if you listen
you will hear a voice behind you, whispering, "This is the way; walk
ye in it."

The Bible is the Word of God, our Father's will concerning his children; and it has something
to say each day, at every point of experience, to every one of us. I want to help the girls
and young women, if I can, to hear a little of what Christ has to say to them.

It is good for us to see ourselves as others see us. Hence, I have asked a number of Christian
young men to give me answers to certain questions, and from these I have quoted in this familiar
talk. I take two of these questions, viz.;

1. "What are some of the most common faults in young women of your acquaintance?"

2. "What are some of the essential elements of character in your ideal of true young womanhood?"

We
shall think then of common faults and of ideals. The first text I have chosen is a prayer for for
the cleansing of faults. The second is a description of the life that pleases God.

"Cleanse thou me from secret faults." Is there one of us who does not, from deepest heart pray
this prayer? I pity that man or that woman who does not long to be cured of faults, whatever
they are, however painful or costly their removal may be.

Some one says,--and the words are worthy of being written in gold,--"Count
yourself richer that day you discover a new fault in yourself,--not
richer because it is there, but richer because it is no longer a hidden
fault; and if you have not found all your faults, pray to have them
revealed to you, even if the revelation must come in a way that hurts
your pride."

These words show us the importance of the prayer: "Cleanse thou me from secret faults." We all have
our faults, which mar the beauty of our lives in the eyes of others. Every noble soul desires
to grow out of all faults, to have them corrected. The smallest fault mars the beauty of the character;
and one who seeks to possess only "whatsoever things are lovely" will be eager to be rid of
whatever is faulty. Ofttimes, however, we do not know our own faults: we are unconscious of
them. We cannot see ourselves as others see us. The friend does us a true kindness who tells
us of the things in our character, habits, manners, which appear as blemishes, although many people
have too much vanity to be told of their faults. They resent it as a personal insult when one points
out any blemish in them. But this is most foolish short-sightedness. To learn of a fault is
an opportunity to add a new line of beauty to the life. Our prayer each day should be that God
would show us our secret faults, whatever messenger he may send to point them out, and then give
us grace to correct them.

The young men who have replied to my question concerning the faults of young women have done
so in most kindly spirit, for to a noble soul it is always an unwelcome task to find fault;
it is much easier to name the beautiful things in those we love than the blemishes.

Several writers have referred to the matter of dress. One says "Too much time is given by many
young ladies to dressing. They scarcely think of anything else." Another names, "The love of
dress, the inordinate desire to excel their companions in this particular," as among the common
faults in young women, adding that it has led many of them to ruin. Another says they like to make
themselves attractive by conspicuous colors, and suggests that if they would spend less time
in shopping and more in some elevating occupation, for example in making home brighter for brothers
and parents, it would be better.

"Following fashion to an extreme that is unbecoming and often extravagant; too great attention
to outward adornment at the expense of inner adornment," another marks as a too prominent fault.
Every young woman should dress well, that is, neatly, tastefully, modestly, whether she be rich
or poor. Conspicuous dressing is vulgar. True refinement avoids anything showy and flashy:
it never dresses better than it can afford, and yet it is always well dressed, even in simple
muslin or plain calico.

Another fault mentioned is the lack of moral earnestness. "Frivolity, arising from want of
purpose in life," one names, "even the most sacred duties and relations being marred by this
frivolousness. The best years of life are wasted in small talk and still smaller reading, tears
and sighs being wasted over a novelist's creations, while God's creatures die for want of
a word of sympathy." Another names, "Frivolity, want of definiteness of purpose." Still another
says: "The giving of so little time to serious reflection and for preparation for the responsible
duties of life. In other words, frivolity of manner, shallowness of thought, and, as a consequence,
insipidity of speech are strongly marked faults in some young ladies." This writer pleads
for deeper, intenser earnestness. "Young women will reach a high excellence of moral character
only as they prepare themselves for life by self-discipline and culture." Another puts it down
as "A want of firm decision in character and action," and says that too often, in times "when
they ought to stand like a rock, they yield and fall;" and adds: "The young ladies of our land
have power to mould the lives of the young men for good or for evil."

There is a caution in these words which every young woman should heed. Life is not play, for
it has its solemn responsibilities, its sacred duties; and eternity lies beyond this little
span. I call you to earnestness, moral earnestness.

Determine to make the most and the best of your life. Get an education to fit you for life's
duties, even though it must be gotten in the little fragments of time that you can redeem from
busy days. Life is too short to crowd everything into it. Something must always be left out. Better
leave out many of your amusements and recreations, than grow up into womanhood ignorant and
with undisciplined intellectual powers. Train your mind to think. Set your ideal before you,--rich,
beautiful womanhood,--and bend all your energy to reach it.

Some of these letters speak of the common talk of girls as being largely idle gossip; criticisms
of absent people; unkind words about persons whom the ladies would meet with warm professions
of friendship and fervent kisses if they were to come in a minute later.

Dear girls, I plead for sincerity in speech. "Do not yield to the passion for miserable gossip
which is so common. Talk about things, not people. Do not malign or backbite your absent friend.
What is friendship worth if the moment the person is out of sight the tongue that has professed
affection becomes a poisoned fang, and the lips which gave their warm kiss utter the word of ridicule,
or sneer, or aspersion? Better be dumb than have the gift of speech to be used in the miserable idle
words, insincerities, and backbitings too common in modern society. Surely something better can
be found to talk about; if not, utter silence is more heaven-like. A stupid girl who cannot
talk at all is better far than a chattering girl who can talk of nothing good or useful.

"Find thou always time to say some earnest word between the idle talk."

One mentions "want of reverence for sacred things" as a sad fault in some young women. He has seen
them whispering in the church and Sunday school, during sermon and lesson, even during prayer,
and has marked other acts of irreverence. It is to be hoped that this fault is indeed rare, unless
it be in very young girls, who know no better. But as the fault has been pointed out by one who
has been sorely pained by it, will not the girls and young women think of it a moment? A girl's religion
should be full of joy and gladness. It should make her happy, fill her lips with song; but it
should make her so reverent that, in the presence of her God, in
prayer, in worship, in the study of the Bible, her heart shall be
silent with the silence of adoration.

Dear girls, remember that in any religious service, you are standing or bowing before God, and let
nothing for one instant tempt you to whisper, to smile, to do aught that would grieve the
Holy Spirit. Others speak of a want of respect for the aged, and especially for parents, as a fault
of young women. "How often is the kind advice a father and mother set aside, just because it
goes against some whim or fancy of their own! A desire on the part of a young lady to live in the
fashion, to be well-dressed at all hours and ready for callers--how much toil and sacrifice often fall
to a good mother from such an ambition!" The writer gives other illustrations of the same spirit
in some girls. It is hoped that there are but few who see their own face in this mirror.

Not long since I stood by the coffin and grave of a young girl whom I had known for a dozen years.
She received a fine education, having finished a course in one of the best colleges of the land.
What did she do with her education? Did she sit down as a lady of elegant leisure? Did she think
her trained powers were too fine to be used in any common work? Did she look down from her
lofty height upon her mother as old-fashioned, out of date? No: she came home from college at
the end of her course, and at once went into her home to lift the burden and care from the shoulders
of the loving, patient mother who had toiled for her so long in order that she might receive her
education and training. When the beautiful girl was dead, the mother told me with loving gladness
how Gertrude had lifted one by one every burden from her during those years, until, at last, the
child's own hands carried all the household care and responsibility.

She did not think her richly-furnished life too fine to be used in plain household duties,
She remembered all her mother's self-denials in her behalf in earlier days, and rejoiced that
now she might, in some measure, reward her. I have spoken of this one young woman's loving
regard for her mother, and of the way she showed it, in the hope that it may inspire in many
another young girl's heart a spirit of noble helpfulness toward a tired mother.

One writer notes as a fault in some young women, that they are careless of their good names.
"They are not careful enough as to their associates and companions. Some of them are seen with
young men who are known to be of questionable moral character. On the streets they talk loudly, so
as unconsciously to attract attention to themselves. They act so that young men of the looser
sort will stare at them and even dare to speak to them." In these and other ways, certain young
women, this writer says, imperil their own good name, and, I may add, imperil their souls.

When will young girls learn that modesty and shrinking from public gaze are the invariable marks
of true beauty in womanhood; and that anything which is contrary to these is a mark of vulgarity
and ill-breeding? Guard your name as the jewel of your life. Many a young woman with pure life has
lived under shadows all her later years, because of some careless--only careless, not wrong--act in
youth which had the appearance of evil.

In one letter received from a thoughtful young man, mention is made
of a "disregard of health," as a common fault in young women.

Another mentions but one fault,--"the lack of glad earnestness."

     Another specifies, "thoughtlessness, heedlessness, a disregard
     of the feelings of others," Another thinks some young women "so
     weak and dependent that they incur the risk of becoming a living embodiment
     of the wicked proverb, 'So good that they are good for nothing.'" On
     the other hand, however, one writer deplores just the reverse
     of this, the tendency in young women to be independent, self-reliant,
     appearing not to need protection and shelter.
     
     Doubtless there is truth in both those criticisms: there are some
     young women who are so dainty, so accomplished, so delicate,
     that they can be of little use in this world. When misfortune comes
     to such and they are thrown out of the cosy nest, they are in a most
     pitiable condition indeed.

They can do nothing to provide for themselves. Then there are others who so pride themselves on their
independence, that one of the sweetest charms of womanhood is lost--the charm of gentle trustfulness.

I
have suggested enough faults for one lesson,--perhaps as many as you can carry in your mind,
certainly as many as you can correct, although I have not exhausted the list that I find in my
correspondence. As I said at the beginning, these faults are pointed out, not in the spirit
of criticism, but in the spirit of kindness, of truest interest, and with desire to help. Many
of them may seem very trivial faults, but small specks stain the whiteness of a fair robe. "Little
things make perfection." You cannot afford to keep the least discovered fault in your character
or conduct, for little blemishes are the beginnings of greater ones that by and by will destroy
all the beauty of life.

Will you not, then, pray this prayer: "Cleanse thou me from secret faults"? Do not try to hide your
faults--hiding them does not cure them. Every true woman wants to grow into perfect moral and
spiritual beauty. In order to do this, she wants to know wherein she fails, what blemishes
others see in her, what blemishes God sees in her. Then, as quickly as she discovers the faults,
she wants to have them removed. The old artist Apelles had for his motto: "Nulla dies sine
linea"--"No day without a line." Will you not take this motto for yours, and seek every day to
get the victory over some little blemish, to get some fault corrected, to get in your life
a little more of the beauty of perfect womanhood? Cleanse thou me,
O Lord, from secret faults.

Now I turn your thoughts away from faults
to ideals. The second question was: "What are some of the essential
elements of character in your ideal of true young womanhood?" Here
also I can give only very few of the answers received.

Nearly every
one emphasizes the element of gentleness. One says: "I like to see
a young lady kind and agreeable to all, yet dignified." "Gentle in
speech, voice, and manner; full of love for her home, yet firm and
decided in her convictions," says another. One sums up his ideal in
these particulars: "An unspotted character, a cheerful disposition,
a generous, untiring heart, and a brave will." Nearly all put strength
with gentleness, in some form. "All the firmness that does not exclude
delicacy, and all the softness that does not imply weakness. Loving,
helpful, and trusting, she must be able to soothe anxiety by her presence;
charm and allay irritability by her sweetness of temper." Another
writes: "A beauty of spirit in which love, gentleness, and kindness
are mingled. Patience and meekness, fortitude, a well-governed temper,
sympathy, and tenderness," Says another: "Kind, courteous, humble,
and affectionate to old and young, rich and poor, yet ambitious to
right limits." One young man writes: "Loving and kind, a Christian
in heart and arts; a character based on Christ and his teachings."
Then follows this noble tribute: "My own mother has lived and proved
this ideal for me."

Of this tenor are all the letters. Without gentleness
no woman can be truly beautiful. Cruelty in a man is a sad disfigurement,
but in a woman it is the marring of all her loveliness.

Purity is
another element which, in many of the letters, is emphasized. I need
not quote the words. I need only remind you that purity must have
its home in the heart, if it is to be the glory of the life. "Blessed
are the pure in heart," is the Master's beatitude. "You are pure,
you say; are your thoughts as white

As the snow that falls with the
midnight's hush? Could you see them blazoned in letters of light,
For the world to read, and feel no blush?

If you stood in the court
of heaven, mid swift, Glad greetings of loved ones who know no wrong,
Could you bare your heart to them all, and lift Unshrinking eyes to
that spotless throng?"

Faithfulness is named by many as another essential
element in true womanhood. One answers: "Courage to take a positive
stand on all moral questions ... Industry that consists in something
more than playing mechanically a few pieces on the piano, or tracing
grotesque figures in wool or silk." Here two elements of faithfulness
are indicated--faithfulness in one's place in all one's work, and
moral faithfulness in following conscience. Other letters suggest
practically the same essential quality.

It is impossible to over-emphasise
this element. The time has gone by forever when woman, in Christian
lands, can be regarded as a mere ornament, and can be shut out of
active life. She is not a doll or a toy. She has her duties and responsibilities.
She is not born merely to be married as soon as possible, and from
girlhood to consider her wedding as the goal of her life.
Would, says he to himself, that those who venerate Rome when divided from her by the Alps and
the ocean, would come here and see with their own eyes her contemptible vileness and inconceivable
degradation; and that those statesmen who are moved by a secret fear to bow the knee to her,
would come hither and mark the baseness of her before whom they are content to lower the honour
and independence of their country! Such, we say, are the first impressions of the visitor to Rome.

But a few days suffice to correct this erroneous estimate. The person looks around him; he
looks below him. There he discovers the real Rome. It is not the Rome that is seen,--it is
the Rome that is unseen,--before which the nations tremble. Beneath his feet are tremendous
agencies at work. There are the pent-up fires that shake the globe. Rome, cut off from all
the world, and surrounded by leagues of silent and blackened deserts, is the centre of energies
that rest not day nor night, and the action of which is felt at the very extremities of the
earth. It seems, indeed, as if Rome had been set free from all the anxieties and labours which
occupy the minds and hands of the rest of the world, of very purpose that she might attend
to only one thing. The labours of the husbandman and the artificer she has forborne. Like the
lilies of the field, she toils not, neither does she spin. She sits in the midst of her deserts,
like the sorceress on the heath, or the conspirator in his den, hatching plots against the
world. Rome is the pandemonium of the earth, and the Pope is the Lucifer of the world's drama.
Fallen he is from the heaven of power and grandeur which he occupied in the twelfth century;
and he and his compeers lie sunk in a very gulph of anarchy and barbarism. Lifting up his eyes,
he beholds afar off the happy nations of Protestantism, reaping the reward of a free Bible
and a free Government, in the riches of their commerce and the stability of their power. The
sight is tormenting and intolerable, and the pontiff is stung thereby into ceaseless attempts
to retrieve his fall. If he cannot mount to his old seat, and sit there once more in superhuman
pride and unapproachable power above the bodies and the souls of men, he may at least hope
to draw down those he so much envies into the same gulph with himself. Hence the villanies
and plots of all kinds of which Rome is full, and which form a source of danger to the nations
of Christendom, from which they may hope to be delivered only when the Papacy shall have been
finally destroyed.

What I propose here is to sketch the mental state of the priests of Italy, so far as my opportunities
enabled me to judge. The subject is more recondite than the foregoing; the facts are less accessible;
and my statements must partake more of the inferential than did those embraced in the former
branches of the subject.

The first question that arises is, in what light do the priests in Italy regard their own system?
Do they look upon it as an unrivalled compound of imposture and tyranny,--a cunning invention
for procuring mitres, tiaras, purple robes, and other good things for themselves? or do they
regard it as indeed founded in truth, and clothed with the sanction of heaven? They are behind
the scenes, and have access to see and hear many things which are not meant for the eye and
ear of the public. The man who pulls the strings of a winking Madonna can scarce persuade himself,
one should think, that the movement that follows is the effect of supernatural power. The priest
who liquefies the blood of St Januarius by the warmth of his hand or the warmth of the fire,
must know that what he has performed is neither more nor less than a very ordinary juggle.
The monk who falls a rummaging in the Catacombs, or in any of the old graveyards about Rome,
and finds there a parcel of decayed bones, which he passes off as those of Saint Theodosia
or Saint Anathanasius, but which are as likely to be the bones of an old pagan, or a Goth,
or a brigand, can hardly believe, one should suppose, his own tale. If the Pope believes in
his own relics, what conceptions must he have of Peter? What a strange configuration of body
must he believe the apostle to have had! Peter must have been a man with some dozen of heads;
with a score of arms, and a hundred fingers or so on each arm; in short, a perfect realization
of the old pagan fable of the giant Briareus. The Pope must believe this, or he must believe
that he gives his attestation to what is not true. Above all, one can hardly imagine it possible
that any man in whom reason had not been utterly quenched could believe in the monstrous dogma
of transubstantiation. What! can a priest at any hour he pleases give existence to Him who
exists from eternity? Can he enclose within a little silver box that Almighty One whom the
heaven, even the heaven of heavens, cannot contain? Let a man confess at the bar of the High
Court of Edinburgh that he believes himself to be God, and the Court will pronounce that that
man is insane, and will hold him incompetent to manage his affairs. And yet every Roman Catholic
priest professes to believe a more startling dogma,--even that he is the creator of God. And
yet, instead of calling that insanity, we must, I suppose, call it religion. Seeing, then,
the priests are called every day to do things which their senses must tell them are juggles,
and to profess their belief in dogmas which their reason must tell them are monstrous and blasphemous
absurdities, is it possible, you ask, that the priests in Italy can believe in their own system?
I must here say, that I do think the majority of them do believe in it.

A goodly number of the priests of Italy are infidels. They no more believe in the Pope than
they believe in the pagan Jupiter. But then, were they to speak out their disbelief, and to
say that purgatory is a mere bugbear for frightening men and getting their money, they know
that a dungeon would instantly be their lot; and infidelity has little of the martyr spirit
in it. These men, like Leo the Tenth, as thorough an infidel as ever lived, hold that it would
be the height of folly to quarrel with a fable that brings them so much gain. Others are mere
worldly men. They were never at the pains to inquire whether their system is true or false.
They sing their mass in the morning; they pass their forenoons at the café, sipping coffee,
and taking a hand at cards; a stoup of wine washes down a substantial dinner; and, after a
saunter along the Corso, or an airing on the Pincian, they doff their clerical vestments, and
go to sup with the nuns, who have the reputation of being excellent cooks.

Others there are whose minds are occasionally visited by strong misgivings. The cloud, so to
speak, will open for a moment, and reveal to their astonished sight, not the majestic form
of Truth, but a gigantic and monstrous imposture. A mysterious hand at times lifts the veil,
and lo! they find themselves in the presence, not of a divinity, but of a demon. They disclose
their doubts when they next go to confession. My son, says the father confessor, these are
the suggestions of the Evil One. You must arm yourself against the Tempter by fasting and penance.
A hair shirt or an iron girdle is called in to silence the voice of reason and the remonstrances
of conscience; and here the matter ends. And there are a few--in every age there have been
a few such--in the Church of Rome, and at present they are very considerably on the increase,
who, in the midst of darkness, by some wondrous means have seen the light. A tract, a Bible,
or some Protestant friend whom Providence had thrown in their way, or some one of the few passages
of Scripture inserted in their Breviary, may have taught them a better way than that of Rome.
Instead of stopping short at the altar of Mary, or at any of the thousand shrines which Rome
has erected as so many barriers between the sinner and God, they go at once to the Divine mercy-seat,
and pour their supplications direct into the ear of the Great Mediator. You ask, why do these
men remain in a Church which they see to be apostate? Fain would they fly, but they know not
how or where. They lift their eyes to the Alps on the one side,--to the ocean on the other.
Alas! they may surmount these barriers; but more difficult still than to scale the mountains
or to traverse the ocean is it to escape beyond the power of Rome. Woe to the unhappy man who
begins to feel his fetters! He awakes to find that he is in a wide prison, with a sentinel
posted at every outlet: escape seems hopeless; and the man buries his secret in his breast.

Some few there are who, more daring by nature, or specially strengthened from above, adventure
on the immense hazards of flight. Of these, some are caught, thrown into a dungeon, and are
heard of no more. Others find their way to England, or some other Protestant State. But here
new trials await them. They are ignorant of our language perhaps. They find themselves among
strangers, whose manners seem to them cold and distant. They are without means of living; and,
carrying with them too, it may be, some of the stains of their former profession, they encounter
difficulties which are the more stumbling that they are unexpected. On these various grounds,
the number of priests who leave the Church of Rome has been, and always will be, small, till
some great revolution or upbreak takes place in that Church.

But, making the most ample allowance for all these classes,--for the men who are atheists and
infidels,--for the mere worldings, whose only tie to their Church is the gain it brings them,--and
for those who are either doubters, or whose doubts have passed into full conviction that the
Church of the Pope is not the Church of Jesus Christ,--making, I say, full allowance for all
these, I have little doubt that the majority of the priests in Italy,--it may be not much more
than a majority, but still a majority,--are sincere believers in their system.

They are not ignorant of the frauds, the knaveries, the fables, and hypocrisies, by which that
system is supported. They cannot shut their eyes to these, which they regard, in fact, as sanctified
by the end to which they are devoted; but they separate between these and the system itself;
and though they cannot tell the line where truth ends and falsehood begins, still they look
upon their system, on the whole, as founded in truth, and carrying with it the sanction of
Heaven. Indeed, belief is a weak term to express the power the system has over them. It is
rather a paralyzing awe, a freezing terror, like that with which his grim deity inspires the
barbarian, which holds captive the strongest mind, and lays reason and conscience prostrate
in the dust. Such I believe to be the state of mind of the greater number of the Italian priesthood.

But how comes this? What is it which has produced this universal slavery? Is it the Pope? Is
it the cardinals? Is it the Jesuits? No; for these men, though the tyrants of others, are themselves
slaves. All are bound by the same chain of adamant, to the car of the same demon. A mournful
procession of dead men truly, with the triple crown in front, and the sandals of the barefooted
Capuchin bringing up the rear. What is it, I repeat, that holds the whole body in subjection,
from the Pope down to the friar? It is the system, the abstract system, with its overwhelming
prestige,--that system which lives on though popes die; the genius of the Papacy, if you will.
This is the real monarch of that spiritual kingdom.

A little power of mental abstraction,--and the subtile genius of the Italian gives him that
power in a high degree,--will enable any one to separate betwixt the system and its agents.
Some one has remarked, that he could form an abstraction of a lord mayor, not only without
his horse, and gown, and gold chain, but even without the stature, features, hands, and feet
of any particular lord mayor. The same can be done of the Papacy. We can form an abstraction
of the Papacy not only without the tiara and the keys, but even without the stature and lineaments,
the hands and feet, of any particular Pope. When we have formed such an abstraction, we have
got the real ruler of the Papacy. That it is the system that is the dominant power in the Church
of Rome, is evident from this one fact, namely, that councils have sometimes deposed the Pope
to save the Papacy. There is in the Pope's kirk, then, a power greater than the Pope. The system
has taken body and shape, as it were, and sits upon the Seven Hills, a mysterious, awe-inspiring
divinity or demon; and the Pope, equally with the friar, bows his head and does obeisance.
Wherever the pontiff looks,--whether backward into history, or around him in the world,--there
are the monuments of this ever living, ever present, and all pervading power. It requires more
force than the mind of fallen man is capable of, to believe that a system which has filled
history with its deeds and the world with its trophies, which has compelled the homage of myriads
and myriads of minds, and before which the haughtiest conquerors and the most puissant intellects
have bowed with the docility of children, is, after all, an unreality,--a mere spectre of the
middle ages,--a ghost conjured up by credulity and knavery from the tombs of defunct idolatries.
This, I say, is the true state of things in Italy. Its priesthood are subdued by their own
system,--by its high claims to antiquity,--its world-wide dominion,--its imposing though faded
magnificence,--its perverted logic,--its pseudo sanctity. These not only carry it over the
reason, but in some degree over the senses also; and the more fully persuaded the priests are
of the truth and divinity of their system, they feel only the more fully warranted to employ
fraud and force in its support,--the winking Madonna to convince one class, and the dungeon
and the iron chain to silence the other.

Having spoken of the abstract and spiritual power that reigns over Italy, and, I may say, over
the whole Catholic world, let me now speak of the corporeal and human machinery by which the
Papacy is carried on.

First comes the Pope. Pio Nono is a man of sixty-three. His years and the various misfortunes
of his reign sit lightly upon him. Were the Pope much given to reflection, there are not wanting
unpleasant topics enough to darken the clear Italian sunlight, as it streams in through the
windows of the Vatican palace. Once was he chased from Rome; and now that he is returned, can
he call Rome his own? Not he. The real master of Rome is the commandant of the French garrison.
And while outside the walls are the dead whom he slew with the sword of France, inside are
the living, whose sullen scowl or fierce glare he may see through the French files, as he rides
out of an afternoon.[9] But Pio Nono takes all in good part. There is not a wrinkle on his
brow; no unpleasant thought appears to shade the jovial light of his broad face. He sits down
to dinner with evidently a good appetite; he sleeps soundly at night, and troubles not his
poor head by brooding over misfortunes which he cannot mend, or charging himself with the direction
of plots which he is not competent to manage. But, if not fitted to take the lead in cabinets,
nature has formed him to shine in a procession. He has a portly figure, a face radiant with
blandness, dissimulation, and vanity; and he looks every inch the Pope, as he is carried shoulder-high
in St Peter's, and sits blazing in his jewelled tiara and purple robes, between two huge fans
of peacocks' feathers. To these accomplishments he adds that of a fine voice; and when he gives
his blessing from the balcony of St Peter's, or assembles the Romans in the Forum, as he did
on a late occasion, when he lifted up hands dripping with his subjects' blood, to call his
hearers to repentance, his tones ring out, in the deep calm air of Rome, clear and loud as
those of a bell. Such is the man who is the nominal head of the Papacy. We say the nominal
head; for such a system as the Papacy, involving the consideration of so many interests, and
requiring such skilful steering to clear the rocks and quicksands amid which the bark of Peter
is now moving, demands the presence at the helm of a steadier hand and a clearer eye than those
of Pio Nono.

I come next to the College of Cardinals. In so large a body we find, as might be expected,
various grades of both intellectual and moral character; and of course there are the corresponding
indications on their faces. An overbearing arrogance, which always communicates to the countenance
an air of vulgarity, more or less, is a very prevailing trait. Their heaven does not depend upon
being linked with a husband, as the Mormons teach. Marriage is a good thing for a woman, if
she marry well. I honor marriage as one of the holiest and most sacred of God's ordinances.

But, here is the truth which I want to impress, that a young woman should not begin her life with
the thought that she must get a husband. Oh, the sad desecration of womanhood that such a purpose
in life produces! Every young girl should set for her great central aim in life, to be a woman,
a true, noble, pure, holy woman, to seek ever the highest things; to learn from her Master her
whole duty and responsibility in this world, and to do the one and fulfil the other, That should
be her aim,--to realize in her character all the possibilities of her womanhood, and to do all
the work for her Master which he may give her to do. Then, if God shall call her to be a wife,
let her still go on with the same reverence, faith, and love, in whatever lines she may be led. I call
young women to faithfulness--that is all, simple faithfulness, Accept your duty, and do it. Accept
your responsibility, and meet it. Be true in every relation you are called to fill, Be brave enough
to be loyal always to your womanhood.

One letter refers to what a true and noble sister may be to her brother, especially of the better
than angel guardianship of an older sister over her younger brother. Evidently this young man writes
with the consciousness that he himself has had the benediction of such an older sister. Volumes
could be written concerning such ministries.

Moses was not the only child by whose infancy's cradle an older sister has kept sacred watch.
He was not the only great man who has owed much of his greatness to a faithful, self-denying Miriam.
Many a man who is now honored in the world owes all his power and influence to a woman, perhaps
too much forgotten now, perhaps worn and wrinkled, beauty gone, brightness faded, living alone
and solitary, but who, in the days of his youth, was guardian angel to him, freely pouring
out the best and richest of her life for him, giving the very blood of her veins that he might
have more life; denying herself even needed comforts that he, her
heart's pride, might be educated and might become a noble man among
men.

Men who have true-hearted, self-forgetful older sisters rarely ever honor them half enough for
their sacrifices, their unselfishnesses, the influence of their gentle purity and their hallowed
love. Many a sister has denied herself everything, and has worn out her very life, for a brother
who in his wealth or fame too often altogether forgets her.

There is a class of women in every community whom society flippantly denominates "old maids."
The world needs yet to be told what uncrowned queens many of these women are, what undecorated heroines,
what blessings to humanity, what builders of homes, what servants of others and of Christ. In thousands
of cases they remain unmarried for the sake of their families. Many of them have refused brilliant
offers of marriage that they might remain at home to be the shield and comfort and stay of parents
growing feeble and needing their gentle care. Hundreds more there are who have hidden away their
own heart-hunger that they devote their lives to good deeds for Christ and for humanity.

Florence Nightingale denied herself the joy and sweetness of wedded happiness, and gave her life
to service in army hospitals, carrying to wounded and weary men the blessing of her kindly ministry,
instead of shutting it up within the walls of a home of her own. And "Sister Dora," who wrought
with such brave spirit in English perl-houses, "whose story is as a helpful evangel, was the
bride of the world's sorrow only." Every community has its own examples of those whose hands have
not felt the pressure of the wedding-ring because home loved ones seemed to need their affection
and their service.

We ought to honor these unmarried women. Many of them are the true heroines, the real sisters
of mercy, of the communities where they live. Those who sometimes
speak lightly of them might better bow down before them in reverence
and kiss the hands, wrinkled now and faded, which never have been
clasped in marriage. Some one, by the coffin of one of these unwedded
queens, writes of the folded hands:

"Roughened and worn with ceaseless
toil and care, No perfumed grace, no dainty skill, had these! They
earned for whiter hands a jewelled case, And kept the scars unlovely
for their share. They
are the most indefatigable confessors, as well as the most eloquent preachers. Their regularity
is like that of nature itself. Every hour of the day has its duty; and their motions are as
punctual as that of the heavenly bodies. Duly every morning as the clock strikes five, they
are at the altar or in the confessional. Their head-quarters are at the Gesu. I shall suppose
that the reader is passing through the long corridor of that magnificent church. Every three
or four paces is a door, leading to a small apartment, which is occupied by a father. Outside
each door hangs a sheet of paper, on which the father puts a list of the employments for the
day. When he goes out, he sticks a pin opposite the piece of business which has called him
away, so that, should any one call and find him not within, he can know at once, by consulting
the card, how the father is occupied, and whether he is accessible at that particular time.
Among the items of business which usually appear on the card, "conference" is now one of very
frequent occurrence, which indicates no inconsiderable amount of business, having reference
to foreign parts, at present on the hands of the order.

I shall suppose that the reader is passing along the Corso. Has he marked that tall thin man
who has just passed him,

 "Walking in beauty like the night?"

There is an air of tidiness in his dress, and of comparative cleanliness on his person. He
wears a small round cap, with three corners; or, if a hat, one of large brim. Neither cowl
nor scapular fetters his motions; a plain black gown, not unlike a frock-coat, envelopes his
person. How softly his footsteps fall! You scarce hear their sound as he glides past you. His
face, how unruffled! As the lake, when the winds are asleep, hides under a moveless surface,
resplendent as a sheet of gold, the dark caverns at its bottom, so does this calm, impassable
face the workings of the heart beneath. This man holds in his hands the threads of a conspiracy
which is exploding at that moment, mayhap in China, or in the Pacific, or in Peru, or in London.

He is at Rome at present, and appears in his proper form and dress as a Jesuit. But that man
can change his country, he can change his tongue, and, Proteus-like, multiply his shapes among
mankind. Next year that man whom you now meet on the streets of Rome may be in Scotland in
the humble guise of a pedlar, vending at once his earthly and his spiritual wares. Or he may
be in England, acting as tutor in some noble family, or in the humbler capacity of body-servant
to a gentleman, or, it may be, filling a pulpit in the Church of England. He may be a Protestant
schoolmaster in America, a dictator in Paraguay, a travelling companion in France and Switzerland,
a Liberal or a Conservative--as best suits his purpose--in Germany, a Brahmin in India, a Mandarin
in China. He can be anything and everything,--a believer in every creed, and a worshipper of
every god,--to serve his Church. Rome has hundreds of thousands of such men spread over all
the countries of the world. With the ring of Gyges, they walk to and fro over the earth, seeing
all, yet themselves unseen. They can unlock the cabinets of statesmen, and enter unobserved
the closets of princes. They can take their seat in synods and assemblies, and dive into the
secrets of families. Their grand work is to sow the seeds of heresies in Churches and of dissensions
in States, that, when the harvest of strife and division is fully matured, Rome may come in
and reap the fruits.

CHAPTER XXIX.

SOCIAL AND DOMESTIC CUSTOMS OF THE ROMANS.[10]

     A Roman House--Wretched Dwellings of Working-Classes--How Working
     Men spend their Leisure Hours--Roman mode of reckoning
     Time--Handicrafts and Trades in Rome--Meals--Breakfast, Dinner,
     &c.--Games--Amusements--Marriages--Deaths and Funerals--Wills
     tampered with--Popular regard to Omens--Superstitions connected
     with the Pope's Name--Terrors of the Priesthood--Weather, and
     Journey Homeward.

I shall now endeavour to bring before my readers, in a short chapter, the daily inner life
of Rome. First of all, let us take a peep into a Roman dwelling. The mansions of the nobility
and the houses of the wealthier classes are built on the plan of the ancient Romans. There
is a portal in front, a paved court in the middle, a quadrangle enclosing it, with suites of
apartments running all round, tier on tier, to perhaps four or five stories. The palaces want
nothing but cleanliness to make them sumptuous. They are of marble, lofty in style, and chaste
though ornate in design. The pictures of the great masters that once adorned them are now scattered
over northern Europe, and the frames are filled with copies. For this the poverty or extravagance
of their owners is to blame. The best pictures in Rome are those in the churches, and these
are sadly dimmed and obscured by the smoke of the incense. A fire-place in a Roman house is
a sort of phenomenon; and yet the climate of Rome, unless at certain times, is not that balmy,
intoxicating element which we imagine it to be. During my stay there, I had to encounter alternate
deluges of rain, with lightning, and cutting blasts of the Tramontana. The comfort of an Italian
house, especially in winter, depends more on its exposure to the sun than on any arrangement
for heating it. Some few, however, have fire-places in the rooms. The kitchen is placed on
the top of the house,--the very reverse of its position with us. The ends sought hereby are
safety, and the convenience of discharging the culinary effluvia into the atmosphere. The fire-place
is unique, and not unlike that of a smithy. There is a cap for sparks; and about three feet
above the floor stands a stone sole, in which holes are cut for the fornelli, which are square
cast-iron grated boxes for holding the wood char, upon which the culinary utensils are placed.
These are but ill adapted for preparing a roast. John Bull would look with sovereign contempt,
or downright despair, according to the state of his stomach, on the thing called a roast in
Rome. There it is seldom seen beyond the size of a beef-steak. Much small fry is roasted with
a ratchet-wheel and spit. This is wound up with a weight, and revolves over the fire, which
is strewed upon the hearth.

The working classes generally purchase their meals cooked in the Osteria Cucinante, where food
and wine are to be had. These are numerous in Rome. They may be fairly called the homes of
the working classes, for there they lounge so long as their baiocchi last. The houses of the
working classes are comfortless in the extreme. They are of stone, and roomy, but unfurnished.
A couple of straw-bottomed chairs and a bed make up generally the entire furnishings of a Roman
house. Indeed, the latter article appears to be the only reason for having a house at all.
So soon as the day's labour is over, the working men resort to the wine and eating shops and
coffeehouses, where they remain till the time of shutting, which is two and three hours of
the night. The Roman reckoning of the day begins at Ave Maria, which is a quarter of an hour
after sunset. The first hour of the night is consequently an hour after Ave Maria, from which
the Romans reckon consecutively till the twenty-fourth hour. As the sun sets earlier or later,
according to the season of the year, the hours vary of course, and the same period of the day
that is indicated by the twelfth hour at the time of equinox, is indicated by the eleventh
hour in midsummer, and the thirteenth hour in midwinter. This is very annoying to travellers
from the north of Europe. "What o'clock is it?" you ask; and are told in reply, "It is the
eighteenth hour and three quarters." To find the time of day from this answer, you must calculate
from Ave Maria, with reference to the time of sunset at that particular season of the year.
Mid-day is announced in Rome by the firing of a cannon from the castle of St Angelo. The French
reckon time as we do, and may possibly, before they leave Rome, teach the Romans to adopt the
same mode of reckoning.

When I stated in a former chapter that trade there is not in Rome, my readers, of course, understood
me to mean that it was comparatively annihilated, not totally extinguished. The Romans must
have houses, however poor; clothes, however homely; and food, however plain; and the supply
of these wants necessitates the existence, to a certain extent, of the various trades and handicrafts.
But in Rome these exist in an embryotic state, and are carried on after the most antiquated
modes,--much as in Britain five hundred years ago. The principal public works,--for by this
name must we dignify the little quiet concerns in the Eternal City,--are situated in the neighbourhood
of Trastevere, the decidedly plebeian quarter of Rome, although it would not do to say so to
a Trasteverian. There are woollen manufactories and candle manufactories. The chief customer
of the latter is the Church. The armoury and mint are contiguously situated to St Peter's.
The tanning of hides is extensively carried on along the banks of the Tiber, whose classic
"gold" is not unfrequently streaked with oozy streams of a dirty white. Flour-mills are numerous.
Amid the brawls which disturb the Trastevere, the ear can catch the ring of the shuttle, for
there a few hand-loom weavers pursue their calling. There is a tobacco manufactory in the same
quarter; and I must state, for truth compels me, that most of the Roman women take snuff. From
the windows of the Vatican Museum one can see the tile and brick maker busy at his trade behind
the palace. Extensive potteries exist near to Ripa Grande, where the most of the kitchen and
chamber utensils for city and country are made. I may here note, that most of the cooking utensils
of the working man are of earthenware, and stand the fire remarkably well.

There are about a score of soap-works in Rome, but the soap manufactured in these establishments
is abominable. My friend Mr Stewart informed me that he brought a soap-boiler from Glasgow,
who understood his business thoroughly, and had soap made in Rome as we have it in this country,
but without the palm-oil. This ingredient was not used, because, not being in the tariff, it
was thought that, should it be imported, it would in all probability be classed under "perfumeries,"
and charged an exorbitant duty. The soap being a new thing in Rome, and unlike the nauseous
stuff there in use, a clamour was raised against it, to the effect that it produced sickness,
and caused headache and vomiting. The Roman ladies, in certain circumstances, are most fastidious
about smells, though why they should in Rome, of all places in Europe, is most unaccountable.
The Government, compassionating their sufferings, seized a parcel of the soap, and caused it
to be analyzed by a chemist. The chemist's report was not unfavourable; nevertheless, owing
to the strong prejudice against the article, the sale was so limited, that its manufacture
had to be discontinued as unremunerative. Besides the trades already enumerated, there are
in the Eternal City marble-cutters, mosaics and cameo workers, sculptors and painters, vine-dressers,
olive-dressers, vegetable cultivators, silk-worm rearers, and a few manufacturers of silk scarfs.
There are, too, in a feeble state, the trades connected with the making and mending of clothes,
the building and repairing of houses. And to feel how feeble these trades are, it is only necessary
to see the garments of the Romans, how coarse in material and how uncourtly in cut. The peasant
throws a sheep's skin over him, and is clad; the lower classes of the towns look as if they
fabricated their own garments, from the spinning upwards. To the best of my knowledge, there
was only one house being built in all Rome when I was there; and that was rising on an old
foundation near the Capitol. The makers of votive offerings and wax-candles for the saints
are a more numerous class than the masons in Rome. Washer-women form a numerous body, as do
lodging-house keepers,--a class that includes many of the nobles. The clerks are numberless,
and very ill paid, having in many cases to attend two or three employers to eke out a living.
Men are invariably employed as house-servants in Rome. They cook, clean the chambers, make
up the beds, in short, do everything that is necessary to be done in a house.

The workman begins his day's labour at six or seven, as the season of the year may be. He breakfasts
on coffee, or on coffee and milk in equal proportions, or on warm milk alone. Bread is used,
which he soaks in his tumbler of coffee. Few take butter; fewer still eggs or ham, for pecuniary
reasons. Many of the working classes take soup of bread paste; others take salad and olive-oil
with bread. The peasantry cut up their coarse bread, saturate it with olive-oil, dust it over
with pepper, and eat it along with finocchio (fennel), the vegetable being unboiled. Roasted
or boiled chestnuts are extensively used at all times of the day. They are to be had on the
streets; many making a living by roasting and selling these fruits.

Mid-day is the common dining hour. The meal generally consists of soup of bread, herbs, paste,
or macaroni, butcher-meat, fowls, snails (white, fed on grass), frogs, entrails of fowls and
young birds, omelettes, sausages, salad with olive-oil, dried olives, fruit, and wine, according
to the circumstances of the person. The country people during harvest make their dinner of
coarse bread, to which they add a few cloves of garlic, a little goat's-milk cheese, and sour
wine diluted with water. Many live on bread alone, with wine. Supper is generally a substantial
meal, consisting more or less of the same materials as are used for dinner, salad and wine
never failing. Tomatoes are extensively used, ate alone, or serving for all kinds of dinner
and supper stews. Green figs are much used. Polenda is a universal article of food amongst
the peasantry. It is Indian corn ground and boiled, and made to take the place that porridge
does in Scotland, with this difference, that it is boiled in pork fat.

The amusements of the working classes are not numerous. Moro and the bowls are their two principal
games. The first is generally played at in twos, and is not unlike our schoolboy game of odds
or evens. The Romans, at this game, however, put themselves into the attitude of gladiators,--each
naming a number, and extending at the same time so many fingers; and the party that names the
number corresponding with the number of fingers extended by both is the victor. So many guesses
constitute the game. The attitude and airs of the combatants in this simple game,--which seems
fitter for children than for men,--are very ridiculous. The other chief amusement of the Romans
is bowls. These are made of wood. So many hands are ranged on this side, and an equal number
on that; and the game proceeds more or less after the fashion of curling. The feast days,--which
are numerous in Rome,--on which labour is interdicted under a heavy penalty, are mostly passed
at bowls; as the Sabbaths, on which labour is also forbidden, though under a much smaller penalty,
are generally with the drawing of the lottery. All places of rendezvous beyond the walls have
the sign of the balls, along with the accompanying intimation, Vino, Bianco e Rosso. Encircling
the courtyard adjoining the house is a broad straw-shed or canopy, beneath which the crowd
assembles, young and old, male and female, gathering round small tables, and discussing the
fiasci of Orvieto and toast. The game is proceeding all the while in their neighbourhood, the
stakes being so many more flasks of the choice wine of Orvieto. This continues till Ave Maria,
when the crowd break up, withdraw to the city, and, after a visit to the wine-shops within
the walls, go home, and (as I was naïvely told by a Scotch lady resident in Rome) beat their
wives as much as they do in England.

In the coffeehouses the grand sources of amusement are dice and drafts, along with backgammon
and billiards. The latter two games are confined to the upper and middle classes. Most of the
upper classes, I believe, have billiard-rooms at home, for family use and conversazione-party
amusement. In the absence of newspapers, journals, and books, it would be impossible, without
these expedients, to get through the evening. All who can afford to attend the theatre (more
properly opera), do so as regularly as the night comes; and the scenes and acts which they
there witness form the basis of Italian conversation. It is at least a safe subject. No Roman
who has the fear of a prison before him would discuss politics in a mixed company. Once, indeed,
he attempted to subdue it, from a desire to hear the debates in the House of Commons, but even
then the Marquess of Carmarthen could not prevail on him to go into the body of the house.

Having dined with the King at Kensington, he was prevailed on to see the ceremony of his Majesty
passing four bills; but, it appears from a note of Lord Dartmouth, that here, as in the Commons,
he avoided going into the house. His Lordship says, "He had a great dislike to being looked at,
but had a mind to see the King in parliament; in order to which he was placed in a gutter upon
the house-top, to peep in at the window, where he made so ridiculous
a figure, that neither king nor people could forbear laughing, which
obliged him to retire sooner than he intended."

Marriage is negotiated, not by the young persons, but by the parents. The mother charges herself
with everything appertaining to the making of the match, conducting even the correspondence.
Of course, to address a billet doux to the young lady would be to infringe upon the prerogatives
of mamma, which must ever be held inviolate if success is seriously aimed at. The mother receives
all such epistles, and answers them in the daughter's behalf. The young lady is closely watched,
and is never left a moment in the society of her intended partner previous to marriage, unless
in the presence of a third party. The Romans thus marry by sight, and have no means, so far
at least as regards personal intercourse, of ascertaining the dispositions, tastes, intelligence,
and habits of each other. After marriage the lady is free. She may visit and receive visitors;
and has now an opportunity for like and dislike; and may be tempted possibly to use it all
the more that she had no such opportunity before.

From marriages I pass to deaths and funerals. The usages customary on the last illness of a
Roman I cannot better describe than by referring to a case which my friend Mr Stewart had occasion
to witness. It was that of a clerk in the Roman savings bank, an acquaintance of his, and a
young man of some means. In 1846 he caught fever, and, after lingering for three weeks, died.
Relatives he had none; and my friend never met any one with the patient save the priest, whose
duty it was to administer the last sacrament, and to do so in time. The sick man's chamber
was curiously arranged. On the bed-cover were laid three crucifixes: one was four feet in length;
the other two were of smaller size. This safeguard against the demons was further reinforced
by the addition of a palm-branch, and a few trifling pictures of the Virgin and saints. On
the wall, above the bed, hung a frame, containing a picture of the Virgin Mary, executed in
the ordinary style, with lighted candles beside it. Two were placed on each side, and to these
was added una mazza di fiori. Notwithstanding all this he died. The body was then carried to
church for the last services, preparatory to consignment to the burying-ground of Saint Lorenzo.
A single word pointing to that blood that cleanseth from all sin would have been of more avail
than all this idle array; but that word was not spoken.

Towards the close of life, especially if the person be wealthy, the priests and monks grow
very assiduous in their attentions, and the relatives become in proportion uneasy. I was introduced
at Rome to a Signor Bondini, who had a wealthy relative in the Regno di Napoli, on the verge
of eighty, and very infirm. There was a monastery in his immediate neighbourhood, and the monks
of that establishment were in daily attendance upon him. His friends in Rome felt much anxiety
regarding the disposal of his property. How the matter ended I know not; but I trust, for the
sake of my acquaintance, that all went well. Nor do friends feel quite safe even after the
"will" has been ratified by the testator's death. There is a tribunal, as I have formerly stated,
for revising wills,--the S. Visita,--which assumes large powers. Of this a curious instance
occurred recently. A Signor Galli, cousin of the minister of that name already mentioned, died
in the July of 1854, and left his whole property, amounting to about fifty thousand pounds,
to neither relatives nor priests, but to works of benevolence for the relief of the poor. The
trustee under the deed was proceeding to plan a workhouse or an asylum for infirm old men,
when the Chapter of St Peter's claimed the money, on the ground that, as the works of benevolence
were not specified in the will, the funds were the property of St Peter's. Some hundreds of
old men are employed in the repairs continually going on about that church, and the Chapter
meant to spend the money in that way. Meanwhile the S. Visita put in its claim in opposition
to the Chapter, and awarded the property for masses for the soul of the departed; deeming,
doubtless, that the whole would be little enough to expiate the well-known liberal opinions
of the deceased. So stands the matter at present. It is impossible to say whether the money
will be spent in paving the Piazza San Pietro, or in masses; as to the relief of the poor,
that is now out of the question.

It is customary for Roman families to desert the dead, that is, to leave the body in the hands
of the priests and monks, who perform the necessary offices to the corpse, conduct the funeral,
and sing masses for the soul of the departed. The pomp and display of the one, and the length
and number of the other, are regulated entirely by the circumstances of the deceased's family.
A more ghastly procession than the funeral one cannot imagine. Instead of a company of grave
men, carrying with decorous sorrow to its final resting-place the body of their departed brother,
you meet what you take to be a procession of ghouls. The coffin, borne shoulder-high, comes
along the street, followed by a long line of figures, enveloped from head to foot in black
serge gowns, with holes for the eyes. They march along, carrying large black crosses and tallow
candles, and using their voices in something which is betwixt a chant and a howl. The sight
suggests only the most dismal associations. But it has its uses, and that is, to move the living
to be liberal in masses to rescue the soul from the power of the demons, of which no feeble
representation is exhibited in this ghostly and unearthly procession.

The modern Italians pay great regard to omens; and, in the important affairs of life, are guided
rather by considerations of lucky and unlucky than the maxims of wisdom. The name of the present
Pope the Romans hold to be decidedly of evil omen; so much so, that to affix it anywhere is
to make the person or thing a mark for calamity. And I was told a curious list of instances
corroborative of this opinion. The first year of the reign of Pius was marked by an unprecedented
and disastrous flood. The Tiber rose so high in Rome, that it drowned the stone lions in the
Piazza del Popolo, flooded the city, and filled the Corso to a depth that compelled the citizens
to have recourse to boats. The Government had a great cannon named after the Pope, which was
used in the war of independence sanctioned by Pius in 1848. The cannon Pio was taken by the
Austrians, although it was afterwards restored. There was a famous steamer, the property of
the Papal Government, named "Pia," which plied on the Adriatic. That steamer shared the fate
of all that bears the Pope's name. It was taken, too, by the Austrians, but not returned; though,
for a reason I shall afterwards state, better it had been sent back. I was wandering one afternoon
amid the desolate mounds outside the walls on the east, when I saw a cloud of frightful blackness
gather over Rome, and several intensely vivid bolts shoot downward. When I entered the city,
I found that the "Porta Pia" had been laid in ruins, and that the occurrence had revived all
the former impressions of the Romans regarding the evil significancy of the Pope's name. All
who came to his aid in his reforming times, they say, were smitten with disaster or sudden
death. He never raises his hands to bless but down there comes a curse. I was not a little
struck, in the winter following my return from Rome, to read in the newspapers, that this same
steamer Pia, of which I had heard mention made in Rome as having about it a magnet of evil
in the Pope's name, had gone down in the Adriatic, with all on board. It was one of the two
vessels which carried the suite of the Russian Grand Dukes when they visited Venice in the
winter of 1852, and, encountering a tempest on its return, perished, with some two hundred
persons, consisting of crew and soldiers.

As regards the affection which the Romans bear to Pope and Papacy, I was assured by Mr Freeborn,
our consul in Rome, that there is not a priest in that city who had two hours to live when
the last French soldier shall have marched out at the gate. All who had resided for some time
in Rome, and knew the state of feeling in the population, shuddered to think of what would
certainly happen should the French be withdrawn. I have been told by those who visited Rome
more recently, that the Romans now do not ask for so much as two hours. "Give us but half an
hour," say they, "and we undertake that the Papacy shall never again trouble the world." No
true Protestant can wish, or even hope, to put down the system in this way; nevertheless it
is a fact, that the Romans have been goaded to this pitch of exasperation, and the slightest
change in the political relations of Europe might precipitate on Rome and the Papal States
an avalanche of vengeance. The November of 1851 was a time of almost unendurable apprehension
to the priests. With reference to France, then on the eve of the coup d'etat, though not known
to be so save in Rome,--where I am satisfied it was well known,--the priests, I was told by
those who had access to know, said, "We tremble, we tremble, for we know not how we shall finish!"
They were said to have their pantaloons, et cetera, all ready, to escape in a laic dress. Assuredly
the curse has taken effect upon the occupants of the Vatican not less than on the inhabitants
of the Ghetto.

Among other things that did not realize my expectations in Italy was the weather. During my
stay in Rome there were dull and dispiriting days, with the Alban hills white to their bottom.
Others were clear, with the piercingly cold Tramontana sweeping the streets; but more frequently
the sirocco was blowing, accompanied with deluges of rain, and flashes of lightning that made
the night luminous as the day, and peals that rocked the city on its foundations. One Sabbath
evening we had a slight shock of earthquake; and I began to think that I had come to see the
volcanic covering of the Campagna crack, and the old hulk which has been stranded on it so
long sink into the abyss. My homeward journey was accomplished so far in the most dismal weather
I have ever seen. I started from Rome on a Monday afternoon, in a Veturino carriage, with two
Roman gentlemen as my companions. It was the Civita Vecchia road, for my purpose was to go
by sea to France. We reached the half-way house some hours after dark; and, having supped,
we were required to conform to the rule of the house, which was to retire, not to bed, but
to our vehicle, which stood drawn up on the highway, and pass the night as best we could. I
awoke at day-break, and found the postilion yoking the horses in a perfect hurricane of wind
and rain. We reached Civita Vecchia at breakfast-time, and found the Mediterranean one roughened
expanse of breakers, with the white waves leaping over the mole, and violently rocking the
vessels in the harbour. The steamers from Naples to Marseilles were a week over due, and the
agents could not say when one might arrive. Time pressed; and after wandering all day about
the town,--one of the most wretched on earth,--and seeing the fiery sun find his bed in the
weltering ocean, I took my seat in the diligence for Rome.

This was the third time I had passed through that land of death the Campagna; and that night
in especial I shall never forget. My companions in the interieur were two Dutch gentlemen,
and a lady, the wife of one of them. The rain fell in deluges; the frequent gleams showed us
each other's faces; and the bellowing thunder completely drowned the rattle of our vehicle.
The long weary night wore through, and about four of the morning we came to the old gate. My
passport had been viséd with reference to a sea-voyage; and to explain my change of route to
the officials in Civita Vecchia and at the gate of Rome, and persuade them to make the corresponding
alterations, cost me some little trouble, and a good many paulos into the bargain. I succeeded,
fortunately, for otherwise I should have had to submit to a detention of several days. How
to make the homeward journey had now become a serious question. The weather had made the sea
unnavigable; and the Alps, now covered to a great depth with ice and snow, could be crossed
only on sledges. I resolved on going by land to Leghorn,--a wearisome and expensive route,
but one that would show me the old Etruria, with several cities of note in Italian history.
The diligence for Florence was to start in an hour. I hurried to the office, and engaged the
only seat that remained unbespoke, in the coupé happily, with a Russian and Italian gentleman
as companions. I made my final exit by the Flaminian gate; and as I crossed the swollen Tiber,
and began to climb the height beyond, the first rays of the morning sun were slanting across
the Campagna, and tinging with angry light the troubled masses of cloud that hung above the
many-domed city.

For a few hours the ride was pleasant. All around lay the neglected land, thinly besprinkled
with forlorn olives, but without signs of man, save where a crumbling village might be seen
crowning the summit of the little conical hills that form so striking a feature in the Etrurian
landscape. When we had reached the spurs of the Apennines the storm fell. The air was thickened
with alternate showers of sleet and snow. We had to encounter torrents in the valleys, and
drifted wreaths on the heights; in short, the journey was to the full as dreary as one through
the Grampians would have been at the same season. There was little to tempt us to leave our
vehicle at the few villages and towns where we halted, for they seemed half-drowned in rain
and mud. Late in the afternoon we reached Viterbo, and stopped to eat a wretched dinner. We
found in the hotel but little of that abundance of which the magnificent vine-stocks in the
adjoining fields gave so goodly promise. Starting again at dusk, the ladies of the party inquired
where the patrol was that used to accompany travellers through the brigand-haunted country
of Radicofani, on which we were about to enter; but could get no satisfactory answer. We skirted
the lake of Bolsena, with its rich but deserted shores, and its fine mountains of oak. Dr. Trotter
says--"We daily see, in all parts of the world, men who, by profligacy and hard-drinking, have
brought themselves to a goal; yet, if we consult the register of the prison, it does not appear
that any of these habitual drunkards die by being forced to lead sober lives." And he contends, that
"whatever debility of the constitution exists, it is to be cured by the usual medicinal means
which are employed to restore weakened organs. But the great difficulty in these attempts to cure inebriety
is in satisfying the mind, and in whetting the blunted resolutions of the patient; and this
is, doubtless, more easily accomplished by a gradual abstraction of his favourite potations."

Dr.
Lettsom mentions a person who usually drank twelve drams a day; but
being convinced of his approaching misery, took the resolution to
wean himself from this poison.

He always drank out of one glass, into which he daily let fall a drop of sealing-wax. By this
means he had twelve drops less of spirit every day, till at length, his glass being filled with
wax, his habit was cured.

"In the drunkard," says Dr. Willan, "the memory and the faculties depending on it, being impaired,
there takes place an indifference towards usual occupations, and accustomed society or amusements.
No interest is taken in the concerns of others--no love, no sympathy remain: even natural affection
to nearest relatives is gradually extinguished, and the moral sense obliterated. The wretched
victims of a fatal poison fall, at length, into a state of fatuity,
and die with the powers both of body and mind wholly exhausted.

Some, after repeated fits of derangement, expire in a sudden and violent phrenzy; some are hurried
out the world by apoplexies; others perish by the slower process of jaundice, dropsy," &c.

P.T.W.

*
* * * *

A SCENE ON WINDERMERE.

"Beautiful scene! how fitted to allure The printless footsteps of some sea-born maid."

It was a holy calm--the sunbeams tinged The lake with gold, and flush'd
the gorgeous brow Of many a cloud whose image shone beneath The blue
translucent wave; the mountain-peaks Were robed in purple, and the
balmy air Derived its fragrance from the breath of flow'rs That seem'd
as if they wish'd to close their eyes, And yield their empire to the
starry throng.

The wind, as o'er the lake it gently died, Bequeath'd its cadence
to the shore, and waked The echo slumbering in the distant vales,
Diversified with woods, and rural homes.

The calm was lovely! and o'er such a scene It brooded like a spirit,
softening all That lay beneath its blessed influence!

On Windermere--what poetry belongs To such a name--deep, pure and beautiful, As its trout-peopled
wave!--on Windermere Our skiff pursued its way amid the calm Which fill'd the heart with holiest
communings. On Windermere--what scenes entranced the eye That wander'd o'er them! either undefined
Or traced upon the outline of the sky. Afar the lovely panorama glow'd, Until the mountains,
on whose purple brows The clouds were pillow' d, closed it from our view. The fields were fraught
with bloom, on them appear'd The verdant robe that Nature loves to wear, And rocky pathways fringed
with bristling pine, O'er which the wall of many a cottage-home Graced with the climbing vine, or beautified
With roses bending to each passing breeze, Attracts the eye, and glistens in the sun-- Were
interspersed around; while in the vale The streamlet gave a silver gleam, and flow'd Beneath
the hill, on whose majestic brow, Dimm'd with the ivy of a thousand years, The rural fane, encircled
with its tombs, Displayed its mouldering form. Amid the light And harmony of this enchanting
scene, 'Tis sweet to have a temple that recalls The heart from earth's turmoil, and hallows it With hopes
that soar beyond the flight of time.

Beautiful Lake! most lovely Windermere! Thou mirror to the mountains that enclose Thy shores
with zone magnificent;--in storm, Or calm--when summer wantons with thy waves, Or winter clouds
thy crystal brow with gloom, Oh! mayst thou still entrance the wanderer's
eye, And keep congenial quiet in his soul. There is not on the face of the earth a region more barren
of everything Christian, and of everything that ought to spring from Christianity, than is
the region of the Seven Hills. And not only do we there find the absence of all that reminds
us of Christianity, or that could indicate her presence; but we find there the presence, on
a most gigantic scale, and in most intense activity, of all the elements and forms of evil.
When the infidel would select the very strongest proofs that Christianity cannot possibly be
Divine, and that its influence on individual and national character is most disastrous, he
goes to the banks of the Tiber. The weapons which Voltaire and his compeers wielded with such
terrible effect in the end of last century were borrowed from Rome. Now, why is this? Either
Christianity is to a most extraordinary degree destructive of all the temporal interests of
man, or Romanism is not Christianity.

The first part of the alternative cannot in reason be maintained. Christianity, like man, was
made in the image of Him who created her; and, like her great Maker, is essentially and supremely
benevolent. She is as much the fountain of good as the sun is the fountain of light; and the
good that is in the minor institutions which exist around her comes from her, just as the mild
effulgence of the planets radiates from the great orb of day. She cherishes man in all the
extent of his diversified faculties, and throughout the vast range of his interests, temporal
and eternal. But Romanism is as universal in her evil as Christianity is in her good. She is
as omnipotent to overthrow as Christianity is to build up. Man, in his intellectual powers
and his moral affections,--in his social relations and his national interests,--she converts
into a wreck; and where Christianity creates an angel, Romanism produces a fiend. Accordingly,
the region where Romanism has fixed its seat is a mighty and appalling ruin. Like some Indian
divinity seated amidst the blood, and skulls, and mangled limbs of its victims, Romanism is
grimly seated amidst the mangled remains of liberty, and civilization, and humanity. Her throne
is a graveyard,--a graveyard that covers, not the mortal bodies of men, but the fruits and
acquisitions, alas! of man's immortal genius. Thither have gone down the labours, the achievements,
the hopes, of innumerable ages; and in this gulph they have all perished. Italy, glorious once
with the light of intelligence and of liberty on her brow, and crowned with the laurel of conquest,
is now naked and manacled. Who converted Italy into a barbarian and a slave? The Papacy. The
growth of that foul superstition and the decay of the country have gone on by equal stages.
In the territory blessed with the pontifical government there is--as the previous chapters
show--no trade, no industry, no justice, no patriotism; there is neither personal worth nor
public virtue; there is nothing but corruption and ruin. In fine, the Papal States are a physical,
social, political, and moral wreck; and from whatever quarter that religion has come which
has created this wreck, it is undeniable that it has not come from the New Testament. If it
be true that "a tree is known by its fruits," the tree of Romanism was never planted by the
Saviour.

With such evidence before him as Italy furnishes, can any man doubt what the consequence would
be of admitting this system into Britain? If there be any truth in the maxim, that like causes
produce like effects, the consequences are as manifest as they are inevitable. There is a force
of genius, a versatility and buoyancy, about the Italians, which fit them better than most
to resist longer and surmount sooner the influence of a system like the Papacy; and yet, if
that system has wrought such terrible havoc among them,--if it has put them down and keeps
them down,--where is the nation or people who may think to embrace Romanism, and yet escape
being destroyed by it? Assuredly, should it ever gain the ascendancy in this country, it will
inflict, and in far shorter time, the same dire ruin upon us which it has inflicted on Italy.

Let no man delude himself with the idea that it is simply a religion which he is admitting,
and that the only change that would ensue would be merely the substitution of a Romanist for
a Protestant creed. It is a scheme of Government; and its introduction would be followed by
a complete and universal change in the political constitution and government of the country.
The Romanists themselves have put this matter beyond dispute. Why did the Papists divide territorially
the country? Why did they assume territorial titles? and why do they so pertinaciously cling
to these titles? Why, because their chief aim is to erect a territorial and political system,
and they wish to secure, by fair means or foul, a pretest or basis on which they may afterwards
enforce that system by political and physical means. Have we forgotten the famous declaration
of Wiseman, that his grand end in the papal aggression was to introduce canon law? And what
is canon law? The previous chapters show what canon law is. It is a code which, though founded
on a religious dogma, namely, that the Pope is God's Vicar, is nevertheless mainly temporal
in its character. It claims a temporal jurisdiction; it employs temporal power in its support,--the
sbirri, Swiss guards, and French troops at Rome, for instance; and it visits offences with
temporal punishment,--banishment, the galleys, the carabine, and guillotine. In its most modified
form, and as viewed under the glosses of the most dexterous of its modern commentators and
apologists, it vests the Pope in a DIRECTING POWER, according to which he can declare null
all constitutions, laws, tribunals, decisions, oaths, and causes contrary to good morals, in
other words, contrary to the interests of the Church, of which he is the sole and infallible
judge; and all resistance is punishable by deprivation of civil rights, by confiscation of
goods, by imprisonment, and, in the last resort, by death. In short, it vests in the Pope's
hands all power on earth, whether spiritual or temporal, and puts all persons, ecclesiastical
and secular, under his foot. A more overwhelming tyranny it is impossible to imagine; for it
is a tyranny that unites the voice with the arm of Deity. We challenge the Romanist to show
how he can inaugurate his system in Britain,--set up canon law, as he proposes,--without changing
the constitution of the country. We affirm, on the grounds we have stated, that he cannot.
This, then, is no battle merely of churches and creeds; it is a battle between two kingdoms
and two kings,--the Pope on one side, and Queen Victoria on the other; and no one can become
an abettor of the pontiff without being thereby a traitor to the sovereign.

And with the fall of our religion and liberty will come all the demoralizing and pauperizing
effects which have followed the Papacy in Italy. Mind will be systematically cramped and crushed;
and everything that could stimulate thought, or inspire a love for independence, or recall
the memory of a former liberty, will be proscribed. We cannot have the Papacy and open tribunals.
We cannot have the Papacy and free trade: our factories will be closed, as well as our schools
and churches; our forges silenced, as well as our printing presses. Motion even will be forbidden;
or, should our railways be spared, they will convey, in lack of merchandise, bulls, palls,
dead men's bones, and other such precious stuff. Our electric telegraph will be used for the
pious purpose of transmitting absolutions and pardons, and our express trains for carrying
the host to some dying penitent. The passport system will very speedily cure our people of
their propensity to travel; and, instead of gadding about, and learning things which they ought
not, they will be told to stay at home and count their beads. The Index will effectually purge
our libraries, and give us but tens where we have now thousands. Alas for the great masters
of British literature and song! The censorship will make fine work with our periodic literature,
pruning the exuberance and taming the boldness of many a now free pen. Our clubs, from Parliament
downwards, will have their labours diminished, by having their sphere contracted to matters
only on which the Church has not spoken; and our thinkers will be taught to think aright, by
being taught not to think at all. We must contract a liking for consecrated wafers and holy
water; and provide a confessor for ourselves, our wives, and daughters. We must eat only fish
on Friday, and keep the Church's holidays, however we may spend the Sabbath. We must vote at
the bidding of the priest; and, above all, take ghostly direction as regards our last will
and testament. The Papacy will overhaul all our political rights, all our social privileges,
all our domestic and private affairs; and will alter or abrogate as it may find it for our
and the Church's good. In short, it will dig a grave, in which to bury all our privileges and
rights together, rolling to that grave's mouth the great stone of Infallibility.

Nor let us commit the error of under-estimating the foe, or of thinking, in an age when intelligence
and liberty are so diffused, that it is impossible that we can be overcome by such a system
as the Papacy. We have not, like the early Christians, to oppose a rude, unwieldy, and gross
paganism; we are called to confront an idolatry, subtle, refined, perfected. We encounter error
wielding the artillery of truth. We wrestle with the powers of darkness clothed in the armour
of light. We are called to combat the instincts of the wolf and tiger in the form of the messenger
of peace,--the Satanic principle in the angelic costume. Have we considered the infinite degradation
of defeat? Have we thought of the prison-house where we will be compelled to grind for our
conqueror's sport,--the chains and stakes which await ourselves and our posterity? And, even
should our lives be spared, they will be spared to what?--to see freedom banished, knowledge
extinguished, science put under anathema, the world rolled backwards, and the universe become
a vast whispering gallery, to re-echo only the accents of papal blasphemy.

This atrocious and perfidious system is at this hour triumphant on the Continent of Europe.
Britain only stands erect. How long she may do so is known only to God; but of this I am assured,
that if we shall be able to keep our own, it will be, not by entering into any compromise,
but by assuming an attitude of determined defiance to the papal system. There must be no truckling
to foreign despots and foreign priests: the bold Protestant policy of the country must be maintained.
In this way alone can we escape the immense hazards which at present threaten us. And what
a warning do the nations of the Continent hold out to us! They teach how easily liberty may
be lost, but how infinite the sacrifices it takes to recover it. A moment's weakness may cost
an age of suffering. If we let go the liberty we at present enjoy, none of us will live to
see it regained. Look at the past history of the Papacy, and mark how it has retained its vulpine
instincts in every age, and transmitted from father to son, and from generation to generation,
its inextinguishable hatred of man and of man's liberties. Look at it in the Low Countries,
and see it overwhelming them under an inundation of armies and scaffolds. Look at it in Spain,
and see it extinguishing, amid the fires of innumerable autos da fe, the genius, the chivalry,
and the power of that great nation. Look at it in France, whose history it has converted into
an ever-recurring cycle of revolutions, massacres, and tyrannies. Look at it in the blood-written
annals of the Waldensian valleys, against which it launched crusade after crusade, ravaging
their soil with fire and sword, and ceasing its rage only when nothing remained but the crimson
stains of its fearful cruelty. And now, after creating this wide wreck,--after glutting the
axe,--after flooding the scaffold, and deluging the earth itself with human blood,--it turns
to you, ye men of England and Scotland! It menaces you across the narrow channel that divides
your country from the Continent, and dares to set its foul print on your free shore! Will you
permit it? Will you tamely sit still till it has put its foot on your neck, and its fetter
on your arm? Oh! if you do, the Bruce who conquered at Bannockburn will disown you! The Knox
who achieved a yet more glorious victory will disown you! Cranmer, and all the martyrs whose
blood cries to heaven against it, while their happy spirits look down from their thrones of
light to watch the part you are prepared to play in this great struggle, will disown you! Your
children yet unborn, whose faith you will thus surrender, and whose liberty you will thus betray,
will curse your very names. But I know you will not. You are men, and will die as men, if die
you must, nobly fighting for your faith and your liberties. You will not wait till you are
drawn out and slaughtered as sheep, as you assuredly will be if you permit this system to become
dominant. But if you are prepared to die, rather than to live the slaves of a detestable and
ferocious tyranny like this, I know that you shall not die; for I firmly believe, from the
aspects of Providence, and the revelations of the Divine Word, that, menacing as the Papacy
at present looks, its grave is dug, and that even now it totters on the brink of that burning
abyss into which it is destined to be cast; and if we do but unite, and strike a blow worthy
of our cause, we shall achieve our liberties, and not only these, but the liberties of nations
that stretch their arms in chains to us, under God their last hope, and the liberties of generations
unborn, who shall arise and call us blessed.

 THE END.

 EDINBURGH: PRINTED BY MILLER AND FAIRLY.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] See the Antiquity of the Waldenses treated of at length in Leger's "Histoire de l'Eglise
Vaudoise;" and Dr Gilly's "Waldensian Researches."

[2] The author would soften his strictures on this head by a reference to the truly interesting
volume on the "Ladies of the Reformation," by his talented friend the Rev. James Anderson.

[3] I have before me a list of prices current (Prezzo Corrente Legale de generi venduti nella
piazza di Roma dal di 28 Febbraro al di 5 Marzo 1852), from which it appears, that sculpture,
paintings, tallow, bones, skins, rags, and pozzolano, comprise all the exports from the Papal
States. What a beggarly list, compared with the natural riches of the country! In fact, vessels
return oftener without than with lading from that shore.

[4] It was so when the author was in Rome. The enterprising company of Fox & Henderson have
since succeeded in overcoming the pontifical scruples, and bringing gas into the Eternal City;
Cardinal Antonelli remarking, that he would accept of their light in return for the light he
had sent to England.

[5] As illustrative of our subject, we may here quote what Mr Whiteside, M.P., in his interesting
volumes, "Italy in the Nineteenth Century," says of the estimation in which all concerned with
the administration of justice are held at Rome:--

"The profession of the law is considered by the higher classes to be a base pursuit: no man
of family would degrade himself by engaging in it. A younger son of the poorest noble would
famish rather than earn his livelihood in an employment considered vile. The advocate is seldom
if ever admitted into high society in Rome; nor can the princes (so called) or nobles comprehend
the position of a barrister in England. They would as soon permit a facchino as an advocate
to enter their palaces; and they have been known to ask with disdain (when accidentally apprised
that a younger son of an English nobleman had embraced the profession of the law), what could
induce his family to suffer the degradation? Priests, bishops, and cardinals, the poor nobles
or their impoverished descendants, will become,--advocates or judges, never. The solution of
this apparent inconsistency is to be found in the fact, that in most despotic countries the
profession of the law is contemptible. In Rome it is particularly so, because no person places
confidence in the administration of the law, the salaries of the judges are small, the remuneration
of the advocate miserable, and all the great offices grasped by the ecclesiastics. Pure justice
not existing, everybody concerned in the administration of what is substituted for it is despised,
often most unjustly, as being a participator in the imposture."

[6] See book vii., chap. x.

[7] Monsignor Marini, who was head of the police under Gregory XVI., and the infamous tool
in all the arrests and cruelties of Lambruschini, was made a cardinal by the present Pope.
All Rome said, let the next cardinal be the public executioner. Talent, certainly, has fair
play at Rome, when a policeman, and even the hangman, may aspire to the chair of Peter.

[8] WHAT THE ROMAN RELIGION COSTS.

The following statistics of the wealth of the clergy in the Roman States are taken from the
American Crusader:--

"The clergy in the Roman States realize from the funds a clear income of two millions two hundred
and fifty thousand dollars. From the cattle they have another income of one hundred thousand
dollars; from the canons, three hundred thousand dollars; from the public debt another income
of one million two hundred and fifty thousand dollars; from the priests' individual estates,
two hundred and fifty thousand dollars; from the portions assigned by law to nuns, five hundred
thousand dollars; from the celebration of masses, two millions one hundred and fifty thousand
dollars; from taxes on baptisms, forty-five thousand dollars; from the tax on the Sacrament
of Confirmation, eighteen thousand dollars; from the celebration of marriages, twenty-five
thousand dollars; from the attestations of births, nine thousand dollars; from other attestations,
such as births, marriages, deaths, &c. &c., nine thousand seven hundred and fifty dollars;
from funerals, six hundred thousand dollars; from the gifts to begging-orders, one million
eight hundred and twenty-five thousand dollars; from the gifts for motives of benevolence or
festivities, or maintenance of altars and lights, or for celebrating mass for the souls in
purgatory, two hundred thousand dollars; from the tithes exacted in several parts of the Roman
States according to the ancient rigour, one hundred and fifty thousand dollars; from preaching
and panegyrics, according to the regular taxes, one hundred and fifty thousand dollars; from
seminaries for entrance taxes and other rights belonging to the students, besides the boarding,
fifteen thousand dollars; from the chancery for ecclesiastical provisions, for matrimonial
licenses, for sanatives, &c. &c., fifty thousand dollars; from benedictions during Easter,
thirty thousand dollars; from offerings to the miraculous images of Virgin Marys and Saints,
seventy-five thousand dollars; from triduums for the sick, or for prayers, five hundred thousand
dollars; from benedictions to fields, cattle, nuptial-beds, &c. &c., nine thousand dollars.

"All these incomes, which amount to ten million five hundred and ten thousand seven hundred
and fifty dollars, are realized and enjoyed by the secular and regular clergy, composed in
all of sixty thousand individuals, including nuns, without mentioning the incomes allowed them
from foreign countries, for the chancery and other cosmopolite congregations.

"It is further to be observed, that in this calculation are not comprised the portions which
the Romans call passatore, which the laity pay to the clergy; such as purchase, permutation,
resignation, and ordination taxes; patents for confessions, preaching, holy oils, privileged
altars, professors' chairs, and the like, which will make up another amount of a million of
dollars; nor those other taxes called pretatico, which are paid by the Jews to the parish priest
for permission to dwell without the Jews' quarter; nor those for the ringing of bells for dying
persons, or those who are in agony; nor those which cripples pay for receiving in Rome the
visit of the wooden child of the celestial altar, who must always go out in a carriage, accompanied
by friars called minori observanti, Franciscan friars, whose incomes they collect and govern. [7]
There are among our countrymen those who are scarcely outdone by the Tzar of Russia and his
companions. At the same place, and probably at the same house, long known as Moon's, two noble dukes,
the one dead, the other yet living, stopped, as they intended, for a moment, while sitting in
their carriages, to eat a mutton chop, which they found so good that
they each of them devoured eighteen, and drank five bottles of claret.

It would appear, indeed, from all accounts, that the Tzar was a prodigiously hard drinker, in
his younger days. In a letter from Mr. A. Bertie to Dr. Charlett, and in the same collection,
he says, "The Tzar lay the other night at Mr. James Herbert's, being come from Deptford to see the
Redoubt,[8] which the justices have suppressed, by placing six constables
at the door.

Upon that disappointment he fell to drinking hard at one Mr. Morley's; and the Marquess of
Carmarthen, it being late, resolved to lodge him at his brother-in-law's, where he dined the next
day; drank a pint of brandy and a bottle of sherry for his morning draught; and after that about
eight more bottles of sack and so went to the playhouse."[9]

[8] It is presumed some notorious place of ill fame.
[9] Ballard's Collection. Bodleian.

The King having given a grand
ball at St. James's, in honour of the Princess's birthday, Peter was
invited; but instead of mixing with the company, he was put into a
small room, from whence he could see all that passed without being
himself seen.
In Tuscany, forty-two, though that land is claimed as a kind of earthly paradise; and in the
Papal States not less than one hundred murders for the million of people. There are ninety
in Sicily; and in Naples the result is more appalling still, where public documents show there
are two hundred murders per year to the million of people!

The above facts are all drawn from the civil and criminal records of the respective countries
named. Now, taking the whole of these countries together, we have seventy-five cases of murder
for every million of people. In Protestant countries,--England, for example,--we have but four
for every million. Aside from various other demoralizing influences of Popery, the fact now
to be named beyond doubt operates with great power in cheapening human life in Catholic countries.
The Protestant criminal believes he is sending his victim, if not a Christian, at once to a
miserable eternity; and this awful consideration gives a terrible aspect to the crime of murder.
But the Papist only sends his victim to purgatory, whence he can be rescued by the masses the
priest can be hired to say for his soul; or his own bloody hand and heart will not hinder him
from doing that office himself. We think the above facts in regard to vice and crime in the
two great departments of Christendom worthy the most serious pondering of every friend of morality
and virtue.

[9] Martinus Scriblerus says, that "the Pope's band, though the finest in the world, would
not divert the English from burning his Holiness in effigy on the streets of London on a Guy
Fawkes' day;" nor, I may add, the Romans from burning him in person on the streets of Rome
any day, were the French away.

[10] For much of the information contained in this chapter I am indebted to my intelligent
friend Mr Stewart.