T. HAVILAND HICKS SENIOR

BY J. RAYMOND ELDERDICE

TO MASTER LLOYD ELDERDICE

CONTENTS

    I. HICKS--WILD WEST BAD MAN
   II. "LEAVE IT TO HICKS"
  III. HICKS' PRODIGIOUS PRODIGY
   IV. QUOTING SCOOP SAWYER'S LETTER
    V. HICKS MAKES A DECISION
   VI. HICKS MAKES A SPEECH
  VII. HICKS STARTS ANOTHER MYSTERY
 VIII. COACH CORRIDAN SURPRISES THE ELEVEN
   IX. THEOPHILUS' MISSIONARY WORK
    X. THOR'S AWAKENING
   XI. "ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL"
  XII. THEOPHILUS BETRAYS HICKS
 XIII. HICKS--CLASS KID--YALE '96
  XIV. THE GREATER GOAL
   XV. HICKS HAS A "HUNCH"
  XVI. THANKS TO CAESAR NAPOLEON
 XVII. HICKS MAKES A RASH PROPHECY
XVIII. T. HAVILAND HICKS, JR.'S HEADWORK
  XIX. BANNISTER GIVES HICKS A SURPRISE PARTY
   XX. "VALE, ALMA MATER!"

T. HAVILAND HICKS, SENIOR

CHAPTER I

HICKS--WILD WEST BAD MAN

  "Oh, a bold, bad man was Chuckwalla Bill--
  An' he lived in a shanty on Tom-cat Hill;
  Ten notches on the six-gun he toted on his hip--
  For he'd sent ten buckos on the One-way Trip!"

Big Butch Brewster, captain and full-back of the Bannister College football squad, his behemoth
bulk swathed in heavy blankets and crowded into a narrow bunk, shifted his vast tonnage restlessly.
He was dreaming of the wild and woolly West, and like a six-reel Western drama thrown on the
screen in a moving-picture show, he visioned in his slumbers a vivid and spectacular panorama.

The first lurid scene was the Deserted Limited held up at a tank station in the great Mojave
Desert by a lone, masked bandit who winged the dreaming Butch in the shoulder, the latter being
an express guard who resisted. After the desperado, Two-Gun Steve, had forced the engineer
to run the train back to a siding, he had ordered Butch to vamoose. Quite naturally, then,
the collegian next found himself staggering across the arid expanse, until at last, half dead
from a burning thirst, seeking vainly for a water-hole, the vast stretch of sandy, sagebrush-studded
wastes shimmered into a gorgeous ocean of sparkling blue waters. Then, as he collapsed on the
scorching-hot sand, helpless, the cool water so near, suddenly the scene shifted.

In quick and vivid succession, Butch Brewster beheld a burning stockade besieged by howling
Indians, and a frontier town shot up by recklessly riding cowboys on a jamboree. Then he became
a tenderfoot, badgered by yelling, shooting roisterers, and later a sheriff, bravely leading
his posse to a sensational battle with that same Two-Gun Steve and his gang, entrenched in
a rock-bound mountain defile.

Finally, he stood with hands above his head in company with other passengers of the Sagebrush
Stagecoach, while a huge, red-shirted Westerner with a fierce black mustache and a six-shooter
in each hand belching bullets at Butch's dancing feet, roared out huskily: "Oh--I'm a ring-tailed
roarer (<i>bang-bang</i>)! I'm a rip-snortin', high-falutin', loop-the-loopin' <i>bad</i> man
(<i>bang-bang</i>)! I'm wild an' woolly, an' full o' fleas, an' hard to curry below the knees--I'm
a roarin' wild-cat, an' it's my night to howl (<i>bang-bang</i>)! Yip-yip-yip-<i>yeee</i>!"

Big Butch, opening his eyes and starting up, gazed about him in sheer surprise; for an instant,
in that state of bewilderment that comes with sudden awakening, he almost believed himself
in a Western ranch bunkhouse, and that some happy cowboy outside roared a grotesque ballad.
He gazed at the interior of a rough shack built of pine boards, with bunks constructed in tiers
on both sides. There were figures in them--Western cowboys, perhaps. Then it seemed, somehow,
that the voice drifting from the outside was strangely familiar. Back at Bannister College,
where he remembered he had gone in the dim and dusty past, he had often heard that same fog-horn
voice, roaring songs of a less blood-curdling character, and accompanied by that same banjo
twanging, which tortured the campus, and bothered would-be studious youths!

"I'm not in a moving-picture show," Butch informed himself, as he donned khaki trousers, football
sweater, and heavy shoes. "I'm not on a Western ranch, either. I'm in the sleep-shack of Camp
Bannister, the football training-camp of the Bannister College squad! Those fellows in the
bunks are not cowboys, Indians, and bandits--they are my teammates! I did dream stuff that
would shame a Wild West scenario, but I understand it all now--my dreams were influenced by
T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.!"

At that dramatic moment, to substantiate his statement, the raucous voice, accompanied by resounding
chords strummed on a banjo, sounded again. The vocal and instrumental chaos was frequently
punctured by revolver reports, as the torturesome Caruso outside roared:

  "Oh, Chuckwalla Bill thought life was sweet--
  Till he met up with Sure-shot Pete;
  A hotter shootin' match Last Chance never saw--
  But Sure-shot Pete was some quicker on the draw!"

The pachydermic Butch, fully dressed--and awake, raging in his wrath like an active volcano,
glanced at his watch, and discovered that it was exactly five A.M.! Intensely pacified by this
knowledge, he lumbered toward the bunkhouse door and flung it open, determined to crush the
pestersome youth who thus unfeelingly disturbed the quietude of Camp Bannister at such an unearthly
hour! However, his grim purpose was temporarily thwarted--before him spread a beautiful panorama,
a vast canvas painted in rich hues and colors, that indescribably charming masterpiece of nature,
entitled dawn.

Butch, gazing from the bunkhouse doorway toward the pebbly shore of the placid lake stretching
out for two miles before him, beheld Old Sol, blood-red, peeping above the wooded hills on
the far-off, opposite strand of Lake Conowingo; the luminous orb laid a flaming pathway across
the shimmering waters, and golden bars of light, like gleaming fingers outstretched, fell athwart
the tall pines that towered on the high bluff back of the camp. The glorious sunshine, succeeding
a flood of rosy color, inundated the scene; it bathed in a gorgeous radiance the early autumn
woods, it illumined the bunkhouse, and another rude shanty known to the squad as the grub-shack,
it poured down on old Hinky-Dink, the ancient negro cookee, setting the breakfast tables just
outside the canvas cook-tent.

"Deed, cross mah heart, Mistah Butch," grinned old Hinky-Dink, seeing, as a motion picture
director would express it, "Wrath registered on the countenance" of Butch Brewster, "Ah done
tole dat young Hicks dat a bird what cain't sing an' will sing mus' be made <i>not</i> to sing!
Ah done info'med him dat yo'-all was layin' fo' him, cause he done bus' up yo' sleep!"

A jay bird, a flashing bit of vivid blue, shot from a tall pine, jeering shrilly at Butch;
out on the lake, a trout leaped above the water for an infinitesimal second, its shining scales
gleaming in the sunshine. From the cook-tent, where old Hinky-Dink grumbled at the frying pan,
the appetizing odor of frying fish assailed the football captain, softening his wrath.

High above the shanties, on a tall flagpole made from a straight young pine, floated a big
gold and green banner, its bright colors gleaming in the sunshine; it bore the words:

    CAMP BANNISTER
    TRAINING CAMP
    THE FOOTBALL SQUAD
    BANNISTER COLLEGE

Head Coach Corridan, smashing the precedent that had made former Gold and Green squads have
their training camp at Bannister College, had brought the Varsity and second-string stars to
this camp on the shore of Lake Conowingo, in the Pennsylvania mountains. For two weeks, one
of which had passed, they were to train at Camp Bannister, until college officially opened;
swimming, hunting, cross-country runs, and a healthful outdoor existence would give the athletes
superb condition, and daily scrimmages on the level field back of the bluff rounded out an
eleven that promised to be the strongest in Bannister history.

As big, good-natured Butch Brewster stood in the bunkhouse doorway, his wrath at the pestiferous
Hicks forgotten, in his rapture at the glorious dawn, he saw something that showed why his
dreams had been of the wild West! The expression of indignation, however, yielded to one of
humorous affection, as he gazed toward the shore.

"I can't be angry with Hicks!" breathed Butch, beholding a spectacle more impressive than dawn.
"So, the irrepressible wretch has Coach Corridan's revolvers, used in starting our training
sprints, and a lot of blank cartridges! He is giving an imitation of a Western bad man. No
wonder I dreamed of Indians, cowboys, and hold-ups; I'll have revenge on the heartless villain,
routing me out at five!"

He saw a massive rock, rising thirty feet in air, its sheer walls scaled only by a rope-ladder
the collegians had rigged up on one side. Atop of "Lookout There!" as the campers humorously
designated the rock, roosted a youth who possessed the colossal structure of a splinter, and
whose cherubic countenance was decorated with a Cheshire cat grin. Quite unaware that his riotous
efforts had brought out the wrathful Butch Brewster, the youthful narrator of Chuckwalla Bill's
stormy career continued his excessively noisy seance.

His costume was strictly in character with his song. He wore a sombrero, picked up on his Exposition
trip the past vacation, a lurid red outing-shirt, and he had wrapped a blanket around each
locomotive limb to imitate a cowboy's chaps. Two revolvers suspended from a loosened belt,
</i>a la</i> wild West, and as Butch stared, the embryo Western bad man twanged a banjo noisily,
and roared the concluding stanza of his desperado hero's history:

  "Said Chuckwalla Bill, 'Oh, boys, plant me
  With my boots on--on the wide prair-eee'--
  Where the coyotes howl, they planted Bill--
  An' so far as </i>I</i> know, he's sleepin' there still!"

"Here they come," grinned Butch, hearing a tumult in the bunkhouse, and a confused Babel of
voices. "Hicks has awakened the camp. Now watch the fellows wreak summary vengeance on his
toothpick frame!"

From the sleep-shack, aroused at that weird hour by the clamor of the irrepressible youth,
T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., tumbled others of the squad, in varying stages of <i>deshabille</i>;
big Beef McNaughton, right half-back, Roddy Perkins, the Titian-haired right-end, Pudge Langdon,
a ponderous tackle, and Monty Merriweather, a clean-cut, aggressive candidate for left end.
From within, other wrathy youths howled vociferous protests at their tormentor:

"Stop that noise; put your muzzle on again, Hicks!"--"Where's the fire? Say, Hicks, muffle
your exhaust!"--"Say, Coach, must we endure this day and night?"

The bunkhouse fairly erupted angry collegians, boiling out like bees swarming from a disturbed
hive; Hefty Hollingsworth, the Herculean center-rush. Biff Pemberton, left half-back, Bunch
Bingham, Tug Cardiff, and Buster Brown, three huge last-year substitutes; second-string players,
Don Carterson, Cherub Challoner, Skeet Wigglesworth, and Scoop Sawyer. A dozen others, from
sheer laziness, hugged their bunks devotedly, despite the terrific turmoil outside.

"It's a disgrace, a <i>howling</i> shame!" exploded Beef, his elephantine frame swathed in
blankets to conceal a lack of vestiture, "Last night, until midnight, that graceless wretch
roosted on 'Lookout There' and because the glorious moonlight made him sentimental and slushy,
he twanged his banjo and warbled such mushy stuff as 'My Love is young and fair. My Love has
golden hair!' When does he expect us to sleep?"

"He doesn't!" explained Monty Merriweather, with succinct lucidity, grinning at his comrades.
"Say, fellows, you know how Hicks dreads a cold shower-bath; well, some of you rage at him
from the other side of the rock, while </i>I</i> climb up the rope-ladder and close with him!
Then some of you prehistoric pachyderms ascend, and we'll chuck that pestersome insect into
the cold, cold lake--"

"Done!" chuckled Butch Brewster, delightedly. So, while he, Beef McNaughton, Hefty Hollingsworth,
and others beguiled the jeering Hicks, expressing in dynamic, red-hot sentences their exact
opinions of his perfidy, the athletic Monty imitated a mountain-scaling Italian soldier. He
climbed stealthily up the swaying rope-ladder; nearer and nearer to the unsuspecting youth
he crept, while the cherubic Hicks, to tantalize the group below, again burst forth:

"</i>Whoop-eee</i>! I'm a bold, <i>bad</i> man (<i>bang-bang</i>)! I got ten notches on my
ole six-gun--I'm a <i>killer</i>. I wings a man before breakfast every day! I got a private
burying-ground, where I plants my victims (<i>bang-bang</i>)! Yip-yip-yip-<i>yee</i>! Oh, I'm
a--</i>Ouch</i>, Monty--leggo me--Oh, I'll be good--why didn't I pull that rope-ladder up here?
Don't bust my banjo --don't let Butch get me--"

Monty Merriweather, reaching the flat top of the rock, had courageously flung himself, without
regard for the Bad Man's desperate record, on the startled Hicks, whose first thought was for
his beloved banjo. While he held the blithesome tormentor helpless, Butch, Beef, and Roddy
Perkins climbed the rope-ladder, and the grinning youth was soon in their clutches, while the
collegians below, like a Roman, mob aroused by the oratory of Mr. Mark Antony, howled for revenge:

"Bust the old banjo over his head, Butch!"--"Sing to him, Beef--that's an <i>awful</i> revenge
on Hicks!"--"Tie him to the rock--make him miss his breakfast!"

"Hicks," growled Butch, eyeing his sunny comrade ominously, "you ought to be tarred and feathered,
and shot at sunrise! When Bannister opens, you will be a Senior, and you'll disgrace '19's
dignity! This is a sample of what we have endured at college for three years, and the worst
is yet to come! You have committed the awful atrocity of awakening Camp Bannister at five A.
M. with your ridiculous imitation, of a Western desperado. To dampen your ardor, we will chuck
you into the cold lake--just as you are!"

"Help! Assistance! Aid! Succor!" shouted the happy-go-lucky Hicks, as the behemoth Butch and
Beef seized him, swinging him aloft with ludicrous ease, "Police! Fire! Murder! Take care of
my banjo, Monty. Tell all the fellows at old Bannister I died game, and plant Hair-Trigger
Bill with his boots on! </i>Oooo</i>, Beef, Butch, <i>have a heart</i>, that water is <i>cold</i>!"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., relieved of banjo and revolvers, but his shadow-like structure still
clad in shoes, trousers, with imitation "chaps" and flamboyant red shirt, with his classic
head still adorned by the sombrero, was swung back and forth by the two bulky football stars--once--twice--

"</i>Three</i>--Let him go!" shouted Butch Brewster, and like a falling meteor, the splinter-like
youth, who had already fallen from grace, shot from the rock, head-first, disappearing with
a spectacular splash in the icy waters of Lake Conowingo. Knowing Hicks to be as much at home
in the water as a fish in an aquarium, the hilarious squad on shore prepared to jeer his reappearance
above the water; however, their program was interrupted by old Hinky-Dink, who stood in the
cook-tent doorway, belaboring a dishpan lustily with a soup-ladle, and shouting:

"Breakfus' am served; fus' an' las' call fo' breakfus; all dem what am late don't git no breakfus!"

"Breakfast!" exclaimed Monty Merriweather, who, with Roddy, Butch, and Beef, remained on the
rock, despite the summons of the Cookee. "Hurry up, Hicks, I'm ravenous. Say, Butch, suppose
all that Western regalia makes him water-logged; he's a terribly long while down there! Didn't
he look like the hero in a moving-picture feature? We've given him the water-cure, but he will
do that same stunt over again. That sunny-souled Hicks is simply Incorrigible!"

CHAPTER II

"LEAVE IT TO HICKS"

Head Coach Patrick Henry Corridan, known to toil-tortured Gold and Green football squads from
time immemorial as "the Slave-Driver," Captain Butch Brewster, and serious Deacon Radford,
the star Bannister quarter-back, foregathered around a table in the Camp Bannister grub-shack.

It was ten-thirty of the morning whose dawn T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., had blithesomely hailed
with an impromptu musicale and saengerfest on "Lookout There!" rock, and the football triumvirate
were in togs. The squad, over in the bunkhouse, noisily donned gridiron armor for the morning
practice, and the pestiferous Hicks was maintaining a mysterious silence, somewhere.

This football trio, on whom rested the responsibility of rounding out a winning Bannister eleven,
vastly resembled a coterie of German generals, back of the trenches, studying a war-map. Before
them was spread what seemed to be a large checker-board. It was a miniature gridiron, with
the chalk-marks painted in white; there were thumb-tacks stuck here and there, some with flat
tops painted green and gold, others, representing the enemy, were solid red. The former had
names printed on them, Butch, Roddy, Beef, and so on. By sticking these on the board, the three
directors of Bannister's football destiny could work out new plays, and originate possible
winning lineups.

"We've just got to win the State Championship this season, Coach!" declared Butch, banging
the table emphatically, as he stated a self-evident fact. "It's my last year for Old Bannister,
and so with Beef and Pudge. I'll give every ounce of strength I possess In every game, to make
that pennant float over Bannister Field!"

"Bannister <i>will</i> win it!" vowed the behemoth Beef, his good-natured countenance grim,
and his jaw set. "Not for five years has a Gold and Green team won the Championship--not since
the year before Butch and I were Freshmen! We've got a splendid bunch of material to build
a team with, and--"

"Our biggest problem is this," spoke Coach Corridan, as with a phenomenal display of strength
he took Beef McNaughton between thumb and forefinger and placed him on the field. "We must
strengthen both line and backfield, for we lost by graduation Babe McCabe, Heavy Hughes, and
Jack Merritt. Now, to replace that lost power--"

Just then, from directly beneath the open window by which they had gathered, like the midnight
serenade of a romantic lover, sounded the well-known foghorn voice of T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.,
as to the plunkety-plunk of a banjo accompaniment, he warbled melodiously:

  "Gone are the days--I used to spend with Car-o-li-nah!
  She had the sunshine in her laughter (<i>plunkety-plunk</i>)
  Just like that state they named her after--"

"</i>Hicks</i>!" announced Butch, stealthily approaching the window, and beckoning his companions.
"Easy--look at him, Deke, there he is, Hicks, the irrepressible! We might as well attempt to
stab a rhinocerous to death with a humming-bird's feather, as to try and reform <i>him</i>!"

Arrayed like a lily of the field, a model of sartorial splendor, Hicks occupied a chair beneath
the window, tilted back gracefully against the side of the grub-shack. He had decked his splinter-structure
with a dazzling Palm Beach suit, and a glorious pink silk shirt, off-set by a lurid scarf.
A Panama hat decorated his head, white Oxfords and flamboyant hosiery adorned his feet, while
the inevitable Cheshire cat grin beautified his cherubic countenance. A latest "best seller"
was propped on his knees, and as he perused its thrilling pages, he carelessly strummed his
beloved banjo, and in stentorian tones chanted a sentimental ballad:

  "Gone are the days--the golden days I'm dreaming of,
  I think I hear her softly calling (plunkety-plunk)
  'Will you be back? Will you be back? (plunk-plunk)
  Back to the Car-o-li-nah you love?'"(plunkety-plunk),

For three golden campus years T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., had gayly pursued the even tenor (or
<i>basso</i>, since he possessed a foghorn, subterranean voice) of his Bannister career. He
absolutely refused to take life seriously, and he was forever arousing the wrath--mostly pretended,
for no one could be really angry with the genial youth--of his comrades, by twanging his banjo
and roaring out rollicking ballads at all hours. He was never so happy as when entertaining
a crowd of happy students in his cozy quarters, or escorting a Hicks' Personally Conducted
expedition downtown for a Beef-Steak Bust, at his expense, at Jerry's, the rendezvous of hungry
collegians.

However, despite his butterfly existence, Hicks, possessed of a scintillating mind, always
set the scholastic pace for 1919, by means of occasional study-sprints, as he characteristically
called them. But when it came to helping his beloved Dad realize a long-cherished ambition
to behold his only son and heir shatter Hicks, Sr.'s, celebrated athletic records, it was a
different story. T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., ever since he committed the farcical <i>faux pas</i>
of running the wrong way with the pigskin in the Freshman-Sophomore football contest of his
first year, had been a super-colossal athletic joke at old Bannister.

His record to date, beside that reverse touchdown that won for the Sophomores, consisted of
scoring a home-run with the bases congested, on a strike-out; of smashing hurdles and cross-bars
on the track; endangering his heedless career with the shot and hammer; and making a ridiculous
farce of every event he entered, to the vast hilarity of the students, who, with the exception
of Butch Brewster, had no idea his ridiculous efforts were in earnest. In the high-jump, however,
Hicks had given considerable promise, which to date the grasshopper collegian had failed to keep.

Hicks, the lovable, impulsive, and irrepressible, with his invariable sunny disposition, his
generous nature, and his democratic, loyal comradeship for everybody, was loved by old Bannister.
The students forgave him his pestersome ways, his frequent torturing of them with banjo-twanging
and rollicking ballads. His classmates idolized him, Juniors and Sophomores were his true friends,
and entering Freshmen always regarded this happy-go-lucky youth as a demigod of the campus.

Big Butch Brewster, who was forever futilely lecturing the heedless Hicks, thrust his head
from the grub-shack window, fought down a grin, and sternly arraigned his graceless comrade:

"Hicks, you frivolous, campus-cluttering, infinitesimal atom of nothing, you labor under the
insane delusion that college life is a continuous vaudeville show. You absolutely refuse to
take your Bannister years seriously, you banjo-thumping, pillow-punishing, campus-torturing
nonentity. You will never grasp the splendid opportunities within your reach! You have no ambition
but to strum that banjo, roar ridiculous songs, fuss up like a tailor's dummy, and pester your
comrades, or drag them down to Jerry's for the eats! You won't be earnest, you Human Cipher,
Before you entered Bannister, you formed your ideas and ideals of campus life from colored
posters, moving-pictures, magazine stories, and stage dramas like 'Brown of Harvard"; you have
surely lived up, or down, to those ideals, you--"

"Them's harsh words, Butch!" joyously responded the grinning Hicks, unchastened, for he knew
good Butch Brewster would not, for a fortune, have him forsake his care-free nature. "Thou
loyal comrade of my happy campus years, what wouldst thou of me?--have me don sack-cloth and
ashes, strike 'The Funeral March' on my golden lyre, and cry out in anguish, </i>'ai! ai</i>!
'Nay, nay, a couple of nays; college years are all too brief; hence I shall, by my own original
process, extract from them all the sunshine and happiness possible, and by my wonderful musical
and vocal powers, bring joy to my colleagues, who--</i>Ouch</i>, Butch--look out for that nail,
you inhuman elephant--"

Big Butch, at that juncture of Hicks' monologue, had effectively terminated it by leaning from
the window, grasping his unsuspecting comrade by the scruff of the neck, and dragging him over
the window-ledge, into the grub-shack, and the presence of Coach Corridan and Deacon Radford.
Strenuous objection was registered, both by the futilely struggling Hicks, and a nail projecting
from the sill, which caught in the Palm Beach trousers and ripped a long rent in them; fortunately,
Hicks' anatomy escaped a similar fate.

"A ripping good move, eh-what?" chuckled Hicks, twisting like a contortionist, to view the
damage done his vestiture, "Hello, what have we here?--the German field-map, by the Van Dyke
beard of the Prophet! I bring the Kaiser's order, ham and eggs, and a cup of coffee. No, that's
a mistake. General Hen Von Kluck, lead a brigade of submarines up yon hill to thunder the Russian
fort! Von Hindering-Bug, send a flock of aeroplanes and Zeppelins to the Allied trenches, the
enemy is shooting Russian caviare at--"

"Hicks," said Head Coach Corridan, smiling at Butch Brewster's indignation, "you are such a
wonder at solving perplexing problems by your marvelous 'inspirations,' suppose you turn the
scintillating searchlight of your colossal intellect upon the question that Bannister must
solve, to produce a championship eleven!"

It was T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.'s, inveterate habit, whenever a baffling situation, or what the
French call an "<i>impasse</i>" presented itself, to state with the utmost confidence, "Oh,
just leave it to Hicks!" On most occasions, when he made this remark, accompanied by a swaggering
braggadocio that never failed to make good Butch Brewster wrathful, the happy-go-lucky youth
possessed not the slightest idea of how the problem was to be solved. He just uttered his rash
promise, and then trusted to his needed inspiration to illuminate a way out! And, as the Bannister
campus well knew, Hicks had solved more than one torturing question by an inspiration that
flashed on his intellect, when all hope of a satisfactory solution seemed dead.

For example, in his Sophomore year, when the Freshman leader, James Roderick Perkins, that
same Titian-haired Roddy who was now a bulwark at right end, became charged with a Napoleonic
ambition, and organized a Freshman Equal Rights campaign, paralyzing Bannister football by
refusing to allow Freshmen to try for athletic teams, unless their demands were granted. Hicks,
when his inspiration finally smote him, smashed the Votes-for-Freshmen crusade, and quelled
Roddy, Futilely racking his brain for a counter-attack, having blithely told the troubled campus,
"Just leave it to Hicks," he had ceased to worry, and then the inspiration had come, By The
Big Brotherhood of Bannister giving the upper-classmen full government over Freshmen, a scheme
successfully carried through, the peril had been thwarted.

"I got a letter from Dad yesterday," began Hicks, somewhat irrelevantly, considering the Coach's
remarks, "and he said--"

"'--Inclosed find the check you wrote for,'" quoth Deacon Radford, humorously. "'If you keep
up this pace, I shall have to turn my steel mills to producing war munitions, to pay your college
bills.' Say, Hicks, seriously, listen to our problem, and suggest what Coach Corridan should do."

While Hicks' athletic powers were known to equal those of the paralyzed oldest inhabitant of
a Civil War Veterans' Home, the sunny youth knew football thoroughly; often he originated plays
that the team worked out with success, and his suggestions were always weighed carefully by
the football directors. So, after he had adjusted his lurid scarf at the correct angle, and
gazed ruefully at his torn habiliments, the sunshiny Senior seated himself at the table, before
the "war-map," and gave heed to the Coach.

"Here's the problem, Hicks," said the Slave-Driver, indicating the Bannister eleven, represented
by the gold and green topped thumb-tacks. "From the line we lost Babe, a tackle, Heavy, a guard,
and Jack Merritt, a star end. Now, Monty Merriweather will hold down Jack's place O. K.--l
can shift Beef from right half to guard, and put Butch at right-half, while Bunch Bingham can
take care of Babe's old berth at tackle. But I have no one to shoot in at full-back, when I
shift Butch; you see, Hicks, my plan is to build an eleven that can execute old-time, line-smashing
football, and up-to-date open play as well; I want fast ends and halves, with a snappy quarter,
and I have them; also, the backfield is heavy enough for line-bucking, if I get my beefy full-back.
I must have a big, heavy, fast player, a giant who simply can't be stopped when he hits the
line. With Butch and Biff at halves, Deke at quarter. Roddy and Monty ends, and my heavy line--why,
a ponderous, irresistible Hercules at full-back will--"

"Say!" grinned the irrepressible Hicks, as Coach Corridan warmed up to his vision, "you don't
want <i>much</i>, Coach! Why don't you ask Ted Coy, the famous ex-Yale full-back, to give up
his business and play the position for you? Maybe you can persuade Charlie Brickley, a <i>fair</i>
sort of dropkicker, to quit coaching Hopkins, and kick a few goals for old Bannister! I get
you, Coach--you want a fellow about the size of the </i>Lusitania,</i> made of structural steel,
a Brobdingnagian Colossus who will guarantee to advance the ball fifteen yards per rush, or
money refunded! 

VIII. Whatsoever doth happen in the world, doth happen justly, and so if thou dost well take heed,
thou shalt find it. I say not only in right order by a series of inevitable consequences, but according
to justice and as it were by way of equal distribution, according to the true worth of everything.
Continue then to take notice of it, as thou hast begun, and whatsoever thou dost, do it not
without this proviso, that it be a thing of that nature that a good
man (as the word good is properly taken) may do it.

This observe carefully in every action.

IX.

Conceit no such things, as he that wrongeth thee conceiveth, or would have thee to conceive,
but look into the matter itself, and see what it is in very truth.

X. These two rules, thou must have always in a readiness.

First, do nothing at all, but what reason proceeding from that regal and supreme part, shall
for the good and benefit of men, suggest unto thee. And secondly, if any man that is present
shall be able to rectify thee or to turn thee from some erroneous persuasion, that thou be always
ready to change thy mind, and this change to proceed, not from any respect of any pleasure
or credit thereon depending, but always from some probable apparent
ground of justice, or of some public good thereby to be furthered;
or from some other such inducement.

XI. Hast thou reason? I have. Why then makest thou not use of it? For if thy reason do her part,
what more canst thou require?

XII.

As a part hitherto thou hast had a particular subsistence: and now shalt thou vanish away
into the common substance of Him, who first begot thee, or rather thou shalt be resumed again
into that original rational substance, out of which all others have
issued, and are propagated.

Many small pieces of frankincense are set upon the same altar, one drops first and is consumed,
another after; and it comes all to one.

XIII.

Within ten days, if so happen, thou shalt be esteemed a god of them, who now if thou shalt return
to the dogmata and to the honouring of reason, will esteem of thee no better than of a mere
brute, and of an ape.

  XIV. Not as though thou hadst thousands of years to live. Death
  hangs over thee: whilst yet thou livest, whilst
  thou mayest, be good.

XV. Now much time and leisure doth he gain, who is not curious to know what his neighbour hath said,
or hath done, or hath attempted, but only what he doth himself, that it may be just and holy?
or to express it in Agathos' words, Not to look about upon the evil conditions of others, but to
run on straight in the line, without any loose and extravagant agitation.

XVI.

He who is greedy of credit and reputation after his death, doth not consider, that they themselves
by whom he is remembered, shall soon after every one of them be dead;
and they likewise that succeed those; until at last all memory, which
hitherto by the succession of men admiring and soon after dying hath
had its course, be quite extinct.

But suppose that both they that shall remember thee, and thy memory with them should be immortal,
what is that to thee? I will not say to thee after thou art dead;
but even to thee living, what is thy praise?

But only for a secret and politic consideration, which we call oikonomian or dispensation.
For as for that, that it is the gift of nature, whatsoever is commended
in thee, what might be objected from thence, let that now that we
are upon another consideration be omitted as unseasonable.

That which is fair and goodly, whatsoever it be, and in what respect soever it be, that it is
fair and goodly, it is so of itself, and terminates in itself, not admitting praise as a part or
member: that therefore which is praised, is not thereby made either
better or worse.

This I understand even of those things, that are commonly called
fair and good, as those which are commended either for the matter
itself, or for curious workmanship.

As for that which is truly good, what can it stand in need of more than either justice or
truth; or more than either kindness and modesty? Which of all those, either becomes good or
fair, because commended; or dispraised suffers any damage?

Doth the emerald become worse in itself, or more vile if it be not
commended?

Doth gold, or ivory, or purple?

Is there anything that doth though never so common, as a knife, a flower, or a tree?

XVII.

If so be that the souls remain after death (say they that will not
believe it); how is the air from all eternity able to contain them?

How is the earth (say I) ever from that time able to Contain the
bodies of them that are buried?

  For as here the change and resolution
  of dead bodies into
  another kind of subsistence (whatsoever
  it be;) makes place for other dead
  bodies: so the souls after death transferred
  into the air, after they have conversed
  there a while, are either by way of transmutation,
  or transfusion, or conflagration, received again into that original
rational substance, from which all others do proceed: and so give
way to those souls, who before coupled and associated unto bodies,
now begin to subsist single.

This, upon a supposition that the souls after death do for a while subsist single, may be answered.
And here, (besides the number of bodies, so buried and contained by the earth), we may further consider
the number of several beasts, eaten by us men, and by other creatures. For notwithstanding
that such a multitude of them is daily consumed, and as it were buried in the bodies of the
eaters, yet is the same place and body able to contain them, by reason of their conversion, partly
into blood, partly into air and fire. What in these things is the speculation of truth? to divide
things into that which is passive and material; and that which is
active and formal.

XVIII.

Not to wander out of the way, but upon every motion and desire, to
perform that which is just: and ever to be careful to attain to the
true natural apprehension of every fancy, that presents itself.

XIX. Whatsoever is expedient unto thee, O World, is expedient unto me; nothing can either be
'unseasonable unto me, or out of date, which unto thee is seasonable. Whatsoever thy seasons
bear, shall ever by me be esteemed as happy fruit, and increase. O Nature! from thee are all things,
in thee all things subsist, and to thee all tend. Could he say of Athens, Thou lovely city of
Cecrops; and shalt not thou say of the world, Thou lovely city of
God?

XX. They will say commonly, Meddle not with many things, if thou wilt live cheerfully. Certainly
there is nothing better, than for a man to confine himself to necessary actions; to such and
so many only, as reason in a creature that knows itself born for society, will command and enjoin.
This will not only procure that cheerfulness, which from the goodness, but that also, which from
the paucity of actions doth usually proceed. For since it is so, that most of those things,
which we either speak or do, are unnecessary; if a man shall cut
them off, it must needs follow that he shall thereby gain much leisure,
and save much trouble, and therefore at every action a man must privately
by way of admonition suggest unto himself, What? may not this that
now I go about, be of the number of unnecessary actions?

Neither must he use himself to cut off actions only, but thoughts and imaginations also, that
are unnecessary for so will unnecessary consequent actions the better be prevented and cut off.

XXI.
Try also how a good man's life; (of one, who is well pleased with those things whatsoever, which
among the common changes and chances of this world fall to his own lot and share; and can live
well contented and fully satisfied in the justice of his own proper present action, and in the
goodness of his disposition for the future:) will agree with thee.

Thou hast had experience of that other kind of life: make now trial of this also. Trouble not
thyself any more henceforth, reduce thyself unto perfect simplicity. Doth any man offend? It is
against himself that he doth offend: why should it trouble thee? Hath anything happened unto
thee? It is well, whatsoever it be, it is that which of all the common chances of the world
from the very beginning in the series of all other things that have, or shall happen, was destinated
and appointed unto thee.

To comprehend all in a few words, our life is short; we must endeavour to gain the present
time with best discretion and justice. Use recreation with sobriety.

XXII. Either this world is a kosmoz or comely piece, because all disposed and governed by certain
order: or if it be a mixture, though confused, yet still it is a comely piece. For is it possible
that in thee there should be any beauty at all, and that in the whole world there should be nothing
but disorder and confusion? and all things in it too, by natural
different properties one from another differenced and distinguished;
and yet all through diffused, and by natural sympathy, one to another
united, as they are?

XXIII. A black or malign disposition, an effeminate disposition; an hard inexorable disposition,
a wild inhuman disposition, a sheepish disposition, a childish disposition; a blockish, a false,
a scurril, a fraudulent, a tyrannical: what then?

If he be a stranger in the world, that knows not the things that are in it; why not be a stranger
as well, that wonders at the things that are done in it?

XXIV. He is a true fugitive, that flies from reason, by which men are sociable. He blind, who
cannot see with the eyes of his understanding. He poor, that stands in need of another, and hath
not in himself all things needful for this life. He an aposteme of the world, who by being discontented
with those things that happen unto him in the world, doth as it were apostatise, and separate
himself from common nature's rational administration. For the same nature it is that brings
this unto thee, whatsoever it be, that first brought thee into the world. He raises sedition
in the city, who by irrational actions withdraws his own soul from
that one and common soul of all rational creatures.

XXV.

There is, who without so much as a coat; and there is, who without so much as a book, doth put
philosophy in practice. I am half naked, neither have I bread to eat, and yet I depart not
from reason, saith one. But I say; I want the food of good teaching, and instructions, and
yet I depart not from reason.

XXVI. What art and profession soever thou hast learned, endeavour to affect it, and comfort thyself
in it; and pass the remainder of thy life as one who from his whole heart commits himself and
whatsoever belongs unto him, unto the gods: and as for men, carry not thyself either tyrannically
or servilely towards any.

XXVII. Consider in my mind, for example's sake, the times of Vespasian: thou shalt see but the
same things: some marrying, some bringing up children, some sick,
some dying, some fighting, some feasting, some merchandising, some
tilling, some flattering, some boasting, some suspecting, some undermining,
some wishing to die, some fretting and murmuring at their present
estate, some wooing, some hoarding, some seeking after magistracies,
and some after kingdoms.

And is not that their age quite over, and ended? Again, consider now the times of Trajan. There
likewise thou seest the very self-same things, and that age also is now over and ended. In the like
manner consider other periods, both of times and of whole nations, and see how many men, after they
had with all their might and main intended and prosecuted some one
worldly thing or other did soon after drop away, and were resolved
into the elements.

But especially thou must call to mind them, whom thou thyself in thy lifetime hast known much distracted
about vain things, and in the meantime neglecting to do that, and closely and unseparably (as
fully satisfied with it) to adhere unto it, which their own proper constitution did require.
And here thou must remember, that thy carriage in every business must be according to the
worth and due proportion of it, for so shalt thou not easily be tired
out and vexed, if thou shalt not dwell upon small matters longer than
is fitting.

XXVIII. Those words which once were common and ordinary, are now become obscure and obsolete; and
so the names of men once commonly known and famous, are now become in a manner obscure and obsolete
names.

Camillus, Cieso, Volesius, Leonnatus; not long after, Scipio, Cato, then Augustus, then Adrianus,
then Antoninus Pius: all these in a short time will be out of date, and, as things of another
world as it were, become fabulous. And this I say of them, who once shined as the wonders of their
ages, for as for the rest, no sooner are they expired, than with them all their fame and memory.
And what is it then that shall always be remembered? all is vanity.

What is it that we must bestow our care and diligence upon? even
upon this only: that our minds and wills be just; that our actions
be charitable; that our speech be never deceitful, or that our understanding
be not subject to error; that our inclination be always set to embrace
whatsoever shall happen unto us, as necessary, as usual, as ordinary,
as flowing from such a beginning, and such a fountain, from which
both thou thyself and all things are.

Willingly therefore, and wholly surrender up thyself unto that fatal concatenation, yielding
up thyself unto the fates, to be disposed of at their pleasure.

XXIX. Whatsoever is now present, and from day to day hath its existence; all objects of memories,
and the minds and memories themselves, incessantly consider, all things that are, have their being by
change and alteration. Use thyself therefore often to meditate upon this, that the nature of the
universe delights in nothing more, than in altering those things that are, and in making others
like unto them. So that we may say, that whatsoever is, is but as it were the seed of that which
shall be.

For if thou think that that only is seed, which either the earth or the womb receiveth, thou
art very simple.

XXX.

Thou art now ready to die, and yet hast thou not attained to that perfect simplicity: thou
art yet subject to many troubles and perturbations; not yet free from all fear and suspicion
of external accidents; nor yet either so meekly disposed towards all men, as thou shouldest;
or so affected as one, whose only study and only wisdom is, to be just in all his actions.

XXXI. Behold and observe, what is the state of their rational part; and those that the world doth
account wise, see what things they fly and are afraid of; and what
things they hunt after.

XXXII. In another man's mind and understanding thy evil Cannot subsist, nor in any proper temper
or distemper of the natural constitution of thy body, which is but
as it were the coat or cottage of thy soul.

Wherein then, but in that part of thee, wherein the conceit, and
apprehension of any misery can subsist?

Let not that part therefore admit any such conceit, and then all is well. Though thy body which
is so near it should either be cut or burnt, or suffer any corruption
or putrefaction, yet let that part to which it belongs to judge of
these, be still at rest; that is, let her judge this, that whatsoever
it is, that equally may happen to a wicked man, and to a good man,
is neither good nor evil.

For that which happens equally to him that lives according to nature,
and to him that doth not, is neither according to nature, nor against
it; and by consequent, neither good nor bad.

XXXIII.

Ever consider and think upon the world as being but one living substance, and having but one
soul, and how all things in the world, are terminated into one sensitive
power; and are done by one general motion as it were, and deliberation
of that one soul; and how all things that are, concur in the cause
of one another's being, and by what manner of connection and concatenation
all things happen.

XXXIV. What art thou, that better and divine part excepted, but as Epictetus said well, a wretched
soul, appointed to carry a carcass up and down?

XXXV. To suffer change can be no hurt; as no benefit it is, by change to attain to being. The
age and time of the world is as it were a flood and swift current,
consisting of the things that are brought to pass in the world.

For as soon as anything hath appeared, and is passed away, another succeeds, and that also
will presently out of sight.

XXXVI. Whatsoever doth happen in the world, is, in the course of nature, as usual and ordinary
as a rose in the spring, and fruit in summer. Of the same nature is sickness and death; slander,
and lying in wait, and whatsoever else ordinarily doth unto fools use to be occasion either
of joy or sorrow. That, whatsoever it is, that comes after, doth
always very naturally, and as it were familiarly, follow upon that
which was before. For thou must consider the things of the world,
not as a loose independent number, consisting merely of necessary
events; but as a discreet connection of things orderly and harmoniously
disposed. In the Quadrangle, under the brilliant arc-lights, the exuberant
youths paused,

"One--two--three--let 'er go!" boomed Beef, and the football squad, in <i>basso profundo</i>,
aided by the Phillyloo Bird's uncertain tenor, and Theophilus' quavery treble, roared in a
tremendous vocal explosion that shook the dormitories:

"Hicks is coming! Hicks is coming! Everybody out on the campus! Get ready to welcome our T.
Haviland Hicks, Jr.! Hicks is bringing Bannister's full-back--a </i>Prodigious Prodigy</i>!"

Windows rattled up, heads were thrust out, a fusillade of questions bombarded the squad in
the Quadrangle below; from the three upper-class dormitories erupted hordes of howling, shouting
youths, and soon the Quad. was filled with a singing, yelling, madly happy crowd. The Bannister
Band, that famous campus musical organization, following a time-honored habit of playing on
every possible occasion, gladsomely tuned up and soon the noise was deafening, while study-hour,
as prescribed by the Faculty, was forgotten.

"Everybody on the campus, at once!" Butch Brewster, Master-of-Ceremonies, boomed through his
megaphone, having aroused excitement to the highest pitch by reading Hicks' telegram. "Old
Dan Flannagan's jitney-bus will soon heave into sight. Let the Band blare, make a <i>big noise</i>.
Let's show Hicks how glad we are to have him back to old Bannister."

It is historically certain that Mr. Napoleon Bonaparte returning from Jena and Austerlitz,
Mr. Julius Caesar, home at Rome from his Conquests, or Mr. Alexander the Great (Conqueror,
not National League pitcher) never received such a welcome as did T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., from
his Bannister comrades that night. To the excited students, massed on the campus before the
Gym. awaiting his arrival, every second seemed a century; everybody talked at once until the
hubbub rivaled that of a Woman's Suffrage Convention. Thomas Haviland Hicks, Jr., was actually
returning to old Bannister; and he was bringing "The Prodigious Prodigy," whatever that was,
with him. Knowing the cheery Senior's intense love of doing the dramatic and his great ambition
to startle his Alma Mater with some sensational stunt, they could hardly wait for old Dan Flannagan's
jitney-bus to roll up the driveway,

"Here he comes!" shrieked, little Skeet Wigglesworth, an excitable Senior, who had climbed
a tree to keep watch. "Here comes our Hicks!"

"Honk--Honk!" To the incessant blaring of a raucous horn, old Dan Flannagan's jitney-bus moved
up the driveway. The genial Irish Jehu, who for over twenty years had transported Bannister
collegians and alumni to and from College Hill in a ramshackle hack drawn by Lord Nelson, an
antiquated, somnambulistic horse, had yielded to modern invention at last. Lord Nelson having
become defunct during vacation, Old Dan, with a collection taken up by several alumni at Commencement,
had bought a battered Ford, and constructed therewith a jitney-bus. This conveyance was fully
as rattle-trap in appearance as the traditional hack had been, but the returning collegians
hailed it with glee.

"All hail Hicks!" howled Butch Brewster, beside himself with joy, "Altogether--the Bannister
yell for--</i>Hicks</i>!"

With half the collegians giving the yell, a number shouting indiscriminately, the Bannister
Band blaring furiously, "Behold, The Conquering Hero Comes," with the youths a yelling, howling,
shrieking, dancing mass, old Dan Flannagan, adding his quota of noises with the Claxon, brought
his bus to a stop. This was a hilarious spectacle in itself, for on its sides the Bannister
students had painted:

    HENRY FORD'S "PIECE-OF-A-SHIP," </i>THE DOVE</i>! ALL RIDING IN THIS JIT DO
    SO AT THEIR OWN RISK! TEN CENTS FOR A JOY-RIDE TO COLLEGE HILL! YES,
    IT'S A </i>FORD</i>! WHAT DO YOU CARE? GET ABOARD!

On the roof of "The Dove," or "The Crab," as the collegians called it when it skidded sideways,
perched precariously that well-known, beloved youth, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr. He clutched his
pestersome banjo and was vigorously strumming the strings and apparently howling a ballad,
lost in the unearthly turmoil. As the jitney-bus stopped, the grinning Hicks arose, and from
his lofty, position made a profound bow.

"Speech! Speech! Speech!" A mighty shout arose, and Hicks raised his hand for silence, which
was immediately delivered to him.

"Fellows, one and all," he shouted, a mist before his eyes, for his impulsive soul was touched
by the ovation, "I--I am <i>glad</i> to be back! Say--I--I--well, I'm glad to be back--that's all!"

At this masterly oration, which, despite its brevity, contained volumes of feeling, the Bannister
students went wild--for a longer period than any political convention ever cheered a nominated
candidate, they cheered T. Haviland Hicks, Jr. "Roar--roar--roar--<i>roar</i>!" in deafening
sound-waves, the noise swept across the campus; never had football idol, baseball hero, or
any athletic demigod, in all Bannister's history, been accorded such a tremendous ovation.

"Fellows," called T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., climbing down from his precarious perch, "stand back;
I have brought to Bannister the 'Prodigious Prodigy.' I have rounded up a full-back who will
beat Ballard all by himself. Behold the new Gold and Green football eleven, 'Thor'!"

From the grinning Dan Flannagan's jitney-bus, like a Russian bear charging from its den, lumbered
a being whose enormous bulk fairly astounded the speechless youths; Butch Brewster, Beef McNaughton,
Tug Cardiff, Bunch Bingham, Buster Brown, and Pudge Langdon were popularly regarded as the
last word in behemoths, but this "Thor" dwarfed them, towered above them like a Colossus over
Lilliputians. He was a youth, and yet a veritable Hercules. Over six feet he stood, with a
massive head, covered with tousled white hair, a powerful neck, broad shoulders, a vast chest.
To a judge of athletes, he would tip the scales at a hundred and ninety pounds, all solid muscle,
for that superb physique held not an ounce of superfluous flesh.

"Hicks," said Head Coach Patrick Henry Corridan, gazing at the mountain of muscle, "if <i>size</i>
means anything, you have brought old Bannister an entire football squad! What splendid material
to train for the Big Games, why--he will be irresistible!"

CHAPTER IV

QUOTING SCOOP SAWYER'S LETTER

  "I didn't raise my </i>Ford</i> to be a <i>jitney</i>--
  To run the streets, and stay out late at night!
  Who dares to put a jitney sign, upon it--
  And send my <i>peace-ship</i> out for fares to fight?"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., standing by his open window at 3 P. M. one afternoon a week after his
sensational return to Bannister College, with the "Prodigious Prodigy" in tow, indulged in
the soul-satisfying pastime of twanging his banjo, and roaring, in his subterranean voice,
a parody on "I Didn't Raise My Boy to be a Soldier." It was actually the first Caruso-like
outburst of the pestersome youth that year, but his saengerfest brought vociferous howls of
protest from campus and dormitories:

"</i>Bow-wow-wow</i>! The Grand Opery season is starting!"

"Sing some records for a talking-machine company, Hicks!"

"Kill that tom-cat! Listen to the back-fence musicale!"

"Say, Hicks--we'll take your word for that noise!"

On the Gym. steps, loafing a few moments before jogging out to Bannister Field for a strenuous
scrimmage under the personal supervision of Slave-Driver Corridan, the Gold and Green football
squad had gathered. It was from these stalwart gridiron gladiators that the caustic criticism
of T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.'s, vocal atrocities emanated, and the imitation of a mournful hound
by "Ichabod," the skyscraping Senior, was indeed phenomenal. Added to the howls, whistles,
jeers, and shouts of the squad, were like condemnations from other collegians, sky-larking
on the campus, or in the dorms.

"At that," grinned Captain Butch Brewster happily, "it surely makes me feel jubilant to hear
Hicks' foghorn voice shattering the echoes, with his banjo strumming disturbing the peace--for
which offense it shall soon be arrested. We can truly say that old Bannister is now officially
opened for another year, for T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., has performed his annual rite--"

"Right--!" scoffed big Pudge Langdon, indignantly, as he gazed up at the happy-go-lucky youth,
at the window of his room on the third-floor, campus side, of Bannister Hall, "Hicks ought
to be tarred and feathered; there is <i>nothing right</i> in the way he has acted since his
return to college! He struts around like Herman, the Master-Magician, and all the fellows fully
expect to see him produce white rabbits from his cap, or make varicolored flags out of his
handkerchief."

"We ought to toss him in a blanket," stormed Beef McNaughton, in ludicrous rage. "Ever since
he mystified Bannister by going out and corralling a Hercules who is an entire eleven in himself,
Hicks has maintained that sphinx-like silence as to how he achieved the feat, and he swaggers
around, enshrouded in <i>mystery</i>! All we know is that 'Thor' is John Thorwald, of Norwegian
descent. If we ask <i>him</i> for information, that wretch Hicks has him trained to say, 'Ask
the little fellow, Hicks!'"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., in truth, had acted in a most reprehensible manner since that memorable
night when he brought "Thor, the Prodigious Prodigy," to the campus. Not that he ceased to
be the same sunny-souled, popular and friendly youth. The collegians, happy at finding his
room open-house again, flocked to his cozy quarters, Freshmen <i>fell</i> under the spell of
his generous nature, his Beef-Steak Busts, down at Jerry's were nightly occurrences, and he
was the same Hicks as of old. But, after the dramatic manner in which Hicks had mysteriously
made good the rash vow uttered at Camp Bannister and had brought to Coach Corridan a blond-haired
giant who seemed destined to perform prodigies at full-back, the sunny Senior had evidently
labored under the delusion that he was "Kellar, The Great Magician."

Instead of relieving the tortured curiosity of the students, wild to know how and where Hicks
had unearthed this physical Hercules, who in every way filled the details of Head Coach Corridan's
"blue-prints," T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., enjoying to the full this novel method of torturing
his comrades, made a baffling mystery of the affair, much to the indignation of his friends.

</i>"Just leave it to Hicks,"</i> he would say, when the Bannister youths cajoled, implored,
threatened, or argued. "Thor is eligible to play four years of football at old Bannister. I
call him Thor, after the great Norse god, Thor; he is of Norwegian descent. That is all of
the Billion-Dollar Mystery I can disclose; ten thousand dollars offered for the correct solution."

"Here comes Scoop Sawyer," said Monty Merriweather, as that Senior, waving his arms in air,
catapulted from Bannister Hall, and strode toward the squad on the Gym. steps; his appearance
registered wrath, in photo-play parlance, and on reaching his comrades he immediately acquainted
them with its cause.

"Listen to that Hicks!" he exploded, gesticulating with a sheaf of papers. "Hicks, the mocking-bird!
He is mocking <i>us</i>--with his 'Billion-Dollar Mystery!' Say--here I am writing to Jack
Merritt; he played football four years for old Bannister; he was captain of the Gold and Green
eleven; last Commencement he graduated, and the last thing he said to me was, 'Scoop, old pal,
write to me next fall, tell me everything about the football season; keep me posted as to new
material!' </i>Everything</i>--keep him posted as to new material--</i>Bah</i>! If I write
that Hicks has brought a fellow he calls 'Thor,' who spreads the regulars over the field, Jack
will want to know the details, and--that villainous Hicks won't divulge his dread secret!"

At this moment, Scoop Sawyer, so-called because he was ambitious to be a newspaper reporter,
after graduation, and for his humorous articles in the </i>Bannister Weekly</i>, had his intense
wrath soothed by that which has "power to soothe the savage breast"; T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.,
displaying a wonderful originality by composing, then chanting, his parody, concluded the chorus
roaring lustily, to a rollicking banjo accompaniment:

  "If street car companies gave seats to all patrons
  The strap-hangers in jitneys would not ride.
  There'd be no jits. today
  If Ford owners would say,
  I didn't raise my Ford to be a--jitney!"

"That is too much!" raged Captain Butch Brewster, facing his excited colleagues. "Come on,
fellows, we'll invade Hicks' room, read him Scoop's letter to Jack Merritt, and <i>make</i>
him solve the Mystery! We're done with diplomacy; now, we'll deliver the ultimatum; when the
squad returns from scrimmage, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., will tell us all about Thor, or be tossed
in a blanket! Are you with me?"

"We are <i>ahead</i> of you!" howled Roddy Perkins, leading a wild charge for the entrance
to Bannister Hall. Following him up the two flights of stairs with thunderous tread came Butch,
Beef, Monty, Biff, Hefty, Pudge, Tug, Ichabod, Bunch, Buster, Bus Norton, and several second-team
players, Cherub, Chub Chalmers, Don, Skeet, and Scoop Sawyer with his letter. With a terrific,
blood-chilling clatter, and hideous howls, the Hicks-quelling Expedition roared down the third
corridor of Bannister, and surged into the room of that tantalizing T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.!

"Safety first!" shrieked that cheery collegian, stowing his banjo in the closet and making
a strenuous but futile effort to dive head-first beneath the bed, being forcibly restrained
by Beef, who clung to his left ankle. "Say, to what am I indebted for the honor of this call?
Why, when I got back to Bannister, you fellows gushed, 'Oh, we're <i>so</i> glad you're back,
Hicks, old top; we missed even your saengerfests,' and when I start one--"

"Hicks," pronounced Butch Brewster grimly, holding the genial offender by the scruff of the
neck, "you tantalizing, aggravating, irritating, lunatical, conscienceless degenerate! You
assassin of Father Time, you disturber of the peace, <i>heed</i>! Scoop Sawyer is writing to
Jack Merritt, to tell about the football team, and Bannister's chances of the Championship;
he wants to tell Jack all about this Thor! Now, you have acted like Herman-Kellar-Thurston
long enough, and hear our final word. Read Scoop's letter, and if when you finish its perusal
you fail to give us full information, and answer all questions about Thor--"

"The football team will toss you in a blanket until you do!" finished Monty Merriweather, "We
intended to wait until after the scrimmage, but Butch evidently believes we should end your
bothersome mystery as once, and--"

"'Curiosity killed the cat!'" grinned T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.; then seeing the avenues and boulevards
of escape were closed, but fighting for time, "let me peruse said missive indited by our literarily
overbalanced Scoop. I am reluctant to dispel the clouds of mystery, but--"

Scoop Sawyer thrust the typewritten pages of the letter--composed on the battered old typewriter
in the editorial sanctum of the </i>Bannister Weekly</i>--into Hicks' grasp and with a grin,
that blithesome youth read:

Bannister College, Sept, 27.

DEAR OLD JACK:

There is so <i>much</i> to tell you, old pal, that I scarcely know where to start, but you
want to know about the football eleven, so I'll write about T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., and his
'Billion-Dollar Mystery,' as he calls it; about Thor, the Prodigious Prodigy. You well know
what a scatter-brained wretch Hicks is, and how he dearly loves to plot dramatic climaxes--to
mystify old Bannister. Just now Hicks has the campus as wrathful as it is possible to be with
that lovable youth; he has originated a great mystery, and achieved a seemingly impossible
feat, and instead of explaining it, he swaggers around like a Hindoo mystic enshrouded in mystery
and the fellows are wild enough to tar and feather the incorrigible villain!

To get off to a sprint-start, up in Camp Bannister, before college opened, when the squad was
in training camp, Butch Brewster says that Coach Corridan one day, before Hicks, expressed
a fervid ambition to find a huge, irresistible fullback--

Here the chronicle must hang fire, while T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., grinning at the wrath his
mysterious behavior aroused, peruses those sections of Scoop Sawyer's epistle telling of two
scenes already described; first, the one in the Camp Bannister grub-shack, where Head Coach
Corridan blue-printed the Gargantuan athlete he desired, and the blithesome Hicks confidently
requested that the Herculean task be left to him; second, the scene of intense excitement on
the campus the night that the missing Hicks returned personally conducting that mountain of
muscle, the blond-haired Thor.

Having grinned at these descriptions, the pestiferous Hicks scanned a picturesque description
by Scoop of the events that transpired between that memorable night and the present invasion
of the sunny Senior's room by the indignant squad.

--Naturally, Jack, old Bannister was intensely curious to know who this "Thor" could be, and
how Hicks unearthed such a giant. But, instead of swaggering a trifle, as he inevitably does,
and saying, 'Oh, I told you just to leave it to Hicks!' then telling all about it, after accomplishing
what everyone believed a ridiculously impossible quest, he maintains that provokingly mysterious
silence, and John Thorwald (we know his name, anyway) stolidly refers us to Hicks. So where
Thor originated or how under the sun Hicks got on his trail, after making his rash vow to corral
a mighty fullback, is a deep, dark mystery.

Now for Thor himself. Words cannot describe that Prodigious Prodigy; he must be seen to be
believed! We do know that he is John Thorwald, and of distinctly Norwegian descent, so that
calling him after the mythic Norse god is extremely appropriate. And he is reminiscent of the
great Thor, with his vast strength and prowess. Thanks to T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.'s, love of
mystery, and of tantalizing old Bannister, we know nothing of Thorwald's past, but we are sure
he has lived and toiled among <i>men</i>, to possess that powerful build. I can't describe
him, old man, without resorting to exaggeration, for ordinary words and phrases are utterly
inadequate with Thor! Conjure up a vision of Gulliver among the Lilliputians and you can picture
him towering over us. He is a Viking of old, with his fair features and blond hair. Probably
twenty-five years old, he has a powerful frame and prodigious strength, he dwarfs such behemoths
as Butch and Beef, and makes such insignificant mortals as little Theophilus and myself seem
like insects!

Thor is so <i>big</i>, Jack, that when he gets in a room, he crowds everyone into the corridor,
and fills it alone. No wonder Hicks telegraphed to knock out the partitions between five rooms
to make space for Thor! When he stands on the campus he blots out several sections of scenery,
and the college disappears, giving the impression he has swallowed it. Thor is a slow-minded
being, but possessed of a grim determination. To get an idea into his mind requires a blackboard
and Chautauqua lecturer, but once he masters it, he never lets go; so it will be with football
signals, once let him grasp a play, he will never be confused. He is simply a huge, stolid
giant. He has a bulldog purpose to get an education, and nothing else matters. As for college
spirit, the glad comradeship of the campus, he has no time for it; he pays no attention to
the fellows at all, only to Hicks.

His devotion to that wretch is pathetic! He follows Hicks around like a huge mastiff after
a terrier, or an ocean leviathan towed by a tug-boat; he seems absolutely helpless without
T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., and so we have a daily Hicks' personally conducted tour of Thor to
interest us. Briefly, Jack, John Thorwald is a slow-moving, slow-minded, grimly bulldog giant,
who has come to Bannister to study, and as for any other phase of campus existence, he has
never awakened to it!

Now for the football story: Well, the day after Hicks' sensational arrival, which I described,
Coach Corridan, Captain Butch Brewster, Beef, Buster, Pudge, Monty, and Roddy with yours truly,
went to Thor's room in Creighton just before football practice. We found that Colossus, who
had matriculated as a Freshman, aided by Hicks, patiently masticating mental food as served
by Ovid. Coach Corridan said, 'Come on, Thorwald, over to the Gym.; we'll fix you out with
togs, if we can get two suits big enough to make one for your bulk! Ever play the game?' 'I
play some,' rumbled Thor stolidly, never raising his eyes from his Latin. 'Don't bother me,
I want to <i>study.</i> I have not time for such foolishness. I am here to study, to get an
education!' 'But,' urged the coach earnestly, 'you <i>must</i> play football for your Alma
Mater, for old Bannister. Why, you--you <i>must</i>, that's all!' Thor gazed at Hicks questioningly--I
forgot to add that insect's name--and asked, 'Is it so, Hicks? I <i>got</i> to play for the
college?' And when Hicks grinned, '</i>Sure</i>, Thor, it must be did. Bannister expects you
to smear the other teams over the landscape,' that blond Norwegian Viking said, 'Well, then,
I play.'

All Bannister turned out to behold the "Prodigious Prodigy" on the football field. Somewhere--Hicks
won't divulge where--Thor has learned the rudiments of the game. With that bulldog tenacity
of his, he has learned them well. Hence he was ready for the scrubs, and in the practice game
it was a veritable slaughter of the innocents. The 'Varsity could not stop Thor. Remember 'Ole'
Skjarsen, the big Swede of George Fitch's 'Siwash College' tales? Thor, after the ten minutes
required to teach him a play, would take the ball and just wade through the regulars for big
gains. The only way to stop him was for the entire eleven to cling affectionately to his bulk,
and then he transported them several yards. He is a phenom, a veritable Prodigious Prodigy,
and maybe old Bannister isn't <i>wild</i> with enthusiasm. His development will be slow but
sure, and by the time the big games for the championship come, he will be a whole team in himself.
Right now he goes through daily scrimmage as solemnly as if performing a sacred rite. He doesn't
thrill with college spirit, but as for football--

Leaving Hicks to read the rest of Scoop Sawyer's long missive, terminating with indignant condemnation
of the sunny youth's love of mystery, the terrific enthusiasm roused at old Bannister by the
daily appearance on Bannister Field of Thor, and his irresistible marches through the 'Varsity,
must be chronicled and explained.

Not for five seasons, not since the year before Hicks, Pudge, Butch, Beef and the others of
1919 were Freshmen, had the Gold and Green corraled that greatest glory, The State Intercollegiate
Football Championship! In Captain Butch's Sophomore year, he had flung his bulk into the fray,
training, sacrificing, fighting like a Trojan, only to see the pennant lost by a scant three
inches, as Jack Merritt's forty-yard drop-kick for the goal that would have won the Championship
struck the cross-bar and bounded back into the field. And the past season-old Bannister could
still vision that tragic scene of the biggest game.

The students could picture Captain Brewster, with the Bannister eleven a few yards from Ballard's
goal-line, and the touchdown that would give the Gold and Green that supreme glory. One minute
to play; Deacon Radford had given Butch the pigskin, and like a berserker, he fought entirely
through the scrimmage. But a kick on the head had blinded him, in the <i>melee</i>--free of
tacklers, with the goal-line, victory, and the Championship so near, he staggered, reeled blindly,
crashed into an upright, and toppled backward, senseless on the field, while the Referee's
whistle announced the end of the game, and glory to Ballard. Even then, after the first terrible
shock of the loss, of the cruel blow fate dealt the Gold and Green two successive seasons,
the slogan was: "</i>Next year</i>--Bannister will win the Championship--<i>next year</i>!"

It was now "next year!" Losing only Jack Merritt, Babe McCabe and Heavy Hughes from the line-up,
and having Monty Merrlweather and Bunch Bingham, fully as good, Coach Corridan's Gold and Green
eleven, before the season started, seemed a better fighting machine than even the one of the
year before. But when the irrepressible T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., in some mysterious fashion
making good his rash vow to produce a smashing full-back that can't be stopped, towed that
stolid, blond Colossus, Thor, to old Bannister, enthusiasm broke all limits!

Mass-meetings were held every night. Speeches by Coaches, Captain, players, Faculty, and students,
aroused the campus to the highest pitch; every day, the entire student-body, with The Bannister
Band, turned out on Bannister Field to cheer the eleven, and to watch the Prodigious Prodigy
perform valorous deeds, like the god Thor. "Bannister College--State Championship!" was the
cry, and with the giant Thor to present an irresistible catapulting that could not be stopped,
the Gold and Green exultantly awaited the big games with Hamilton and Ballard.

And yet, the stolid, unemotional, unawakened Thor, on whom every hope of the Championship was
based, whom all Bannister came out to watch every day, practiced as he studied, doggedly, silently.
It was evident to all that he hated the grind, that he wanted to quit, that his heart was not
in the game, but for some cause, he drove his Herculean body ahead, and could not be stopped!

"Now, you abandoned wretch," said Butch Brewster grimly, as the happy-go-lucky Hicks finished
Scoop's letter, and glanced about him wildly seeking a way of escape, "in one minute you will
tell us all about John Thorwald, alias 'Thor,' or be tossed sky-high in a blanket by the football
squad, and please believe me, you'll break all altitude records!"

"Spare me, you banditti!" pleaded Hicks, reluctant to cease torturing Bannister with his Billion-Dollar
Mystery, yet equally unwilling to aviate from a blanket heaved by the husky athletes. "Why
seek ye to question the ways of T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.? You have your Prodigious Prodigy--your
smashing full-back is distributing the 'Varsity over the scenery with charming nonchalance
that promises dire catastrophe for other teams, once he makes the regulars, so--"

At that dramatic moment, just as Butch Brewster glanced at Hicks' alarm-clock, to start the
minute of grace, a startling interruption saved the gladsome youth from having to make a decision.
A heavy, creaking tread shook the corridor, and the squad beheld, looming up in the doorway,
Thor. He was not in football togs, and as he started to speak his fair face as stolid and expressionless
as that of a sphinx, Captain Butch Brewster stepped toward him.

"Thor!" he exclaimed, seizing the blond Colossus by the arm, "You aren't ready for the scrimmage;
hustle over to the Gym. and get on your suit."

But John Thorwald, as passive of feature as though he announced something of the most infinitesimal
importance, and were not hurling a bomb-shell whose explosion, was to shake old Bannister terrifically,
spoke in a matter-of-fact manner: "I shall not play football--any more,"

"</i>What</i>!" Every collegian in Hicks' room, including that dazed producer of the Prodigious
Prodigy, chorused the exclamation; to them it was as stunning a shock as the nation would suffer
if its President calmly announced, "I'm tired of being President of the United States. I shall
not report for work tomorrow." Bannister College, ever since the night that Thor arrived on
the campus, had talked or thought of nothing but how this huge, blond-haired Hercules would
bring the Championship to the Gold and Green; his prodigies on the gridiron, his ever-increasing
prowess, had aroused enthusiasm to fever heat, and now--

"I was told wrong," said Thor, shifting his vast tonnage awkwardly from one foot to the other,
and evidently bewildered at the consternation caused by what he believed a trifling announcement,
"I understood that I <i>had</i> to play football, that the Faculty required it of me, and the
students let me think so. I have just learned from Doctor Alford that such is not true, that
I do not have to play unless I choose, hence, I quit. I came to college to study, to gain an
education. I have toiled long and hard for the opportunity, and now I have it, I shall not
waste my time on such foolishness."

Then, utterly unconscious that he had spoken sentences which would create a mighty sensation
at old Bannister, that might doom the Gold and Green to defeat, lose his Alma Mater the Championship,
and bring on himself the cruel ostracism and bitter censure of his fellows, John Thorwald lumbered
down the corridor. A moment of tense silence followed and then Captain Butch Brewster groaned.

"It's all over, it's all over, fellows!" he said brokenly, "Bannister loses the Championship!
We know it is impossible to move Thor on the football field, and now that he has said 'No!'
to playing football, dynamite can not move him from his decision."

Then, crushed and disconsolate, the football squad filed silently from the room, to break the
glad news to Coach Corridan, and to spread the joyous tidings to old Bannister. When they had
gone, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., staring at the figurative black cloud that lowered over his Alma
Mater, strove to find its silver lining, and at last he partially succeeded.

"Anyway," said Hicks, with a lugubrious effort to grin, "Thor's announcement shocked the squad
so much that I was not forced to explain my Billion-Dollar Mystery!"

CHAPTER V

HICKS MAKES A DECISION

"In the famous words of Mr. Somebody-Or-Other," quoth T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., "something has
<i>got</i> to be did, and immediately to once!"

Big Butch Brewster nodded assent. So did Head Coach Patrick Henry Corridan, Beef McNaughton,
Team Manager Socks Fitzpatrick, Monty Merriweather, Dad Pendleton, President of the Athletic
Association, and Deacon Radford, quarter-back, also Shad Fishpaw, who, being Freshman Class-Chairman,
maintained a discreet silence. Instead of the usual sky-larking, care-free crowd that infested
the cozy quarters of the happy-go-lucky Hicks, every collegian present, except the ever-cheerful
youth, seemed to have lost his best friend and his last dollar at one fell swoop!

"Oh, yes, something has got to be did!" fleered Beef McNaughton, the davenport creaking under
the combined tonnage of himself and Butch Brewster, "But who will do it? Where's all that Oh-just-leave-it-to-Hicks
stuff you have pulled for the past three years, you pestiferous insect? </i>Bah</i>! You did
a lot; you dragged a Prodigious Prodigy to old Bannister, enshrouded him in darkest mystery,
and now, when he pushed the 'Varsity off the field and promised to corral the Championship,
single-handed, he puts his foot down, and says, '</i>No</i>--I will not play football!' Get
busy, Little Mr. Fix-It."

"Oh, just leave it to Hicks!" accommodated that blithesome Senior, with a cheeriness he was
far from feeling. "You all do know why Thor won't play football; it is not like last season,
when Deke Radford, a star quarter-back, refused either to play, or to explain his refusal.
Let me get an inspiration, and then Thor will once again gently but firmly thrust entire football
elevens down the field before him!"

As evidence of how intensely serious was the situation, let it be chronicled that, for the
first time in his scatter-brained campus career, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., did not dare strum
his banjo and roar out ballads to torture his long-suffering colleagues. Popular and beloved
as he was, the gladsome youth hesitated to shatter the quietude of the campus with his saengerfest,
knowing as he did what a terrible blow Thor's utterly astounding announcement had been to the
college.

It was nine o'clock, one night two weeks after the day when John Thorwald, better known as
Thor, the Prodigious Prodigy, so mysteriously produced by Hicks, had stolidly paralyzed old
Bannister by unemotionally stating his decision to play no more football. Since then, to quote
the Phillyloo Bird, "Bannister has staggered around the ring like a prizefighter with the Referee
counting off ten seconds and trying to fight again before he takes the count." In truth, the
students had made a fatal mistake in building all their hopes of victory on that blond giant,
Thor; seeing his wonderful prowess, and beholding how, in the first week of the season, the
Norwegian Colossus had ripped to shreds the Varsity line which even the heavy Ballard eleven
of the year before could not batter, it was but natural that the enthusiastic youths should
think of the Championship chances in terms of </i>Thor</i>. For one week, enthusiasm and excitement
soared higher and higher, and then, to use a phrase of fiction, everything fell with a dull,
sickening thud!

In vain did Coach Corridan, the staff of Assistant Coaches, Captain Butch Brewster, and others
strive to resuscitate football spirit; nightly mass-meetings were held, and enough perfervid
oratory hurled to move a Russian fortress, but to no avail. It was useless to argue that, without
Thor, Bannister had an eleven better than that of last year, which so nearly missed the Championship.
The campus had seen the massive Thor's prodigies; they knew he could not be stopped, and to
attempt to arouse the college to concert pitch over the eleven, with that mountain of muscle
blotting out vast sections of scenery, but not in football togs, was not possible. 

It is found easier, by the short-sighted victims of disease, to palliate their torments by medicine
than to prevent them by regimen. The vulgar of all ranks are invariably sensual and indocile;
yet I cannot but feel myself persuaded that when the benefits of vegetable diet are mathematically
proved, when it is as clear that those who live naturally are exempt from premature death as that nine
is not one, the most sottish of mankind will feel a preference towards
a long and tranquil, contrasted with a short and painful, life.

On the average, out of sixty persons four die in three years. Hopes are entertained that, in April, 1814,
a statement will be given that sixty persons, all having lived more than three years on vegetables
and pure water, are then IN PERFECT HEALTH.

More than two years have now elapsed; NOT ONE OF THEM HAS DIED; no such example will be found in any sixty
persons taken at random. Seventeen persons of all ages (the families of Dr. Lambe and Mr. Newton)
have lived for seven years on this diet without a death, and almost without the slightest illness.
Surely, when we consider that some of those were infants, and one a martyr to asthma now nearly
subdued, we may challenge any seventeen persons taken at random in
this city to exhibit a parallel case.

Those who may have been excited to question the rectitude of established habits of diet by
these loose remarks, should consult Mr. Newton's luminous and eloquent essay. ("Return to Nature,
or Defence of Vegetable Regimen". Cadell, 1811.)

When these proofs come fairly before the world, and are clearly seen by all who understand arithmetic,
it is scarcely possible that abstinence from aliments demonstrably
pernicious should not become universal.

In proportion to the number of proselytes, so will be the weight of evidence; and when a thousand
persons can be produced, living on vegetables and distilled water, who have to dread no disease
but old age, the world will be compelled to regard animal flesh and fermented liquors as slow but
certain poisons. The change which would be produced by simpler habits on political economy is sufficiently
remarkable. The monopolizing eater of animal flesh would no longer destroy his constitution by devouring
an acre at a meal, and many loaves of bread would cease to contribute
to gout, madness and apoplexy, in the shape of a pint of porter, or
a dram of gin, when appeasing the long-protracted famine of the hardworking
peasant's hungry babes.

The quantity of nutritious vegetable matter, consumed in fattening the carcase of an ox, would
afford ten times the sustenance, undepraving indeed, and incapable of generating disease, if
gathered immediately from the bosom of the earth. The most fertile districts of the habitable globe
are now actually cultivated by men for animals, at a delay and waste of aliment absolutely
incapable of calculation. It is only the wealthy that can, to any great degree, even now, indulge
the unnatural craving for dead flesh, and they pay for the greater licence of the privilege by subjection
to supernumerary diseases

.

They appealed to him not to betray his Alma Mater; they implored him, for his love of old Bannister;
they besought him, because of his college spirit; and all the time, for all that the Prodigious
Prodigy understood, they might as well have remained silent.

"I will tell you something," spoke Thor, at last, with an air of impatient resignation, "and
don't bother me again, please! I have come to Bannister College to get an education, and I
have the right to do so, without being pestered. I pay my bills, and I am entitled to all the
knowledge I can purchase. I look from my window, and I see boys, whose fathers are toiling,
sacrificing, to send them here. Instead of studying, to show their gratitude, they loaf around
the campus, or in their rooms, twanging banjos and guitars, singing silly songs, and sky-larking.
I don't know what all this rot is you are talking of; 'college spirit,' 'my Alma Mater,' and
so on. I do not want to play football; I do not like the game; I need the time for my study,
so I will not play. Both my father and myself have labored and sacrificed to send me to college.
The past five years, with one great ambition to go to college and learn, I have toiled like
a galley-slave.

"And now, when opportunity is mine, do you ask me to <i>play</i>? You want me to loaf around,
wasting precious time better spent in my studies. What do I care whether the boys like me,
or hate me? Bah! I can take any two of you, and knock your heads together! Their friendship
or enmity won't move me. I shall study, learn. I will not waste time in senseless foolishness,
and I <i>won't</i> play football again."

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr. was silent as he stood by the window of his room, gazing down at the
campus where the collegians were gathering before marching to the Auditorium for the nightly
mass-meeting that would vainly strive to arouse a fighting spirit in the football "rooters."
That blithesome, heedless, happy-go-lucky youth was capable of far more serious thought than
old Bannister knew; and more, he possessed the rare ability to read character; in the case
of Thor, he saw vastly deeper than his indignant comrades, who beheld only the surface of the
affair. They knew only that John Thorwald, a veritable Colossus, had exhibited football prowess
that practically promised the State Championship to old Bannister, and then--he had quit the
game. They understood only that Thor refused to play simply because he did not want to, and
as to why their appeals to his college spirit and his love for his Alma Mater were unheeded
they were puzzled.

But the gladsome Hicks, always serious beneath his cheerful exterior, when old Bannister's
interests were at stake, or when a collegian's career might be blighted, when the tragedy could
be averted, fully understood. Of course, as originator of the Billion-Dollar Mystery, and producer
of the Prodigious Prodigy, he knew more about the strange John Thorwald than did his mystified
comrades. He knew that Thor, as he named him, was just a vast hulk of humanity, stolid, unimaginative
of mind, slow-thinking, a dull, unresponsive mass, as yet unstirred by that strange, subtle,
mighty thing called college spirit. He realized that Thor had never had a chance to understand
the real meaning of campus life, to grasp the glad fellowship of the students, to thrill with
a great love for his Alma Mater. All that must come in time. The blond giant had toiled all
his life, had labored among men where everything was practical and grim.

"I must save him," murmured Hicks softly, for the others in his room were talking of Thor.
"Oh, imagine that powerful body, imbued with a vast love for old Bannister, think of Thor,
thrilling with college spirit. Why, Yale's and Harvard's elevens combined could not stop his
rushes, then. I must save him from himself, from the condemnation of the fellows, who just
don't understand. I must, some way, awaken him to a complete understanding of college life
in its entirety, but how? He is so different from Roddy Perkins, or Deke Radford."

It seemed that the lovable Hicks was destined to save, every year of his campus career, some
entering collegian who incurred the wrath, deserved or otherwise, of the students. In his Freshman
first term, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., indignant at the way little Theophilus Opperdyke, the timorous,
nervous "grind," had been alarmed at the idea of being hazed, had by a sensational escape from
a room locked, guarded, and filled with Sophomores, gained immunity for himself and the boner
for all time, thus winning the loyal, pathetic devotion of the Human Encyclopedia. As a Sophomore,
by crushing James Roderick Perkins' Napoleonic ambition to upset tradition, and make Freshmen
equal with upperclassmen, Hicks had turned that aggressive youth's tremendous energy in the
right channels, and made him a power for good on the campus.

And, a Junior, he had saved good Deacon Radford. When that serious youth, a famous prep. quarter,
entered old Bannister, the students were wild at the thought of having him to run the Gold
and Green team, but to their dismay, he refused either to report for practice or to explain
his decision. Hicks, promising blithely, as usual, to solve the mystery and get Deke to play,
discovered that the youth's mother, called "Mother Peg" by the collegians, was head-waitress
downtown at Jerry's and that she made her son promise not to own the relationship, and that
while she worked to get him through college, Deacon would not play football. The inspired Hicks
had gotten Mother Peg to start College Inn, and board Freshmen unable to get rooms in the dormitories,
and Deacon had played wonderful football. For this achievement, the original youth failed to
get glory, for he sacrificed it, and swore all concerned to secrecy.

"But Roddy and Deke were different," reflected Hicks, pondering seriously. "Both had been to
Prep. School, and they understood college life and campus spirit. It was Roddy's tremendous
ambition that had to be curbed, and Deke was the victim of circumstances. But Thorwald--it
is just a problem of how to awaken in him an understanding of college spirit. The fellows don't
understand him, and--"

A sudden thought, one of his inspirations, assailed the blithesome Hicks. Why not make the
fellows understand Thor? Surely, if he explained the "Billion-Dollar Mystery," as he humorously
called it, and told why Thorwald, as yet, had no conception of college life, in its true meaning,
they would not feel bitter against him; perhaps, instead, though regretful at his decision
not to play the game, they would all strive to awaken the stolid Colossus, to stir his soul
to an understanding of campus tradition and existence. But that would mean--"I surely hate
to lose my Billion-Dollar Mystery!" grinned T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., remembering the intense
indignation of his comrades at his Herman-Kellar-Thurston atmosphere of mystery, "It is more
fun than, my 'Sheerluck Holmes' detective pose or my saengerfests. Still, for old Bannister,
and for Thor."

It would seem only a trifle for the heedless Hicks to give up his mystery, and tell Bannister
all about Thor; yet, had the Hercules reconsidered, and played football, the torturesome youth
would have bewildered his colleagues as long as possible, or until they made him divulge the
truth. He dearly loved to torment his comrades, and this had been such an opportunity for him
to promise nonchalantly to produce a Herculean full-back, then, to return to the campus with
the Prodigious Prodigy in tow, and for him to perform wonders on Bannister Field, naturally
aroused the interest of the youths, and he had enjoyed hugely their puzzlement, but now--

"Say, fellows," he interrupted an excited conversation of a would-be Committee of Ways and
Means to make Thor play football, "I have an announcement to make."

"Don't pester us, Hicks!" warned Captain Butch Brewster, grimly. "We love you like a brother,
but we'll crush you if you start any foolishness, and--"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., with the study-table between himself and his comrades, assumed the
attitude of a Chautauqua lecturer, one hand resting on the table and the other thrust into
the breast of his coat, and dramatically announced:

"In the Auditorium--at the regular mass-meeting tonight--T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., will give
the correct explanation of Thor, the Prodigious Prodigy, and will solve the Billion-Dollar
Mystery!"

CHAPTER VI

HICKS MAKES A SPEECH

The announcement of T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., had practically the same effect on Head Coach Corridan
and the cheery Senior's comrades as a German gas-bomb would have on the inmates of an Allied
trench. For several seconds they stared at the blithesome youth, in a manner scarcely to be
called aimless, since their looks were aimed with deadly accuracy at him, but in general, with
the exception of Hicks, those in the room resembled vastly some of the celebrated Madame Tussaud's
wax-works in London.

"Oh," breathed Monty Merriweather, with the appearance of dawning intelligence, "that's so,
Coach, Hicks never has disclosed the details of his achievement; we were about to extort a
confession from him, when Thor broke up the league with his announcement, and since then, Bannister
has been too worried over Thorwald to trifle with Hicks!"

"That's a good idea!" exclaimed Coach Corridan, who had been remarkably silent, for him, pondering
the football crisis, "Hicks can make his explanation at the regular mass-meeting tonight, in
the Auditorium. I'll post an announcement of his purpose, and you fellows spread the news among
the students, stating that Hicks will tell how he rounded up Thor. Some have shirked these
meetings since Thorwald quit the game, and this will bring them out, so maybe we can arouse
the fighting spirit again!"

So well did Butch, Beef, Socks, Monty, Dad, Deacon, and Shad tell the news, that when the bell
in the Administration Hall tower rang at ten o'clock it was ascertained by score-keepers that
every youth at Bannister, Freshmen included, except that Hercules, Thor, had assembled in the
Auditorium. That stolid behemoth, who regarded the football mass-meeting as foolishness, was
reported as boning in his cheerless room, fulfilling the mission for which he came to college,
namely, to get his money's worth of knowledge, which he evidently regarded as some commodity
for which Bannister served merely as a market.

Big Butch Brewster, on the stage of the Auditorium, the big assembly-hall of the college, along
with Coach Corridan, several of the Gold and Green eleven, two members of the Faculty, several
Assistant Coaches, and T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., stepped forward and stilled the tumult of the
excited youths with upraised hand.

"We have with us tonight," he spoke, after the fashion of introducing after-dinner speakers,
"Mr. Thomas Haviland Hicks, Jr., the celebrated Magician and Mystifier, who will present for
your approval his world-famous Billion-Dollar Mystery, and give the correct solution to Thor,
the problem no one has been able to solve. I take great pleasure in introducing to you this
evening, Mr. Thomas Haviland Hicks, Jr."

The collegians, firmly believing it was another of the pestiferous Hicks' jokes, and wholly
unaware of the deep purpose of the sunny-souled, irrepressible youth's speech, went into paroxysms
of glee, as the shadow-like Hicks stepped forward. For several minutes, the hall echoed with
jeers, shouts, groans, whistles, and sarcastic comments:

"Hire a hall, Hicks; tell it to Sweeney!"--"Bryan better look out. Hicks, the </i>Chau-talker;</i>"--"Spill
the speech, old man; spread the oratory!"--"Oh, where are my smelling-salts? I know I shall
faint!"--"You'd better play a banjo-accompaniment to it, Hicks!"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., for once in his campus career, fervidly wished he had not been such
a happy-go-lucky, care-free collegian, for now, when he was serious, his comrades refused to
believe him to be in such a state. However, quiet was obtained at last, thanks to the fact
that the youths possessed all the curiosity of the proverbial cat who died thereby, and the
sunny Senior plunged earnestly into his famous speech, that was destined, at old Bannister,
to rank with that of Demosthenes "On The Crown," or any of W. J, Bryan's masterpieces.

"Fellows," began Hicks, without preface, "I know I've built myself the reputation of being
a scatterbrained, heedless nonentity, and it's too late to change now. But tonight, please
believe me to be thoroughly in earnest. Bannister faces more than one crisis, more than one
tragedy. It is true that the football eleven is crippled by the defection of Thor, that we
fellows have somewhat unreasonably allowed his quitting the game to shake our spirit, but there
is more at stake than football victories, than even the State Intercollegiate Football Championship!
The future of a student, of a present Freshman, his hopes of becoming a loyal, solid, representative
college man, a tremendous power for good, at old Bannister, hang in the balance at this moment!
I speak of John Thorwald. You students have it in your power to make or break him, to ruin
his college years and make him a recluse, a misanthrope, or to gradually bring him to a full
realization of what college life and campus tradition really mean."

"I have made a great mystery of Thor, just for a lark, but the enmity and condemnation of the
campus for him because he quit football suddenly, shows me that the time for skylarking is
past. For his sake, I must plead. In the very act of transcribing his mind was apt to stray from
the work in hand to higher things; he would lose himself in contemplating those airy abstractions
and lofty visions of which alone he greatly cared to sing, to the neglect and detriment of
the merely external and formal element of his song.

Shelley recked little of the jots and tittles of literary craftsmanship; he committed many a small sin
against the rules of grammar, and certainly paid but a halting attention to the nice distinctions
of punctuation.

Thus in the early editions a comma occasionally plays the part of a semicolon; colons and semicolons
seem to be employed interchangeably; a semicolon almost invariably appears where nowadays we
should employ the dash; and, lastly, the dash itself becomes a point of all work, replacing indifferently
commas, colons, semicolons or periods. Inadequate and sometimes haphazard as it is, however,
Shelley's punctuation, so far as it goes, is of great value as an index to his metrical, or at
times, it may be, to his rhetorical intention--for, in Shelley's hands, punctuation serves
rather to mark the rhythmical pause and onflow of the verse, or to secure some declamatory
effect, than to indicate the structure or elucidate the sense. For this reason the original
pointing has been retained, save where it tends to obscure or pervert the poet's meaning. Amongst
the Editor's Notes at the end of the Volume 3 the reader will find
lists of the punctual variations in the longer poems, by means of
which the supplementary points now added may be identified, and the
original points, which in this edition have been deleted or else replaced
by others, ascertained, in the order of their occurrence.

In the use of capitals Shelley's practice has been followed, while an attempt has been made
to reduce the number of his inconsistencies in this regard.

To have reproduced the spelling of the manuscripts would only have served to divert attention from Shelley's
poetry to my own ingenuity in disgusting the reader according to
the rules of editorial punctilio.

(I adapt a phrase or two from the preface to "The Revolt of Islam".) Shelley was neither very
accurate, nor always consistent, in his spelling.

He was, to say the truth, indifferent about all such matters: indeed, to one absorbed in the
spectacle of a world travailing for lack of the gospel of "Political Justice", the study of orthographical
niceties must have seemed an occupation for Bedlamites. Again--as a distinguished critic and editor
of Shelley, Professor Dowden, aptly observes in this connexion--'a great poet is not of an
age, but for all time.' Irregular or antiquated forms such as 'recieve,' 'sacrifize,' 'tyger,' 'gulph,'
'desart,' 'falshood,' and the like, can only serve to distract the reader's attention, and
mar his enjoyment of the verse. Accordingly Shelley's eccentricities in this kind have been
discarded, and his spelling reversed in accordance with modern usage. All weak preterite-forms,
whether indicatives or participles, have been printed with "ed" rather than "t", participial
adjectives and substantives, such as 'past,' alone excepted. In the case of 'leap,' which has two
preterite-forms, both employed by Shelley (See for an example of the longer form, the "Hymn to
Mercury", 18 5, where 'leaped' rhymes with 'heaped' (line 1).

The shorter form, rhyming to 'wept,' 'adapt,' etc., occurs more frequently.)--one with the long vowel
of the present-form, the other with a vowel-change (Of course, wherever this vowel-shortening
takes place, whether indicated by a corresponding change in the spelling or not, "t", not "ed" is properly
used--'cleave,' 'cleft,'; 'deal,' 'dealt'; etc. The forms discarded
under the general rule laid down above are such as 'wrackt,' 'prankt,'
'snatcht,' 'kist,' 'opprest,' etc.) like that of 'crept' from 'creep'--I
have not hesitated to print the longer form 'leaped,' and the shorter
(after Mr. Henry Sweet's example) 'lept,' in order clearly to indicate
the pronunciation intended by Shelley.

 I'll now read it to you:

"Pittsburgh, Pa., Sept, 17.

"DEAR SON THOMAS:

"Read the inclosed clipping from the </i>San Francisco Examiner</i> of August 25, and then
pay close attention to the following facts: At the time of this news-story I was in 'Frisco
on business, as you will recall, and for reasons to be outlined, when I read of the </i>Southern
Cross</i> finding the marooned John Thorwald, and bringing him to that city, I was particularly
interested, so much so that I at once looked up the one-time first mate of the ill-starred
</i>Zephyr</i> and brought him to Pittsburgh in my private car. My reason was this; in my employ,
in the International Steel Combine's mill, was John Thorwald's son, John Thorwald, Jr.

"To state facts as briefly as possible, almost a year ago, as I took some friends through the
steel rolling mill, I chanced to step directly beneath a traveling crane, lowering a steel
beam; seeing my peril, I was about to step aside when I caught my foot and fell. Just then
a veritable giant, black and grimy, leaped forward, and with a prodigious display of strength,
placed his powerful back under the descending weight, staving it off until I rolled over to safety!

"Well, of course, I had the fellow report to my office, and instinctively feeling that I wanted
to show my gratitude, without being patronizing, he responded to my question as to what I could
do to reward him, by asking simply that I get him some job that would allow him to attend night
school. He stated that, owing to the fact that he worked alternate weeks at night shift he
was unable to do so. Questioning him further, I learned the following facts:

"He was John Thorwald, Jr., only son of John Thorwald, Sr., a Norwegian; his mother was also
a Norwegian, but he is a natural born American. Realizing the opportunities for an educated
young man in our land, Thorwald's parents determined that he should gain knowledge, and until
he was fifteen years old, he attended school in San Francisco. When he was fifteen, his father
signed as first mate on the yacht </i>Zephyr</i>, going with the oil-king, Henry B. Kingsley,
on a pleasure cruise in the Southern Pacific; Thorwald, Sr.'s, story you read in the paper.
Soon after the news of the </i>Zephyr's</i> wreck, with all on board lost, as was then supposed,
Thorwald's mother died. Her dying words (so young Thorwald told me, and I was moved by his
simple, straightforward tale) were an appeal to her boy. She made him promise, for her sake,
to study, study, study to gain knowledge, and to rise in the world! Thorwald promised. Then,
believing both his parents dead, the young Norwegian, a youth of fifteen without money, had
to shift for himself.

"Thomas, Jack London could weave his adventures into a gripping masterpiece. Starting in as
cabin-boy on a freighter to Alaska, young Thorwald, in the past ten years, has simply crowded
his life with adventure, thrill, and experience, though thrills mean nothing to him. He was
in the Klondike gold-fields, in the salmon canneries, a prospector, a lumber-jack in the Canadian
Northwest, a cowboy, a sailor, a worker in the Panama Canal Zone, on the Big Ditch, and too
many other things to remember. Finally, he drifted to Pittsburgh, where his prodigious strength
served him in the steel-mills, and, let me add, served <i>me</i>, as I stated.

"And ever, no matter where he wandered, or what was his toil, whenever possible, Thorwald studied.
His promise to his mother was always his goal, and in the cities he studied, or in the wilds
he read all the books he could find. The past year, finding he had a good-pay job in Pittsburgh,
he settled to determined effort, and by sheer resolution, by his wonderful power to grasp facts
and ideas for good once he gets them, he made great progress in night school, until he was
shifted, a week before he saved my life, to work that required him to toil nightly, alternate
weeks. So, for a year, Thor has had every possible advantage, some, unknown to him, I paid
for myself; I got him clerical work, with shorter hours, he went to night school, and I employed
the very best tutor obtainable, letting Thorwald pay him, as he thought, though his payments
wouldn't keep the tutor in neckties. The gratitude of the blond giant is pathetic, and suspecting
that I paid the tutor something, he insisted on paying all he could, which I allowed, of course.

"Well, in August, a year after Thorwald rescued me from serious injury, perhaps death, I was
in 'Frisco, and read of Thorwald, Sr.'s rescue and return. Overjoyed, I took the father to
Pittsburgh, to the son. I witnessed their meeting, with the father practically risen from the
dead, and all those stolid, unimaginative Norwegians did was to shake hands gravely! Young
Thorwald told of his mother's last words, and of his promise, of his having studied all the
years, and of his late progress, so that he was ready to enter college. His father, happy,
insisted that he enter this September, and he would pay for his son's college course, to make
up for the years the youth struggled for himself--Kingsley's heirs, I believe, gave Thorwald,
Sr., five thousand dollars on his return. Miserable man! you, one of the meanest, have wantonly
defaced one of the noblest specimens of the workmanship of God. Nor shall it be your excuse,
that, murderer as you are, you have spoken daggers, but used none.

The circumstances of the closing scene of poor Keats's life were not made known to me until the
"Elegy" was ready for the press. I am given to understand that the wound which his sensitive
spirit had received from the criticism of "Endymion" was exasperated by the bitter sense of
unrequited benefits; the poor fellow seems to have been hooted from the stage of life, no less
by those on whom he had wasted the promise of his genius, than those on whom he had lavished
his fortune and his care.

He was accompanied to Rome, and attended in his last illness by Mr. Severn, a young artist of
the highest promise, who, I have been informed, 'almost risked his own life, and sacrificed every
prospect to unwearied attendance upon his dying friend.' Had I known these circumstances before
the completion of my poem, I should have been tempted to add my feeble
tribute of applause to the more solid recompense which the virtuous
man finds in the recollection of his own motives.

Mr. Severn can dispense with a reward from 'such stuff as dreams are made of.' His conduct
is a golden augury of the success of his future career--may the unextinguished Spirit of his
illustrious friend animate the creations of his pencil, and plead against Oblivion for his name!

***

ADONAIS.

I
weep for Adonais--he is dead! O, weep for Adonais! though our tears Thaw not the frost which
binds so dear a head! And thou, sad Hour, selected from all years To mourn our loss, rouse thy
obscure compeers, 5 And teach them thine own sorrow, say: "With me Died Adonais; till the Future
dares Forget the Past, his fate and fame shall be An echo and a light unto eternity!"

2. Where wert thou, mighty Mother, when he lay, 10 When thy Son lay, pierced by the shaft which
flies In darkness? where was lorn Urania When Adonais died?

With veiled eyes, 'Mid listening Echoes, in her Paradise She sate, while one, with soft enamoured
breath, 15 Rekindled all the fading melodies, With which, like flowers that mock the corse beneath,
He had adorned and hid the coming bulk of Death.

3. Oh, weep for Adonais--he is dead! Wake, melancholy Mother, wake and weep! 20 Yet wherefore?
Quench within their burning bed Thy fiery tears, and let thy loud heart keep Like his, a mute and
uncomplaining sleep; For he is gone, where all things wise and fair Descend;--oh, dream not
that the amorous Deep 25 Will yet restore him to the vital air; Death feeds on his mute voice,
and laughs at our despair.

4. Most musical of mourners, weep again! Lament anew, Urania!--He died, Who was the Sire of an
immortal strain, 30 Blind, old and lonely, when his country's pride, The priest, the slave,
and the liberticide, Trampled and mocked with many a loathed rite Of lust and blood; he went,
unterrified, Into the gulf of death; but his clear Sprite 35 Yet reigns o'er earth; the third among
the sons of light.
5. Most musical of mourners, weep anew! Not all to that bright station
dared to climb; And happier they their happiness who knew, Whose tapers
yet burn through that night of time 40 In which suns perished; others
more sublime, Struck by the envious wrath of man or god, Have sunk,
extinct in their refulgent prime; And some yet live, treading the
thorny road, Which leads, through toil and hate, to Fame's serene
abode.

With wild shouts, the aroused collegians poured from the Auditorium, an excited, turbulent
mass of youthful humanity, a tide that swept T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., on the shoulders of several,
out on the campus. Massed beneath the window of John Thorwald's room, in Creighton Hall, the
Bannister students, now fully understanding that stolid Hercules, and stirred to admiration
of him by T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.'s, great speech, cheered the somewhat mystified Thor again
and again; in vast sound waves, the shouts rolled up to his open window:

"Rah! Rah! Rah-rah-rah! </i>Thor! Thor! Thor</i>!" Captain Brewster, through a big megaphone,
roared; "Fellows--What's the matter with </i>Thor</i>?"

And in a terrific outburst which, as the Phillyloo Bird afterward said, "Like to of busted
Bannister's works!" the enthusiastic collegians responded:

"</i>He's</i>--all--right!"

Then Butch, apparently in quest of information, persisted:

"</i>Who's</i> all right?"

To which the three hundred or more youths, all seemingly equipped with lungs of leather, kindly
answered:

"Thor! Thor! Thor!"

Still, though the Phillyloo Bird declared that this vocal explosion caused the seismographs
as Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, and in Salt Lake City, Utah, to register an earthquake
somewhere, it had on the blond Freshman a strange effect. The vast mountain of muscle lumbered
heavily across the room, gazed down at the howling crowd of collegians without emotion, then
slammed down the window, and returned to study.

"</i>Good night</i>" called Hicks. "The show is over! Let him have another yell, boys, to show
we aren't insulted; then we'll disband!"

Considering Thorwald's cool reception of their overtures, which some youth remarked, "Were
as noisy as that of a Grand Opera Orchestra," it was quite surprising to the students, in the
morning, when what occurred an hour after their serenade was revealed to them. As the story
was told by those who witnessed the scene, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., Butch, Beef, Monty, Pudge,
Roddy, Biff, Hefty, Tug, Buster, and Coach Corridan after the commotion subsided, retired to
the sunny Hicks' quarters, where the football situation was discussed, along with ways and
means to awaken Thor, when that colossal Freshman himself loomed up in the doorway.

As they afterward learned, several excited Freshmen had dared to invade Thor's den, even while
he studied, and give him a more or less correct account of T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.'s masterly
oration in his defense. Out of their garbled descriptions, big John Thorwald grasped one salient
point, and straightway he started for Hicks' room, leaving the indignant Freshmen to tell their
story to the atmosphere.

"Hicks," said Thor, not bothering with the "Mr." required of all Freshmen, as his vast bulk
crowded the doorway, "is it true that Mr. Thomas Haviland Hicks, Sr., wants me to play football?
He has been very kind to me, and has helped me, and so have you, here at college. After a year
of study, I should have had to stop night-school, but for him--instead, I got another year,
and prepared for Bannister. I did not know that <i>he</i> desired me to play, but if he does,
I feel under obligation to show my great gratitude, both for myself and for my father,"

A moment of silence, for the glorious news could not be grasped in a second; those in the room,
knowing Thomas Haviland Hicks, Sr.'s, brilliant athletic record at old Bannister, and understanding
his great love for his Alma Mater, knew that Hicks, Sr., had sent Thor to Bannister to play
football for the Gold and Green, though, as he had written his son, he would not have done
so had he honestly believed that another college would suit the ambitious Goliath better.

"Does he?" stammered the dazed T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., while the others echoed the words feebly,
"Yes, I should say he <i>does</i>!"

For a second, the ponderous young Colossus hesitated, and then, as calmly as though announcing
he would add Greek to his list of studies, and wholly unaware that his words were to bring
joy to old Bannister, he spoke stolidly.

"Then I shall play football."

CHAPTER VII

HICKS STARTS ANOTHER MYSTERY.

T HAVILAND HICKS, JR., his chair tilted at a perilous angle, and his feet thrust gracefully
atop of the study-table, in his cozy room, one Friday afternoon two weeks after John Thorwald's
return to the football squad, was fathoms deep in Stevenson's "Treasure Island." As he perused
the thrilling pages, the irrepressible youth twanged a banjo accompaniment, and roared with
gusto the piratical chantey of Long John Silver's buccaneer crew; Hicks, however, despite his
saengerfest, was completely lost in the enthralling narrative, so that he seemed to hear the
parrot shrieking, "Pieces of eight!

He was reading that breathlessly exciting part where the cabin-boy of the </i>Hispaniola</i>,
and Israel Hands have their terrible fight to the death, with the dodging over the dead man
rolling in the scuppers, the climbing up the mast, and the dirk pinning the boy's shoulder,
before Hands is shot and goes to join his mate on the bottom; just at the most absorbing page,
as he twanged his beloved banjo louder, and roared the chantey, there sounded, "Tramp--tramp--tramp!"
in the corridor, the heavy tread of many feet sounded, coming nearer. Instinctively realizing
that the pachydermic parade was headed for <i>his</i> room, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., rushed
to the closet, murmuring, "Safety first!" as usual, and stowed away his banjo. He was just
in the nick of time, for a second later there crowded into his room Captain Butch, Pudge, Beef,
Hefty, Biff, Monty, Roddy, Bunch, Tug, Buster, Coach Corridas, and Thor, the latter duo bringing
up the rear.

"Hicks, you unjailed public nuisance!" said Butch Brewster, affectionately. "We, whom you behold,
are going for to enter into that room across the corridor from your boudoir, and hold a football
signal quiz and confab. We should request that you permit a thunderous silence to originate
in your cozy retreat, for the period of at least a hour! A word to the <i>wise</i> is sufficient,
so I have spoken several, that even you may comprehend my meaning,"

"I gather you, fluently!" grinned T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., taking up "Treasure Island" and his
graceful pose once more. "Leave me to peruse the thrilling pages of this classic blood-and-thunder
book, and I'll cause a beautiful serenity to obtain hither."

"See that you do, you pestiferous insect!" threatened Beef McNaughton, ominously. "Come on,
fellows, Hicks can't escape our vengeance, if he bursts into what he fatuously believes is
song. Just let him act hippicanarious, and--"

When the Gold and Green eleven, half of which, to judge by size, was Thor, had gone with Coach
Corridan into the room across from that of the blithesome Hicks, the sunny-souled Senior tried
to resume his perusal of "Treasure Island," but somehow the spell had been broken by the invasion
of his cozy quarters. So, after vainly essaying to take up the thread of the story again, Hicks
arose and stood by the window, gazing across the campus to Bannister Field, deserted, since
the football team rested for the game of the morrow. As he stood there, the gladsome Hicks
reflected seriously. He thought of "Thor," and decided sorrowfully that the problem of awakening
that stolid Colossus to a full understanding of campus life was as unsolved as ever.

"But I <i>won't</i> give it up!" declared Hicks, determinedly. "I have always been good at
math, and I won't let this problem baffle me."

Since the night, two weeks back, when T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., had made his memorable speech,
explaining to his fellow-students the "Billon-Dollar Mystery," and arousing in them a vast
admiration for the slow-minded, plodding John Thorwald, every collegian had done his best to
befriend the big Freshman. Upperclassmen helped him with his studies. Despite his almost rude
refusal to meet any advances, the collegians always had a cheery greeting for him, and his
class-mates, in fear and trembling, invaded his den at times, to show him they were his friends.
Yet, despite these whole-hearted efforts, only two of old Bannister did the silent Thor seem
to desire as comrades: the festive Hicks, for reasons known, and--remarkable to chronicle--little
Theophilus Opperdyke, the timorous, studious "Human Encyclopedia."

"Colossus and Lilliputian!" the Phillyloo Bird quaintly observed once when this strangely assorted
duo appeared on the campus. "Say, fellows--some time Thor will accidentally sit on Theophilus,
and we'll have another mystery, the disappearance of our boner!"

The generous Hicks, longing for Thor's awakening to come, was not in the least jealous of his
loyal little friend, Theophilus. In fact, he was sincerely delighted that the unemotional Hercules
desired the comradeship of the grind, and he urged the Human Encyclopedia to strive constantly
to arouse in Thor a realization of college existence, and a true knowledge of its meaning.
At least one thing, Theophilus reported, had been achieved by Hicks' defense of Thorwald, and
the subsequent attitude of the collegians-- the colossal Freshman was puzzled, quite naturally.
When over three hundred youths criticized, condemned, and berated him one night, and the next,
even before he reconsidered his decision about football, came under his window and cheered
him, no wonder the young Norwegian was bewildered.

On the football field, with his dogged determination, his bulldog way of hanging on to things
until he mastered them, big Thor progressed slowly, and surely; the past Saturday, against
the heavy Alton eleven, the blond Freshman had been sent in for the second half, and, to quote
an overjoyed student, he had "busted things all up!" It seemed simply impossible to stop that
terrible rush of his huge body. Time after time he plowed through the line for yards, and old
Bannister, visioning Thor distributing Hamilton and Ballard over the field, in the big games,
literally hugged itself.

And yet, despite Thorwald's invincible prowess, despite the vast joy of old Bannister at the
chances of the Championship, some intangible shadow hovered over the campus. It brooded over
the training-table, the shower-rooms after scrimmage, on Bannister Field during practice; as
yet, no one had dared to give it form, by voicing his thought, but though no youth dared admit
it, something was wrong, there was a defective cog in the machinery of that marvelous machine,
the Gold and Green eleven.

"'Oh, just leave it to Hicks," quoth that sunny youth, at length, turning from the window;
"I'll solve the problem, or what is more probable, Theophilus may stir that sodden hulk of
humanity, after awhile. I won't worry about it, for that gets me nothing, and it will all come
out O.K., I'm positive!"

At this moment, just as T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., picked up "Treasure Island" again, he heard
drifting across the corridor from the room opposite, in Butch Brewster's familiar voice:

"--Yes, I'll win three more Bs'--one each in football, baseball and track; next spring, I'll
annex my last B at old Bannister, fellows--"

His <i>last</i> B--The words struck the blithesome Hicks with sledge-hammer force. Big Butch
Brewster was talking of his last B, when he, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., had never won his first;
with a feeling almost of alarm, the sunny youth realized that this was his final year at old
Bannister, his last chance to win his athletic letter, and to make happy his beloved Dad, by
helping him to realize part of his life's ambition--to behold his son shattering Hicks, Sr.'s,
wonderful record. His final chance, and outside of his hopes of winning the track award in
the high-jump, Hicks saw no way to win his B.

Thomas Haviland Hicks, Sr., as has been chronicled, the beloved Dad of the cheery Senior, a
Pittsburgh millionaire Steel King, was a graduate of old Bannister, Class of '92. While wearing
the Gold and Green, he had made an all-round athletic record never before, or afterward, rivaled
on the campus. At football, basketball, track, and baseball, he was a scintillating star, annexing
enough letters to start an alphabet, had they been different ones. Quite naturally, when the
Doctor, speaking anent the then infantile Thomas Haviland Hicks, Jr., said, "Mr. Hicks, it's
a boy!"--the one-time Bannister athlete straightway began to dream of the day when his only
son and heir should follow in his Dad's footsteps, shattering the records made at Bannister,
and at Yale, by Hicks, <i>pere</i>.

However, to quote a sporting phrase, the son of the Steel King "upset the dope!" At the start
of his Senior year, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr. had not annexed a single athletic honor, nor did
the signs point to any records being in peril of getting shattered by his prowess; as Hicks
himself phrased it, "Dame Nature was <i>some stingy</i> when she handed out the Hercules stuff
to me!" The happy-go-lucky youth, when he matriculated as a Freshman at Bannister College,
was builded on the general lines of a toothpick, and had he elected to follow a pugilistic
career, a division somewhat lighter than the tissue paperweight class would have had to be
devised to accommodate the splinter-student. A generous, sunny-souled, intensely democratic
collegian, despite his father's wealth, the festive Hicks, with his room always open-house
to all; his firm friendship for star athlete or humble boner, his never-failing sunny nature,
together with his famous Hicks Personally Conducted Expeditions downtown to the Beef-Steak
Busts he had originated, in his three years at old Bannister, had made himself the most popular
and beloved youth on the campus, but, he had not won his B!

And he had tried. With a full realization, of his Dad's ambition, his life-dream to behold
his son a great athlete, the blithesome Hicks had tried, but with hilariously futile results.
Nature had endowed him, as he told his loyal comrade, Butch Brewster, with "the Herculean build
of a Jersey mosquito," and his athletic powers neared zero infinity. In his Freshman year,
he inaugurated his athletic career by running the wrong way in the Sophomore-Freshman football
game, scoring a touchdown that won for the enemy, and naturally, after that performance, every
athletic effort was greeted with jeers by the students,

"I <i>have</i> tried!" said Hicks, producing two letters from the study-table, "But not like
I should have tried. I could never have played on the eleven, or on the nine, but I have a
chance in the high-jump. I know I've been indolent and care-free, and I ought to have trained
harder. Well, I just must win my track B this spring, but as to keeping the rash promise I
made to Butch as a Freshman--not a chance!"

It had been at the close of his Freshman year, after Hicks, in the Interclass Track Meet, had
smashed hurdles, broken high-jumping cross-bars, finished last in several events, and jeopardized
his life with the shot and hammer, that he made the rash vow to which he now had reference.
Butch, believing his sunny friend had entered all the events just to entertain the crowd, in
his fun-loving way, was teasing him about his ridiculous fiascos, when Hicks had told him the
story--how his Dad wanted him to try and be a famous athlete; he showed Butch a letter, received
before the meet, asking his son to try every event, and to keep on training, so as to win his
B before he graduated. Butch, great-hearted, was surprised and moved by the revelation that
the gladsome youth, even as he was jeered by his friendly comrades, who thought he performed
for sport, was striving to have his Dad's dream come true; he had sympathized with his classmate,
and then his scatter-brained colleague had aroused his indignation by vowing, with a swaggering
confidence:

"'Oh, just leave it to Hicks!' Remember this, Butch, before I graduate from old Bannister,
I shall have won my B in three branches of sport!"

Butch had snorted incredulously. To win the football or the baseball B, the gold letter for
the former, and the green one for the latter sport, an athlete had to play in three-fourths
of the season's games, on the "'Varsity"; to gain the white track letter, one had to win a
first place in some event, in a regularly scheduled track meet with another team. And now,
Butch's skepticism seemed confirmed, for at the start of his last year at college, Hicks had
not annexed a single B, though he bade fair to corral one in the spring in the high-jump.

"Heigh-ho!" chuckled Hicks, at length. "Here I am threatening to get gloomy again! Well I'll
sure train hard to win my track letter, and that seems all I can do! I'd like to win my three
B's, and jeer at Butch, next June, but--<i>it can't be did</i>! I shall now twang my trusty
banjo, and drive dull care away."

"</i>Hicks</i>!" Big Butch Brewster crashed across the corridor, both doors being open. "Is
this how you maintain a quiet? I'm going to call Thor over and make him sit down on you! Why,
you--"

"Have mercy!" plead the grinning Hicks. "Honest, Butch, I didn't go to bust up the league--I--I
heard you talk about your B's, and I got to thinking that </i>I</i> have but little time to
make my Dad happy; see, here's proof--read these letters I was perusing--"

Puzzled, Butch scanned the first one, dated back in the May of their Freshman year; Hicks had
received it before the class track meet, and, as chronicled, he had heard from his sunny comrade
later, how it impelled the splinter youth to try every event, while Bannister believed him
to enter them for fun. The letter was post-marked "Pittsburgh, Pa.," and it read:

DEAR SON THOMAS:

Your last term's report gratified me immensely, and I am proud of your class record, and scholastic
achievements. Pitch in, and lead your class, and make your Dad happy.

But there is something else of which I want to write, Thomas. As you must know, it has always
been a cause of keen regret to me that you have never seemed to care for athletics of any sort;
you appear to be too indolent and ease-loving to sacrifice, or to endure the hardships of training.
I suppose it is because of my athletic record both at Bannister and at old Yale that I am so
eager to see you become a star; in fact, it is my life's most cherished ambition to have you
become as famous as your Dad.

However, I realize that my fond dream can never come true. Nature has not made you naturally
strong and athletic, and what athletic success you may gain, must come from long and hard training
and practice. If you can only win your college letter, your B, Thomas, while at Bannister,
I shall be fully content.

I said nothing when you failed even to try for the teams at your Preparatory School, but I
did hope that at Bannister, under good coaches and trainers, you would at least endeavor to
win your letter. I must admit that I am disappointed, for you have not even made an earnest
effort to find your event. Often, by trying everything, especially in a track meet, a fellow
finds his event, and later stars in it.

I really believe that if you would start in now to develop yourself by regular, systematic
gymnasium work, and if you would only try, in a year or so you could make a Bannister team.
Theodore Roosevelt, you know, was a puny, weakly boy, but he built himself up, and became an
athlete. If you want to please me, start now and find your event. Attempt all the sports, all
the various track and field events, and always build yourself up by exercise in the Gym.

And you owe it to your Alma Mater, my son! Even if, after conscientious effort, you fail to
win your B, to know that you have given your college and teams what help you could, will please
your Dad. Remember, the fellow who toils on the scrubs is the true hero. If you become good
enough to give the first eleven, the first nine, the first five, or the first track squad a
hard rub and a fast practice, you are serving Bannister.

I don't ask you to do this, Thomas, I only say that it will make me happy just to know you
are striving. If you never get beyond the scrubs, just to hear you are serving the Gold and
Green, giving your best, in that humble unhonored way, will please me. And if, before you graduate,
you <i>can</i> win your B, I shall be so glad! Don't get discouraged, it may take until your
Senior year, but once you start, <i>stick</i>.

Your loving

DAD.

"Read this one, too, Butch," requested Hicks, hurriedly, as a hail of, "Oh, you Hicks, come
here!" sounded down the corridor, from Skeet Wigglesworth's abode. "I'll be back as soon as
Skeet finishes his foolishness. Don't wait for me, though, if I am delayed, for you want to
be talking football."

Left alone, big Butch Brewster, who of all the collegians that had known and loved the sunny
Hicks, some now graduated, understood that his athletic efforts, jeered good-naturedly by the
students, were made because of a great desire to win his B and make happy his Dad, read the
second letter, dated a few days before:

DEAR SON THOMAS:

You are starting the last lap, son, your Senior year, and your final chance to win your B!
Don't forget how happy it will make your Dad if you win your letter just once! Of course, you
cannot gain it in football, for nature gave you no chance, nor in baseball; but in track work
it is up to you. Train hard, Thomas, and try to win a first place; just win your track B, and
I'll rest content!

Your college record gives me great pleasure. You stand at the top in your studies, and you
are vastly popular, while the Faculty speak highly of you. Let your B come as a climax to your
career, and I'll be so proud of you. Don't forget, you are the "Class Kid" of Yale, '96, and
those sons of old Eli want you to win the letter. As to football, you cannot win your gold
B by playing three-fourths of a season's games, but you might get in a big game, even win it,
if you'll get confidence enough to tell Coach Corridan about yourself. Don't mind the jeers
of your comrades--they just don't know how you've tried to please your Dad; you owe it to your
Alma Mater to tell, and, take my word as a football star, you have the goods! Your peculiar
prowess has won many a contest, and old Bannister needs it this season, I hear--

There was more, but big Butch scarcely saw it, bewildered as the behemoth Senior was; what
new mystery had Hicks set afoot? What did Hicks, Sr., mean by writing, "You might get in a
big game, even win it, if you'll get confidence enough to tell Coach Corridan about yourself?
You owe it to your Alma Mater to tell, and take my word, as a football star, you have the goods--"
Why, everyone knew that T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., possessed no more football ability than a Jersey
mosquito, and yet--

"Another Hicks mystery," groaned Butch, holding the two letters thoughtfully. "And father and
son are in it, But if Hicks don't get his B, it will be a shame. </i>Say, I know--</i>"

A few moments later, good-hearted Butch Brewster, in the behalf of his sunny comrade, T. Haviland
Hicks, Jr., was making to the Gold and Green eleven and Coach Corridan, as eloquent a speech
as that blithesome youth, two weeks before, had made in defense of the condemned and ostracized
Thor! He read them the two letters of Hicks' beloved Dad, and told how the cheery collegian
wanted to win his B for his father's sake; graphically, he related Hicks, Sr.'s, great ambition,
and how Hicks, Jr., for three years had vainly tried to make good at some athletic sport, and
to win his letter. Big Butch, warming to his theme, spoke of how T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., letting
the students believe that he entered every event in the track meet of his Freshman year just
for fun, had been trying to find his event, and train for it; he explained that the festive
youth, ever sunny-natured, under the good-humored jeers of his comrades, who did not know his
real purpose, really yearned to win his B.

"You fellows, and you, Coach," he thundered, "all know how Hicks, unable to make the 'Varsity,
has always done humble service for old Bannister, cheerfully, gladly; how he keeps the athletes
in good spirits at the training-table, and is always on hand after scrimmage to rub them out.
He is chock-full of college spirit, and is intensely loyal to his Alma Mater. Why, look how
he rounded up Thor--he ought to have his B for that!"

Thanks to Butch's speech, the Gold and Green football stars, most of whom were Hicks' closest
friends, saw the scatter-brained, happy-go-lucky youth in a new light; his eloquent defense
of John Thorwald had shown old Bannister that he could be serious, but the knowledge that T.
Haviland Hicks, Jr., even as he made a ridiculous farce in athletics, was ambitious to win
his B, just to make his Dad happy, stunned them. For three years, the sunny Hicks' appearance
on old Bannister Field, to try for a team, had meant a small-sized riot of jeers and good-natured
ridicule at his expense; but Hicks had always grinned </i>a la</i> Cheshire cat,--and no one
but good Butch Brewster, all the time, had known how in earnest the lovable collegian was.

"Now," concluded Butch, "Hicks <i>may</i> win a B in track work, if he gets a first place in
the high-jump, and if so, O.K., but if he does not--"

"You mean--" Monty Merriweather--understood, "if he fails, then the Athletic Association ought
to--"

"Present him with a B!" said Butch, earnestly, "as a deserved reward for his faithful loyalty
and service to old Bannister's athletic teams. Don't let him graduate without gaining his letter,
and making his Dad realize a part of his ambition--a two-thirds vote of the Athletic Association
can award him his letter, and when all the students know the truth about his ridiculous fiasco
on Bannister Field, and realize the serious purpose beneath them all, they--"

"</i>We'll give him his B</i>!" shouted Beef, loudly, "If he fails in track work next spring,
we'll vote him his letter, anyway!"

Out in the corridor, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., returning from Skeet Wigglesworth's room and entering
his own cozy quarters, could not help hearing the conversation, as the doors of both his den
and the room across the corridor were open. A great love for his comrades came to his impulsive
heart, and a mist before his eyes, as he heard how they wanted to vote him his B in case he
failed to win it in track work; he thrilled at Butch's speech, but--

"Fellows," he startled them by appearing in the doorway, "I--I thank you from the bottom of
my heart. I couldn't help hearing, you know--I <i>do</i> appreciate your generous thoughts,
but--I can't and won't accept my B unless I win it according to the rule of the Athletic Association."

A silence, and then Butch Brewster, gripping his comrade's hand understandingly, held out to
him the two letters.

"Forgive me, old man," he breathed, "for reading them aloud, but I wanted the fellows to know,
to appreciate you! And what does he mean by saying that you may get in a <i>big game</i>--may
<i>win</i> it--that you have the goods in football, but lack the confidence to announce it
to Coach Corridan? Also that old Bannister needs just the peculiar brand you possess?"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., his sunny, Cheshire cat grin illuminating his cherubic countenance,
beamed on the eleven and Coach Corridan a moment.

"Oh, that's a <i>mystery</i>," he said, cheerfully. "If I <i>do</i> gain the courage and confidence,
I'll explain, but unless I do--it remains a--<i>mystery</i>!"

CHAPTER VIII

COACH CORRIDAN SURPRISES THE ELEVEN

"ALL MEMBERS OF THE FIRST ELEVEN ARE URGENTLY REQUESTED TO BE PRESENT IN THE ROOM OF T. HAVILAND
HICKS, JR.--AT EIGHT P. M. TONIGHT; YOU WILL BE DETAINED ONLY A FEW MINUTES, BUT LET EVERY
PLAYER COME, AS A MATTER OF EXTREME IMPORTANCE WILL BE PRESENTED. PATRICK HENRY COERIDAN, HEAD-COACH."

"Now, what do you suppose is up Coach Corridan's sleeve?" demanded T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.,
cheerfully. "Has Ballard learned our signals, or some Bannister student sold them to a rival
team, as per the usual football story? Though the notice doth not herald it, I am to be present,
for my room is to be used, and the Coach gave me a special invitation to cut the Gordian knot
with my keen intellect."

The sunny Hicks, with Butch, Beef, Tug, and Monty, had just come from "Delmonico's Annex,"
the college dining-hall, after supper; they had paused before the Bulletin Board at the Gymnasium
entrance, where all college notices were posted, and the Coach's urgent request had caught
their gaze. The announcement had caused quite a stir on the campus. The Bannister youths stood
in excited groups talking of it, and in the dormitories it superseded all thought of study;
however, there seemed little chance that any but the "'Varsity" and T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.,
who was always consulted in football problems, would know what took place in this meeting.

"There is only one way to find out, Hicks," responded big Butch Brewster, his arm across his
blithesome comrade's shoulders, "and that is, attend the meeting! You can wager that every
member of the eleven will be there, except Thor--he regards it as 'foolishness,' I suppose,
and he won't spare that precious time from his studies."

At five minutes past eight, Butch's prophecy was fulfilled, for every member of the eleven
<i>was</i> in Hicks' cozy room, except Thor, the Prodigious Prodigy, whose presence would have
caused a mild sensation. It was an extremely quiet and orderly gathering, for Coach Corridan,
who had the floor, was so grave that he impressed the would-be sky-larking youths. Having their
undivided attention, he proceeded to make a speech that, to all intents and purposes, had much
the same effect on the team and Hicks as a Zeppelin's bombs on London:

"Boys," he spoke, in forceful sentences, driving straight to the point, "I am going to take
the eleven, and Hicks, whose suggestions are always timely, into my confidence, in the hope
that we, working together, may carry out an idea of mine for the awakening of Thor to a realization
of things! I ask you not to let what I shall tell you be known to the student-body, but you
fellows play with Thor every day, and you will understand the crisis, and appreciate <i>why</i>
it is done, if I decide it necessary to drop John Thorwald from the football squad."

"Drop Thor from the squad!" gasped T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., staggered, and then pandemonium
broke loose among the players. Drop the Prodigious Prodigy from the squad, why, what <i>could</i>
the Slave-Driver be thinking of? Why, look how Thorwald, on the scrubs, tore through the heavy
'Varsity line for big gains. He was simply unstoppable; and yet, almost on the eve of the big
game that old Bannister depended on Thor to win by his splendid prowess, he might be dropped
from the squad! Excited exclamations sounded from Captain Butch Brewster, Beef, and the others
of the Gold and Green eleven:

"Why not give the big games to Ballard and Ham, Coach?"

"Say, shoot Theophilus Opperdyke in at full-back!"

"Good-by, championship! No hopes now, fellows!"

"If Thor doesn't play in the Big Games--good night!"

A greater sensation could not have been caused even had kindly white-haired Prexy announced
his intention of challenging Jess Willard for the World's Heavy-Weight Championship. Dropping
that human battering-ram, Thor, from the football, squad was something utterly undreamed-of.
Coach Corridan raised his hand for silence, and the youths subsided.

"Hear me carefully, boys," he urged, "I know that old Bannister has come to regard John Thorwald
as invincible, to use his vast bulk as a foundation on which to build hopes of the Championship,
which is a bad policy, for no team can be a <i>one-man</i> team and win. I realize that as
a football player, Thor hasn't an equal in the State today, and if he had the right spirit,
he would have few in the country. It would be ridiculous to decry his prowess, for he is a
physical phenomenon. But you remember T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.'s, splendid defense of Thor, a
week or so ago? Hicks gave you a full and clear explanation of the big fellow, and showed you
<i>why</i> he does not know what college spirit is, what loyalty and love for one's Alma Mater
mean! His masterly speech changed your attitude toward Thor, and even before he decided to
play football, for Mr. Hicks' sake, you admired him, because of his indomitable purpose, his
promise to his dying mother. Now </i>I</i> am telling you why he may be dropped from the squad,
because I want you fellows to give Thor a square deal, to remember what Hicks told you of him,
and to keep on striving to awaken him to the true meaning of campus years, to make him realize
that college life is more than a mere buying of knowledge. I want to keep him on the squad,
if humanly possible, and I shall outline my plot later.

"Tomorrow we play Latham College. It is the last game before the big games for The State Intercollegiate
Football Championship. Saturday after this, we play Hamilton, and the following week Ballard,
the Champions! The eleven I send in against those teams must be a solid unit, <i>one</i> in
spirit and purpose--every member of the Gold and Green team must be welded with his team-mates,
and they must forget everything but that their Alma Mater must win the Championship! With no
thought of self-glory, no other purpose in playing than a love for old Bannister, every fellow
must go into those games to fight for his Alma Mater! Now, as for Thor, I need not tell you
that he is not in sympathy with our ambition; he simply does not understand campus tradition
and spirit. He is as yet not possessed of an Alma Mater; he plays football only because of
gratitude to Mr. Thomas Haviland Hicks, Sr., and he hates to lose the time from his studies
for the practice. The football squad knows that his presence is a veritable wet blanket on
enthusiasm and the team's fighting spirit."

It was true. That intangible shadow of something wrong, brooding over training-table, shower-room,
and Bannister Field, that self-evident truth which almost every collegian had for days confessed
to himself yet hesitated to voice, had been given definite form by Coach Corridan talking to
the eleven. The good that Thorwald might do for the team by his superb prowess and massive
bulk was more than offset and nullified by his attitude.

To the blond Colossus, daily practice was unutterable mental torture. His mind was on his studies,
to which his bulldog purpose shackled him; he begrudged the time spent on Bannister Field;
he was stolid, silent, aloof. He scarcely ever spoke, except when addressed. He reported for
practice at the last second, went through the scrimmage like a great, dumb, driven ox, doing
as he was ordered; and when the squad was dismissed he hurried to his room. He was among the
squad, but not of them; he neither understood nor cared about their love for old Bannister,
their vast desire to win for their Alma Mater; he played football because he was grateful to
Hicks, Sr., for helping him to get started toward his goal, but as Coach Corridan now told
the 'Varsity, he killed the squad's enthusiasm,

"All of this cannot fail to damage the <i>esprit de corps</i>, the <i>morale</i>, of the eleven,"
declared Coach Corridan, having outlined Thor's attitude. "I know that every member of the
squad, if Thor played the game because of college spirit, for love of old Bannister, would
rejoice at his prowess. But as it is they are justly resentful that he is not in the spirit
of the game. What we may gain by his playing, we lose because the others cannot do their best
with his example to hurt their fighting spirit. I do not want, nor will I have on my eleven,
any player who plays for other reasons than a love for his Alma Mater, be he a Hogan, Brickley,
Thorpe, or Mahan. I have waited, hoping Thorwald would be awakened, as Hicks explained, but
now I must act. Tomorrow's game with Latham must see Thor awakened, or I must, for the sake
of the eleven, drop him from the squad for the rest of the season.

"Yet I beg of you, in case the plan I shall propose fails, remember Hicks' appeal! Do not condemn
or ostracize John Thorwald in any degree. He has three more seasons of football, so let us
keep on trying to make him understand campus life, college tradition. Be his friends, help
him all you can, and sooner or later he will awaken. Something may suddenly shock him to a
true understanding of what old Bannister means to a fellow. Or perhaps the awakening will be
slow, but it must come. And Bannister can win without Thor, don't forget that! We'll make one
final effort to awaken Thor, and if it fails, just forget him, boys, so far as football goes,
and watch the Gold and Green win that championship."

"What is your scheme, Coach?" questioned Captain Butch Brewster, his honest countenance showing
how heavily the responsibility of team-leader weighed upon him. "You are right; as Thor is
now, he is a handicap to the eleven, but--"

"My idea is this," explained the Slave-Driver earnestly. "Select some student to go to Thorwald
and try to show him that unless he gets into the game and plays for old Bannister, he will
be dropped from the squad. If possible, let the fellow make him understand that, in his case,
it will be a shame and a dishonor. Now, Butch, you and Hicks can probably approach Thor, or
perhaps you know of someone who--"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.'s, cherubic countenance showed the light of dawning inspiration, and
Coach Corridan paused, as the sunny youth exhibited a desire to say something, with him not
by any means a phenomenal happening; given the floor, the blithesome youth burst forth excitedly:
"Theophilus--Theophilus Opperdyke is the one! He has more influence over Thor than any other
student, and the big fellow likes the little boner. Thor will at least listen to Theophilus,
which Is more than any of us can gain from him."

After the meeting had adjourned, and the last inspection had been made in the other dorms,
the Seniors being exempt, several members of the Gold and Green team--Captain Butch, Beef,
Pudge, Monty, Roddy, and Bunch, together with little Theophilus Opperdyke, dragged from his
studies--foregathered in the cozy room of T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.; those who had heard the coach's
talk were still stunned at the ban likely to be placed on the Brobdingnagian Thor. On the campus
outside Creighton Hall, a horde of Bannister youths, incited by Tug Cardiff, who gave them
no reason for his act, were making a strenuous effort to awaken the Prodigious Prodigy, evidently
depending on noise to achieve that end, for a vast sound-wave rolled up to Hicks' windows--"Rah!
Rah! Rah! Thor! Thor! Thor! He's--all--right!"

"Listen!" exploded T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., indignantly. "You and I, Theophilus, would give
a Rajah's ransom just to hear the fellows whoop it up for us like that, and it has no more
effect on that sodden hulk of a Thor than bombarding an English super-dreadnaught with Roman
candles! Howsomever, Coach Corridan exploded a shrapnel bomb on old Bannister's eleven tonight."

Then Hicks carefully outlined to the dazed little boner the substance of the coach's talk to
the team, and Theophilus was alarmed when he thought of Thor's being dropped from the squad.
When Captain Butch had outlined the Slave-Driver's plot for striving to awaken the Colossus
to a realization of what a disgrace it would be to be sent from the gridiron, though he did
not announce that the Human Encyclopedia had been elected to carry out Coach Corridan's last-hope
idea, Theophilus sat on the edge of the chair, blinking owlishly at them over his big-rimmed
spectacles.

"After all, fellows," quavered Theophilus nervously, "Coach Corridan, if he drops Thor from
the squad, won't create such a riot on the campus as you might expect. You see, the students,
even as they built and planned on Thor, gradually came to know that there is vastly more to
be considered than physical power. That great bulk actually acts as a drag on the eleven, because
Thor isn't in sympathy with things! Still, if he could only be aroused, awakened, wouldn't
the team play football, with him striving for old Bannister, and not because he thinks he ought
to play, for Hicks' dad? Oh, I <i>do</i> hope the Coach's plan succeeds, and he awakens tomorrow;
I know the boys won't condemn him, if he doesn't, but--I--I want him to understand!"

"It's his last chance this season," reflected T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., enshrouded in a penumbra
of gloom. "I made a big boast that I would round up a smashing full-back. I returned to Bannister
with the Prodigious Prodigy. I made a big mystery of him, and then--biff!--Thor quit football. What
have I said? Yes, it was rightly said, for my master is an orator. I think I have caught cold,
whether from walking in slippers or from writing badly, I do not know. I am always annoyed with phlegm,
but to-day I seem to snivel more than usual. Well, I will pour oil on my head and go off to
sleep.

I don't mean to put one drop in my lamp to-day, so weary am I from riding and sneezing. Farewell,
dearest and most beloved master, whom I miss, I may say, more than
Rome it~dL'

1 Ad M Caes., iv.

1.

2 ii. 14

3 iv. 5,6.

'MY BELOVED MASTER,-I am well. I slept a little more than usual for my slight cold, which seems
to be well again.

So I spent the time from the eleventh hour of the night to the third of the day partly in
reading in Cato's Agriculture, partly in writing, not quite so badly as yesterday indeed. Then,
after waiting upon my father, I soothed my throat with honey-water,
ejecting it without swallowing: I might say gargle, but I won't, though
I think the word is found in Novius and elsewhere.

After attending to my throat I went to my father, and stood by his side as he sacrificed. Then
to luncheon. What do you think I had to eat? A bit of bread so big, while I watched others gobbling
boiled beans, onions, and fish full of roe. Then we set to work at gathering the grapes, with
plenty of sweat and shouting, and, as the quotation runs, "A few high-hanging clusters did we
leave survivors of the vintage." After the sixth hour we returned
home.

I did a little work, and poor work at that.

Then I had a long gossip with my dear mother sitting on the bed.

  My conversation was: What do you think
  my friend Fronto is doing just
  now? She said: And what do you think
  of my friend Gratia?'(1) My turn now: And what of our little Gratia,(2)
the sparrowkin?

  After this kind of talk, and an argument
  as to which of you loved the other
  most, the gong sounded, the signal
  that my father had gone to the bath.

We supped, after ablutions in the oil-cellar-I mean we supped after ablutions, not after ablutions
in the oil-cellar; and listened with enjoyment to the rustics gibing. After returning, before
turning on my side to snore, I do my task and give an account of the day to my delightful master,
whom if I could long for a little more, I should not mind growing a trifle thinner. Farewell, Fronto,
wherever you are, honey-sweet, my darling, my delight. Why do I want you? I can love you while
far away.'

One anecdote puts Marcus before us in a new light:(3)

1 Fronto's wife.

  
  2 Fronto's daughter
  
  3 Ad M. Caes ii. 12.
    

'When my father returned home from the vineyards, I mounted my horse as usual, and rode on ahead
some little way. Well, there on the road was a herd of sheep, standing all crowded together
as though the place were a desert, with four dogs and two shepherds, but nothing else. Then
one shepherd said to another shepherd, on seeing a number of horsemen: 'I say,' says he, 'look
you at those horsemen; they do a deal of robbery.' When I heard this, I clap spurs to my horse,
and ride straight for the sheep. In consternation the sheep scatter; hither and thither they
are fleeting and bleating. A shepherd throws his fork, and the fork falls on the horseman who
came next to me. We make our escape.' We like Marcus none the worse for this spice of mischief.

Another
letter(1) describes a visit to a country town, and shows the antiquarian
spirit of the writer 'M. CAESAR to his MASTER M. FRONTO, greeting.

'After I entered the carriage, after I took leave of you, we made a journey comfortable enough,
but we had a few drops of rain to wet us.

But before coming to the country-house, we broke our journey at Anagnia, a mile or so from
the highroad.

  Then we inspected that ancient
  town, a miniature it is, but has
  in it many antiquities, temples, and religious ceremonies quite out
of the way.

There is not a corner without its shrine, or fane, or temple; besides, many books written on linen,
which belongs to things sacred. Then on the gate as we came out was written twice, as follows:
"Priest don the fell."(2) I asked one of the inhabitants what that word was. He said it was
the word in the Hernican dialect for the victim's skin, which the priest puts over his conical
cap when he enters the city. I found out many other things which I desired to know, but the only
thing I do not desire is that you should be absent from me; that is my chief anxiety. Now for
yourself, when you left that place, did you go to Aurelia or to Campania? Be sure to write
to me, and say whether you have opened the vintage, or carried a host of books to the country-house;
this also, whether you miss me; I am foolish to ask it, whenas you tell it me of yourself.
Now if you miss me and if you love me, send me your letters often, which is a comfort and consolation
to me. Indeed I should prefer ten times to read your letters than all the vines of Gaurus or the
Marsians; for these Signian vines have grapes too rank and fruit too sharp in the taste, but I prefer
wine to must for drinking. Besides, those grapes are nicer to eat dried than fresh-ripe; I vow
I would rather tread them under foot than put my teeth in them. But I pray they may be gracious
and forgiving, and grant me free pardon for these jests of mine.

Farewell, best friend, dearest, most learned, sweetest master. When you see the must ferment
in the vat, remember that just so in my heart the longing for you
is gushing and flowing and bubbling.

Good-bye.'

1 Ad Verum. Imp ii. 1, s. fin.

2 Santentum

Making all allowances for conventional exaggerations, it is clear from the correspondence that
there was deep love between Marcus and his preceptor. The letters cover several years in succession,
but soon after the birth of Marcus's daughter, Faustina, there is a large gap. It does not follow
that the letters ceased entirely, because we know part of the collection is lost; but there was
probably less intercourse between Marcus and Fronto after Marcus took to the study of philosophy
under the guidance of Rusticus.

When Marcus succeeded to the throne in 161, the letters begin again, with slightly increased
formality on Fronto's part, and they go on for some four years, when Fronto, who has been continually
complaining of ill-health, appears to have died. One letter of the later period gives some
interesting particulars of the emperor's public life, which are worth quoting. Fronto speaks of Marcus's
victories and eloquence in the usual strain of high praise, and then
continues.(1) 'The army when you took it in hand was sunk in luxury
and revelry, and corrupted with long inactivity.

At Antiochia the soldiers had been Wont to applaud at the stage plays, knew more of the gardens
at the nearest restaurant than of the battlefield. Horses were hairy from lack of grooming, horsemen
smooth because their hairs had been pulled out by the roots(2) a rare thing it was to see a soldier
with hair on arm or leg. Moreover, they were better drest than armed; so much so, that Laelianus
Pontius, a strict man of the old discipline, broke the cuirasses of some of them with his finger-tips,
and observed cushions on the horses' backs. At his direction the tufts were cut through, and out
of the horsemen's saddles came what appeared to be feathers pluckt from geese. Few of the men
could vault on horseback, the rest clambered up with difficulty by aid of heel and knee and
leg not many could throw a lance hurtling, most did it without force or power, as though they were
things of wool-dicing was common in the camp, sleep lasted all night,
or if they kept watch it was over the winecup.

By what regulations to restrain such soldiers as these, and to turn them to honesty and industry,
did you not learn from Hannibal's sternness, the discipline of Africanus, the acts of Metellus
recorded in history.

1 Ad Verum. imp., ii. I, s.fin.

2 A common mark of the effeminate at Rome.

After the preceptorial letters cease the others are concerned with
domestic events, health and sickness, visits or introductions, birth
or death.

Thus the empperor writes to his old friend, who had shown some diffidence in seeking an interview:(1)

'To
MY MASTER.

'I have a serious grievance against you, my dear master, yet indeed my grief is more than my grievance,
because after so long a time I neither embraced you nor spoke to you, though you visited the palace,
and the moment after I had left the prince my brother. I reproached my brother severely for not
recalling me; nor durst he deny the fault.' Fronto again writes on
one occasion: 'I have seen your daughter.

It was like seeing you and Faustina in infancy, so much that is charming her face has taken from
each of yours.' Or again, at a later date:(2) I have seen your chicks, most delightful sight that
ever I saw in my life, so like you that nothing is more like than the likeness.... By the mercy of Heaven
they have a healthy colour and strong lungs. One held a piece of white bread, like a little
prince, the other a common piece, like a true philosophers son.'

1 Ad Verum. Imp. Aur. Caes., i. 3.

2 Ad Ant. Imp i., 3.

Marcus, we know, was devoted to his children. They were delicate in health, in spite of Fronto's
assurance, and only one son survived the father. We find echoes of this affection now and again
in the letters. 'We have summer heat here still,' writes Marcus, 'but since my little girls are
pretty well, if I may say so, it is like the bracing climate of spring to us.'(1) When little
Faustina came back from the valley of the shadow of death, her father at once writes to inform Fronto.(2)
The sympathy he asks he also gives, and as old age brings more and more infirmity, Marcus becomes
even more solicitous for his beloved teacher.

The poor old man suffered a heavy blow in the death of his grandson, on which Marcus writes:(3)
'I have just heard of your misfortune. Feeling grieved as I do when one of your joints gives
you pain, what do you think I feel, dear master, when you have pain of mind?' The old man's reply,
in spite of a certain self-consciousness, is full of pathos. He recounts with pride the events
of a long and upright life, in which he has wronged no man, and lived in harmony with his friends
and family. His affectations fall away from him, as the cry of pain is forced from his heart:--

(4)'Many
such sorrows has fortune visited me with all my life long.

To pass by my other afflictions, I have lost five children under the most pitiful conditions
possible: for the five I lost one by one when each was my only child, suffering these blows of
bereavement in such a manner that each child was born to one already bereaved. Thus I ever lost my
children without solace, and got them amidst fresh grief.....'

The letter continues with reflections on the nature of death, 'more to be rejoiced at than bewailed,
the younger one dies,' and an arraignment of Providence not without dignity, wrung from him as
it were by this last culminating misfortune. It concludes with a summing-up of his life in protest
against the blow which has fallen on his grey head.

1 Ad M. Caes., v. 19

2 iv. 11

3 De Nepote Amissa

4 De Nepote Amissa 2

'Through my long life I have committed nothing which might bring dishonour, or disgrace, or shame:
no deed of avarice or treachery have I done in all my day's: nay, but much generosity, much kindness,
much truth and faithfulness have I shown, often at the risk of my own life. I have lived in amity with
my good brother, whom I rejoice to see in possession of the highest
office by your father's goodness, and by your friendship at peace
and perfect rest.

The offices which I have myself obtained I never strove for by any underhand means. I have
cultivated my mind rather than my body; the pursuit of learning I have preferred to increasing
my wealth. I preferred to be poor rather than bound by any' man's obligation, even to want
rather than to beg. I have never been extravagant in spending money, I have earned it sometimes
because I must. I have scrupulously spoken the truth, and have been glad to hear it spoken to
me. I have thought it better to be neglected than to fawn, to be dumb than to feign, to be seldom
a friend than to be often a flatterer. 1 have sought little, deserved not little. So far as
I could, I have assisted each according to my means. I have given help readily to the deserving,
fearlessly to the undeserving. No one by proving to be ungrateful has made me more slow to
bestow promptly all benefits I could give, nor have I ever been harsh to ingratitude. (A fragmentary
passage follows, in which he appears to speak of his desire for a
peaceful end, and the desolation of his house.) I have suffered long
and painful sickness, my beloved Marcus.

Then I was visited by pitiful misfortunes: my wife I have lost, my grandson I have lost in Germany:(1)
woe is me! I have lost my Decimanus. If I were made of iron, at this tine I could write no more.'
It is noteworthy that in his meditations Marcus Aurelius mentions Fronto only once.(2) All his
literary studies, his oratory and criticism (such as it was) is forgotten;
and, says he, 'Fronto taught me not to expect natural affection from
the highly-born.' Fronto really said more than this: that 'affection'
is not a Roman quality, nor has it a Latin name.(3) Roman or not Roman,
Marcus found affection in Fronto; and if he outgrew his master's intellectual
training, he never lost touch with the true heart of the man it is
that which Fronto's name brings up to his remembrance, not dissertations
on compound verbs or fatuous criticisms of style.

1 In the war against the Catti.

2 Book I., 8.

3 Ad Verum, ii. 7

NOTES

THIS being neither a critical edition of the text nor an emended edition of Casaubon's translation,
it has not been thought necessary to add full notes. Casaubon's own notes have been omitted,
because for the most part they are discursive, and not necessary
to an understanding of what is written. In those which here follow,
certain emendations of his are mentioned, which he proposes in his
notes, and follows in the translation. In addition, one or two corrections
are made where he has mistaken the Greek, and the translation might
be misleading. Those which do not come under these two heads will
explain themselves.

The text itself has been prepared by a comparison
of the editions of 1634 and 1635. It should be borne in mind that
Casaubon's is often rather a paraphrase than a close translation;
and it did not seem worth while to notice every variation or amplification
of the original. In the original editions all that Casauhon conceives
as understood, but not expressed, is enclosed in square brackets.
These brackets are here omitted, as they interfere with the comfort
of the reader; and so have some of the alternative renderings suggested
by the translator. In a few cases, Latin words in the text have been
replaced by English.

Numbers in brackets refer to the Teubner text
of Stich, but the divisions of the text are left unaltered. For some
of the references identified I am indebted to Mr. G. H. Rendall's
Marcus Aurelius.

BOOK II "Both to frequent" (4). Gr. to mh, C. conjectures
to me. The text is probably right: "I did not frequent public lectures,
and I was taught at home."

VI Idiots.... philosophers (9). The reading
is doubtful, but the meaning seems to be: "simple and unlearned men"

XII
"Claudius Maximus" (15). The reading of the Palatine MS. (now lost)
was paraklhsiz Maximon, which C. supposes to conceal the letters kl
as an abbreviation of Claudius.

XIII "Patient hearing... He would
not" (16). C. translates his conjectural reading epimonon ollan. on
proapsth Stich suggests a reading with much the same sense: .....epimonon
all antoi "Strict and rigid dealing" (16). C. translates tonvn (Pal.
MS.) as though from tonoz, in the sense of "strain." "rigour." The
reading of other MSS. tonvn is preferable.

XIII "Congiaries" (13).
dianomais, "doles."

XIV "Cajeta" (17). The passage is certainly corrupt.
C. spies a reference to Chryses praying by the sea-shore in the Illiad,
and supposes M. Aurelius to have done the like. None of the emendations
suggested is satisfactory. At § XV. Book II. is usually reckoned to
begin. BOOK II III. "Do, soul" (6). If the received reading be right,
it must be sarcastic; but there are several variants which show how
unsatisfactory it is. C. translates "en gar o bioz ekasty so par eanty",
which I do not understand. The sense required is: "Do not violence
to thyself, for thou hast not long to use self-respect. Life is not
(v. 1. so long for each, and this life for thee is all but done."

X.
"honour and credit do proceed" (12).

"Thor! Thor! What's the matter? What's wrong?" quavered the alarmed Theophilus, "Have you gotten
bad news?"

"Read it, read it," said the big Freshman lifelessly, extending the letter to the startled
Senior. "It's all over, I suppose, and I've got to go to work again. I've got to leave college,
and toil once more, and save. My promise to my mother can't be fulfilled--yet. And just as
I was getting fairly started."

Theophilus Opperdyke hurriedly perused the message, which had come to Thor in that night's
mail but which the blond giant had let lie unnoticed while he tackled his geometry. With difficulty
Theophilus deciphered the scrawl on an official letterhead:

THE NEW YORK-CHRISTIANA STEAMSHIP LINE

(New York Offices)

Nov. 4, 19--.

DEAR SON:

I am writing to tell you that I've run into a sort of hurricane, and you and I have got a hard
blow to weather. I started you at college on the $5,000 received from the heirs of Henry B.
Kingsley, on whose yacht, as you know, I was wrecked in the South Seas, and marooned for ten
years. I figured on giving you an education with that sum, eked out by my wages, and what you
earn in vacations.

I had the $5,000, untouched, in a New York bank, and I wanted to take it over to Christiania;
when I was about to sail on my last voyage, I drew out the sum, and put it in care of the Purser
of the </i>Norwhal</i>, on which I was mate, intending, of course, to get it on docking, and
deposit it in Christiania. At the last hour I was transferred to the </i>Valkyrie</i>, to sail
a few days later, and I knew the </i>Norwhal's</i> purser would leave the $5,000 for me in
the Company's Christiania offices, so I did not bother to transfer it to the </i>Valkyrie</i>.

Perhaps you read in the newspapers that the </i>Norwhal</i> struck a floating mine, and went
down with a heavy loss of life. The Purser was among those lost, and none of the ship's papers
were saved; my $5,000, of course, went down also.

I am sorry, John, but there seems nothing to do but for you to leave college and work. For
your mother's sake, I wish we could avoid it; but we must wait and work and tackle it again.
Your first term expenses are paid, so stay until the term is out. Perhaps Mr. Hicks can give
you a job in one of his steel mills again, but we must work our own way, son. Don't lose courage,
we'll fight this out together with the memory of your promise to your dying mother to spur
you on. The road may be long and rocky but we'll make it. Just work and save, and in a year
or two you can start at college again. You can study at night, too, and keep on learning.

I'll write later. Stay at college till the term is up, and in the meantime try to land a job.
However, you won't have any trouble to do that. Keep your nerve, boy, for your mother's sake.
It's a hard blow, but we'll weather it, never fear, and reach port.

Your father,

JOHN THORWALD, SR.

P.S. I am sailing on the </i>Valkyrie</i> today, will write you on my return to New York, in
a few weeks.

Theophilus looked at the massive young Norwegian, who had taken this solar-plexus blow with
that same stolid apathy that characterized his every action. He wanted to offer sympathy, but
he knew not how to reach Thor. He fully understood how terrific the blow was, how it must stagger
the big, earnest Freshman, just as he, after ten years of grinding toil, of sacrifice, of grim,
unrelenting determination, had conquered obstacles and fought to where he had a clear track
ahead. Just as it seemed that fate had given him a fair chance, with his father rescued and
five thousand dollars to give him a college course, this terrible misfortune had befallen him.
Theophilus realized what it must mean to this huge, silent Hercules, just making good his promise
to his dying mother, to give up his studies, and go back to work, toil, labor, to begin all
over again, to put off his college years.

"Leave me, please," said Thor dully, apparently as unmoved by the blow as he had been by Theophilus'
appeal. "I--I would like to be alone, for awhile."

Left alone, John Thorwald stood by the window, apparently not thinking of anything in particular,
as he gazed across the brightly lighted Quad. The huge Freshman seemed in a daze--utterly unable
to comprehend the disaster that had befallen him; he was as stolid and impassive as ever, and
Theophilus might have thought that he did not care, even at having to give up his college course,
had not the Senior known better.

Strangely enough, the behemoth Thorwald was not thinking so much of having to give up his studies,
of having to lay aside his books and take up again the implements of toil. He was not pondering
on the cruelty of fate in making him abandon, at least temporarily, his goal; instead, his
thoughts turned, somehow, to his experiences at old Bannister, to the football scrimmages,
the noisy sessions in "Delmonico's Annex," the college dining-hall, to the skylarking he had
often watched in the dormitories. He thought, too, of the happy, care-free youths, remembering
Hicks, good Butch Brewster, loyal little Theophilus; and as he reflected, he heard those Juniors,
over the way, singing. Just now they were chanting that exquisitely beautiful Hawaiian melody,
"Aloha Oe," or "Farewell to Thee," making the words tell of parting from their Alma Mater.
There was something in the refrain that seemed to break down Thor's wall of reserve, to melt
away his aloofness, and he caught himself listening eagerly as they sang.

Somehow he felt no desire to condemn those care-free youths, to call their singing silly foolishness,
to say they were wasting their time and their fathers' money. Queer, but he actually liked
to hear them sing, he realized he had come to listen for their saengerfests. Now that he had
to leave college, for the first time he began to ponder on what he must leave. Not alone books
and study, but--

As he stood there, an ache in his throat, and an awful sorrow overwhelming him, with the richly
blended voices of the happy Juniors drifting across to him, chanting a song of old Ballard,
big Thor murmured softly:

"What did little Theophilus say? What was it Shakespeare wrote?

CHAPTER X

THOR'S AWAKENING

  "There's a hole in the bottom of the sea,
  And we'll put Bannister in that hole!
  In that hole--in--that--hole--
  Oh, we'll put Bannister in that hole!"

"In the famous words of the late Mike Murphy," said T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., "the celebrated
Yale and Penn track trainer, 'you can beat a team that can't be beat, but--you can't beat a
team that won't be beat!' Latham must be in the latter class."

It was the Bannister-Latham game, and the first half had just ended. Captain Butch Brewster's
followers had trailed dejectedly from Bannister Field to the Gym, where Head Coach Corridan
was flaying them with a tongue as keen as the two-edged sword that drove Adam and Eve from
the Garden of Eden. A cold, bleak November afternoon, a leaden sky lowered overhead, and a
chill wind swept athwart the field; in the concrete stands, the loyal "rooters" of the Gold
and Green, or of the Gold and Blue, shivered, stamped, and swung their arms, waiting for the
excitement of the scrimmage again to warm them. Yet, the Bannister cohorts seemed silent and
discouraged, while the Latham supporters went wild, singing, cheering, howling. A look at the
score-board explained this:

    END OF FIRST HALF: SCORE:
      Bannister ........ 0
      Latham ........... 3

The statement of T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., swathed in a gold and green blanket and humped on
the Bannister bench, to shivering little Theophilus Opperdyke, the Phillyloo Bird, Shad Weatherby,
and several more collegians who had joined him when the half ended, was singularly appropriate.
In Latham's light, fast eleven, trained to the minute, coached to a shifty, tricky style of
play with numberless deceptive fakes from which they worked the forward pass successfully,
Bannister seemed to have encountered, as Mike Murphy phrased it, "A team that won't be beat!"
According to the advance dope of the sporting writers, who, in football, are usually as good
prophets as the Weather Bureau, Bannister was booked to come out the winner by at least five
touchdowns to none. But here a half was gone, and Latham led by three points, scored on a rather
lucky field-goal!

The psychology of football is inexplicable. Yale, beaten by Virginia, Brown, and Wash-Jeff,
with the Blue's best gridiron star ineligible to play, a team that seemed at odds with itself
and the 'Varsity, mismanaged, poorly coached, journeys to Princeton to battle with old Nassau;
the Tiger, Its tail as yet untwisted, presents its best eleven for several seasons, a great
favorite in the odds, and yet the final score is Yale, 14; Princeton, 7! A strange fear of
the Bulldog, bred of many bitter defeats, of similar occasions when a feeble Yale team aroused
itself and trampled an invincible Orange and Black eleven, when the Blue fought old Nassau
with a team that "wouldn't" be beat, gave victory to the poorer aggregation. So many things
unforeseen often enter into a football contest, shifting the balance of power from the stronger
to the weaker team. One eleven gets the jump on the other, the favorite weirdly goes to pieces--team
dissension may exist, a dozen other causes--but, boiled down, Mike Murphy's statement was most
appropriate now.

Latham simply <i>would not</i> be beat! The sporting pages had said: "Latham simply can't beat
Bannister!" Here the team, that could not be beaten was being defeated, and the team that would
not be defeated was, so far, the victor. Perhaps the threatened dropping of Thor from the Gold
and Green squad shook somewhat Captain Butch's players; more likely, the Latham aggregation
got the jump on Bannister, opening up a bewildering attack of criss-crosses, line plunges,
cross-bucks, and tandems, from all of which the forward pass frequently developed; they literally
overwhelmed a supposedly unbeatable team. And once they got the edge, it was hard for Bannister
to regain poise and to smother the fast plays that swept through or around the bewildered eleven.

"We have <i>got</i> to beat 'em!" growled Shad, "Mike Murphy or not. Why, if little old Latham
cleans us up, smash go our chances of the State Championship! Oh, look at Thor--the big mountain
of muscle. Why doesn't he wake up, and go push that team off the field?"

Thor, the Prodigious Prodigy, his vast hulk unprotected from the cold wind by a football blanket,
squatted on the ground, on the side-line, apparently in a trance. Ever since the night before,
when his father's letter had dealt such a knock-out blow to his hopes of fulfilling the promise
to his dying mother, had rudely side-tracked him from the climb to his goal, the blond giant
had maintained that dumb apathy. If anything, it seemed that the cruel blow of fate had only
served to make Thor more stolid and impassive than ever, and Theophilus wondered if the Colossus
had really grasped the import of the tragic letter as yet. The news had spread over the college
and campus, and the students were sincerely sorry for Thor. But to offer him sympathy was about
as difficult as consoling a Polar bear with the toothache.

Coach Corridan, carrying out his plot, had decided not to start Thor in the first half of the
game. So the Norwegian Hercules, having received no orders to the contrary, however, donned
togs and appeared on the side-line, where he had sat, paying not the slightest heed to the
scrimmage and seemingly unaware that the Gold and Green was facing defeat and the loss of the
Championship, for a game lost would put the team out of the running. All big John Thorwald
knew was, in a few weeks he must leave old Bannister, must give up, for a time, his college
course. Just when the grim battle was won, he must leave, to work. Not that the Viking cared
about toil. It was the delay that chafed even his stolid self. He was stunned at having to
wait, maybe two years, before starting again.

Try as he would, he could not fight away the keen realization that books and study were not
all he would regret to leave. He was forced to acknowledge that his mind kept wandering to
other things. He found himself pondering on the parting with Theophilus Opperdyke, with that
crazy Hicks; he wondered if he, out in the world again, toiling his lonely way, would miss
the glad fellowship of these care-free youths that he had watched, but never shared, if he
would ever think of the weeks at old Bannister. Somehow, he felt that he would often vision
the Quad at night, brightly lighted, dormitories' lights agleam, students crossing and recrossing,
shouting at studious comrades. He would hear again the melodious banjo-twanging, the gleeful
saengerfests, the happy skylarking of the boys. He had never entered into all this, and yet
he knew he would miss it all; why, he would even miss the daily scrimmage on Bannister Field;
the noisy shower-room, with its clouds of steam, and white forms flitting ghostlike. He would
miss the classrooms; in brief, <i>everything</i>!

John Thorwald was awakening! Even had this blow not befallen him, the huge, slow-minded Norwegian,
in time, with Theophilus Opperdyke's missionary work, would have gradually come to understand
things better--at least, to know he was wrong in his ideas, which is the beginning of wisdom.
Already, he had ceased to condemn all this as foolishness, to rail at the youths for wasting
time and money. Already something stirred within him, and yet, stolid as he was, bashful among
the collegians, he was apparently the same. But the sudden shock Head Coach Corridan spoke
of had come. His father's letter telling of his loss and that Thor must leave Bannister had
awakened him to the startling knowledge that he did care for something more than study, that
all the things that had puzzled him, that he had sneered at, meant something to his existence,
that he dreaded leaving other things than his books.

"I--I don't understand things," thought Thorwald. "But--if I could only stay, I'd want to learn.
I'd try to get this 'college' spirit! Oh, I've been all wrong, but if I could only stay--"

As if in answer to his unspoken thought, the big Freshman beheld marching toward him Theophilus
Opperdyke, his spectacles off, and his face aglow, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., evidently in the
throes of emotional insanity; a Senior whom he knew as Parson Palmetter; Registrar Worthington,
and Doctor Alford, the kindly, beloved Prexy of old Bannister. The last named placed his hand
on the puzzled behemoth's ponderous shoulder.

"Thorwald," he said kindly, "Hicks, Opperdyke and Brewster, last night, came to my study and
acquainted me with your misfortune. They told me of your life-history, of your splendid purpose
to gain knowledge, to make something of yourself, for your dying mother's sake. Old Bannister
needs men like you, Thorwald. Perhaps you do not understand campus ways and tradition yet,
perhaps you are not in sympathy with everything here; but once a love for your Alma Mater is
awakened, you will be a power for good for your college.

"Now I at once took up the matter with Mr. Palmetter, President of The Students' Aid Bureau.
This year, for the first time in our history, we have dispensed with janitors and sweeps in
the dormitories, and with dining-hall waiters, so that needy and deserving students may work
their way through Bannister. Owing to the fact that Mr. Deane, a Senior, has given up his dormitory,
Creighton Hall, as he has funds for the year and needs the time to study, we can offer you
board and tuition, in exchange for your work in the dormitory, and waiting on tables in the
dining-hall. Since your first term bills, until January first, are paid, if you will start
to work at once, we will credit any work done this term on books and incidentals for next term.
By this means--"

"Why, you don't--you <i>can't</i> mean--" rumbled Thor, who had just dimly grasped the greatest
point in Prexy's speech. "Why, then I won't have to leave Bannister--I won't have to quit my
studies! Oh, thank you, sir; thank you! I will work <i>so</i> hard. I am not afraid of work;
I love it--a chance to toil and earn my education, that's what I want! Thank you!"

"And in addition," said the Registrar, "Mr. Palmetter reports that he can secure you, downtown,
a number of furnaces to tend this winter, which you can do early in the morning and at night;
this will bring you an income for living expenses, and in the spring something else will offer
itself. It means every moment of your time will be crowded, but Bannister needs workers--"

Something stirred in John Thorwald. His heart had been touched at last. He thought of T. Haviland
Hicks, Jr., Butch, and little Theophilus worried at his having to leave college, going to Doctor
Alford; of Prexy, the Registrar, and Parson Palmetter, working to keep Thor at old Bannister.
He recalled how sympathetic all the youths had been, how they admired his purpose and determination;
and he had rewarded their friendliness with cold aloofness. He felt a thrill as he visioned
himself working for his education, rising in the cold dawn, tending furnaces, working in the
dorm., waiting on tables--studying. With what fierce joy he would assail his tasks, glad that
he could stay! He knew the students would rejoice, that they would not look down on him; instead,
they would respect and admire him, toiling to grow and develop, to attain his goal!

"Go to it, Thor!" urged T. Haviland Hicks, Jr. "We all want you to stay, old man; we'll give
you a lift with your studies. Old Bannister <i>wants</i> you, <i>needs</i> you, so <i>stick</i>!"

"Stay, please!" quavered little Theophilus. "You don't want to leave your Alma Mater; stay,
Thorwald, and--you'll understand things soon,"

"Report at the Registrar's office at seven tonight, Thorwald," said Prexy, and then, because
he understood boys and campus problems, "and to show your gratitude, you might go out there
and spank that team which is trying to lick old Bannister."

John Thorwald, when Doctor Alford and the Registrar had gone, arose and stood gazing across
Bannister Field. He saw not the white-lined gridiron, the gaunt goal-posts, the concrete stands
filled with spectators, or the gay banners and pennants. He saw the buildings and campus of
old Bannister, the stately old elms bordering the walks; he beheld the Gym., the four dormitories--Bannister,
Nordyke, Smithson, and Creighton--the white Chapel, the ivy-covered Library, the Administration
and Recitation Halls; he glimpsed the Memorial Arch over the entrance driveway, and big Alumni
Hall. All at once, like an inundating wave, the great realization flashed on Thor that he did
not have to leave it all! Often again would he hear the skylarking youths, the gay songs, the
banjo-strumming; often would he see the brightly lighted Quad., would gaze out on the campus!
It was still his--the work, the study, and, if he tried, even the glad comradeship of the fellows,
the bigger things of college life, which as yet he did not understand.

The big slow-minded youth could not awaken, at once, to a full knowledge and understanding
of campus life and tradition, to a knowledge of college spirit; but, thanks to the belief that
he had to leave it all, he had awakened to the startling fact that already he loved old Bannister.
And now, joyous that he could stay, John Thorwald suddenly felt a strong desire to do something,
not for himself, but for these splendid fellows who had worried for his sake, had worked to
keep him at college. The Latham eleven was on the field, the Gold and Blue rooters rioted in
the stands. From the Bannister cohorts came a thunderous appeal:

  "Hold 'em, boys--hold 'em, boys--hold--hold--<i>hold</i>!
  Don't let 'em beat the Green and the Gold!"

A sudden fury swayed the Prodigious Prodigy; it was his college, his eleven, and those Blue
and Gold youths were actually beating old Bannister! The Bannister boys had admired him, some
of them had helped him in his studies, three had told Doctor Alford of him, had made it possible
for him to stay, to keep on toward his goal. </i>They</i> would be sorrow-stricken if Latham
won! A feeling of indignation came to Thor. How dare those fellows think they could beat old
Bannister! Why, <i>he</i> would go out there and show them a few things!

Head Coach Corridan, let it be chronicled, was paralyzed when he ducked under the side-line
rope--stretched to hold the spectators back--to collide with an immovable body, John Thorwald,
and to behold an eager light on that behemoth's stolid face. Grasping the Slave-Driver in a
grip that hurt, Thor boomed:

"Mr. Corridan, let me play, <i>please</i>! Send me out this half. We can win. We've <i>got</i>
to win! I want to do something for old Bannister. Why, if we lose today, we lose the Championship!
I don't understand things yet, but I do love the college. I want to fight for Bannister. </i>Please</i>
let me play!"

The astonished coach and the equally dazed Gold and Green eleven, with the bewildered collegians
who heard Thor's earnest appeal, were silent a few moments, unable to grasp the truth. Then
Captain Brewster, his face aglow, seized the big Freshman's arm excitedly.

"</i>Sure</i> you'll play, Thor!" he shouted. "Fullback, old man! Come on, team. Thor's awake!
He wants to fight for his Alma Mater; he wants Bannister to win! Oh, watch us shove Latham
off the field--everybody together now--the yell, for Thor!"

"Right here," grinned an excitedly happy T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., when the yell was given, "is
where a team that won't be beat gets licked by a chap what can lick 'em!"

What took place when the blond Prodigious Prodigy lumbered on Bannister Field at the start
of the last half of the Bannister-Latham game can be imagined by the final score-board figures:

    BANNISTER ......... 27
    LATHAM ............. 3

It can best be described with the aid of Scoop Sawyer's account in the next </i>Bannister Weekly:</i>

--At the start of the second half, however, the Latham cohorts were given a shock when they
beheld a colossal being almost as big as the entire Gold and Blue eleven, go in at fullback
for Bannister. And the Latham eleven received a series of shocks when Thor began intruding
that massive body of his into their territory. Tennyson's saying, "The old order changeth,
yielding place to new" was aptly illustrated in the second half; for Bannister's bugler quit
sounding "Retreat!" and blew "Charge!" Four touchdowns and three goals from touchdowns, in
one half, is usually considered a fair day's work for an entire team. Even Yale or Harvard;
but when one player corrals four touchdowns in a half--he is going some! Well, Thor went some!
Most of the half he furnished free transportation for two-thirds of the Latham team, carrying
them on his back, legs, and neck, as he strode down the field; a writ of habeas corpus could
not have stopped the blond Colossus. Anyone would have stood more show to stop an Alpine avalanche
than to slow up Thor, and the stretcher was constantly in evidence, for Latham knockouts.

The game turned into a Thor's Personally Conducted Tour. Thorwald, escorted by the Gold and
Green team, made four quick tours to the Latham goal-line. It was simply a matter of giving
the ball to the Prodigious Prodigy, then waving the linesmen to move down twenty yards or more
toward Latham's line. Thor was simply unstoppable, and more beneficial even than his phenomenal
playing was his encouragement to the team. He kept urging them to action, his foghorn growl
of, "Come on, boys!" was a slogan of victory! Judging by Thor's awakening, and his work of
the Latham game, Bannister's hopes of The State Intercollegiate Football Championship are as
roseate as the blush on a maiden's cheek at her first kiss, and--

That night, in the cozy room of T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., John Thorwald, supremely happy yet
withal as uncomfortable as a whale on the Sahara Desert, overflowed an easy-chair. The room
was filled, or what space Thor left, with the Bannister eleven, second-team players, Coach
Corridan, and several students; on the campus a riotous crowd of Bannister youths "raised merry
Heck," as Hicks phrased it, and their cheer floated up to the windows:

"Rah! Rah! Rah! Thor! Thor! Thor! He's--all--right!"

"Come, fellows," spoke T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.

"Let's sing to the captain, good old Butch! Let 'er go!"

  "Here's to good Butch Brewster! Drink it down!
  Here's to good Butch Brewster! Drink It down!
  Here's to good Butch Brewster--
  He plays football like he <i>uster--</i>
  Drink it down! Drink it down--down--down--down!"

A strange sound startled the joyous youths; it was a rumbling noise, like distant thunder,
and at first they could not place it. Then, as It continued, they located the disturbance as
coming from the prodigious body of Thor, and at last the wonderful phenomenon dawned on them.

"Thor is singing college songs!" quavered little Theophilus Opperdyke, so happy that his big-rimmed
spectacles rode the end of his nose. "Oh, Hicks--Butch--Thor is awake at last! He is trying
to get college spirit, to understand campus life--"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., suddenly realized that what he had so ardently longed for had come
to pass; aided by Theophilus' missionary work and by the sudden shock of Thorwald, Sr.'s, letter.
Thor was awakened, had come to know that he loved old Bannister. His awakening, as shown in
the football game, had been splendid. How he had towered over the scrimmage, in every play,
urging his team to fight, himself doing prodigies for old Bannister. Thor, who had been so
silent and aloof! Then the sunny-souled youth remembered.

"Oh, I told you I'd awaken Thor, Butch!" he began, but that behemoth quelled him with an ominous
look.

"</i>You</i>!" he growled, with pretended wrath, "<i>you</i>! It was Theophilus Opperdyke who
did the most of it, and Thorwald's father did the rest! Don't you rob Theophilus of his glory,
you feeble-imitation-of-some-thing-human!"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., grinned </i>a la</i> Cheshire cat. The happy-go-lucky Senior was vastly
glad that Thor had awakened, that now he would try to grasp the real meaning of college existence.
He felt that the young Hercules, from now on, would slowly and surely develop to a splendid
college man, that he would do big things for his Alma Mater. And the generous Hicks gave Theophilus
all the credit, and impressed on that happy Human Encyclopedia the fact that he had done a
great deed for old Bannister. Just so, Thor was awakened.

"Oh, I say, Deke Radford, Coach, and Butch," Hicks chortled, getting the attention of that
triumvirate as well as that of the others in the room, "remember up in Camp Bannister, in the
sleep-shack, when Coach Corridan outlined a smashing full-back he wanted?"

"Sure!" smiled Deke. "What of it, Hicks?"

Then T, Haviland Hicks, Jr., that care-free, lovable, irrepressible youth, whose chance to
swagger before this same trio had been postponed so long and seemingly lost forever, satiated
his fun-loving soul and reaped his reward. Calling their attention to Thor, the Prodigious
Prodigy, and asking them to remember his playing against Latham that day, the sunny Senior
strutted before them vaingloriously.

"Oh, I told you just to leave it to Hicks!" he declared, grinning happily. "I promised to round
up an unstoppable fullback, a Gargantuan Hercules, and I did! Just think of what he will do
to Hamilton and Ballard in the big games! As I have often told you, <i>always</i>--leave It
to Hicks!"

CHAPTER XI

"ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL"

  "Oh, what we'll do to Ballard
  Will surely be a shame!
  We'll push their team clear off the field
  And win the football game!"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., one night three days after the first big game, that with Hamilton,
a week following Thor's great awakening in the Latham game, sat in his cozy room, having assumed
his favorite position--chair tilted back at a perilous angle and feet thrust atop of the radiator.
The versatile youth, having just composed a song with which to encourage Bannister elevens
in the future, was reading it aloud, when his mind was torpedoed by a most startling thought.

"Land o' Goshen!" reflected the sunny-souled Senior, aghast. "I haven't twanged my ole banjo
and held forth with a saengerfest for a coon's age! I surely can do so now without arousing
Butch to wrath. Thor has awakened, Hamilton is walloped, and Bannister will surely win the
Championship! Everything is happy, an' de goose hangs high, so here goes!"

Holding his banjo </i>a la</i> troubadour, the blithesome Hicks, who as a Senior was harassed
by no study-hours or inspections, strode from his room and out into the corridor, up and down
which he majestically paced, like a sentinel on his beat, twanging his beloved banjo with abandon,
and roaring in his foghorn, subterranean voice:

  "Oh, the way we walloped Hamilton
  Surely was a shame!
  And we're going to win the Championship--
  For we'll do Ballard the same!

  "And Bannister shall flaunt the flag
  For at least three seasons more;
  Because--no team can win a game
  While the Gold and Green has Thor!"

On Bannister Field, three days before, the Gold and Green had crushed the strong team from
"old Ham" to the tune of 20 to 0; Thor's magnificent ground-gaining, in which he smashed through
the supposedly impregnable defense of the enemy, was a surprise to his comrades and a shock
to Hamilton. Time and again, on the fourth down, the ball was given to Thorwald, and the blond
Colossus, with several of old Ham's players clinging to him, plunged ahead for big gains. So
now with a monster mass-meeting in half an hour, the exultant Bannister youths pretended to
study, but prepared to parade on the campus, cheer the eleven and Thor, and arouse excitement
for the winning of the biggest game, a victory over Ballard, a week later.

From the rooms of would-be studious Seniors on both sides of the corridor, as Hicks patrolled
it, came vociferous protests and classic criticisms, gathering in force and volume as the breezy
youth's foghorn voice roared his song; that heedless collegian grinned as he heard:

"R-r-rotten! Give that Jersey calf more rope!"

"Hicks has had a relapse! </i>Sing-Sing</i> for yours, old man!"

"Arrest Hicks, under the Public Nuisance Act!"

"</i>Woof! Woof</i>! Shoot it quick! Don't let it suffer!"

Just as T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., strumming the banjo blithely and Carusoing with glee, reached
the end of the corridor and executed a brisk 'bout-face, he heard a terrific commotion on the
stairway, and, a moment later, Butch Brewster, Beef McNaughton, Deacon Radford and Monty Merriweather
gained the top of the stairs. As they were now between the offending Hicks and his quarters,
there seemed no chance for the sunny Senior to play his safety-first policy; so he waited,
panic-stricken, as Butch and Beef lumbered heavily down the corridor.

"Help! Aid! Succor! Relief! Assistance!" shrieked Hicks, leaning his beloved banjo against
the wall and throwing himself into what he fatuously believed was an intensely pugilistic pose.
"I am a believer in preparedness. You have me cornered, so beware! I am a follower of Henry
Ford, but even </i>I</i> will fight--at bay!"

"Well, you are at <i>sea</i> now!" growled Beef, tucking the splinter youth under one arm and
striding down the corridor, followed by Butch with the banjo, and Monty with Deacon. "You desperado,
you destroyer of peace and quietude, you one-cylinder gadabout! You're off again! We'll instruct
you to annoy real students, you faint shadow of something human!"

"Them's harsh sentences, Beef!" chuckled T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., as that behemoth kicked open
Hicks' door, bore the futilely squirming, kicking youth into the room, and hurled him on the
davenport. "Watch my banjo, there, Butch; have a couple of cares! Say, what'smatter wid youse
guys, anyhow? This is my first saengerfest for eons. Old Bannister has a clear track ahead
at last, the Championship is won for <i>sure</i>, and Thor, that mighty engine of destruction
to Ham's and Ballard's hopes, after much tinkering, is hitting on all twelve cylinders. Why,
I prithee, deny me the pleasure of a little joyous song?"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., since the memorable Latham game, when Thor had awakened between halves,
and the Prodigious Prodigy had shown himself worthy of his title by winning the game after
defeat leered at old Bannister, had suffered a relapse, and was again his old sunny, heedless,
happy-go-lucky self. Now that John Thorwald had been startled into realizing that he loved
his college and had been saved from having to leave, now that he played football for his Alma
Mater, and Bannister's hopes of the Championship were roseate, the blithesome Hicks had abandoned
himself to a golden existence of Beefsteak Busts downtown at Jerry's, entertaining jolly comrades
in his cozy room, and pestering the campus with his banjo and ridiculous imitations of Sheerluck
Holmes, the Dachshund Detective. Big Butch Brewster, lecturing him for his care-free ways,
as futilely as he had done for three years past, gave up in despair.

"I might as well be showing moving-pictures to the inmates of a blind asylum," he growled on
one occasion, "as to persuade you to quit acting like a lunatic! You, a Senior--acting like
an escaped inhabitant of Matteawan! Bah!"

Big Butch Brewster, drawing a chair up to the davenport, assumed the manner of a physician
toward a recalcitrant patient, while Beef carefully stowed the banjo in the closet and Deacon
Radford, an interested spectator, sat on the bed. The happy-go-lucky Hicks, at a loss to account
for the strange expressions of his comrades, tried to arise, but the football captain pinned
him down with one hand.

"Seriously, Hicks," spoke Butch, "your saengerfest came at a lamentably inopportune time! I
regret to Inform you that old Bannister faces another problem, with regard to Thor, and unless
it is solved, I fear--"

"Thor has balked again?" gasped the dazed Hicks, whom Butch now allowed to sit up, as he showed
interest. "Has the engine of destruction stalled? Why, as fast as we get him lined up, off
he slides at an angle! Well, you fellows did perfectly right to bring this baffling problem,
whatever it is, to me. What is the trouble--won't Thor play football?"

The irrepressible Hicks was bewildered at hearing that a new problem regarding Thor had arisen,
and, naturally, he at once connected it with football, since the big Freshman had twice balked
in that respect. Since his awakening, effected by Theophilus' missionary work, his last appeal,
and Thor's letter from his father, Thor had earnestly striven to grasp the true meaning of
college life, to understand campus tradition. No longer did he hold aloof, boning always, in
his lonely room. Instead, he mingled with his fellows, lingering with the team for the skylarking
in the shower-room after scrimmage, turning out for the nightly mass-meeting. Often, as the
youths practiced songs and yells on the campus, Thor's terrific rumble was heard--some had
even dared to slap his massive back and say, "Hello, Thor, old man!" and the big Freshman had
responded. It was evident to all that Thorwald was striving to become a collegian, and knowing
his slow, bulldog nature, there was no doubt as to his ultimate success; hence T. Haviland
Hicks, Jr., was vastly puzzled now.

"Oh, Thor hasn't backslid!" smiled Beef. "You see, Hicks, it's this way: Owing to Mr. Thorwald's
losing the five thousand dollars, Thor, as you know, is working his way at Bannister. Well,
with his hustling, his studies and football scrimmage, he simply does not have a minute for
the other phases of college life, for the comradeship with his fellows--"

"Here is his day's schedule," chimed in Deacon, referring to a paper: "Rise at four-thirty
A. M. Hustle downtown to tend several furnaces until seven. Breakfast at seven. Till nine,
make beds and sweep dormitory rooms. Nine till three-fifteen P. M., recitation periods and
dormitory work, sandwiched. Then until supper, football practice, and nights study. Add to
that waiting on tables for the three meals, and what time has Thor to broaden and develop,
to take in all the big things of campus existence, to grow into an all-round college man?"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., wonderful to chronicle, was silent. He was reflecting on the irony
of fate; as Deacon said, now that Thor had awakened, and earnestly wanted to be a collegian,
he had no time to enter into campus life. Glad at being able to stay at old Bannister, to keep
on with his studies, climbing steadily toward his goal, and finding a joy in his new relationship
with the students, the ponderous Thorwald had flung himself into his hustling, as the youths
called working one's way at college, with zeal. To the huge Freshman, toil was nothing, and
since it meant that he could keep on with his study, he was content. The collegians vastly
admired his grim determination; they aided all they could with his studies, and helped with
his work, so he could have more time for scrimmage, and yet another phase of the problem came
to Hicks.

It seemed unjust that John Thorwald, after his long years of hard physical toil, and his mental
struggles, often after hours of grinding work, at the very time when the five thousand dollars
from Henry B. Kingsley's heirs promised him a chance to study without a body tortured and exhausted,
should be forced again to take up his stern fight for knowledge. And it was cruel that Thor,
just awakening to the true meaning of college life, striving to grasp campus tradition, and
eager to serve his Alma Mater in every way, should have so little time to mingle with his fellows.
He should be with them on the campus, on the athletic field, in the dorms., the literary society
halls, the Y. M. C. A. He should be realizing the golden years of college life, the glad comradeship
of the campus. Instead, he must arise in the bitter cold, gray dawn, and from then until late
night toil and study unceasingly.

"It's a howling shame!" declared the serious Hicks, a heart full of sympathy for Thor. "Just
as he wakes up and is trying to understand things at old Bannister, bang! the </i>Norwhal</i>
is blown up by a stray mine, and down goes his dad's money. Why didn't Mr. Thorwald get the
five thousand transferred to the </i>Valkyrie</i>? Oh, if that money hadn't gone down to Davy
Jones' locker, Thor would be awakened and have time for college life, too!"

Butch Brewster started to speak when the thunderous tread of John Thorwald sounded in the corridor.
The Prodigious Prodigy seemed approaching at double-quick time, and the youths stared at each
other. However, when Thor appeared in the doorway, a letter in hand, they gazed at him in bewilderment,
for his face fairly glowed.

"Read it, fellows, read it!" he breathed, with what, for him, was almost excitement. "It just
came! Oh, isn't that good news? Read it out, Captain Butch. Won't we wallop Ballard now!"

Big Butch Brewster, mystified by Thor's happiness, and urged on by his equally puzzled comrades,
drew out the letter, and a glad smile coming to his honest countenance, he read aloud:

"THE NEW YORK-CHRISTIANIA. STEAMSHIP LINE (New York Office)

"Nov. 18, 19--.

"MR. JOHN THORWALD, JR., Bannister College.

"DEAR SIR:

"We beg to state that your father, first mate on our liner, the </i>Valkyrie</i>, three days
outbound from New York to Christiania, sent a message, <i>via</i> wireless, to our New York
offices by the inbound Dutch Line's </i>Rotterdam</i>. The </i>Rotterdam</i> relayed the message
to us, and we forward it herewith, <i>verbatim:</i>

"'DEAR SON: Purser of my ship, the </i>Valkyrie</i>, informed me today that the purser of the
ill-fated </i>Norwhal</i>, learning of my transfer to this liner, transferred my $5,000 to
the </i>Valkyrie</i> before he sailed to his fate. I am sending this <i>via</i> the </i>Rotterdam</i>,
inbound, and our office will forward it to you. Will write on arriving at Christiania. Father.'

"We are sorry for the delay in forwarding this message, but through an accident, it was mislaid
in our office for a few days.

"Yours truly,

"THE NEW YORK-CHRISTIANIA STEAMSHIP LINE,

"per J. L. G."

A moment of silence; outside on the campus the Bannister youths, preparing for the mass-meeting
in the Auditorium, started cheering. Someone caught sight of Thor, standing now by the window
of Hicks' room, on the third floor of Bannister Hall, and a few seconds later there sounded:

"Thor! Thor! Thor! Thor will bring the Championship to old Bannister! Rah! Rah! Rah!--Thor!"

"Oh," shouted T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., grinning happily, his arm across Thor's massive shoulders,
"'All's well that ends well,' as Bill Shakespeare says. It's all right now, Thor. Fate dealt
you a hard punch, but it served its purpose; for it made you realize how you would regret to
leave college. Now you won't have to hustle and have all your time filled with toil and study;
you can go after every phase of campus life, and serve old Bannister in so many ways."

John Thorwald stood, a contented look on his placid, impassive face, gazing down at the campus
below and hearing the plaudits of the excited collegians. The stately old elms, gaunt and bare,
tossed their limbs against a leaden sky; a cold, dreary wind sent clouds of dry leaves scurrying
down the concrete walks. In the faint moonlight that struggled through the clouds, the towers
and spires of old Bannister were limned against the sky-line. Across the campus, on Bannister
Field, the goal-posts, skeleton-like, kept their lonely vigil. On that field, in less than
a week, the Gold and Green must face the crucial test--against Ballard's championship eleven,
in the Biggest Game; and now, almost on the eve of battle, the shackles had been knocked from
him; he was free of the great burden, free to serve his Alma Mater, to fight for the Gold and
Green, to grow and develop into an all-round, representative college man.

All of a sudden it dawned on the slow-thinking young Norwegian just how much this freedom to
grow and expand meant to him, and he turned from the window. From below, the shouts of "Thor!
Thor! Thor!" drifted, stirring his blood, as he looked at Hicks, Butch, Beef, Monty and Deacon.

"'All's well that ends well,' you say. Hicks," he spoke slowly, his face joyous. "That's true;
but I'm just starting, fellows. I'm just <i>beginning</i> to live my college years, not for
myself, but for old Bannister, for my Alma Mater, for I am awake, and <i>free</i>!"

CHAPTER XII

THEOPHILUS BETRAYS HICKS

Big Butch Brewster, a life-sized picture of despair, roosted dejectedly on the Senior Fence,
between the Gym and the Administration Building. It was quite cold, and also the beginning
of the last study-period before Butch's final and most difficult recitation of the day, Chemistry.
Yet instead of boning in his warm room, the behemoth Senior perched on the fence and stared
gloomily into space.

As he sat, enveloped in a penumbra of gloom, the campus entrance door of Bannister Hall, the
Senior dorm., opened suddenly, and T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., that happy-go-lucky youth, came
out cautiously, after the fashion of a second-story artist, emerging from his crib with a bundle
of swag, the last item being represented by a football tucked under Hicks' left arm. Beholding
Butch Brewster on the Senior Fence, the sunny-souled Senior exhibited a perturbation of spirit
seeming undecided whether to beat a retreat or to advance.

"Now what's ailin' <i>you</i>?" demanded Butch wrathily, believing the pestersome Hicks to
be acting in that burglarious manner for effect. "Why should <i>you</i> sneak out of a dorm.,
bearing a football like it was an auk's egg? Why, you resemble a nigger, making his get-away
after robbing a hen-roost! Don't torment me, you accident-somewhere-on-its-way-to-happen. I
feel about as joyous as a traveling salesman who has made a town and gotten nary a order!"

"It's <i>awful</i>!" soliloquized T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., perching beside the despondent Butch
on the Senior Fence. "I am not a fatalist, old man, but it <i>does</i> seem that fate hasn't
destined Thor to play football for old Bannister this season! Here, after he won the Ham game,
and we expected him to waltz off with Ballard's scalp and the Championship, he has to tumble
downstairs! Oh, it's tough luck!"

It was two days before the biggest game, with Ballard--the contest that would decide the State
Intercollegiate Football Championship. Ballard, the present champions, discounting even Hamilton's
stories of Thor's prowess, were coming to Bannister with an eleven more mighty than the one
that had crushed the Gold and Green the year before, with a heavy, stonewall line, fast ends,
and a powerful, shifty backfield. The Ballard team was confident of victory and the pennant.
Bannister, building on the awakened Thorwald, superbly sure of his phenomenal strength and
power, of his unstoppable rushes, serenely practiced the doctrine of preparedness, and awaited
the day.

And then John Thorwald, the Prodigious Prodigy, whose gigantic frame seemed unbattered by the
terrific daily scrimmage, whom it was impossible to hurt on the gridiron, the day before, going
downstairs in Creighton Hall, hurrying to a class, had caught his heel on the top step, and
crashed to the bottom! And now, with a broken ankle, the blond Colossus, heartbroken at not
being able to win the Championship for old Bannister, hobbled about on crutches. Without Thor,
the Gold and Green must meet the invincible Ballard team! It was a solar-plexus blow, both
to the Bannister youths, confident in Thor's prowess, building on his Herculean bulk, and to
the big Freshman. Thorwald, awakened, striving to grasp campus tradition, to understand college
life, was eager to fling himself into the scrimmage, to give every ounce of his mighty power,
to offer that splendid body, for his Alma Mater, and now he must hobble impotently on the side-line,
watching his team fight a desperate battle.

"If Bannister only had a sure, accurate drop-kicker!" reflected Captain Butch hopelessly. "One
who could be depended on to average eight out of ten trials, we'd have a fighting chance with
Ballard. Deke Radford is a wonder. He can kick a forty-five-yard goal, but he's erratic! He
might boot the pigskin over when a score is needed from the forty-yard line, and again he might
miss from the twenty-yard mark. Oh, for a kicker who isn't brilliant and spectacular, but who
can methodically drop 'em over from, say, the thirty-five-yard line! Hello, what's the row, Hicks?"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., started to speak, changed his mind, coughed, grew red and embarrassed,
and acted in a most puzzling manner. At any other time, big Butch would have been bewildered;
but with Thor's loss weighing on his mind, the Gold and Green captain gave his comrade only
a cursory glance.

"I--I--Oh, nothing, Butch!" stammered Hicks, to whom, being "fussed," as Bannister termed embarrassment,
was almost unknown. "I--I guess I'll take this football over to my locker in the Gym. I ought
to glance at my Chemistry, too. So-long, Butch; see you later, old top!"

When the splinter-youth had drifted into the Gym., Butch Brewster, remembering his strange
actions, actually managed to transfer his thoughts for a time from the eleven to the care-free
T. Haviland Hicks, Jr. The behemoth Senior reflected that, to date, the pestiferous Hicks had
not explained his baffling mystery he recalled the day when he had told the Gold and Green
eleven of the loyal Hicks' ambition to please his dad by winning his B, when he had described
the youth's intense college spirit and had suggested that if Hicks failed to corral his letter
the Athletic Association award him one for his loyalty to old Bannister. And Butch saw again
the bewildering sentences in the letter from Thomas Haviland Hicks, Sr., to his son.

"Evidently," meditated Butch, literally and figuratively "on the fence," "Hicks has failed
to summon up enough self-confidence to explain his mystery; queer, too, for he usually is bubbling
with faith in himself. He has acted like a bashful schoolgirl at frequent times--he starts
to tell me something, then he gets embarrassed, back-fires, and stalls. He and Theophilus have
been sneaking out in the early dawn, too. Wow! What did he sneak out of the dorm. that way,
with a football, for? He looked like a yeggman working night shift. Why should <i>he</i> skulk
out with a football? He has never explained his dad's letter, or told just what Mr. Hicks meant
by calling him the "Class Kid" of Yale, '96, and saying those members of old Eli wanted him
to star! Oh, he's a tantalizing wretch, and I'd like to solve his mystery, without his knowledge,
so I could--"

At that instant, to the intense indignation and bewilderment of good Butch Brewster, little
Theophilus Opperdyke, the timorous Human Encyclopedia of old Bannister, exited from Bannister
Hall. The Senior boner gave a correct imitation of the offending Hicks, in that he skulked
out, gazing around him nervously; but he portaged no pigskin, and, unlike the sunny youth,
on periscoping Butch, he seemed relieved.

"Theophilus, <i>come here</i>!" thundered the wrathful football captain, shifting his tonnage
on the Senior Fence. "What's the plot, anyhow? It's bad enough when T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.,
sneaks out, bearing a football, like an amateur cracksman making a getaway; but when you appear,
imitating a Nihilist about to hurl a bomb--say, what's the answer to the puzzle, old man?"

Little Theophilus, his pathetically frail body trembling with suppressed excitement, his big-rimmed
spectacles tumbling off with ridiculous regularity, and his solemn eyes peering owlishly at
his behemoth classmate, stood before the startled Butch. It was evident that the 1919 grind
labored under great stress. He was waging a terrific battle with himself, struggling to make
some vast and all-important decision. He strove to speak, hesitated, choked, coughed apologetically,
and acted as fussed as Hicks had done, until Butch was wild; then, as if resolved to cast the
die and cross the Rubicon, he decided, and plunged desperately ahead.

"It's--it's Hicks, Butch!" he quavered, torn cruelly by conflicting emotions. "Oh, I don't
want to be a traitor--he trusted me with his secret, and I--I can't betray him, I just can't!
But he didn't make me promise not to tell. He just told me not to. Oh, it's his very last chance,
Butch, and with Thor hurt, old Bannister might need him in the Ballard game."

"What is it, Theophilus, old man?" Butch spoke kindly, for he saw the solemn little Senior
was intensely excited. "Tell me--if our Alma Mater needs any fellow's services, you know, he
should give them freely--since you did not promise not to tell about Hicks, if Bannister may
be able to use Hicks against Ballard--though I can't, by any stretch of the imagination, figure
how--then it is your duty to tell! I think I glimpse the dark secret--Hicks possesses some
sort of football prowess, goodness knows what, and he lacks the confidence to tell Coach Corridan!
Now, were it only drop-kicking--"

</i>"It is drop-kicking!"</i> Theophilus burst forth desperately. "Hicks is a drop-kicker,
Butch, and a sure one--inside the thirty-yard line. He almost <i>never</i> misses a goal, and
he kicks them from every angle, too. He isn't strong enough to kick past the thirty-yard line,
but inside that he is wonderfully accurate. With Thor out of the Ballard game, a drop-kick
may win for Bannister, and Deke Radford is so erratic! Oh, Hicks will be angry with me for
telling; but he just won't tell about himself, after all his practice, because he fears the
fellows will jeer. He is afraid he will fail in the supreme test. Oh, I've betrayed him, but--"

"T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., a drop-kicker!" exploded the dazed Butch, who could not have been
more astounded had Theophilus announced that the sunny youth possessed powers of black magic.
"Theophilus Opperdyke, Tantalus himself was never so tantalized as I have been of late. Tell
me the whole story, old man--hurry. Spill it, old top!"

Butch Brewster, by questioning the excited Human Encyclopedia, like a police official giving
the third degree, slowly extracted from Theophilus the startling story. A year before, just
as the Gold and Green practiced for the Ham game, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., one afternoon, had
arrayed his splinter-structure in a grotesque, nondescript athletic outfit, and had jogged
out on Bannister Field. The gladsome youth's motive had been free from any torturesome purpose.
He intended to round up the Phillyloo Bird, Shad Weatherby, and other non-athletic collegians,
and with them boot the pigskin, for exercise. However, little Skeet Wigglesworth, beholding
him as he donned the weird regalia of loud sweater, odd basket-ball stockings, tennis trousers,
baseball shoes, and so on, misconstrued his plan, and believed Hicks intended to torment the
squad. Hence, he hurried out, so that when Hicks appeared in the offing, the football squad
and the spectators in the stands had jeered the happy-go-lucky Junior, and had good-natured
sport at his expense.

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., after Jack Merritt had drop-kicked a forty-yard goal, made the excessively
rash statement that it was easy. Captain Butch Brewster had indignantly challenged the heedless
youth to show him, and the results of Hicks' effort to propel the pigskin over the crossbar
were hilarious, for he missed the oval by a foot, nearly dislocated his knee, and, slipping
in the mud, he sat down violently with a thud. However, so the excited Theophilus now narrated,
even as the convulsed students jeered Hicks, hurling whistles, shouts, cat-calls, songs and
humorous remarks at the downfallen kicker, one of Hicks' celebrated inspirations had smitten
the pestersome Junior, evidently jarred loose by his crashing to terra firma.

"Hicks figured this way, Butch," explained little Theophilus Opperdyke, eloquent in his comrade's
behalf, "nature had built him like a mosquito, and endowed him with enough power to lift a
pillow; hence he could never hope to play football on the 'Varsity; but he knew that many games
are won by drop-kicks and by fellows especially trained and coached for that purpose, and they
don't need weight and strength, but they must have the art, that peculiar knack which few possess.
His inspiration was this: Perhaps he had that knack, perhaps he could practice faithfully,
and develop into a sure drop-kicker. If he trained for a year, in his Senior season, he might
be able to serve old Bannister, maybe to win a big game. So he set to work."

Theophilus hurriedly yet graphically narrated how T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., had made the loyal,
hero-worshiping little Human Encyclopedia his sole confidant. He told the thrilled Butch how
the sunny youth, from that day on, had watched and listened as Head Coach Corridan trained
the drop-kickers, learning all the points he could gain. Vividly he described the mosquito-like
Hicks, as he with a football bought from the Athletic Association began in secret to practice
the fine art of drop-kicking! For a year, at old Bannister and at his dad's country home near
Pittsburgh, Hicks had faithfully, doggedly kept at it. With no one bat Theophilus knowing of
his great ambition, he had gone out on Bannister Field, when he felt safe from observation;
here, with his faithful comrade to keep watch, and to retrieve the pigskin, he had practiced
the instructions and points gained from watching Coach Corridan train the booters of the squad.
To his vast delight, and the joy of his little friend, Hicks had found that he did possess
the knack, and from before the Ham game until Commencement he had kept his secret, practicing
clandestinely at old Bannister; he had improved wonderfully, and when vacation started the
cheery collegian had told his beloved dad, Mr. Thomas Haviland Hicks, Sr., of his hopes.

The ex-Yale football star, delighted at his son's ambition to serve old Bannister and joyous
at discovering that Hicks actually possessed the peculiar knack of drop-kicking, coached the
splinter-youth all summer at their country place near Pittsburgh. The volcano fermented, and
in a fiery stream of lava cast me up. I lay torn by the torture-snakes of hell amid the glowing
cinders, and yet continued to exist.--A forest was on fire: I darted on wings of fury and despair
into the crackling wood.

Fire dropped upon me from the trees, but the flames only singed my limbs; alas! it could not
consume them.--I now mixed with the butchers of mankind, and plunged in the tempest of the raging
battle. I roared defiance to the infuriate Gaul, defiance to the victorious German; but arrows
and spears rebounded in shivers from my body. The Saracen's flaming sword broke upon my skull:
balls in vain hissed upon me: the lightnings of battle glared harmless
around my loins: in vain did the elephant trample on me, in vain the
iron hoof of the wrathful steed!

The mine, big with destructive power, burst upon me, and hurled me high in the air--I fell on heaps
of smoking limbs, but was only singed. The giant's steel club rebounded from my body; the
executioner's hand could not strangle me, the tiger's tooth could not pierce me, nor would
the hungry lion in the circus devour me. I cohabited with poisonous snakes, and pinched the red
crest of the dragon.--The serpent stung, but could not destroy me. The dragon tormented, but dared
not to devour me.--I now provoked the fury of tyrants: I said to Nero, 'Thou art a bloodhound!'
I said to Christiern, 'Thou art a bloodhound!, I said to Muley Ismail, 'Thou art a bloodhound!'--The
tyrants invented cruel torments, but did not kill me. Ha! not to be able to die--not to be able
to die--not to be permitted to rest after the toils of life--to be doomed to be imprisoned for
ever in the clay-formed dungeon--to be for ever clogged with this worthless body, its lead of diseases
and infirmities--to be condemned to [be]hold for millenniums that
yawning monster Sameness, and Time, that hungry hyaena, ever bearing
children, and ever devouring again her offspring!--Ha! not to be permitted
to die!

Awful Avenger in Heaven, hast Thou in Thine armoury of wrath a punishment more dreadful? then
let it thunder upon me, command a hurricane to sweep me down to the foot of Carmel, that I there
may lie extended; may pant, and writhe, and die.!"'

This fragment is the translation of part of some German work, whose title I have vainly endeavoured
to discover. I picked it up, dirty and torn, some years ago, in Lincoln's-Inn Fields.

7. 135, 136:--

I will beget a Son, and He shall bear The sins of all the world.

A book is put into our hands when children, called the Bible, the
purport of whose history is briefly this: That God made the earth
in six days, and there planted a delightful garden, in which He placed
the first pair of human beings.

In the midst of the garden He planted a tree, whose fruit, although within their reach, they
were forbidden to touch. That the Devil, in the shape of a snake, persuaded them to eat of
this fruit; in consequence of which God condemned both them and their posterity yet unborn
to satisfy His justice by their eternal misery. That, four thousand years after these events
(the human race in the meanwhile having gone unredeemed to perdition), God engendered with
the betrothed wife of a carpenter in Judea (whose virginity was nevertheless uninjured), and
begat a son, whose name was Jesus Christ; and who was crucified and
died, in order that no more men might be devoted to hell-fire, He
bearing the burthen of His Father's displeasure by proxy.

The book states, in addition, that the soul of whoever disbelieves this sacrifice will be
burned with everlasting fire.

During many ages of misery and darkness this story gained implicit belief; but at length men
arose who suspected that it was a fable and imposture, and that Jesus Christ, so far from
being a God, was only a man like themselves. But a numerous set of men, who derived and still
derive immense emoluments from this opinion, in the shape of a popular belief, told the vulgar that
if they did not believe in the Bible they would be damned to all
eternity; and burned, imprisoned, and poisoned all the unbiassed and
unconnected inquirers who occasionally arose.

They still oppress them, so far as the people, now become more enlightened, will allow.

The belief in all that the Bible contains is called Christianity. A Roman governor of Judea,
at the instance of a priest-led mob, crucified a man called Jesus eighteen centuries ago. He
was a man of pure life, who desired to rescue his countrymen from the tyranny of their barbarous
and degrading superstitions. The common fate of all who desire to benefit mankind awaited him.
The rabble, at the instigation of the priests, demanded his death, although his very judge made
public acknowledgement of his innocence.

Jesus was sacrificed to the honour of that God with whom he was afterwards confounded. It is
of importance, therefore, to distinguish between the pretended character of this being as the
Son of God and the Saviour of the world, and his real character as a man, who, for a vain attempt
to reform the world, paid the forfeit of his life to that overbearing tyranny which has since
so long desolated the universe in his name.

Whilst the one is a hypocritical Daemon, who announces Himself as the God of compassion and
peace, even whilst He stretches forth His blood-red hand with the sword of discord to waste the
earth, having confessedly devised this scheme of desolation from
eternity; the other stands in the foremost list of those true heroes
who have died in the glorious martyrdom of liberty, and have braved
torture, contempt, and poverty in the cause of suffering humanity.

(Since writing this note I have some reason to suspect that Jesus
was an ambitious man, who aspired to the throne of Judea.

The vulgar, ever in extremes, became persuaded that the crucifixion of Jesus was a supernatural
event. Testimonies of miracles, so frequent in unenlightened ages, were not wanting to prove that
he was something divine.

This belief, rolling through the lapse of ages, met with the reveries
of Plato and the reasonings of Aristotle, and acquired force and extent,
until the divinity of Jesus became a dogma, which to dispute was death,
which to doubt was infamy.

  
  CHRISTIANITY is now the established
  religion: he who attempts to impugn it
  must be contented to behold murderers and traitors take precedence
of him in public opinion; though, if his genius be equal to his courage,
and assisted by a peculiar coalition of circumstances, future ages
may exalt him to a divinity, and persecute others in his name, as
he was persecuted in the name of his predecessor in the homage of
the world.

The same means that have supported every other popular belief have supported Christianity. War,
imprisonment, assassination, and falsehood; deeds of unexampled and incomparable atrocity
have made it what it is.

The blood shed by the votaries of the God of mercy and peace, since
the establishment of His religion, would probably suffice to drown
all other sectaries now on the habitable globe.

We derive from our ancestors a faith thus fostered and supported: we quarrel, persecute, and hate
for its maintenance.

Even under a government which, whilst it infringes the very right of thought and speech, boasts
of permitting the liberty of the press, a man is pilloried and imprisoned because he is a deist,
and no one raises his voice in the indignation of outraged humanity. But it is ever a proof that
the falsehood of a proposition is felt by those who use coercion, not reasoning, to procure its admission;
and a dispassionate observer would feel himself more powerfully interested in favour of a man who,
depending on the truth of his opinions, simply stated his reasons
for entertaining them, than in that of his aggressor who, daringly
avowing his unwillingness or incapacity to answer them by argument,
proceeded to repress the energies and break the spirit of their promulgator
by that torture and imprisonment whose infliction he could command.

Analogy seems to favour the opinion that as, like other systems, Christianity has arisen and augmented,
so like them it will decay and perish; that as violence, darkness, and deceit, not reasoning
and persuasion, have procured its admission among mankind, so, when enthusiasm has subsided, and time,
that infallible controverter of false opinions, has involved its pretended evidences in the darkness
of antiquity, it will become obsolete; that Milton's poem alone will give permanency to the remembrance
of its absurdities; and that men will laugh as heartily at grace, faith, redemption, and original
sin, as they now do at the metamorphoses of Jupiter, the miracles of Romish saints, the efficacy
of witchcraft, and the appearance of departed spirits.

Had the Christian religion commenced and continued by the mere force of reasoning and persuasion,
the preceding analogy would be inadmissible. We should never speculate on the future obsoleteness
of a system perfectly conformable to nature and reason: it would endure so long as they endured;
it would be a truth as indisputable as the light of the sun, the criminality of murder, and
other facts, whose evidence, depending on our organization and relative situations, must remain
acknowledged as satisfactory so long as man is man. It is an incontrovertible fact, the consideration
of which ought to repress the hasty conclusions of credulity, or moderate its obstinacy in maintaining
them, that, had the Jews not been a fanatical race of men, had even the resolution of Pontius
Pilate been equal to his candour, the Christian religion never could have prevailed, it could not even
have existed: on so feeble a thread hangs the most cherished opinion of a sixth of the human
race! When will the vulgar learn humility? When will the pride of ignorance blush at having
believed before it could comprehend?

Either the Christian religion is true, or it is false: if true, it comes from God, and its authenticity
can admit of doubt and dispute no further than its omnipotent author is willing to allow. Either the
power or the goodness of God is called in question, if He leaves those doctrines most essential
to the well-being of man in doubt and dispute; the only ones which, since their promulgation,
have been the subject of unceasing cavil, the cause of irreconcilable
hatred.

IF GOD HAS SPOKEN, WHY IS THE UNIVERSE NOT CONVINCED?

There is this passage in the Christian Scriptures: 'Those who obey not God, and believe not
the Gospel of his Son, shall be punished with everlasting destruction.' This is the pivot upon
which all religions turn:--they all assume that it is in our power to believe or not to believe;
whereas the mind can only believe that which it thinks true. A human being can only be supposed accountable
for those actions which are influenced by his will. But belief is utterly distinct from and unconnected
with volition: it is the apprehension of the agreement or disagreement of the ideas that compose
any preposition.

Belief is a passion, or involuntary operation of the mind, and, like other passions, its intensity
is precisely proportionate to the degrees of excitement. Volition
is essential to merit or demerit.

But the Christian religion attaches the highest possible degrees of merit and demerit to that
which is worthy of neither, and which is totally unconnected with the peculiar faculty of the mind,
whose presence is essential to their being.

Christianity was intended to reform the world: had an all-wise Being planned it, nothing is
more improbable than that it should have failed: omniscience would infallibly have foreseen the
inutility of a scheme which experience demonstrates, to this age, to have been utterly unsuccessful.

Christianity
inculcates the necessity of supplicating the Deity. Prayer may be considered under two points
of view;--as an endeavour to change the intentions of God, or as a formal testimony of our
obedience.

But the former case supposes that the caprices of a limited intelligence can occasionally instruct
the Creator of the world how to regulate the universe; and the latter, a certain degree of
servility analogous to the loyalty demanded by earthly tyrants. Obedience indeed is only the pitiful
and cowardly egotism of him who thinks that he can do something better than reason.

Christianity, like all other religions, rests upon miracles, prophecies, and martyrdoms. No religion
ever existed which had not its prophets, its attested miracles, and, above all, crowds of devotees
who would bear patiently the most horrible tortures to prove its authenticity. It should appear
that in no case can a discriminating mind subscribe to the genuineness
of a miracle.

A miracle is an infraction of nature's law, by a supernatural cause; by a cause acting beyond
that eternal circle within which all things are included. God breaks through the law of nature,
that He may convince mankind of the truth of that revelation which, in spite of His precautions,
has been, since its introduction, the subject of unceasing schism and cavil.

Miracles resolve themselves into the following question (See Hume's Essay, volume 2 page 121.):--Whether
it is more probable the laws of nature, hitherto so immutably harmonious, should have undergone
violation, or that a man should have told a lie? Whether it is more probable that we are ignorant of
the natural cause of an event, or that we know the supernatural one? That, in old times, when
the powers of nature were less known than at present, a certain set of men were themselves deceived,
or had some hidden motive for deceiving others; or that God begat
a Son, who, in His legislation, measuring merit by belief, evidenced
Himself to be totally ignorant of the powers of the human mind--of
what is voluntary, and what is the contrary?

We have many instances of men telling lies;--none of an infraction of nature's laws, those laws
of whose government alone we have any knowledge or experience. The records of all nations afford innumerable
instances of men deceiving others either from vanity or interest, or themselves being deceived
by the limitedness of their views and their ignorance of natural causes: but where is the accredited
case of God having come upon earth, to give the lie to His own creations?

There would be something truly wonderful in the appearance of a ghost;
but the assertion of a child that he saw one as he passed through
the churchyard is universally admitted to be less miraculous.

But even supposing that a man should raise a dead body to life before
our eyes, and on this fact rest his claim to being considered the
son of God;--the Humane Society restores drowned persons, and because
it makes no mystery of the method it employs, its members are not
mistaken for the sons of God.

All that we have a right to infer from our ignorance of the cause of any event is that we do
not know it: had the Mexicans attended to this simple rule when they heard the cannon of the
Spaniards, they would not have considered them as gods: the experiments of modern chemistry would
have defied the wisest philosophers of ancient Greece and Rome to have accounted for them
on natural principles. An author of strong common sense has observed that 'a miracle is no miracle
at second-hand'; he might have added that a miracle is no miracle in any case; for until we are
acquainted with all natural causes, we have no reason to imagine
others.

There remains to be considered another proof of Christianity--Prophecy. A book is written before
a certain event, in which this event is foretold; how could the prophet
have foreknown it without inspiration? how could he have been inspired
without God?

The greatest stress is laid on the prophecies of Moses and Hosea on the dispersion of the Jews,
and that of Isaiah concerning the coming of the Messiah. The prophecy of Moses is a collection
of every possible cursing and blessing; and it is so far from being marvellous that the one
of dispersion should have been fulfilled, that it would have been
more surprising if, out of all these, none should have taken effect.

 There was a breathless stillness,
as the big athlete poised the pigskin, tilted on end, then strode back to his position.

"All ready, Ballard?" The Referee's call brought an affirmative from the Orange and Black leader.

"Ready, Bannister?"

"Ready!" boomed big Butch Brewster, with a final shout of encouragement to his players.

The biggest game was starting! Before ten thousand wildly excited and partisan spectators,
the Gold and Green and the Orange and Black would battle for Championship honors; with Thor
out of the struggle, Ballard, three-time Champion, was the favorite. The visitors had brought
the strongest team in their history, and were supremely confident of victory. Bannister, however,
could not help remembering, twice fate had snatched the greatest glory from their grasp, in
Butch's Sophomore year, when Jack Merritt's drop-kick struck the cross-bar, and a year later,
when Butch himself, charging for the winning touchdown, crashed blindly into the upright. Old
Bannister had not won the Championship for five years, and now--when the chances had seemed
roseate, with Thor, the Prodigious Prodigy--smashing Hamilton out of the way, Fate had dealt
the annual blow in advance, by crippling him.

"Oh, we've <i>got</i> to win!" shivered T. Haviland Hicks, Jr. "Oh, I hope I don't get sent
in--I mean--I hope Bannister wins without me! But if I <i>do</i> have to kick--Oh, I hope I
send it over that cross-bar--"

A second later the Ballard line advanced, the fullback's toe ripped into the pigskin, sending
it whirling, high in air, far into Bannister's territory; the yellow oval fell into the outstretched
arms of Captain Butch Brewster, on the Gold and Green's five-yard line, and--"We're off!" shrieked
Hicks, excitedly. "Come on, Butch--run it back! Oh, we're off."

The biggest game had started!

CHAPTER XIV

THE GREATER GOAL

"Time out!"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., enshrouded in a gold and green blanket, and standing on the side-line,
like a majestic Sioux Chief, gazed out on Bannister Field. There, on the twenty-yard line,
the two lines of scrimmage had crashed together and Bannister's backfield had smashed into
Ballard's stonewall defense with terrific impact, to be hurled back for a five-yard loss. The
mass of humanity slowly untangled, the moleskin clad players rose from the turf, all but one.
He, wearing the gold and green, lay still, white-faced, and silent.

"It's Biff Pemberton!" chattered Hicks, shivering as with a chill. "Oh, the game is lost, the
Championship is gone. Biff is out, and the last quarter is nearly ended. Coach Corridan has
got to send me in to kick. It's our very last chance to tie the score, and save old Bannister
from defeat!"

The time keeper, to whom the referee had megaphoned for time out, stopped the game, while Captain
Butch Brewster, the campus Doctor, and several players worked over the senseless Biff.

From the Bannister section, the Gold and Green undergraduates, alumni, and supporters, feeling
a dread of approaching defeat grip their hearts, yet determined to the last, came the famous
old slogan of encouragement to elevens battling on the gridiron:

  "Smash 'em, boys, run the ends--hold, boys, <i>hold</i>--
  Don't let 'em beat the Green and the Gold!
  Touchdown! Touchdown! Hold, boys, <i>hold,
  Don't</i> let 'em win from the Green and the Gold!"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., with a groan of despair, sat down on the deserted subs. bench. With
a feeling that all was lost, the splinter-like Senior gazed at the big score-board, announcing,
in huge, white letters and figures:

4TH QUARTER; TIME TO PLAY--2 MIN.; BANNISTER'S BALL ON BALLARD'S 22-YD. LINE; 4TH DOWN--8 YDS.
TO GAIN; SCORE: BALLARD--6; BANNISTER--3.

It had been a terrific contest, a biggest game never to be forgotten by the ten thousand thrilled
spectators! Each eleven had been trained to the second for this decisive Championship fight,
and with the coveted gonfalon of glory before them, the Bannister players battled desperately,
while Ballard's fighters struggled as grimly for their Alma Mater. For six years, the Gold
and Green had failed to annex the Championship, and for the past three, the invincible Ballard
machine had rushed like a car of Juggernaut over all other State elevens; one team was determined
to wrest the banner from its rival's grasp, and the other fully as resolved to retain possession,
hence a memorable gridiron contest, to which even the alumni could find none in past history
to compare, was the result.

Weakened by the loss of Thor, whose colossal bulk and Gargantuan strength would have made victory
a moral certainty, presenting practically the same eleven that had faced Ballard the past season
and had been defeated by a scant margin, old Bannister had started the first quarter with a
furious rush that swept the enemy to midfield without the loss of a first down. Then Ballard
had rallied, stopping that triumphal march, on its own thirty-five yard line, but unable to
check Quarterback Deacon Radford, who booted a forty-three-yard goal from a drop-kick, with
the score 3-0 in Bannister's favor, and Deacon, a brilliant but erratic kicker, apparently
in fine trim, the Gold Green rooters went wild.

In the second half, however, came the break of the game, as sporting writers term it. The strong
Ballard eleven found itself, and with a series of body-smashing, bone-crushing rushes, battering
at the Bannister lines like the Germans before Verdun, they steadily fought their way, trench
by trench, line by line, down the field. Without a fumble, or the loss of a single yard, the
terrific, catapulting charges forced back old Bannister, until the enemy's fullback, who ran
like the famous Johnny Maulbetsch, of Michigan, shot headlong over the goal line! The attempt
for goal from touchdown failed, leaving the score, at the end of the third quarter, Ballard--6;
Bannister--3.

And Deacon Radford, whose first effort at drop-kicking had been so brilliant, failed utterly.
Three times, taking a desperate chance, the Bannister quarter booted the pigskin, but the oval
flew wide of the goal posts, even from the thirty-yard line. With his mighty toe not to be
depended on, with the Gold and Green line worn to a frazzle by Ballard's battering rushes,
unable to beat back the victorious enemy, the Bannister cohorts, dismayed, saw the start of
the fourth and final quarter, their last hope. The forward pass had been futile, for the visitors
were trained especially for this aerial attack, and with ease they broke up every attempt.
And then, with the ball in Ballard's possession on Bannister's twenty-yard line, came a fumble--like
a leaping tiger, Monty Merriweather had flung himself on the elusively bounding ball, rolled
over to his feet, and was off down the field.

"Touchdown! Touchdown! Touchdown!" shrieked old Bannister's madly excited students, as Monty
sprinted. "Go it, Monty--<i>touchdown</i>! Sprint, old man, <i>sprint</i>!"

But Cupid Colfax, Ballard's famous sprinter, playing quarterback, was off on Monty's trail
almost instantly, and his phenomenal speed cut down the Ballard end's advantage; still, by
dint of exerting every ounce of energy, it was on Ballard's forty-yard line that Monty Merriweather,
hugging the pigskin grimly, finally crashed to earth.

"Come on, Bannister!" shouted Captain Butch Brewster, as the two teams lined down. "Right across
the goal-line, then kick the goal, and we win! Play the game--<i>fight</i>--Oh, we can win
the Championship right now."

Then ensued a session of football spectacular in the extreme, replete with thrilling plays,
with sensational tackles, and blood-stirring scrimmage. The Bannister players, nerved by Captain
Brewster's exhortation, by sheer will-power drove their battered bodies into the scrimmage.
End runs, line-smashing tandem plays, forward passes, followed in bewildering succession, until
the ball rested on Ballard's twenty-yard line, and a touchdown meant victory and the Championship
for old Bannister, Another rush, and five yards gained, then, Ballard, fighting at the last
ditch, made a stand every bit as heroic and thrilling as that sensational march in the first
half. The Gold and Green's tigerish rushes were hurled back--three times Captain Butch threw
his backfield against the line, and three times not an inch was gained. On the third down,
Monty Merriweather was forced back for a loss, so now, with two minutes to play and the ball
in Bannister's possession, with eight yards to gain, the play was on Ballard's twenty-two-yard
line!

And the biggest game had produced a new hero of the gridiron. Biff Pemberton, left half-back,
imbued with savage energy, had borne the brunt of that spectacular advance; and now, he stretched
on the turf, white and still.

"Hicks, old man," T, Haviland Hicks, Jr. turned as a hand rested grippingly on his shoulder.
Head Coach Patrick Henry Corridan, his face grim, had come to him, and in quick, terse sentences,
he outlined his plan.

"It's Bannister's last chance--" he said, tensely. "We <i>can't</i> make the first down, the
way Ballard is fighting, unless we take desperate odds. Now, Hicks, it's <i>up to you</i>.
On <i>you</i> depend old Bannister's hopes."

A great, chilling fear swept over T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., leaving him weak and shaken. It had
come at last-the moment for which he had trained and practiced drop-kicking, for a year, in
secret, that moment he had hoped would come, sometime, and yet had dreaded, as in a nightmare.
Before that vast, howling crowd of ten thousand madly partisan spectators, <i>he</i> must go
out on Bannister Field, to try and boot a drop-kick from the twenty-eight-yard-line, to save
the Gold and Green from defeat. And he thought of the great glory that would be his, if he
succeeded-he would be a campus hero, the idol of old Bannister, the youth who saved his Alma
Mater from defeat, in the biggest game! Then he remembered his Dad, inspiring the eleven, between
the halves, by a ringing speech; he heard again his sentences:

"--And to serve old Bannister, to bring glory and honor to our dear Alma Mater, is our greater
goal! Go back into the game, throw yourselves into the scrimmage, with no thought of personal
glory, of the plaudits of the crowd--it is a fine thing, a splendid goal, to play the game
and be a hero; it is a far more noble act to strive for the greater goal, one's Alma Mater!"

"Now listen carefully," Coach Corridan rushed on, "Biff is knocked out. They'll start again
soon, we are going to take a desperate chance; your Dad advises it! A tie score means the Championship
stays with Ballard. To win it, we must <i>win</i> this game--and on <i>you</i> everything depends."

"But--how--" stammered Hicks, dazed--the only way to <i>tie</i> the score was by a drop-kick;
the only way to win, by a touchdown--did the Coach mean he was <i>not</i> to realize his great
ambition to save old Bannister by a goal, the reward of his long training?

"You jog out," whispered Coach Corridan, hurriedly, for a stretcher was being rushed to Biff
Pemberton, "report to the Referee, and whisper to Butch to try Formation Z; 23-45-6-A! Now,
here is the dope: our only chance is to fool Ballard completely. When you go out, the Bannister
rooters, and your Yale friends, will believe it is to try a drop-kick and tie the score. I
am sure that the Ballard team will think this, too, because of your slender build. You act
as though you intend to try for a goal, and have Captain Butch make our fellows act that way.
Then--it is a fake-kick; the backfield lines up in the kick formation, but the ball is passed
to Butch, at your right. He either tries for a forward pass to the right end, or if the end
Is blocked, rushes it himself! Hurry-the referee's whistle is blowing; remember, Hicks, my
boy, it's the greater goal, it's for your Alma Mater."

In a trance, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., flung off the gold and green blanket, and dashed out on
Bannister Field. How often, in the past year, had he visioned this scene, only--he pictured
himself saving the game by a drop-kick, and now Coach Corridan ordered him to sacrifice this
glory! From the stands came the thunderous cheer of the excited Bannister cohorts, firmly believing
that the slender youth, so ludicrously fragile, among those young Colossi, was to try for a goal.

"Rah! Rah! Rah! Rah! Rah! Hicks! Kick the goal--Hicks!"

And from the Yale grads., among them his Dad, came a shout, as he jogged across the turf:

"Breka-kek-kek--co-ax--Yale! Hicks-Hicks-Hicks!"

But the Bannister Senior did not thrill. Now, instead, a feeling of growing resentment filled
his soul; even this intensely loyal youth, with all his love for old Bannister, was vastly
human, and he felt cheated of his just rights. How the students were cheering him, how those
Yale men called his name, and he was not to have his big chance! That for which he had trained
and practiced; the opportunity to serve his Alma Mater, by kicking a goal at the crucial moment,
and saving Bannister from defeat, was never to be his. Now, in his last game at college, he
was to act as a decoy, as a foil. Like a dummy he must stand, while the other Gold and Green
athletes ran off the play! Instead of everything, a tie game, or a defeat, depending on his
kicking, defeat or victory hung on that fake play, on Butch Brewster and Monty Merriweather!
So--the ear-splitting plaudits of the crowd for "Hicks!" meant nothing to him; they were dead
sea fruit, tasteless as ashes--as the ashes of ambition.

"I was nearly a <i>traitor</i>" gasped T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., his Dad's words echoing In his
memory, and a vision of that staunch, manly Bannister ex-athlete before him. "Oh, I was betraying
my Alma Mater. Instead of rejoicing to make <i>any</i> sacrifice, however big, for Bannister,
I thought only of myself, of my glory! I'll do it, Dad, I'll strive for the greater goal, and--we
just can't fail."

Reaching the scrimmage, Hicks, whose nervous dread had left him, when he fought down selfish
ambition, and thirst for glory, reported to the Referee, and hurriedly transferred Coach Corridan's
orders to Captain Butch Brewster; half a minute of precious time was spent in outlining the
desperate play to the eleven, for "time!" had been called, and then--

"Z-23-45-6-A!" shouted Quarterback Deacon Radford. "Come on, line--hold! Right over the cross-bar
with it, Hicks--tie the score, and save Bannister from defeat--"

The Gold and Green backfield shifted to the kick formation. Ten yards back of the center, on
the thirty-two-yard line of Ballard, stood T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.; the vast crowd was hushed,
all eyes stared at that slender figure, standing there, with Captain Butch Brewster at his
right, and Beef McNaughton on his left hand-the spectators believed the frail-looking youth
had been sent in to try a drop-kick. The Ballard rooters thought it, and--the Ballard eleven
were <i>sure</i> of their enemy's plan--Hicks' mosquito-like build, his nervous swinging of
that right leg, deluded them, and helped Coach Corridan's plot.

It was the only play, if Bannister wanted the Championship enough to try a desperate chance;
better a fighting hope for that glory, with a try for a touchdown, than a field-goal, and a
tie-score! The lines of scrimmage tensed. The linesmen dug their cleats in the sod, those of
Ballard tigerish to break through and block; old Bannister's determined to <i>hold</i>. Back
of Ballard's line, the backfield swayed on tip-toe, every muscle nerved, ready to crash through;
the ends prepared to knock Roddy and Monty aside, the backs would charge madly ahead, in a
berserk rush, to crash into that slim figure.

"Boot it, Hicks!" shrieked Deke Radford, and as he shouted, the pigskin shot from the Bannister
center's hands; the Gold and Green line held nobly, but not so the ends. Monty Merriweather,
making a bluff at blocking the left end, let him crash past, while he sprinted ahead--Captain
Butch Brewster, to whom the pass had been made, ran forward, until he saw he was blocked, and
then, seeing Monty dear, he hurled a beautiful forward pass.

Into the arms of the waiting Monty it fell, and that Gold and Green star, absolutely free of
tacklers, sprinted twelve yards to the goal-line, falling on the pigskin behind it! Coach Corridan's
"100 to 1" chance, suggested by Mr. Thomas Haviland Hicks, Sr., had succeeded, and--the Biggest
Game and the Championship had come to old Bannister at last!

Followed a scene pauperizing description! For many long years old Bannister had waited for
this glory; years of bitter disappointment, seasons when the Championship had been missed by
a scant margin, a drop-kick striking the cross-bar, Butch Brewster blindly crashing into an
upright. But now, all their pent-up joy flowed forth in a mighty torrent! Singing, yelling,
dancing, howling, the Bannister Band leading them, the Gold and Green students, alumni, Faculty,
and supporters, snake-danced around Bannister Field. A vast, writhing, sinuous line, it wound
around the gridiron, everyone who possessed a hat flinging it over the cross-bars. The victorious
eleven, were borne by the maddened youths--Captain Butch, Pudge, Beef, Monty, Roddy, Ichabod,
Tug, Hefty, Buster, Bunch, and--T. Haviland Hicks, Jr. Ballard, firmly believing Hicks would
try a field-goal, had been taken completely off guard. Surprised by the daring attempt, it
had succeeded with ease, and the final score was Bannister--10; Ballard--6!

"At last! At last!" boomed Butch Brewster, to whom this was the happiest day of his life. "The
Championship at last. My great ambition is realized. Old Bannister has won the Championship,
and I was the Team Captain!"

After a time, when "the shouting and the tumult died," or at least quieted somewhat, T. Haviland
Hicks, Jr., felt a hand on his arm, and looking down from the shoulders on which he perched,
he saw his Dad. Mr. Hicks' strong face was aglow with pride and a vast joy, and he shook his
son's hand again and again.

"I understand, Thomas!" he said, and his words were reward enough for the youth. "It was a
<i>big</i> sacrifice, but you made it gladly--I know! You gave up personal glory for the greater
goal, and--old Bannister won the Championship! You helped win, for the winning play turned
on <i>you</i>. It was splendid, my son, and I am proud of you! No matter if your sacrifice
is never known to the fellows, </i>I</i> understand."

A moment of silence on Hicks' part; then the sunny youth grinned at his beloved Dad, as he
responded blithesomely: "I'm Pollyanna, that old Bannister and </i>I</i> won out, Dad!"

CHAPTER XV

HICKS HAS A "HUNCH"

"Ladies and gentlemen, Seniors, Juniors, Sophomores, human beings, and--</i>Freshmen</i>! Mr.
Thomas Haviland Hicks, Jr., the Olympic High-Jump Champion, holder of the World's record, and
winner at the Panama-Pacific International Exposition National Championships, in his event,
is about to high jump! The bar is at five feet, ten inches. Mr. Hicks is the Herculean athlete
in the crazy-looking bathrobe."

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., his splinter-structure enshrouded in that flamboyant bathrobe of vast
proportions and insane colors, that inevitably attended his athletic efforts, shaming Joseph's
coat-of-many-colors, gazed despairingly at his good friend, Butch Brewster, and Track-Coach
Brannigan, with a Cheshire cat grin on his cherubic countenance.

"It's no use, Butch, it's no use!" quoth he, with ludicrous indignation, as big Tug Cardiff,
the behemoth shot-putter, through a huge megaphone imitated a Ballyhoo Bill, and roared his
absurd announcement to the hilarious crowd of collegians in the stand. "Old Bannister will
<i>never</i> take my athletic endeavors seriously. Here I have won two second places, and a
third, in the high-jump this season, and have a splendid show to annex <i>first</i> place and
my track B in the Intercollegiates, but--hear them!"

It was a balmy, sunshiny afternoon in late May. The sunny-souled, happy-go-lucky T. Haviland
Hicks, Jr., had trained indefatigably for the high jump, with the result that he had won several
points for his team--however, he had not realized his great ambition of first place, and his
track letter.

As Hicks now exclaimed to his team-mate and Coach Brannigan, no matter, to the howling Bannister
youths, if he <i>had</i> won three places in the high jump, in regularly scheduled meets; his
comrades had been jeering at his athletic fiascos for nearly four years, and even had Hicks
suddenly blossomed out as a star athlete, they would not have abandoned their joyous habit.
Still, those football 'Varsity players to whom good Butch had read Hicks, Sr.'s, letters, and
explained the sunny youth's persistence, despite his ridiculous failures, though they kept
on hailing his appearance on Bannister Field with exaggerated joy, understood the care-free
collegian, and loved him for his ambition to please his Dad. Since Hicks had absolutely refused
to accept his B, for any sport, unless he won it according to Athletic Association eligibility
rules, the eleven had kept secret the contents of the letters Butch Brewster had read to them,
for Hicks requested it.

The Bannister College track squad, under Track Coach Brannigan and Captain Spike Robertson,
had been training most strenuously for that annual cinder-path classic, the State Intercollegiate
Track and Field Championships. The sprinters had been tearing down the two-twenty straightaway
like suburban commuters catching the 7.20 A.M. for the city. Hammer-throwers and shot-putters--the
weight men--heaved the sixteen-pound shot, or hurled the hammer, with reckless abandon, like
the Strong Man of the circus. Pole-vaulters seemed ambitious to break the altitude records,
and In so doing, threatened to break their necks; hurdlers skimmed over the standard as lightly
as swallows, though no one ever beheld swallows hurdling. The distance runners plodded determinedly
around the quarter-mile track, broad-jumpers tried to jump the length of the landing-pit. And
T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., vainly essayed to clear five-ten In the high-jump!

It was the last-named event that "broke up the show," as the Phillyloo Bird quaintly stated,
somewhat wrongly, since the appearance of that blithesome youth in the offing, his flamboyant
bathrobe concealing his shadow-like frame, had <i>started</i> the show, causing the track squad,
as well as a hundred spectator-students, to rush for seats in the stand. The arrival of T.
Haviland Hicks, Jr., to train for form and height in the high-jump, though a daily occurrence,
was always the signal for a Saturnalia of sport at his expense, because--

"You can't live down your athletic past, Hicks!" smiled good-hearted Butch Brewster. "Your
making a touchdown for the other eleven, by running the wrong way with the pigskin, your hilarious
fiascos in every sport, your home-run with the bases full, on a strike-out-are specters to
haunt you. Even now that you have a chance to win your B, just listen to the fellows."

The track squad's "heavy weight--white hope" section, composed of hammer-heavers and shot-putters--Tug
Cardiff, Beef McNaughton, Pudge Langdon, Buster Brown, Biff Pemberton, Hefty Hollingsworth,
and Bunch Bingham, equipped with megaphones, and with the <i>basso profundo</i> voices nature
gave them, lined up on both sides of the jumping-standards, and chanted loudly:

  "All hail to T. Haviland Hicks!
  He runs like a carload of bricks;
    When to high jump he tries
    From the ground he can't rise--
  For he's built on a pair of toothpicks!"

This saengerfest was greeted with vociferous cheers from the vastly amused youths in the stands,
who hailed the grinning Hicks with jeers, cat-calls, whistles, and humorous (so they believed)
remarks:

"Say, Hicks, you won't <i>never</i> be able to jump anything but your board-bill!"

"You're built like a grass-hopper, Hicks, but you've done lost the hop!"

"If you keep on improving as you've done lately, you'll make a high-jumper in a hundred more
years, old top!"

"You may rise in the world, Hicks, but never in the high jump!"

"Don't mind them, Hicks!" spoke Coach Brannigan, his hands on the happy-go-lucky youth's shoulders.
"Listen to me; the Intercollegiates will be the last track meet of your college years, and
unless you take first place in your event, you won't win your track B. Second, McQuade, of
Hamilton, will do five-eight, and likely an inch higher, so to take first place, you, must
do five-ten. You have trained and practiced faithfully this season, but no matter what I do,
I <i>can't</i> give you that needed two inches, and--"

"I know it, Coach!" responded the chastened Hicks, throwing aside his lurid bathrobe determinedly,
and exposing to the jeering students his splinter-frame. "Leave it to Hicks, I'll clear it
this time, or--"

"Not!" fleered Butch, whom Hicks' easy self-confidence never failed to arouse. "Hicks, listen
to me, </i>I</i> can tell you why you can't get two inches higher. The whole trouble with you
is this; for almost four years you have led an indolent, butterfly, care-free existence, and
now, when you must call on yourself for a special effort, you are too lazy! You can dear five-ten;
you ought to do it, but you can't summon up the energy. I've lectured you all this time, for
your heedless, easy-going ways, and now--you pay for your idle years!"

"You said an encyclopedia, Butch!" agreed the Coach, with vigor. "If only something would just
<i>make</i> Hicks jump that high, if only he could do it once, and know it is in his power,
he could do it in the Intercollegiates, aided by excitement and competition! Let something
<i>scare</i> him so that he will sail over five-ten, and--he will win his B. He has the energy,
the build, the spring, and the form, but as you say, he is so easy-going and lazy, that his
natural grass-hopper frame avails him naught."

"Here I go!" announced Hicks, who, to an accompaniment of loud cheers from the stand, had been
jogging up and down in that warming-up process known to athletes as the in place run, consisting
of trying to dislocate one's jaw by bringing the knees, alternately, up against the chin. "Up
and over--that's my slogan. Just watch Hicks."

Starting at a distance of twenty yards from the high-jump standards, on which the cross-bar
rested at five feet, ten inches, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., who vastly resembled a grass-hopper,
crept toward the jumping-pit, on his toe-spikes, as though hoping to catch the cross-bar off
its guard. Advancing ten yards, he learned apparently that his design was discovered, so he
started a loping gallop, turning to a quick, mad sprint, as though he attempted to jump over
the bar before it had time to rise higher. With a beautiful take-off, a splendid spring--a
quick, writhing twist in air, and two spasmodic kicks, the whole being known as the scissors
form of high jump, the mosquito-like youth made a strenuous effort to clear the needed height,
but--one foot kicked the cross-bar, and as Hicks fell flat on his back, in the soft landing-pit,
the wooden rod, In derision, clattered down upon his anatomy.

"Foiled again!" hissed Hicks, after the fashion of a "Ten-Twent'-Thirt'" melodrama-villain,
while from the exuberant youths in the grandstand, who really wanted Hicks to clear the bar,
but who jeered at his failure, nevertheless, sounded:

"Hire a derrick, Hicks, and hoist yourself over the bar!"

"Your <i>head</i> is light enough--your feet weigh you down!"

"'Crossing the Bar'--rendered by T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.!"

"Going up! Go play checkers, Hicks, you ain't no athlete!"

While the grinning, albeit chagrined T, Haviland Hicks, Jr., reposed gracefully on his back,
staring up at the cross-bar, which someone kindly replaced on the pegs, big Butch Brewster,
who seemed suddenly to have gone crazy, tried to attract Coach Brannigan's attention. Succeeding,
Butch--usually a grave, serious Senior, winked, contorted his visage hideously, pointed at
Hicks, and sibilated, "</i>Now</i>, Coach--now is your chance! Tell Hicks--"

Tug Cardiff, Biff Pemberton, Hefty Hollingsworth, Bunch Bingham, Buster Brown, Beef McNaughton,
and Pudge Langdon, who had been attacked in a fashion similar to Butch's spasm, concealed grins
of delight, and made strenuous efforts to appear guileless, as Track-Coach Brannigan approached
T. Haviland Hicks, Jr. To that cheery youth, who was brushing the dirt from his immaculate
track togs, and bowing to the cheering youths in the stand, the Coach spoke:

"Hicks," he said sternly, "you need a cross-country jog, to get more strength and power in
your limbs! Now, I am going to send the Heavy-Weight-White-Hope Brigade for a four-mile run,
and you go with them. Oh, don't protest; they are all shot-putters and hammer-throwers, but
Butch, and they can't run fast enough to give a tortoise a fast heat. Take 'em out two miles
and back, Butch, and jog all the way; don't let 'em loaf! Off with you,"

The unsuspecting Hicks might have detected the nigger in the woodpile, had he not been so anxious
to make five-ten in the high-jump. However, willing to jog with these behemoths, with whom
even he could keep pace, so as to develop more jumping power, the blithesome youth cast aside
his garish bathrobe, pranced about in what he fatuously believed was Ted Meredith's style,
and howled:

"Follow Hicks! All out for the Marathon--we're off! One--two--three--<i>go</i>!"

With the excited, track squad, non-athletes, and the baseball crowd, which had ceased the game
to watch the start, yelling, cheering, howling, and whistling, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., drawing
his knees up in exaggerated style at every stride, started to lead the Heavy-Weight-White-Hope-Brigade
on its cross-country run. Without wondering why Coach Brannigan had suddenly elected to send
<i>him</i> along with the hammer-throwers and shot-putters, on the jog, and not having seen
the insane facial contortions of the Brigade, before the Coach gave orders, the gladsome Senior
started forth in good spirits, resembling a tugboat convoying a fleet of battleships.

"'Yo! Ho! Yo! Ho! And over the country we go!'" warbled Hicks, as the squad left Bannister
Field, and jogged across a green meadow. "'--O'er hill and dale, through valley and vale, Yo!
Ho! Yo! Ho! Yo! Ho!'"

"Save your wind, you insect!" growled Butch Brewster, with sinister significance that escaped
the heedless Hicks, as the behemoth Butch, a two-miler, swung into the lead. "You'll <i>need</i>
it, you fish, before we get back to the campus! Not <i>too</i> fast, you flock of human tortoises.
You'll be crawling on hands and knees, if you keep that pace up long!"

A mile and a half passed. Butch, at an easy jog, had led his squad over green pastures, up
gentle slopes, and across a plowed field, by way of variety. At length, he left the road on
which the pachydermic aggregation had lumbered for some distance, and turned up a long lane,
leading to a farm-house. Back of it they periscoped an orchard, with cherry-trees, laden with
red and white fruit, predominating. Also, floating toward the collegians on the balmy May air
came an ominous sound:

"Woof! Woof! Woof! Bow-wow-wow! Woof!"

"Come on, fellows!" urged Butch Brewster. "We'll jog across old Bildad's orchard and seize
some cherries--the old pirate can't catch us, for we are attired for sprinting. Don't they
look good?"

"Nothing stirring!" declared Hicks, slangily, but vehemently, as he stopped short in his stride.
"Old Bildad has got a bulldog what am as big as the New York City Hall. He had it on the campus
last month, you know! Not for mine! I don't go near that house, or swipe no cherries from his
trees. If you wish to shuffle off this mortal coil, drive right ahead, but </i>I</i> will await
your return here."

T, Haviland Hicks, Jr.'s, dread of dogs, of all sizes, shapes, pedigrees, and breeds, was well
known to old Bannister; hence, the Heavy-weights now jeered him unmercifully. Old "Bildad,"
as the taciturn recluse was called, who lived like a hermit and owned a rich farm, did own
a massive bulldog, and a sight of his cruel jaws was a "No Trespass" sign. With great forethought,
when cherries began to ripen, the farmer had brought Caesar Napoleon to the campus, exhibited
him to the awed youths, and said, "My cherries be for <i>sale</i>, not to be <i>stole</i>!"
which object lesson, brief as it was, to date, had seemed to have the desired effect. Yet--here
was Butch proposing that they literally thrust their heads, or other portions of their anatomies,
into the jaws of death!

"Well," said Bunch Bingham at last, "I tell you what; we'll jog up to the house and ask old
Bildad to <i>sell</i> us some cherries; we can pay him when he comes to the campus with eggs
to sell, Come along. Hicks, I'll beard the bulldog in his kennel."

So, dragged along by the bulky hammer-throwers and shot-putters, the protesting T. Haviland
Hicks, Jr., in mortal terror of Caesar Napoleon, and the other canine guardians of old Bildad's
property, progressed up the lane toward the house.

"I got a hunch," said the reluctant Hicks, sadly, "that things ain't a-comin' out right! In
the words of the immortal Somebody-Or-Other, 'This 'ere ain't none o' <i>my</i> doin'; it's
a-bein' thrust on me!' All right, my comrades, I'll be the innocent bystander, but heed me--look
out for the bulldog!"

CHAPTER XVI

THANKS TO CAESAR NAPOLEON

The Heavy-Weight-White-Hope-Brigade, towing the mosquito-like T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., advanced
on the stronghold of old Bildad, so named because he was a pessimistic Job's comforter, like
Bildad, the Shuhite, of old--like a flock of German spies reconnoitering Allied trenches. Hearing
the house, with Butch and Beef holding the helpless, but loudly protesting Hicks, who would
fain have executed what may mildly be termed a strategic retreat, big Tug Cardiff boldly marched,
in close formation, toward the door, when the portal suddenly flew open.

"Woof! Woof! Bow! Wow! Woof! Let go, Butch--there's the dog!"

Amid ferocious howls from Caesar Napoleon, and alarmed protests from the paralyzed Hicks, who
could not have run, with his wobbly knees, had he been set free by his captors, old Bildad,
towed from the house by Caesar Napoleon, who strained savagely at the leash until his face
bulged, burst upon the scene with impressive dramatic effect! It was difficult to decide, without
due consideration, which was the more interesting. Bildad, a huge, gnarled old Viking, with
matted gray hair, bushy eyebrows, a flowing beard, and leathery face, a fierce-looking giant,
was appalling to behold, but so was Caesar Napoleon, an immense bulldog, cruel, bloodthirsty,
his massive jaws working convulsively, his ugly fangs gleaming, as he set his great body against
the leash, and gave evidence of a sincere desire to make free lunch of the Bannister youths.
As Buster Brown afterward stated, "Neither one would take the booby prize at a beauty show,
but at that, the bulldog had a better chance than Bildad!" T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., let it be
recorded, could not have qualified as a judge, since his undivided attention was awarded to
Caesar Napoleon!

"What d'ye want round here, ye rapscallions?" demanded Bildad, courteously, holding the savage
bulldog with one hand, and constructing a ponderous fist with the other, "</i>Hike</i>--git
off'n my land, y'hear? </i>Git</i>, er Caesar Napoleon'll git holt o' them scanty duds ye got on!"

"We want to--to buy some cherries, Mr.--Mr. Bildad!" explained Bunch Bingham, edging away nervously.
"We won't steal any, honest, sir. Well pay you for them the very next time you come to the
campus with milk and eggs."

"Ho! Ho!" roared old Bildad, piratically, his colossal body shaking, "A likely tale, lads--an'
when I come for my money, ye'll jeer me off the campus, an' tell me to whistle for it! Off
my land--<i>git,</i> an' don't let me cotch ye on it inside o' two minutes, or I'll let Caesar
Napoleon make a meal off'n yer bones--<i>git</i>!"

To express it briefly, they got. T, Haviland Hicks, Jr., not standing on the order of his going,
set off at a sprint that, while it might have caused Ted Meredith to lose sleep, also aroused
in Caesar Napoleon an overwhelming desire to take out after the fugitive youth, so that Mr.
Bildad was forced to exert his vast strength to hold the massive bulldog. Butch, Beef, Hefty,
Tug, Buster, Bunch, Pudge, and Biff, a pachydermic crew, awed by Caesar Napoleon's bloodthirsty
actions, jogged off in the wake of Hicks, who confidently expected to hear the bulldog giving
tongue, on his trail, at every second.

Another lane, making in from a road making a cross-roads with the one from which they came
to Bildad's house, ran alongside the orchard for two hundred yards, inside the fence; at its
end was a high roadgate. At what they decided was a safe distance from the "war zone," the
Heavy-Weight-White-Hope-Brigade, and T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., the latter forcibly restrained
from widening the margin between him and peril, held a council on preparedness.

"The old pirate!" stormed Butch Brewster, gazing back to where the vast figure of old Bildad,
striding toward the house, towered. "We can't let him get away with that, fellows. I'll have
some of his cherries now, or--"

"No, no--<i>don't</i>, Butch!" chattered Hicks, whose dread of dogs amounted to an obsession.
"He can still see us, and if you leave the lane, he will send Caesar Napoleon after us! Oh,
<i>don't</i>--"

But Butch Brewster, evidently wrathful at being balked, strode from the path, or lane, of virtue,
toward a cherry-tree, whose red fruit hung temptingly low, and his example was followed by
every one of the Brigade, leaving the terrified Hicks to wait in the lane, where, because of
his alarm, he had no time to wonder at the bravado of his behemoth comrades. However, finding
that Bildad had disappeared, and believing he had taken Caesar Napoleon into the house, the
sunny Hicks, who was far from a coward otherwise, but who had an unreasonable dread of dogs,
little or big, was about to wax courageous, and join his team-mates, when a wild shout burst
from Pudge Langdon:

"Run, fellows--<i>run</i>! Bildad's put the bulldog on us! Here comes--Caesar Napoleon--!"

With a blood-chilling </i>"Woof! Woof!"</i> steadily sounding louder, nearer, a streak of color
shot across the orchard, from the house, toward the affrighted Brigade, while old Bildad's
hoarse growl shattered the echoes with "Take 'em out o' here, Nap--chaw 'em up, boy!" For a
startled second, the youths stared at the on-rushing body, shooting toward them through the
orchard-grass at terrific speed, and then:

"Run!" howled T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., terror providing him with wings, as per proverb. Down
the lane, at a pace that would have done credit to Barney Oldfield in his Blitzen Benz, the
mosquito-like youth sprinted madly, and ever, closer, closer on his trail, sounded that awful
"Woof! Woof!" from Caesar Napoleon, who, as Hicks well knew, was acting with full authority
from Bildad! He heard, as he fled frantically, the excited shouts of his comrades.

"Beat it, Hicks--he's right after you--run! Run!"

"Jump the fence--he can't get you then--jump!"

"He's right on your trail, Hicks--<i>sprint</i>, old man!"

"Make the fence, old man--<i>jump</i> it--and you're <i>safe</i>!"

The terrible truth dawned on the frightened youth, as he desperately sprinted: the innocent
bystander always gets hurt. He had protested against the theft of Bildad's cherries, and naturally,
the bulldog had kept after <i>him</i>! But it was too late to stop, for the old adage was extremely
appropriate, "He who hesitates is lost." He must <i>make</i> that road-gate, and tumble over
it, in some fashion, or be torn to shreds by Caesar Napoleon, the savage dog that the cruel
Bildad had sent after the youths.

Nearer loomed the road-gate, appallingly high. Closer sounded the panting breath of the ferocious
Caesar Napoleon, and his incessant "Woof-woof!" became louder. It seemed to the desperate Hicks
that the bulldog was at his heels, and every instant he expected to feel those sharp teeth
take hold of his anatomy! Once, the despairing youth imitated Lot's wife and turned his head.
He saw a body streaking after him, gaining at every jump, also he lost speed; so thereafter,
he conscientiously devoted his every energy to the task in hand, that of making the gate, and
getting over it, before Caesar Napoleon caught his quarry!

At last, the road-gate, at least ten feet high, to Hicks' fevered imagination, came so close
that a quick decision was necessary, for Caesar Napoleon, also, was in the same zone, and in
a few seconds he would overhaul the fugitive. T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., realizing that a second
lost, perhaps, might prove fatal to his peace of mind, desperately resolved to dash at the
gate, and jump; if he succeeded even in striking somewhere near the top, and falling over,
he would not care, for the bulldog would not follow him off Bildad's land. From his comrades,
far in the rear, came the chorus:

"Jump, Hicks! He's right on your heels!"

Like the immortal Light Brigade, Hicks had no time to reason about anything. His but to jump
or be bitten summed up the situation. So, with a last desperate sprint, a quick dash, he left
the ground--luckily, the earth was hard, giving him a solid take-off, and he got a splendid
spring. As he arose In air, al! the training and practicing for form stayed with him, and instinctively
he turned, writhed, and kicked--

For a fleeting second, he saw the top of the gate beneath his body, and he felt a thrill as
he beheld twisted strands of barbed wire, cruel and jagged, across it; then, with a great sensation
of joy, he knew that he had cleared the top, and a second later, he landed on the ground, in
the country road, in a heap.

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., that sunny-souled, happy-go-lucky, indolent youth, for once in his
care-free campus career aroused to strenuous action, scrambled wildly to his feet, and forcibly
realized the truth of Longfellow's, "And things are not-what they seem!" Instead of the ferocious,
bloodthirsty bulldog, Caesar Napoleon, a huge, half-grown St. Bernard pup gamboled inside the
gate, frisking about gleefully, and exhibiting, even so that Hicks, with all his innate dread
of dogs, could understand it, a vast friendliness. In fact, he seemed trying to say, "That's
fun. Come on and play with me some more!"

"Hey, fellows," shrieked the relieved Hicks, "that ain't Caesar Napoleon! Why, he just wanted
to play."

Bewildered, the members of the Heavy-Weight-White-Hope-Brigade of the Bannister College track
squad rushed on the scene. To their surprise, they found not a savage bulldog, but a clumsy,
good-natured St. Bernard puppy, who frisked wildly about them, groveled at their feet, and
put his huge paws on them, with the playfulness of a juvenile elephant.

"Why, it <i>isn't</i> Nappie, for a fact!" gasped Butch. "Oh, I am so glad that old Bildad
wasn't mean enough to put the bulldog after us, for he is dangerous. He scared us, though,
and put this pup on our trail. He wanted to play, and he thought it all a game, when Hicks
fled. Oho! What a joke on Hicks."

"I don't care!" grinned Hicks, thus siding with the famous Eva Tanguay. "You fellows were fooled,
too! You were too <i>scared</i> to run, and if it had been Caesar Napoleon, I'd have saved
your worthless lives by getting him after me! I'll bet Bildad is snickering now, the old reprobate!
Why, Tug, are you <i>crazy</i>?"

Tug Cardiff, indeed, gave indications of lunacy. He marched up to the road-gate, and stood
close to it, so that the barbed wire top was even with his hair; then he backed off, and gazed
first at the gate, then at the bewildered Hicks, while he grinned at the dazed squad in a Cheshire
cat style.

"Measure it, someone!" he shouted. "I am nearly six feet tall, and it comes even with the top
of my dome! Can't you see, you brainless imbeciles, Hicks cleared it."

"Wait for me here!" howled big Butch Brewster, climbing the fence and starting down the road
at a pace that did credit even to that fast two-miler. The Brigade, In the absence of their
leader, tried to estimate the height of the gate, and Hicks, gazing at its barbed-wire top,
shuddered. The St. Bernard pup, having caused T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., for once in his indolent
life to exert every possible ounce of energy in his splinter-frame, groveled at his feet, and
strove to express his boundless joy at their presence.

Butch Brewster, in fifteen minutes, returned, panting and perspiring, bearing a tape-measure,
borrowed at the next farm-house. With all the solemnity of a sacred rite being performed, the
youths waited, as Butch and Tug, holding the tape taut, carefully measured from the ground
to the top of the barbed wire on the gate. Three times they did this, and then, with an expression
of gladness on his honest countenance, Butch hugged the dazed T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., while
Tug Cardiff howled, "Now for the Intercollegiates and your track B, Hicks! You <i>can</i> do
five-ten in the meet, for Coach Brannigan said you could dear it, if only you did it <i>once</i>."

"Why--what do you mean, Tug?" quavered Hicks, not daring to allow himself to believe the truth.
"You--you surely don't mean--"

"I mean, that now you <i>know</i> you can jump that high," boomed Tug, executing a weird dance
of exultation, In which, the Brigade joined, until it resembled a herd of elephants gone insane,
"for you have done it--allowing for the sag, and everything, that gate is just five feet, ten
inches high, and--<i>you cleared it</i>!"

"Ladies and gentlemen--Hicks, of Bannister, is about to high jump! Hicks and McQuade, of Hamilton,
are tied for first place at five feet eight inches! McQuade has failed three times at five-ten!
Hicks' third and last trial! Height of bar--five feet ten inches!"

This time, however, it was not big Tug Cardiff, imitating a Ballyhoo Bill, and inciting the
Bannister youths to hilarity at the expense of the sunny-souled T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.; it
was the Official Announcer at the Annual State Intercollegiate Field and Track Championships,
on Bannister Field, and his announcement aroused a tumult of excitement in the Bannister section
of the stands, as well as among the Gold and Green cinder-path stars.

"Come on, Hicks, old man!" urged Butch Brewster, who, with a dozen fully as excited comrades
of the cheery Hicks, surrounded that splinter-athlete. "It's positively your last chance to
win your track B, or your letter in any sport, and please your Dad! If they lower the bar,
and you two jump off the tie, McQuade's endurance will bring him out the winner."

"You <i>can</i> clear five-ten!" encouraged Bunch Bingham. "You did it once, when you believed
Caesar Napoleon was after you. Just summon up that much energy now, and clear that bar! Once
over, the event and your letter are won! Oh, if we only had that bulldog here, to sick on you."

Sad to chronicle, the score-board of the Intercollegiates recorded the results of the events,
so far, thus:

    HAMILTON ............35 BALLARD .............20 BANNISTER ...........28

It was the last event, and even did Hicks win the high-jump, McQuade's second place would easily
give old Ham. the Championship. Hence, knowing that victory was not booked for an appearance
on the Gold and Green banners, the Bannister youths, wild for the lovable, popular Hicks to
win his Bs vociferously pulled for him:

"Come on, Hicks--up and over, old man--it's <i>easy</i>!"

"Jump, you Human Grass-Hopper--you can do it!"

"Now or never, Hicks! One big jump does the work!"

"Sick Caesar Napoleon on him, Coach; he'll clear it then!"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., casting aside that flamboyant bathrobe, for what he believed was the
last athletic event of his campus career, stood gazing at the cross-bar. One superhuman effort,
a great explosion of all his energy, such as he had executed when he cleared the gate, thinking
Caesar Napoleon was after him, and the event was won! He <i>had</i> cleared that height, it
was within his power. If he failed, as Butch said, the bar would be lowered, and then raised
until one or the other missed once. McQuade, with his superior strength and endurance, must
inevitably win, but as he had just missed on his third trial at five-ten, if Hicks cleared
that height on <i>his</i> final chance, the first place was his.

"And my B!" murmured Hicks, tensing his muscles. "Oh, won't my Dad be happy? It will help him
to realize some of his ambition, when I show him my track letter! It is positively my last
chance, and I <i>must</i> clear it."

With a vast wave of determined confidence inundating his very being, Hicks started for the
bar; after those first, peculiar, creeping steps, he had just started his gallop, when he heard
Tug Cardiff's <i>basso</i>, magnified by a megaphone, roared:

"All together, fellows--<i>let 'er go</i>--"

Then, just as Hicks dug his spikes into the earth, in that short, mad sprint that gives the
jumper his spring, just as he reached the take-off, a perfect explosion of noise startled him,
and he caught a sound that frightened him, tensed as he was:

"Woof! Woof! Bow! Wow! Woof! Woof! Woof! Look out, Hicks, Caesar Napoleon is after you!"

Psychology Is inexplicable. Ever afterward, Hicks' comrades of that cross-country run averred
strenuously that their roaring through megaphones, in concert, imitating Caesar Napoleon's
savage bark at the psychological moment, flung the mosquito-like youth clear of the cross-bar
and won him the event and his B. Hicks, however, as fervidly denied this statement, declaring
that he would have won, anyhow, because he had summoned up the determination to do it! So it
can not be stated just what bearing on his jump the plot of Butch Brewster really had. In truth,
that behemoth had entertained a wild idea of actually hiring old Bildad and Caesar Napoleon
to appear at the moment Hicks started for his last trial, but this weird scheme was abandoned!

Fifteen minutes later, when T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., had escaped from the riotous Bannister
students, delirious with joy at the victory of the beloved youth, the Heavy-Weight-White-Hope
Brigade, capturing the grass-hopper Senior, gave him a shock second only to that which he had
experienced when first he believed Caesar Napoleon was on his trail.

"Perhaps our barking didn't make you jump it!" said Beef McNaughton, when Hicks indignantly
denied that he had been scared over the cross-bar, "but indirectly, old man, we helped you
to win! If we had not put up a hoax on you--"

"A <i>hoax</i>?" queried the surprised Hicks. "What do you mean--hoax?"

"It was all a frame-up!" grinned Butch Brewster, triumphantly. "We paid old Bildad five dollars
to play his part, and as an actor, he has Booth and Barrymore backed off the stage! We got
Coach Brannigan to send you along with us on the cross-country jog, and your absurd dread of
dogs, Hicks, made it easy! Bildad, per instructions, produced Caesar Napoleon, and scared you.
Then, with a telescope, he watched us, and when I gave the signal, he let loose Bob, the harmless
St. Bernard pup, on our trail.

"The pup, as he always does, chased after strangers, ready to play. We yelled for you to run,
and you were so <i>scared</i>, you insect, you didn't wait to see the dog. Even when you looked
back, in your alarm, you didn't know it was not Caesar Napoleon, for his grim visage was seared
on your brain--I mean, where your brain ought to be! And even had you seen it wasn't the bulldog,
you would have been frightened, all the same. But I confess, Hicks, when you sailed over that
high gate, it was one on <i>us</i>."

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., drew a deep breath, and then a Cheshire cat grin came to his cherubic
countenance. So, after all, it had been a hoax; there had not been any peril. No wonder these
behemoths had so courageously taken the cherries! But, beyond a doubt, the joke <i>had</i>
helped him to win his B. It had shown him he could clear five feet, ten inches, for he had
done it--and, in the meet, when the crucial moment came, the knowledge that he <i>had</i> jumped
that high, and, therefore, could do it, helped--where the thought that he never had cleared
it would have dragged him down. He had at last won his B, a part of his beloved Dad's great
ambition was realized, and--

"Oh, just leave it to Hicks!" quoth that sunny-souled, irrepressible youth, swaggering a trifle,
"It was my mighty will-power, my terrific determination, that took me over the cross-bar, and
not--<i>not</i> your imitation of--"

"Woof! Woof! Woof!" roared the "Heavy-Weight-White-Hope-Brigade" in thunderous chorus. "Sick
him--Caesar Napoleon--!"

CHAPTER XVII

HICKS MAKES A RASH PROPHECY

"Come on, Butch! Atta boy--some fin, old top! Say, you Beef--you're asleep at the switch. What
time do you want to be called? More pep there, Monty--bust that little old bulb, Roddy! Aw,
rotten! </i>Say</i>, Ballard, your playing will bring the Board of Health down on you--why
don't you bring your first team out? Umpire? What--do you call that an umpire? Why, he's a
highway robber, a bandit. Put a 'Please Help the Blind' sign on that hold-up artist!"

Big Butch Brewster, captain of the Bannister College baseball squad, navigating down the third-floor
corridor of Bannister Hall, the Senior dormitory, laden with suitcases, bat-bags, and other
impedimenta, as Mr. Julius Caesar says, and vastly resembling a bell-hop in action, paused
in sheer bewilderment on the threshold of T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.'s, cozy room.

"Hicks!" stormed the bewildered Butch, wrathfully, "what in the name of Sam Hill <i>are</i>
you doing? Are you crazy, you absolutely insane lunatic? This is a study-hour, and even if
<i>you</i> don't possess an intellect, some of the fellows want to exercise their brains an
hour or so! Stop that ridiculous action."

The spectacle Butch Brewster beheld was indeed one to paralyze that pachydermic collegian,
T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., the sunny-souled, irrepressible Senior, danced madly about on the tiger-skin
rug in midfloor, evidently laboring under the delusion that he was a lunatical Hottentot at
a tribal dance; he waved his arms wildly, like a signaling brakeman, or howled through a big
megaphone, and about his toothpick structure was strung his beloved banjo, on which the blithesome
youth twanged at times an accompaniment to his jargon:

"Come on, Skeet, take a lead (<i>plunkety-plunk</i>!) Say, d'ye wanta marry first base--divorce
yourself from that sack! (<i>plunk-plunk</i>!) </i>Oh</i>, you bonehead--steal--you won't get
arrested for it! Hi! Yi! </i>Ouch</i>, Butch! Oh, I'll be good--"

At this moment, the indignant Butch abruptly terminated T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.'s, noisy monologue
by seizing that splinter-youth firmly by the scruff of the neck and forcibly hurling him on
the davenport. Seeing his loyal class-mate's resemblance to a Grand Central Station baggage-smasher,
the irrepressible Senior forthwith imitated a hotel-clerk:

"Front!" howled the grinning Hicks, to an imaginary bellboy, "Show this gentleman to Number
2323! Are you alone, sir, or just by yourself? I think you will like the room-it faces on the
coal-chute, and has hot and cold folding-doors, and running water when the roof leaks! The
bed is made once a week, regularly, and--"

"Hicks, you Infinitesimal Atom of Nothing!" growled big Butch, ominously. "What were you doing,
creating all that riot, as I came down the corridor? What's the main idea, anyway, of--"

"Heed, friend of my campus days," chortled the graceless Hicks, keeping a safe distance from
his behemoth comrade, "tomorrow-your baseball aggregation plays Ballard College, at that knowledge-factory,
for the Championship of the State. Because nature hath endowed me with the Herculean structure
of a Jersey mosquito, I am developing a 56-lung-power voice, and I need practice, as </i>I</i>
am to be the only student-rooter at the game tomorrow! Q.E.D.! And as for any Bannister student,
except perhaps Theophilus Opperdyke and Thor, desiring to investigate the interiors of their
lexicons tonight, I prithee, just periscope the campus."

"I guess you are right, Hicks!" grinned Butch Brewster, as he looked from the window, down
on an indescribably noisy scene. "For once, your riotous tumult went unheard. Say, get your
traveling-bag ready, and leave that pestersome banjo behind, if you want to go with the nine!"

Several members of the Gold and Green nine, embryo American and National League stars, roosted
on the Senior Fence between the Gymnasium and the Administration Building, with, suitcases
and bat-bags on the grass. In a few minutes old Dan Flannagan's celebrated jitney-bus would
appear in the offing, coming to transport the Bannister athletes downtown to the station, for
the 9 P.M. express to Philadelphia. Incited by Cheer-Leaders Skeezicks McCracken and Snake
Fisher, several hundred youths encouraged the nine, since, because of approaching final exams.,
they were barred by Faculty order from accompanying the team to Ballard. In thunderous chorus
they chanted:

  "One more Job for the undertaker!
  More work for the tombstone maker!
  la the local ceme<i>tery</i>, they are very--very--<i>very</i>
  Busy on a brand-new grave for--Ballard!"

As the lovable Hicks expressed it, "'Coming events cast their shadows before.' Commencement
overshadows our joyous campus existence!" However, no Bannister acquaintance of T. Haviland
Hicks, Jr., could detect wherein the swiftly approaching final separation from his Alma Mater
had affected in the least that happy-go-lucky, care-free, irrepressible youth. If anything,
it seemed that Hicks strove to fight off thoughts of the end of his golden campus years, using
as weapons his torturesome saengerfests, his Beefsteak Busts down at Jerry's, and various other
pastimes, to the vast indignation of his good friend and class-mate, Butch Brewster, who tried
futilely to lecture him into the proper serious mood with which Seniors must sail through Commencement!

"You are a Senior, Hicks, a Senior!" Butch would explain wrathfully. "You are popularly supposed
to be dignified, and here you persist in acting like a comedian in a vaudeville show! I suppose
you intend to appear on the stage, and, when handed your sheepskin, respond by twanging your
banjo and roaring a silly ballad."

Yet, the cheery Hicks had been very busy, since that memorable day when, thanks to Caesar Napoleon
and the hoax of the Heavy-Weight-White-Hope- Brigade of the track squad, he had cleared the
cross-bar at five-ten, and won the event and his white B! Mr. T. Haviland Hicks, Sr., overjoyed
at his son's achievement, had sent him a generous check, which the youth much needed, and had
promised to be present at the annual Athletic Association Meeting, at Commencement, when the
B's were awarded deserving athletes, which caused Hicks as much joy as the pink slip. With
his final study sprint for the Senior Finals, his duties as team- manager of the baseball nine,
his preparations for Commencement, his social duties at the Junior Prom., and multifarious
other details coincident to graduation, the heedless Hicks had not found time to be sorrowful
at the knowledge that it soon would end, forever, that he must say "Farewell, Alma Mater,"
and leave the campus and corridors of old Bannister; yet soon even Hicks' ebullient spirits
must fail, for Commencement was a trifle over a week off.

"Hicks, you lovable, heedless, irrepressible wretch," said Big Butch, affectionately, as the
two class-mates thrilled at the scene. "Does it penetrate that shrapnel-proof concrete dome
of yours that the Ballard game tomorrow is the final athletic contest of my, and likewise your,
campus career at old Bannister?"

"Similar thoughts has smote my colossal intellect, Butch!" responded the bean-pole Hicks, gladsomely.
"But--why seek to overshadow this joyous scene with somber reflections? You-should-worry. You
have annexed sufficient B's, were they different, to make up an alphabet. You've won your letter
on gridiron, track, and baseball field, and you've been team-captain of everything twice! Why,
therefore, sheddest thou them crocodile tears?"

"Not for myself, thou sunny-souled idler!" announced Butch, generously, "But for <i>thee</i>!
I prithee, since you pritheed me a few moments hence, let that so-called colossal intellect
of yours stride back along the corridors of Time, until it reaches a certain day toward the
close of our Freshman year. Remember, you had made a hilarious failure of every athletic event
you tried-football, basketball, track, and baseball; you had just made a tremendous farce of
the Freshman-Sophomore track meet, and to me, your loyal comrade, you uttered these rash words,
'Before I graduate from old Bannister, I shall have won my B in three branches of sport!'

"I reiterate and repeat, tomorrow's game with Ballard is the last chance you will have. There
is no possibility that you, with your well-known lack of baseball ability, will get in the
game, and--your track B, won in the high-jump, is the only B you have won! Now, do you still
maintain that you will make good that rash vow?"

"'Where there's a will, there's a way.' 'Never say die.' 'While there's life, there's hope.'
'Don't give up the ship.' 'Fight to the last ditch.' 'In the bright lexicon of youth there
is no such word as <i>fail</i>,'" quoth the irrepressible Hicks, all in a breath. "As long
as there is an infinitesimal fraction of a chance left, I repeat, just leave it to Hicks!"

"You haven't got a chance in the world!" Butch assured him, consolingly. "You did manage to
get into one football game, for a minute, and you were a 'Varsity player that long. By sticking
to it, you have won your track B in the high-jump, thanks to your grass-hopper build, and we
rejoice at your reward! Your Dad is happy that you've won a B, so why not be sensible, and
cease this ridiculous talk of winning your B in <i>three</i> sports, when you can see it is
preposterously out of the question, absolutely impossible--"

It was not that Butch. Brewster did not <i>want</i> his sunny classmate to win his B in three
sports, or that he would have failed to rejoice at Hicks' winning the triple honor. Had such
a thing seemed within the bounds of possibility, Butch, big-hearted and loyal, would have been
as happy as Hicks, or his Dad. But what the behemoth athlete became wrathful at was the obviously
lunatical way in which the cheery Hicks, now that his college years were almost ended, parrot-like
repeated, "Oh, just leave it to Hicks!" when he must know all hope was dead. In truth, T, Haviland
Hicks, Jr., in pretending to maintain still that he would make good the rash vow of his Freshman
year, had no purpose but to arouse his comrade's indignation; but Butch, serious of nature,
believed there really lurked in Hicks' system some germs of hope.

"We never know, old top!" chuckled Hicks, though he was <i>sure</i> he could never fulfill
that promise, as he had not played three-fourths of a season on both the football and the baseball
teams, "Something may show up at the last minute, and--"

At that moment, something evidently did show up, on the campus below, for the enthusiastic
students howled in: thunderous chorus, as the "Honk! Honk!" of a Claxon was heard, "Here he
comes! All together, fellows--the Bannister yell for the nine--then for good old Dan Flannagan!"

As Hicks and Butch watched from the window, old Dan Flannagan's jitney-bus, to the discordant
blaring of a horn, progressed up the driveway, even as it had done on that night in September,
when it transported to the campus T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., and Thor, the Prodigious Prodigy.
Amid salvos of applause from the Bannister youths, and blasts of the Claxon, old Dan brought
"The Dove" to a stop before the Senior Fence, and bowed to the nine, grinning genially the while.

"The car waits at the door, sir!" spoke T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., touching his cap after the
fashion of an English butler, before seizing a bat-bag, and his suit-case. "As team manager,
I must attempt to force into Skeet Wigglesworth's dome how he and the five subs, are to travel
on the C. N. & Q., to Eastminster, from Baltimore. Come on, Butch, we're off--"

"You are always off!" commented Butch, good-humoredly, as he seized his baggage and followed
the mosquito-like Hicks from the room, downstairs, and out on the campus. Here the assembled
youths, with yells, cheers, and songs sandwiched between humorous remarks to Dan Flannagan,
watched the thrilling spectacle of the Gold and Green nine, with the Team Manager and five
substitutes, fifteen in all, squeeze into and atop of Dan Flannagan's jitney-Ford.

"Let me check you fellows off," said Hicks, importantly, peering into the jitney, for he, as
Team Manager, had to handle the traveling expenses. "Monty Merriweather, Roddy Perkins, Biff
Pemberton. Butch Brewster, Skeet Wigglesworth, Beef McNaughton, Cherub Challoner, Ichabod Crane,
Don Carterson; that is the regular nine, and are you five subs, present? O. K. Skeet, climb
out here a second."

Little Skeet Wigglesworth, the brilliant short-stop, climbed out with exceeding difficulty,
and facing T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., he saluted in military fashion. The team manager, consulting
a timetable of the C. N. &.Q. railroad, fixed him with a stern look.

"Skeet," he spoke distinctly, "now, <i>get this</i>--myself and eight regulars, <i>nine</i>
in all, will take the 9 P. M. express for Philadelphia, and stay there all night. Tomorrow,
at 8 A. M., we leave Broad Street Station for Eastminster, arriving at 11 A. M. </i>Now</i>
I have a lot of unused mileage on the C. N. & Q., and I want to use it up before Commencement.
So, heed: you want to go <i>via</i> Baltimore, to see your parents. You take the 9.20 P. M.
express tonight, to Baltimore, and go from that city in the morning, to Eastminster, on the
C. N, & Q.--it's the only road. And take the five subs with you, to devour the mileage. Now,
has that penetrated thy bomb-proof dome?"

"</i>Sure;</i> you don't have to deliver a Chautauqua lecture, Hicks!" grinned Skeet. "Say,
what time does my train leave Baltimore, in the A.M., for Eastminster?"

"Let's see." T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., handing the mileage-books to the shortstop, focused his
intellect on the C. N. & Q. timetable. "Oh, yes--you leave Union Station, Baltimore, at 7:30
A.M., arriving at Eastminster at noon; <i>it is the only train, you can get,</i> to make it
in time for the game, so remember the hour--7.30 A.M.! Here, stuff the timetable in your pocket."

In a few moments, the team and substitutes had been jammed into old Dan Flannagan's jitney,
and the Bannister youths on the campus concentrated their interest on the sunny Hicks, who,
grinning </i>a la</i> Cheshire cat, climbed atop of "The Dove," which old Dan was having as
much trouble to start as he had experienced for over twenty years with the late Lord Nelson,
his defunct quadruped. Seeing Hicks abstract a Louisville Slugger from the bat-bag, the students
roared facetious remarks at the irrepressible youth:

"Home-run Hicks--he made a home-run--<i>on a strike-out</i>!"--"Put Hicks in the game, Captain
Butch--he will win it."--"Watch Hicks--he'll pull some <i>bonehead</i> play!"--"Bring home
the Championship, but--lose Hicks somewhere!"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., as the battered engine of the jit. yielded to old Dan's cranking, and
kindly consented to start, surveyed the yelling students, seized a bat, and struck an attitude
which he fatuously believed was that of Ty Cobb, about to make a hit; taking advantage of a
lull in the tumult, the lovable youth howled at the hilarious crowd:

"Just leave it to Hicks! I will win the game and the </i>Championship</i>, for my Alma Mater,
and--I'll do it by my headwork!"

CHAPTER XVIII

T. HAVILAND HICKS, JR'S. HEADWORK

"Play Ball! A LYRICAL DRAMA IN FOUR ACTS.

AUDISNE HAEC AMPHIARAE, SUB TERRAM ABDITE?

[Composed at Este, September, October, 1818 (Act 1); at Rome, March-April 6, 1819 (Acts 2,
3); at Florence, close of 1819 (Act 4). Published by C. and J. Ollier, London, summer of 1820.
Sources of the text are (1) edition of 1820; (2) text in "Poetical Works", 1839, prepared with the
aid of a list of errata in (1) written out by Shelley; (3) a fair
draft in Shelley's autograph, now in the Bodleian.

Our text is that of 1820, modified by edition 1839, and by the Bodleian fair copy. In the following
notes B = the Bodleian manuscript; 1820 = the editio princeps, printed by Marchant for C. and
J. Ollier, London; and 1839 = the text as edited by Mrs. Shelley
in the "Poetical Works", 1st and 2nd editions, 1839.

The reader should consult the notes on the Play at the end of the volume.]

PREFACE.

The Greek tragic writers, in selecting as their subject any portion
of their national history or mythology, employed in their treatment
of it a certain arbitrary discretion.

They by no means conceived themselves bound to adhere to the common interpretation or to imitate
in story as in title their rivals and predecessors. Such a system would have amounted to a resignation
of those claims to preference over their competitors which incited the composition. The Agamemnonian
story was exhibited on the Athenian theatre with as many variations as dramas.

I have presumed to employ a similar license. The "Prometheus Unbound" of Aeschylus supposed the
reconciliation of Jupiter with his victim as the price of the disclosure of the danger threatened
to his empire by the consummation of his marriage with Thetis. Thetis, according to this view
of the subject, was given in marriage to Peleus, and Prometheus,
by the permission of Jupiter, delivered from his captivity by Hercules.

Had I framed my story on this model, I should have done no more than have attempted to restore
the lost drama of Aeschylus; an ambition which, if my preference to this mode of treating the subject
had incited me to cherish, the recollection of the high comparison
such an attempt would challenge might well abate.

But, in truth, I was averse from a catastrophe so feeble as that of reconciling the Champion
with the Oppressor of mankind. The moral interest of the fable, which is so powerfully sustained
by the sufferings and endurance of Prometheus, would be annihilated if we could conceive of him as
unsaying his high language and quailing before his successful and perfidious adversary. The
only imaginary being resembling in any degree Prometheus, is Satan; and Prometheus is, in
my judgement, a more poetical character than Satan, because, in addition
to courage, and majesty, and firm and patient opposition to omnipotent
force, he is susceptible of being described as exempt from the taints
of ambition, envy, revenge, and a desire for personal aggrandisement,
which, in the Hero of "Paradise Lost", interfere with the interest.

The character of Satan engenders in the mind a pernicious casuistry which leads us to weigh
his faults with his wrongs, and to excuse the former because the latter exceed all measure.
In the minds of those who consider that magnificent fiction with a religious feeling it engenders
something worse. But Prometheus is, as it were, the type of the highest perfection of moral and intellectual
nature, impelled by the purest and the truest motives to the best
and noblest ends.

This Poem was chiefly written upon the mountainous ruins of the Baths of Caracalla, among the
flowery glades, and thickets of odoriferous blossoming trees, which are extended in ever winding
labyrinths upon its immense platforms and dizzy arches suspended in the air. The bright blue
sky of Rome, and the effect of the vigorous awakening spring in that divinest climate, and the new life
with which it drenches the spirits even to intoxication, were the inspiration of this drama.

The
imagery which I have employed will be found, in many instances, to
have been drawn from the operations of the human mind, or from those
external actions by which they are expressed.

This is unusual in modern poetry, although Dante and Shakespeare are full of instances of the
same kind: Dante indeed more than any other poet, and with greater
success.

But the Greek poets, as writers to whom no resource of awakening the sympathy of their contemporaries
was unknown, were in the habitual use of this power; and it is the study of their works (since
a higher merit would probably be denied me) to which I am willing that my readers should impute
this singularity.

One word is due in candour to the degree in which the study of contemporary
writings may have tinged my composition, for such has been a topic
of censure with regard to poems far more popular, and indeed more
deservedly popular, than mine.

It is impossible that any one who inhabits the same age with such writers as those who stand
in the foremost ranks of our own, can conscientiously assure himself that his language and
tone of thought may not have been modified by the study of the productions of those extraordinary
intellects. It is true, that, not the spirit of their genius, but the forms in which it has manifested
itself, are due less to the peculiarities of their own minds than to the peculiarity of the
moral and intellectual condition of the minds among which they have
been produced.

Thus a number of writers possess the form, whilst they want the spirit
of those whom, it is alleged, they imitate; because the former is
the endowment of the age in which they live, and the latter must be
the uncommunicated lightning of their own mind.

The peculiar style of intense and comprehensive imagery which distinguishes
the modern literature of England has not been, as a general power,
the product of the imitation of any particular writer.

The mass of capabilities remains at every period materially the same; the circumstances which awaken
it to action perpetually change. If England were divided into forty republics, each equal
in population and extent to Athens, there is no reason to suppose
but that, under institutions not more perfect than those of Athens,
each would produce philosophers and poets equal to those who (if we
except Shakespeare) have never been surpassed.

We owe the great writers of the golden age of our literature to that fervid awakening of the
public mind which shook to dust the oldest and most oppressive form of the Christian religion.
We owe Milton to the progress and development of the same spirit: the sacred Milton was, let
it ever be remembered, a republican, and a bold inquirer into morals and religion. The great writers
of our own age are, we have reason to suppose, the companions and forerunners of some unimagined change
in our social condition or the opinions which cement it. The cloud of mind is discharging its
collected lightning, and the equilibrium between institutions and opinions is now restoring,
or is about to be restored.

As to imitation, poetry is a mimetic art. It creates, but it creates by combination and representation.
Poetical abstractions are beautiful and new, not because the portions of which they are composed
had no previous existence in the mind of man or in nature, but because
the whole produced by their combination has some intelligible and
beautiful analogy with those sources of emotion and thought, and with
the contemporary condition of them: one great poet is a masterpiece
of nature which another not only ought to study but must study.

He might as wisely and as easily determine that his mind should no longer be the mirror of all
that is lovely in the visible universe as exclude from his contemplation the beautiful which exists
in the writings of a great contemporary. The pretence of doing it would be a presumption in
any but the greatest; the effect, even in him, would be strained,
unnatural and ineffectual.

A poet is the combined product of such internal powers as modify the nature of others; and
of such external influences as excite and sustain these powers; he is not one, but both. Every
man's mind is, in this respect, modified by all the objects of nature and art; by every word
and every suggestion which he ever admitted to act upon his consciousness; it is the mirror
upon which all forms are reflected, and in which they compose one
form.

Poets, not otherwise than philosophers, painters, sculptors and musicians, are, in one sense, the
creators, and, in another, the creations, of their age. From this subjection the loftiest
do not escape. There is a similarity between Homer and Hesiod, between Aeschylus and Euripides,
between Virgil and Horace, between Dante and Petrarch, between Shakespeare and Fletcher, between
Dryden and Pope; each has a generic resemblance under which their specific distinctions are arranged.
If this similarity be the result of imitation, I am willing to confess
that I have imitated.

Let this opportunity be conceded to me of acknowledging that I have, what a Scotch philosopher
characteristically terms, 'a passion for reforming the world:' what passion incited him to write and publish
his book, he omits to explain. For my part I had rather be damned with Plato and Lord Bacon,
than go to Heaven with Paley and Malthus. But it is a mistake to suppose that I dedicate my
poetical compositions solely to the direct enforcement of reform, or that I consider them in
any degree as containing a reasoned system on the theory of human life. Didactic poetry is
my abhorrence; nothing can be equally well expressed in prose that
is not tedious and supererogatory in verse.

My purpose has hitherto been simply to familiarise the highly refined imagination of the more
select classes of poetical readers with beautiful idealisms of moral excellence; aware that until
the mind can love, and admire, and trust, and hope, and endure, reasoned
principles of moral conduct are seeds cast upon the highway of life
which the unconscious passenger tramples into dust, although they
would bear the harvest of his happiness.

Should I live to accomplish what I purpose, that is, produce a systematical history of what
appear to me to be the genuine elements of human society, let not the advocates of injustice
and superstition flatter themselves that I should take Aeschylus rather than Plato as my model.

The
having spoken of myself with unaffected freedom will need little apology with the candid;
and let the uncandid consider that they injure me less than their
own hearts and minds by misrepresentation.

Whatever talents a person may possess to amuse and instruct others, be they ever so inconsiderable,
he is yet bound to exert them: if his attempt be ineffectual, let the punishment of an unaccomplished
purpose have been sufficient; let none trouble themselves to heap the dust of oblivion upon his efforts;
the pile they raise will betray his grave which might otherwise have been unknown.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

PROMETHEUS. DEMOGORGON. JUPITER. THE EARTH. OCEAN. APOLLO. MERCURY. OCEANIDES: ASIA, PANTHEA, IONE.
HERCULES.

THE PHANTASM OF JUPITER. THE SPIRIT OF THE EARTH. THE SPIRIT OF THE MOON. SPIRITS OF THE HOURS.
SPIRITS. ECHOES. FAUNS. FURIES.

ACT 1.

SCENE: A RAVINE OF ICY ROCKS IN THE INDIAN CAUCASUS. PROMETHEUS IS DISCOVERED BOUND TO THE PRECIPICE.
PANTEA AND IONE ARE SEATED AT HIS FEET. TIME, NIGHT. DURING, THE SCENE MORNING SLOWLY BREAKS.

PROMETHEUS:
Monarch of Gods and DAEmons, and all Spirits But One, who throng those bright and rolling worlds
Which Thou and I alone of living things Behold with sleepless eyes! regard this Earth Made
multitudinous with thy slaves, whom thou 5 Requitest for knee-worship, prayer, and praise,
And toil, and hecatombs of broken hearts, With fear and self-contempt
and barren hope.

Whilst me, who am thy foe, eyeless in hate, Hast thou made reign and triumph, to thy scorn, 10 O'er
mine own misery and thy vain revenge. Three thousand years of sleep-unsheltered hours, And
moments aye divided by keen pangs Till they seemed years, torture and solitude, Scorn and despair,--these
are mine empire:-- 15 More glorious far than that which thou surveyest From thine unenvied
throne, O Mighty God! Almighty, had I deigned to share the shame Of thine ill tyranny, and hung
not here Nailed to this wall of eagle-baffling mountain, 20 Black, wintry, dead, unmeasured; without
herb, Insect, or beast, or shape or sound of life. Ah me! alas, pain, pain ever, for ever!

No change, no pause, no hope! Yet I endure. I ask the Earth, have not the mountains felt? 25 I ask
yon Heaven, the all-beholding Sun, Has it not seen? The Sea, in storm or calm, Heaven's ever-changing
Shadow, spread below, Have its deaf waves not heard my agony? Ah me! alas, pain, pain ever,
for ever! 30

The crawling glaciers pierce me with the spears Of their moon-freezing crystals; the bright
chains Eat with their burning cold into my bones. Heaven's winged hound, polluting from thy
lips His beak in poison not his own, tears up 35 My heart; and shapeless
sights come wandering by, The ghastly people of the realm of dream,
Mocking me: and the Earthquake-fiends are charged To wrench the rivets
from my quivering wounds When the rocks split and close again behind:
40 While from their loud abysses howling throng The genii of the storm,
urging the rage Of whirlwind, and afflict me with keen hail.

And yet to me welcome is day and night, Whether one breaks the hoar-frost of the morn, 45 Or
starry, dim, and slow, the other climbs The leaden-coloured east; for then they lead The wingless,
crawling hours, one among whom --As some dark Priest hales the reluctant victim-- Shall drag thee,
cruel King, to kiss the blood 50 From these pale feet, which then
might trample thee If they disdained not such a prostrate slave.

Disdain! Ah, no! I pity thee. What ruin Will hunt thee undefended through wide Heaven! How will
thy soul, cloven to its depth with terror, 55 Gape like a hell within! I speak in grief, Not exultation,
for I hate no more, As then ere misery made me wise. The curse Once breathed on thee I would recall.
Ye Mountains, Whose many-voiced Echoes, through the mist 60 Of cataracts, flung the thunder of
that spell! Ye icy Springs, stagnant with wrinkling frost, Which vibrated to hear me, and then
crept Shuddering through India! Thou serenest Air, Through which the Sun walks burning without
beams! 65 And ye swift Whirlwinds, who on poised wings Hung mute and moveless o'er yon hushed
abyss, As thunder, louder than your own, made rock The orbed world! If then my words had power,
Though I am changed so that aught evil wish 70 Is dead within; although no memory be Of what
is hate, let them not lose it now! What was that curse? for ye all
heard me speak.

NOTE: 54 thro' wide B; thro' the wide 1820.

FIRST VOICE (FROM THE MOUNTAINS): Thrice three hundred thousand years O'er the Earthquake's couch
we stood: 75 Oft, as men convulsed with fears, We trembled in our multitude.

SECOND VOICE (FROM THE SPRINGS): Thunderbolts had parched our water, We had been stained with bitter
blood, And had run mute, 'mid shrieks of slaughter, 80 Thro' a city and a solitude.

THIRD VOICE (FROM THE AIR): I had clothed, since Earth uprose, Its wastes in colours not their
own, And oft had my serene repose Been cloven by many a rending groan. 85

FOURTH VOICE (FROM THE WHIRLWINDS): We had soared beneath these mountains Unresting ages; nor
had thunder, Nor yon volcano's flaming fountains, Nor any power above or under Ever made us
mute with wonder. 90

FIRST VOICE: But never bowed our snowy crest As at the voice of thine unrest.

SECOND VOICE: Never such a sound before To the Indian waves we bore. A pilot asleep on the howling
sea 95 Leaped up from the deck in agony, And heard, and cried, 'Ah, woe is me!' And died as
mad as the wild waves be.

THIRD VOICE: By such dread words from Earth to Heaven My still realm was never riven: 100 When
its wound was closed, there stood Darkness o'er the day like blood.

FOURTH VOICE: And we shrank back: for dreams of ruin To frozen caves our flight pursuing Made us
keep silence--thus--and thus-- 105 Though silence is a hell to us.

THE EARTH: The tongueless caverns of the craggy hills Cried, 'Misery!' then; the hollow Heaven
replied, 'Misery!' And the Ocean's purple waves, Climbing the land, howled to the lashing winds,
110 And the pale nations heard it, 'Misery!'

NOTE: 106 as hell 1839, B; a hell 1820.

PROMETHEUS: I hear a sound of voices: not the voice Which I gave forth.

Mother, thy sons and thou Scorn him, without whose all-enduring will Beneath the fierce omnipotence
of Jove, 115 Both they and thou had vanished, like thin mist Unrolled on the morning wind. Know
ye not me, The Titan?

He who made his agony The barrier to your else all-conquering foe? Oh, rock-embosomed lawns,
and snow-fed streams, 120 Now seen athwart frore vapours, deep below, Through whose o'ershadowing woods
I wandered once With Asia, drinking life from her loved eyes; Why scorns the spirit which informs
ye, now To commune with me? me alone, who checked, 125 As one who checks a fiend-drawn charioteer,
The falsehood and the force of him who reigns Supreme, and with the groans of pining slaves Fills
your dim glens and liquid wildernesses: Why answer ye not, still? Brethren!

THE EARTH: They dare not. 130

PROMETHEUS: Who dares? for I would hear that curse again. Ha, what an awful whisper rises up!
'Tis scarce like sound: it tingles through the frame As lightning tingles, hovering ere it strike.
Speak, Spirit! from thine inorganic voice 135 I only know that thou art moving near And love.
How cursed I him?

THE EARTH: How canst thou hear Who knowest not the language of the dead?

PROMETHEUS: Thou art a living spirit; speak as they.

  
  THE EARTH: I dare not speak like life, lest Heaven's
  fell King 140 Should hear, and link me to
  some wheel of pain More torturing than the
  one whereon I roll.

Subtle thou art and good; and though the Gods Hear not this voice, yet thou art more than God,
Being wise and kind: earnestly hearken now. 145

PROMETHEUS: Obscurely through my brain, like shadows dim, Sweep awful thoughts, rapid and thick.
I feel Faint, like one mingled in entwining love; Yet 'tis not pleasure.

THE EARTH: No, thou canst not hear: Thou art immortal, and this tongue
is known 150 Only to those who die.

  
  
  PROMETHEUS: And what art thou, O, melancholy Voice?

THE EARTH: I am the Earth, Thy mother; she within whose stony veins, To the last fibre of the
loftiest tree Whose thin leaves trembled in the frozen air, 155 Joy ran, as blood within a living
frame, When thou didst from her bosom, like a cloud Of glory, arise,
a spirit of keen joy!

And at thy voice her pining sons uplifted Their prostrate brows from the polluting dust, 160 And our
almighty Tyrant with fierce dread Grew pale, until his thunder chained
thee here.

Then, see those million worlds which burn and roll Around us: their inhabitants beheld My sphered
light wane in wide Heaven; the sea 165 Was lifted by strange tempest, and new fire From earthquake-rifted
mountains of bright snow Shook its portentous hair beneath Heaven's frown; Lightning and Inundation
vexed the plains; Blue thistles bloomed in cities; foodless toads 170 Within voluptuous chambers
panting crawled: When Plague had fallen on man, and beast, and worm, And Famine; and black
blight on herb and tree; And in the corn, and vines, and meadow-grass, Teemed ineradicable
poisonous weeds 175 Draining their growth, for my wan breast was dry With grief; and the thin
air, my breath, was stained With the contagion of a mother's hate Breathed on her child's destroyer;
ay, I heard Thy curse, the which, if thou rememberest not, 180 Yet
my innumerable seas and streams, Mountains, and caves, and winds,
and yon wide air, And the inarticulate people of the dead, Preserve,
a treasured spell.

We meditate In secret joy and hope those dreadful words, 185 But dare not speak them.

NOTE: 137 And love 1820; And lovest cj. Swinburne.

PROMETHEUS: Venerable mother!

All else who live and suffer take from thee Some comfort; flowers, and fruits, and happy sounds,
And love, though fleeting; these may not be mine. But mine own words, I pray, deny me not. 190

THE
EARTH: They shall be told. Ere Babylon was dust, The Magus Zoroaster, my dead child, Met his
own image walking in the garden. That apparition, sole of men, he saw. For know there are two
worlds of life and death: 195 One that which thou beholdest; but
the other Is underneath the grave, where do inhabit The shadows of
all forms that think and live Till death unite them and they part
no more; Dreams and the light imaginings of men, 200 And all that
faith creates or love desires, Terrible, strange, sublime and beauteous
shapes.

There thou art, and dost hang, a writhing shade, 'Mid whirlwind-peopled mountains; all the gods
Are there, and all the powers of nameless worlds, 205 Vast, sceptred phantoms; heroes, men, and beasts;
And Demogorgon, a tremendous gloom; And he, the supreme Tyrant, on
his throne Of burning gold.

Son, one of these shall utter The curse which all remember. Call at will 210 Thine own ghost,
or the ghost of Jupiter, Hades or Typhon, or what mightier Gods From all-prolific Evil, since
thy ruin, Have sprung, and trampled on my prostrate sons.

Ask, and they must reply: so the revenge 215 Of the Supreme may sweep
through vacant shades, As rainy wind through the abandoned gate Of
a fallen palace.

  
  PROMETHEUS: Mother, let not aught Of
  that which may be evil, pass again My
  lips, or those of aught resembling
  me. 220 Phantasm of Jupiter, arise,
  appear!
  
  IONE: My wings are folded o'er mine ears: My wings are crossed o'er
mine eyes: Yet through their silver shade appears, And through their
lulling plumes arise, 225 A Shape, a throng of sounds; May it be no
ill to thee O thou of many wounds!

Mr. Thomas Haviland Hicks, Sr., Bannister, '92; Yale, '96, and Pittsburgh millionaire "Steel
King," stood at the window of Thomas Haviland Hicks, Jr.'s, room, his arm across the shoulders
of that sunny-souled Senior, his only son and heir. Father and son stood, gazing down at the
campus. On the Gym steps was a group of Seniors, singing songs of old Bannister, songs tinged
with sadness. Up to Hicks' windows, on the warm June: night, drifted the 1916 Class Ode, to
the beautiful tune, "A Perfect Day." Over before the Science Hall, a crowd of joyous alumni
laughed over narratives of their campus escapades. Happy undergraduates, skylarking on the
campus, celebrated the end of study, and gazed with some awe at the Seniors, in cap and gown,
suddenly transformed into strange beings, instead of old comrades and college-mates.

"'The close of our college days, and the end of our campus years--!'" quoted Mr. Hicks, a mist
before his eyes as he gazed at the scene. "In a few days, Thomas, comes the final parting from
old Bannister--I know it will be hard, for </i>I</i> had to leave the dear old college, and
also Yale. But you have made a splendid record in your studies, you have been one of the most
popular fellows here, and--you have vastly pleased your Dad, by winning your B in the high-jump."

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.'s, last study-sprint was at an end, the final Exams. of his Senior year
had been passed with what is usually termed flying colors; and to the whole-souled delight
of the lovable youth, he and little Theophilus Opperdyke, the Human Encyclopedia, had, as Hicks
chastely phrased it, "run a dead heat for the Valedictory!" So close had their final averages
been that the Faculty, after much consideration, decided to announce at the Commencement exercises
that the two Seniors had tied for the highest collegiate honors, and everyone was satisfied
with the verdict. So, now it was all ended; the four years of study, athletics, campus escapades,
dormitory skylarking--the golden years of college life, were about to end for 1919. Commencement
would officially start on the morrow, but tonight, in the Auditorium, would be held the annual
Athletic Association meeting, when those happy athletes who had won their B during the year
would have it presented, before the assembled collegians, by one-time gridiron, track, and
diamond heroes of old Bannister.

And--the ecstatic Hicks would have his track B, his white letter, won in the high-jump, thanks
to Caesar Napoleon's assistance, awarded him by his beloved Dad, the greatest all-round athlete
that ever wore the Gold and Green! Mr. Thomas Haviland Hicks, Sr., <i>en route</i> to New Haven
and Yale in his private car, "Vulcan," had reached town that day, together with other members
of Bannister College, Class of '92. They, as did all the old grads., promptly renewed past
memories and associations by riding up to College Hill in Dan Flannagan's jitney-bus--a youthful,
hilarious crowd of alumni. Former students, alumni, parents of graduating Seniors, friends,
sweethearts--every train would bring its quota. The campus would again throb and pulsate with
that perennial quickening--Commencement. Three days of reunions, Class Day exercises, banquets,
and other events, then the final exercises, and--T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., would be an alumnus!

"It's like Theophilus told Thor, last fall, Dad," said the serious Hicks. And for you, Dad,
too; I've won a B, but perhaps, had I trained and exercised more, I might have annexed another
letter--still; hello, what's Butch hollering--?"

Big Butch Brewster, his pachydermic frame draped in his gown, and his mortar-board cap on his
head, for the Seniors were required to wear their regalia during Commencement week, was bellowing
through a megaphone, as he stood on the steps of Bannister Hall, and Mr. Hicks, with his cheerful
son, listened:

"Everybody--Seniors, Undergrads., Alumni--in the Auditorium at eight sharp! We are going to
give Mr. Hicks and T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., a surprise party--don't miss the fun!"

"Now, just what does Butch mean, Dad?" queried the bewildered Senior. "Something is in the
wind. For two days, the fellows have had a secret from me--they whisper and plot, and when
</i>I</i> approach, loudly talk of athletics, or Commencement! Say, Butch--</i>Butch</i>--I
ain't a-comin' tonight, unless you explain the mystery."

"Oh, yes, you be, old sport!" roared Butch, from the campus, employing the megaphone, "or you
don't get your letter! Say, Hicks, one sweetly solemn thought attacks me--old Bannister is
puzzling <i>you</i> with a mystery, instead of vice versa, as is usually the case."

"Well, Thomas," said Mr. Hicks, his face lighted by a humorous, kindly smile, as he heard the
storm of good-natured jeers at Hicks, Jr., that greeted Butch Brewster's fling, "I'll stroll
downtown, and see if any of my old comrades came on the night express. I'll see you at the
Athletic Association meeting, for I believe I am to hand you the B. I can't imagine what this
'surprise party' is, but I don't suppose it will harm us. It will surely be a happy moment,
son, when I present you with the athletic letter you worked so hard to win."

When T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.'s, beloved Dad had gone, his firm stride echoing down the corridor,
that blithesome, irrepressible collegian, whom old Bannister had come to love as a generous,
sunny-souled youth, stood again by the window, gazing out at the campus. Now, for the first
time, he fully realized what a sad occasion a college Commencement really is--to those who
must go forth from their Alma Mater forever. With almost the force of a staggering blow, Hicks
suddenly saw how it would hurt to leave the well-loved campus and halls of old Bannister, to
go from those comrades of his golden years. In a day or so, he must part from good Butch, Pudge,
Beef, Ichabod, Monty, Roddy, Cherub, loyal little Theophilus and all his classmates of '19,
as well as from his firm friends of the undergraduates. It would be the parting from the youths
of his class that would cost him the greatest regret. Four years they had lived together the
care-free campus life. From Freshmen to Seniors they had grown and developed together, and
had striven for 1919 and old Bannister, while a love for their Alma Mater had steadily possessed
their hearts. And now soon they must sing, "Vale, Alma Mater!" and go from the campus and corridors,
as Jack Merritt, Heavy Hughes, Biff McCabe, and many others had done before them.

Of course, they would return to old Bannister. There would be alumni banquets at mid-year and
Commencement, with glad class reunions each year. They would come back for the big games of
the football or baseball season. But it would never be the same. The glad, care-free, golden
years of college life come but once, and they could never live them, as of old.

"Caesar's Ghost!" ejaculated T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., making a dive for his beloved banjo, as
he awakened to the startling fact that for some time he had been intensely serious. "This will
never, never do. I must maintain my blithesome buoyancy to the end, and entertain old Bannister
with my musical ability. Here goes."

Assuming a striking pose, </i>a la</i> troubadour, at the open window, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.,
a somewhat paradoxical figure, his splinter-structure enshrouded in the gown, the cap on his
classic head, this regalia symbolic of dignity, and the torturesome banjo in his grasp, twanged
a ragtime accompaniment, and to the bewilderment of the old Grads on the campus, as well as
the wrath of 1919, he roared in his fog-horn voice:

  "Oh, I love for to live in the country!
  And I love for to live on the farm!
  I love for to wander in the grass-green fields--
  Oh, a country life has the charm!
  I love for to wander in the garden--
  Down by the old haystack;
  Where the pretty little chickens go 'Kick-Kack-Kackle!'
  And the little docks go 'Quack! Quack!'"

From the Seniors on the Gym steps, their dignified song rudely shattered by this rollicking
saenger-fest, came a storm of protests; to the unbounded delight of the alumni, watching the
scene with interest, shouts, jeers, whistles, and cat-calls greeted Hicks' minstrelsy:

"Tear off his cap and gown--he's a disgrace to '19!"

"Shades of Schumann-Heink--give that calf more rope!"

"Ye gods--how long must we endure--that?"

"Hicks, a Senior--nobody home--can that noise!"

"Shoot him at sunrise! Where's his Senior dignity?"

Big Butch Brewster, referring to his watch, bellowed through the megaphone that it was nearly
eight o'clock, and loudly suggested that they forcibly terminate Hicks' saengerfest, and spare
the town police force a riot call to the campus, by transporting the pestiferous youth to the
Auditorium, for his "surprise party." His idea finding favor, he, with Beef and Pudge, somewhat
hampered by their gowns, lumbered up the stairway of Bannister, and down the third-floor corridor
to the offending Hicks' boudoir, followed by a yelling, surging crowd of Seniors and underclassmen.
They invaded the graceless youth's room, much to the pretended alarm of that torturesome collegian,
who believed that the entire student-body of old Bannister had foregathered to wreak vengeance
on his devoted head.

"</i>Mercy</i>! Have a heart, fellows!" plead T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., helpless in the clutches
of Butch, Beef, and Pudge, "I won't never do it no more, no time! Say, this is too much--much
too much--too much much too much--I, Oh--<i>help--aid--succor--relief--assistance--"</i>

"To the Auditorium with the wretch!" boomed Butch; and the splinter-youth was borne aloft,
on his broad shoulders, assisted by Beef McNaughton. They transported the grinning Hicks down
the corridor, while fifty noisy youths, howling, "For He's a Jolly Good Fellow!" tramped after
them. Downstairs and across the campus the hilarious procession marched, and into the Auditorium,
where the students and alumni were gathering for the awarding of the athletic B. A thunderous
shout went up, as T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., was carried to the stage and deposited in a chair.

"</i>Hicks! Hicks! Hicks</i>! We've got a surprise for--</i>Hicks</i>!"

"Now, just what have I did to deserve all these?" grinned that happy-go-lucky youth, puzzled,
nevertheless. "Well, time will tell, so all I can do is to possess my soul with impatience;
old Bannister has a mystery for me, this trip!"

In fifteen minutes, the Athletic Association meeting opened. On the stage, beside its officers,
were those athletes, including T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., who were to receive that coveted reward--their
B, together with a number of one-time famous Bannister gridiron, track, basketball, and diamond
stars. Each youth was to receive his monogram from some ex-athlete who once wore the Gold and
Green, and Hicks' beloved Dad--Bannister's greatest hero--was to present his son with the letter.

There were speeches; the Athletic Association's President explained the annual meeting, former
Bannister students and athletic idols told of past triumphs on Bannister Field; the football
Championship banner, and the baseball pennant were flaunted proudly, and each team-captain
of the year was called upon to talk. Mr. Thomas Haviland Hicks, Sr., a great favorite on the
campus, delivered a ringing speech, an appeal to the undergraduates for clean living, and honorable
sportsmanship, and then:

"We now come to the awarding of the athletic B," stated the President. "The Secretary will
call first the name of the athlete, and then the alumnus who will present him with the letter.
In the name of the Athletic Association of old Bannister, I congratulate those fellows who
are now to be rewarded for their loyalty to their Alma Mater!"

Thrilled, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., watched his comrades, as they responded to their names, and
had the greatest glory, the B, placed in their hands by past Bannister athletic heroes. Butch,
Beef, Roddy, Monty, Ichabod, Biff, Hefty, Tug, Buster, Deacon Radford, Cherub, Don, Skeet,
Thor, who had won the hammer-throw. These, and many others, having earned the award by playing
in three-fourths of a season's games on the eleven or the nine, or by winning a first place
in some track event, stepped forward, and were rewarded. Some, as good Butch, had gained their
B many times, but the fact that this was their last letter, made the occasion a sad one. Every
name was called but that of T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., and that perturbed youth wondered at the
omission, when the President spoke:

"The last name," he said, smiling, "is that of Thomas Haviland Hicks, Jr., and we are glad
to have his father present the letter to his son, as Mr. Thomas Haviland Hicks, Sr., is with
us. However, we Bannister fellows have prepared a surprise party for our lovable comrade, and
I beg your patience awhile, as I explain."

Graphically, Dad Pendleton described the wonderful all-round athletic record made by Mr. Thomas
Haviland Hicks, Sr., while at old Bannister, and sketched briefly but vividly his phenomenal
record at Yale; he told of Mr. Hicks' great ambition, for his only son, Thomas, to follow in
his footsteps--to be a star athlete, and shatter the marks made by his Dad. Then he reminded
the Bannister students of T. Haviland Hicks, Jr.'s, athletic fiascos, hilarious and otherwise,
of three years. He explained how that cheery youth, grinning good-humoredly at his comrades'
jeers, had been in earnest, striving to realize his father's ambition. As the spellbound collegians
and grads. listened, Dad chronicled Hicks' dogged persistence, and how he finally, in his Senior
year, won his track B in the high-jump. Then he described the biggest game of the past football
season, the contest that brought the Championship to old Bannister. The youths and alumni heard
how T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., made a great sacrifice, for the greater goal; how, after training
faithfully in secret for a year, hoping sometime to win a game for his Alma Mater, he cheerfully
sacrificed his chance to tie the score by a drop-kick, and became the pivotal part of a fake-kick
play that won for the Gold and Green.

"I have left Hicks' name until last," said Dad, with a smile, "because tonight we have a surprise
party for our sunny comrade, and for his Dad. In the past, the eligibility rule, as regards
the football and baseball B, has been--an athlete must play on the 'Varsity in three-fourths
of the season's games. But, just before the Hamilton game, last fall, the Advisory Board of
the Athletic Association amended this rule.

"We decided to submit to the required two-thirds majority vote of the students this plan, inasmuch
as many athletes, toiling and sacrificing all season for their college, never get to win their
letter, yet deserve that reward for their loyalty, we suggested that Bannister imitate the
universities. Anyone sent into the Yale-Harvard game, you know, wins his H or Y. If one team
is safely ahead, a lot of scrubs are run into the scrimmage, to give them their letter. Therefore,
we--the Advisory Board--made this rule: 'Any athlete taking part, for any period of time whatsoever,
in the Ballard football or baseball game as a regular member of the first team shall be eligible
for his Gold or Green B. This rule, upon approval of the students, to be effective from September
25!'

"Now," continued the Athletic Association President, "we decided to keep this new ruling a
secret until the present, for this reason: Many good football and baseball players, not making
the first teams, lack the loyalty to stick on the scrubs, and others, not as brilliant, but
with more college spirit, give their best until the season's end. We knew that if we announced
this rule last fall, several slackers, who had quit the squad, would come out again, just on
the hope of getting sent into the Ballard game, for their B. This would not be fair to those
who loyally stuck to the scrubs. So we did not announce the rule until the year closed, and
then a practically unanimous vote of the students made the rule effective from September 25.
So--all athletes who took part in the Ballard football game, last fall, for any period of time
whatsoever, are eligible for the gold B, and the same, as regards the green letter, applies
to the Ballard baseball game this spring."

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., gasped. Slowly, the glorious truth dawned on the happy-go-lucky Senior--he
had been sent into the Bannister-Ballard football game; the crucial and deciding play had turned
on him, hence he had won his gold letter! And thanks to his brilliant "mismanaging" of the
nine, losing shortstop Skeet Wigglesworth and the substitutes, he had played the entire nine
innings of the Ballard-Bannister baseball contest, and, therefore, was eligible for his green
B. In a dazed condition, he heard Dad Pendleton saying:

"You remember how T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., was sent into the Ballard game, and how the fake-play
fooled Ballard, who believed he would try a drop-kick? Well, knowing Hicks to be eligible for
his football B, we planned a surprise party. The Advisory Board kept the new rule a secret,
and not until this week was it voted on. Then, the required two-thirds majority made it effective
from last September--we managed to have Hicks absent from the voting, and the fellows helped
us with our surprise! So instead of Mr. Thomas Haviland Hicks, Sr., presenting his son with
one B, that for track work, we are glad to hand him <i>three</i> letters, one for football,
one for baseball, and one for track, to give our own T. Haviland Hicks, Jr. And, let me add,
he can accept them with a clear conscience, for when the rule was made by the Advisory Board,
we had no idea that Hicks would ever be eligible in football or baseball,"

A moment of silence, and then undergraduates and alumni, thrilled at Dad Pendleton's announcement,
arose in a body, and howled for T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., and his beloved Dad. Mr. Hicks, unable
to speak, silently placed the three monograms, gold, green, and white, in his son's hands,
and placed his own on the shoulders of that sunny-souled Senior, who for once in his heedless
career could not say a word!

"What's the matter with Hicks?" Big Butch Brewster roared, and a terrific response sounded:

"He's all right! Hicks! Hicks! Hicks!"

For ten minutes pandemonium reigned. Then, regardless of the fact that, in order to surprise
Mr. Hicks and his son, other athletes, eligible under the new rule, had yet to be presented
with their B, the howling youths swarmed on the stage, hoisted the grinning T. Haviland Hicks,
Jr., and his happy Dad to their shoulders, and started a wild parade around the campus and
the Quadrangle, singing:

"Here's to our own Hicks--drink it down! Drink it down! Here's to our own Hicks--drink it down!
Drink it down! Here's to our own Hicks--When he starts a thing, he sticks--Drink it down--drink
it down--down! Down! Down!"

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., aloft on the shoulders of his behemoth class-mate, Butch Brewster,
was deliriously happy. The surprise party of his campus comrades was a wonderful one, and he
could scarcely realize that he had actually, by the Athletic Association ruling, won his three
B's! How glad his beloved Dad, was, too. He had not expected this bewildering happiness. He
had been so joyous, when his sort earned the track letter, but to have him leave old Bannister,
with a B for three sports--it was almost unbelievable! And, as Dad had said--there had been
no thought of Hicks when the Advisory Board made the rule, so Hicks had no reason to suppose
it was done just to award him his letter.

Then, Hicks remembered that rash vow, made at the end of his Freshman year, a vow uttered with
absolutely no other thought than a desire to torment Butch Brewster, "Before I graduate from
old Bannister, I shall have won my B in three branches of sport!" Never, not even for a moment,
had the happy-go-lucky youth believed that his wild prophecy would be fulfilled, though he
had pretended to be confident to tease his loyal comrades; but now, at the very end of his
campus days, just before he graduated, his prediction had come true! So the sunny Senior, who
four years before had made his rash vow, saw its realization, and suddenly thrilled with the
knowledge that he had a golden opportunity to make Butch indignant.

"Oh, I say, Butch," he drawled, nonchalantly, leaning down to talk in Butch's ear, "do you
recall that day, at the close of our Freshman year, when I vowed to win my B in three branches
of sport, ere I bade farewell to old Bannister?"

"No, you don't get away with that!" exploded Butch Brewster, indignantly, lowering his tantalizing
classmate to terra firma. "Here, Beef, Pudge, catch this wretch; he intends to swagger and say--"

But he was too late, for T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., dodging from his grasp, imitated the celebrated
Charley Chaplin strut, and satiated his fun-loving soul. After waiting for three years, the
irrepressible youth realized an ambition he had never imagined would be fulfilled.

"Oh, just leave it to Hicks!" quoth he, gladsomely. "I told you I'd win my three B's, Butch,
old top, and--<i>ow</i>!--unhand me, you villain, you <i>hurt</i>!"

CHAPTER XX

"VALE, ALMA MATER!"

  "Oh, it was '</i>Ave</i>, Alma Mater--'
  We sang as Freshmen gay;
  But it's '</i>Vale</i>, Alma Mater' now
  As our last farewells we say!"

"</i>Honk-Honk! Br-r-rr-r-Bang! Honk-Monk! Br-rr-rr-r--"</i>

T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., big Butch Brewster, Beef McNaughton, Pudge Langdon, Scoop Sawyer, and
little Theophilus Opperdyke--late Seniors of old Bannister--roosted atop of good old Dan Flannagan's
famous jitney-bus before Bannister Hall. It was nearly time for the 9.30 A. M. express, but
the "peace-ship" had inconsiderately stalled, and the choking, wheezing, and snorting of the
engine, as old Dan frenziedly cranked, together with the Claxon, operated by Skeet Wigglesworth,
rudely interrupted the Seniors' chant. A vociferous protest arose above the tumult:

"Oh, the little old </i>Ford</i>--rambled right along--like heck!"

"Can that noise-we want to sing a last song, boys!"

"Chuck that engine, Dan, and put in an alarm clock spring!"

"Christmas is coming, Dan-u-el--we've graduated you know!"

"'The Dove' doesn't want us to leave old Bannister, fellows!"

Commencement was ended. The night before, on the stage of Alumni Hall, before a vast audience
of old Bannister grads, undergraduates, friends, and relatives of the Seniors, the Class of
1919 had received its sheepskins, and the "Go forth, my children, and live!" of its Alma Mater.
T, Haviland Hicks, Jr., and timorous little Theophilus had jointly delivered the Valedictory,
eight other Seniors, including Butch, Scoop, and the lengthy Ichabod, had swayed the crowd
with oratory. Kindly old Prexy, his voice tremulous, had talked to them, as students, for the
last time. The Class Ode had been sung, the Class Shield unveiled, and then--Hicks and his
comrades of '19 were alumni!

It had been a busy, thrilling time, Commencement Week. There had been scarcely any spare moments
to ponder on the parting so soon to come; after the memorable Athletic Association meeting,
when T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., and his beloved Dad had been given a wonderful "surprise party"
by the collegians, and Hicks had corralled his three B's, time had "sprinted with spiked shoes,"
as the sunny Hicks stated. Event had followed event in bewildering fashion. The Seniors, dignified
in cap and gown, had been feted and banqueted, the cynosure of all eyes. Campus and town were
filled with visitors. Old Bannister pulsated with renewed life, with the glad reunions of former
students. There had been the Alumni Banquet, the annual baseball game between the 'Varsity
and old-time Gold and Green diamond stars, Class Night exercises, the Literary Society Oratorical
Contests, and the last Class Supper; and, Commencement had come.

It was all ended now--the four happy, golden years of campus life, of glad fellowship with
each other; like those who had gone before, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., and his comrades of 1919
had come to the final parting. The sunny-souled youth's Dad had gone to New Haven, to Yale's
Commencement. Alumni and visitors had left town; the night before had witnessed farewells with
Monty, Roddy, Biff, Hefty, and the underclassmen, with that awakened Colossus, John Thorwald.
All the collegians had gone, except the few Seniors now leaving, and they had remained to enjoy
Hicks' final Beefsteak Bust downtown at Jerry's.

The campus was silent and deserted. No footsteps or voices echoed in the dormitories, and a
shadow of sadness hovered over all. The youths who were leaving old Bannister forever felt
an ache in their throats, and little Theophilus Opperdyke's big-rimmed spectacles were fogged
with tears. Three times, in the past, they had left the campus, but this was forever, as collegians!

"I don't care if we miss the old train!" declared Scoop Sawyer, as the jitney-Ford's engine
wheezed, gasped, and was silent, for all of Dan's cranking. "Just think, fellows, it's all
over now--'We have come to the end of our college days-golden campus years are at an end--!'
Say, Hicks, old man, what's your Idea. What future have you blue-printed?"

"Journalism!" announced T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., sticking a fountain pen behind his ear, and
fatuously supposing he resembled a City Editor, "In me you behold an embryo Richard Harding
Davis, or Ty--no, I mean Irvin Cobb. I shall first serve my apprenticeship as a 'cub,' but
ere many years, I shall sit at a desk, run a newspaper, and tell the world where to get off."

"That is--If Dad says so!" chuckled Butch Brewster. 1. How stern are the woes of the desolate mourner,
As he bends in still grief o'er the hallowed bier, As enanguished he turns from the laugh of
the scorner, And drops, to Perfection's remembrance, a tear; When floods of despair down his
pale cheek are streaming, 5 When no blissful hope on his bosom is
beaming, Or, if lulled for awhile, soon he starts from his dreaming,
And finds torn the soft ties to affection so dear.

2. Ah! when shall day dawn on the night of the grave, Or summer succeed to the winter of death?
 While, as Butch says, he'd like to train me to follow in his footsteps,
he understands my ambition so thoroughly that he is trying to get me started--read this:"

The lovable youth produced a letter, the envelope bearing the heading: "THE BALTIMORE CHRONICLE;"
Butch Brewster, to whom he extended it, read aloud:

"Baltimore, Maryland,

"June 12, 1919.

"DEAR OLD CLASSMATE:

"I'd sure like to be with you, back at old Yale, next week, but I can't leave the wheel of
this ship, the </i>Chronicle</i>, for even a day. Give my regards to all of old Eli, '96, old man.

"As regards a berth for your son, Thomas. The </i>Chronicle</i> usually takes on a few college
men during the summer, when our staff is off on vacations. We always use undergraduates, and
often, in two or three summers, we develop them into star reporters. However, for old time's
sake, I'll be glad to give your son a chance, and if he means business, let him report for
duty next Friday, at 1 P.M., to my office. Understand, Hicks, he must come here and fight his
own way, without any favor or special help from me. Were he the son of our nation's President,
I'd not treat him a whit better than the rest of the Staff, so let him know that in advance.
On the other hand, I'll develop him all I can, and if he has the ability, the </i>Chronicle</i>
long-room is the place for him.

"Yours for old Yale,

"'Doc' Whalen, Yale, '96,

"City Editor--</i>THE CHRONICLE</i>." 

There is nothing that is new. All things that are, are both usual and of little continuance.

II.
What fear is there that thy dogmata, or philosophical resolutions and conclusions, should become
dead in thee, and lose their proper power and efficacy to make thee live happy, as long as
those proper and correlative fancies, and representations of things on which they mutually depend
(which continually to stir up and revive is in thy power,) are still kept fresh and alive?


"You--you will make good, Hicks," quavered Theophilus, whose faith in the shadow-like youth
was prodigious. "Oh, that will be splendid, for I am going to take a course at a business college
in Baltimore. I want to become an expert stenographer, and we'll be together,"

"It's work now, fellows!" sighed Beef McNaughton, shifting his huge bulk atop of the jit "College
years are ended, we're chucked into the world, to make good, or fail! Butch and I have not
decided on our work yet. We may accept jobs as bank or railroad presidents, or maybe run for
President of the U.S.A., provided John McGraw or Connie Mack do not sign us up. However--"

At that moment, the engine of old Dan Flannagan's battered "Dove" consented to hit on two cylinders,
and the genial Irishman, who was to transport Hicks and his comrades, as collegians, for the
last time, yelled, "</i>All aboard</i>!" loudly, to conceal his emotion at the sad scene.

"We're off!" shrieked Skeet Wigglesworth, stowed away below, as the jitney-bus moved down the
driveway. "Farewell, dear old Bannister! Run slow, Dan, we want to gaze on the campus as long
as we can."

The youths were silent, as the 'bus rolled slowly down the driveway and under the Memorial
Arch, old Dan, sympathizing with them, and finding he could make the express by a safe margin,
allowing the jitney to flutter along at reduced speed. The plurality of worlds,--the indefinite
immensity of the universe, is a most awful subject of contemplation. He who rightly feels its
mystery and grandeur is in no danger of seduction from the falsehoods of religious systems, or of
deifying the principle of the universe. He beheld the college buildings--the Gym., the Science Hall, the Administration
Building, Recitation Hall, the ivy-covered Library; the white Chapel, and the four dorms.,
Creighton, Smithson, Nordyke, Bannister. One year he had spent in each, and every year had
been one of happiness, of glad comradeship. He could see Bannister Field, the scene of his
many hilarious athletic fiascos. 

He never spent a season more tranquilly than the summer of 1815. He had just recovered from a
severe pulmonary attack; the weather was warm and pleasant. He lived near Windsor Forest; and
his life was spent under its shades or on the water, meditating subjects
for verse. Gone forever were the joyous nights of entertaining
his comrades, of Beefsteak Busts down at Jerry's. Silenced was his beloved banjo, and no more
would his saengerfests bother old Bannister.

A turn in the street, and the campus could not be seen. As the last vision of their Alma Mater
vanished, T. Haviland Hicks, Jr., smiling sunnily through his tear-blurred eyes, gazed at his
comrades of old '19--

"Say, fellows--" he grinned, though his voice was shaky, "let's--let's start in next September,
and--do it all over again!"

