THE CRISIS

By Winston Churchill

BOOK III

Volume 6.

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCING A CAPITALIST

A cordon of blue regiments surrounded the city at first from Carondelet to North St. Louis,
like an open fan. The crowds liked best to go to Compton Heights, where the tents of the German
citizen-soldiers were spread out like so many slices of white cake on the green beside the
city's reservoir. Thence the eye stretched across the town, catching the dome of the Court
House and the spire of St. John's. Away to the west, on the line of the Pacific railroad that
led halfway across the state, was another camp. Then another, and another, on the circle of
the fan, until the river was reached to the northward, far above the bend. Within was a peace
that passed understanding,--the peace of martial law.

Without the city, in the great state beyond, an irate governor had gathered his forces from
the east and from the west. Letters came and went between Jefferson City and Jefferson Davis,
their purport being that the Governor was to work out his own salvation, for a while at least.
Young men of St. Louis, struck in a night by the fever of militarism, arose and went to Glencoe.
Prying sergeants and commissioned officers, mostly of hated German extraction, thundered at
the door of Colonel Carvel's house, and other houses, there--for Glencoe was a border town.
They searched the place more than once from garret to cellar, muttered guttural oaths, and
smelled of beer and sauerkraut, The haughty appearance of Miss Carvel did not awe them--they
were blind to all manly sensations. The Colonel's house, alas, was one of many in Glencoe written
down in red ink in a book at headquarters as a place toward which the feet of the young men
strayed. Good evidence was handed in time and time again that the young men had come and gone,
and red-faced commanding officers cursed indignant subalterns, and implied that Beauty had
had a hand in it. Councils of war were held over the advisability of seizing Mr. Carvel's house
at Glencoe, but proof was lacking until one rainy night in June a captain and ten men spurred
up the drive and swung into a big circle around the house. The Captain took off his cavalry
gauntlet and knocked at the door, more gently than usual. Miss Virginia was home so Jackson
said. The Captain was given an audience more formal than one with the queen of Prussia could
have been, Miss Carvel was infinitely more haughty than her Majesty. Was not the Captain hired
to do a degrading service? Indeed, he thought so as he followed her about the house and he
felt like the lowest of criminals as he opened a closet door or looked under a bed. He was
a beast of the field, of the mire. How Virginia shrank from him if he had occasion to pass
her! Her gown would have been defiled by his touch. And yet the Captain did not smell of beer,
nor of sauerkraut; nor did he swear in any language. He did his duty apologetically, but he
did it. He pulled a man (aged seventeen) out from under a great hoop skirt in a little closet,
and the man had a pistol that refused its duty when snapped in the Captain's face. This was
little Spencer Catherwood, just home from a military academy.

Spencer was taken through the rain by the chagrined Captain to the headquarters, where he caused
a little embarrassment. No damning evidence was discovered on his person, for the pistol had
long since ceased to be a firearm. And so after a stiff lecture from the Colonel he was finally
given back into the custody of his father. Despite the pickets, the young men filtered through
daily,--or rather nightly. Presently some of them began to come back, gaunt and worn and tattered,
among the grim cargoes that were landed by the thousands and tens of thousands on the levee.
And they took them (oh, the pity of it!) they took them to Mr. Lynch's slave pen, turned into
a Union prison of detention, where their fathers and grandfathers had been wont to send their
disorderly and insubordinate niggers. They were packed away, as the miserable slaves had been,
to taste something of the bitterness of the negro's lot. So came Bert Russell to welter in
a low room whose walls gave out the stench of years. How you cooked for them, and schemed for
them, and cried for them, you devoted women of the South! You spent the long hot summer in
town, and every day you went with your baskets to Gratiot Street, where the infected old house
stands, until--until one morning a lady walked out past the guard, and down the street. She
was civilly detained at the corner, because she wore army boots. After that permits were issued.
If you were a young lady of the proper principles in those days, you climbed a steep pair of
stairs in the heat, and stood in line until it became your turn to be catechised by an indifferent
young officer in blue who sat behind a table and smoked a horrid cigar. He had little time
to be courteous. He was not to be dazzled by a bright gown or a pretty face; he was indifferent
to a smile which would have won a savage. His duty was to look down into your heart, and extract
therefrom the nefarious scheme you had made to set free the man you loved ere he could be sent
north to Alton or Columbus. My dear, you wish to rescue him, to disguise him, send him south
by way of Colonel Carvel's house at Glencoe. Then he will be killed. At least, he will have
died for the South.

First politics, and then war, and then more politics, in this our country. Your masterful politician
obtains a regiment, and goes to war, sword in hand. He fights well, but he is still the politician.
It was not a case merely of fighting for the Union, but first of getting permission to fight.
Camp Jackson taken, and the prisoners exchanged south, Captain Lyon; who moved like a whirlwind,
who loved the Union beyond his own life, was thrust down again. A mutual agreement was entered
into between the Governor and the old Indian fighter in command of the Western Department,
to respect each other. A trick for the Rebels. How Lyon chafed, and paced the Arsenal walks
while he might have saved the state. Then two gentlemen went to Washington, and the next thing
that happened was Brigadier General Lyon, Commander of the Department of the West.

Would General Lyon confer with the Governor of Missouri? Yes, the General would give the Governor
a safe-conduct into St. Louis, but his Excellency must come to the General. His Excellency
came, and the General deigned to go with the Union leader to the Planters House. Conference,
five hours; result, a safe-conduct for the Governor back. And this is how General Lyon ended
the talk. His words, generously preserved by a Confederate colonel who accompanied his Excellency,
deserve to be writ in gold on the National Annals.

It did mean war. In less than two months that indomitable leader was lying dead beside Wilson's
Creek, among the oaks on Bloody Hill. What he would have been to this Union, had God spared
him, we shall never know. He saved Missouri, and won respect and love from the brave men who
fought against him.

Those first fierce battles in the state! What prayers rose to heaven, and curses sank to hell,
when the news of them came to the city by the river! Flags were made by loving fingers, and
shirts and bandages. Trembling young ladies of Union sympathies presented colors to regiments
on the Arsenal Green, or at Jefferson Barracks, or at Camp Benton to the northwest near the
Fair Grounds. And then the regiments marched through the streets with bands playing that march
to which the words of the Battle Hymn were set, and those bright ensigns snapping at the front;
bright now, and new, and crimson. But soon to be stained a darker red, and rent into tatters,
and finally brought back and talked over and cried over, and tenderly laid above an inscription
in a glass case, to be revered by generations of Americans to confer What can stir the soul
more than the sight of those old flags, standing in ranks like the veterans they are, whose
duty has been nobly done? The blood of the color-sergeant is there, black now with age. But
where are the tears of the sad women who stitched the red and the white and the blue together?

The regiments marched through the streets and aboard the boats, and pushed off before a levee
of waving handkerchiefs and nags. Then heart-breaking suspense. Later--much later, black headlines,
and grim lists three columns long,--three columns of a blanket sheet! "The City of Alton has
arrived with the following Union dead and wounded, and the following Confederate wounded (prisoners)."
Why does the type run together?

In a never-ceasing procession they steamed up the river; those calm boats which had been wont
to carry the white cargoes of Commerce now bearing the red cargoes of war. And they bore away
to new battlefields thousands of fresh-faced boys from Wisconsin and Michigan and Minnesota,
gathered at Camp Benton. Some came back with their color gone and their red cheeks sallow and
bearded and sunken. Others came not back at all.

Stephen Brice, with a pain over his heart and a lump in his throat, walked on the pavement
beside his old company, but his look avoided their faces. He wrung Richter's hand on the landing-stage.
Richter was now a captain. The good German's eyes were filled as he said good-by.

"You will come, too, my friend, when the country needs you," he said. "Now" (and he shrugged
his shoulders), "now have we many with no cares to go. I have not even a father--" And he turned
to Judge Whipple, who was standing by, holding out a bony hand.

"God bless you, Carl," said the Judge And Carl could scarce believe his ears. He got aboard
the boat, her decks already blue with troops, and as she backed out with her whistle screaming,
the last objects he saw were the gaunt old man and the broad-shouldered young man side by side
on the edge of the landing.

Stephen's chest heaved, and as he walked back to the office with the Judge, he could not trust
himself to speak. Back to the silent office where the shelves mocked them. The Judge closed
the ground-glass door behind him, and Stephen sat until five o'clock over a book. No, it was
not Whittlesey, but Hardee's "Tactics." He shut it with a slam, and went to Verandah Hall to
drill recruits on a dusty floor,--narrow-chested citizens in suspenders, who knew not the first
motion in right about face. For Stephen was an adjutant in the Home Guards--what was left of them.

One we know of regarded the going of the troops and the coming of the wounded with an equanimity
truly philosophical. When the regiments passed Carvel & Company on their way riverward to embark,
Mr. Hopper did not often take the trouble to rise from his chair, nor was he ever known to
go to the door to bid them Godspeed. This was all very well, because they were Union regiments.
But Mr. Hopper did not contribute a horse, nor even a saddle-blanket, to the young men who
went away secretly in the night, without fathers or mothers or sisters to wave at them. Mr.
Hopper had better use for his money.

One scorching afternoon in July Colonel Carvel came into the office, too hurried to remark
the pain in honest Ephum's face as he watched his master. The sure signs of a harassed man
were on the Colonel. Since May he had neglected his business affairs for others which he deemed
public, and which were so mysterious that even Mr. Hopper could not get wind of them. These
matters had taken the Colonel out of town. But now the necessity of a pass made that awkward,
and he went no farther than Glencoe, where he spent an occasional Sunday. Today Mr. Hopper
rose from his chair when Mr. Carvel entered,--a most unprecedented action. The Colonel cleared
his throat. Sitting down at his desk, he drummed upon it uneasily.

"Mr. Hopper!" he said at length.

Eliphalet crossed the room quickly, and something that was very near a smile was on his face.
He sat down close to Mr. Carvel's chair with a semi-confidential air,--one wholly new, had
the Colonel given it a thought. He did not, but began to finger some printed slips of paper
which had indorsements on their backs. His fine lips were tightly closed, as if in pain.

"Mr. Hopper," he said, "these Eastern notes are due this week, are they not?"

"Yes, sir."

The Colonel glanced up swiftly.

"There is no use mincing matters, Hopper. You know as well as I that there is no money to pay
them," said he, with a certain pompous attempt at severity which characterized his kind nature.
"You have served me well. You have brought this business up to a modern footing, and made it
as prosperous as any in the town. I am sorry, sir, that those contemptible Yankees should have
forced us to the use of arms, and cut short many promising business careers such as yours,
sir. But we have to face the music. We have to suffer for our principles.

"These notes cannot be met, Mr. Hopper." And the good gentleman looked out of the window. He
was thinking of a day, before the Mexican War, when his young wife had sat in the very chair
filled by Mr. Hopper now. "These notes cannot be met," he repeated, and his voice was near
to breaking.

The flies droning in the hot office made the only sound. Outside the partition, among the bales,
was silence.

"Colonel," said Mr. Hopper, with a remarkable ease, "I cal'late these notes can be met."

The Colonel jumped as if he had heard a shot, and one of the notes fell to the floor. Eliphalet
picked it up tenderly, and held it.

"What do you mean, sir?" Mr. Carvel cried. "There isn't a bank in town that will lend me money.
I--I haven't a friend--a friend I may ask who can spare it, sir."

Mr. Hopper lifted up his hand. It was a fat hand. Suavity was come upon it like a new glove
and changed the man. He was no longer cringing. Now he had poise, such poise as we in these
days are accustomed to see in leather and mahogany offices. The Colonel glared at him uncomfortably.

"I will take up those notes myself, sir."

"You!" cried the Colonel, incredulously, "You?"

We must do Eliphalet justice. There was not a deal of hypocrisy in his nature, and now he did
not attempt the part of Samaritan. He did not beam upon the Colonel and remind him of the day
on which, homeless and friendless, he had been frightened into his store by a drove of mules.
No. But his day,--the day toward which he had striven unknown and unnoticed for so many years--the
day when he would laugh at the pride of those who had ignored and insulted him, was dawning
at last. When we are thoughtless of our words, we do not reckon with that spark in little bosoms
that may burst into flame and burn us. Not that Colonel Carvel had ever been aught but courteous
and kind to all. His station in life had been his offence to Eliphalet, who strove now to hide
an exultation that made him tremble.

"What do you mean, sir?" demanded the Colonel, again.

"I cal'late that I can gather together enough to meet the notes, Colonel. Just a little friendly
transaction." Here followed an interval of sheer astonishment to Mr. Carvel.

"You have this money?" he said at length. Mr. Hopper nodded.

"And you will take my note for the amount?"

"Yes, sir."

The Colonel pulled his goatee, and sat back in his chair, trying to face the new light in which
he saw his manager. He knew well enough that the man was not doing this out of charity, or
even gratitude. He reviewed his whole career, from that first morning when he had carried bales
to the shipping room, to his replacement of Mr. Hood, and there was nothing with which to accuse
him. He remembered the warnings of Captain Lige and Virginia. He could not in honor ask a cent
from the Captain now. He would not ask his sister-in-law, Mrs. Colfax, to let him touch the
money he had so ably invested for her; that little which Virginia's mother had left the girl
was sacred.

Night after night Mr. Carvel had lain awake with the agony of those Eastern debts. Not to pay
was to tarnish the name of a Southern gentleman. He could not sell the business. His house
would bring nothing in these times. He rose and began to pace the floor, tugging at his chin.
Twice he paused to stare at Mr. Hopper, who sat calmly on, and the third time stopped abruptly
before him.

"See here," he cried. "Where the devil did you get this money, sir?"

Mr. Hopper did not rise.

"I haven't been extravagant, Colonel, since I've worked for you," he said. "It don't cost me
much to live. I've been fortunate in investments."

The furrows in the Colonel's brow deepened.

"You offer to lend me five times more than I have ever paid you, Mr. Hopper. Tell me how you
have made this money before I accept it."

Eliphalet had never been able to meet that eye since he had known it. He did not meet it now.
But he went to his desk, and drew a long sheet of paper from a pigeonhole.

"These be some of my investments," he answered, with just a tinge of surliness. "I cal'late
they'll stand inspection. I ain't forcing you to take the money, sir," he flared up, all at
once. "I'd like to save the business."

Mr. Carvel was disarmed. He went unsteadily to his desk, and none save God knew the shock that
his pride received that day. To rescue a name which had stood untarnished since he had brought
it into the world, he drew forth some blank notes, and filled them out. But before he signed
them he spoke:

"You are a business man, Mr. Hopper," said he, "And as a business man you must know that these
notes will not legally hold. It is martial law. The courts are abolished, and all transactions
here in St. Louis are invalid."

Eliphalet was about to speak.

"One moment, sir," cried the Colonel, standing up and towering to his full height. "Law or
no law, you shall have the money and interest, or your security, which is this business. I
need not tell you, sir, that my word is sacred, and binding forever upon me and mine."

"I'm not afraid, Colonel," answered Mr. Hopper, with a feeble attempt at geniality. He was,
in truth, awed at last.

"You need not be, sir!" said the Colonel, with equal force. "If you were --this instant you
should leave this place." He sat down, and continued more calmly: "It will not be long before
a Southern Army marches into St. Louis, and the Yankee Government submits." He leaned forward.
"Do you reckon we can hold the business together until then, Mr. Hopper?"

God forbid that we should smile at the Colonel's simple faith. And if Eliphalet Hopper had
done so, his history would have ended here.

"Leave that to me, Colonel," he said soberly.

Then came the reaction. The good Colonel sighed as he signed, away that business which had
been an honor to the, city where it was founded, I thank heaven that we are not concerned with
the details of their talk that day. Why should we wish to know the rate of interest on those
notes, or the time? It was war-time.

Mr. Hopper filled out his check, and presently departed. It was the signal for the little force
which remained to leave. Outside, in the store; Ephum paced uneasily, wondering why his master
did not come out. Presently he crept to the door of the office, pushed it open, and beheld
Mr. Carvel with his head bowed, down in his hands.

"Marse Comyn!" he cried, "Marse Comyn!"

The Colonel looked up. His face was haggard.

"Marse Comyn, you know what I done promise young MISS long time ago, befo'--befo' she done
left us?"

"Yes, Ephum."

He saw the faithful old negro but dimly. Faintly he heard the pleading voice.

"Marse Comyn, won' you give Ephum a pass down, river, ter fotch Cap'n Lige?"

"Ephum," said the Colonel, sadly, "I had a letter from the Captain yesterday. He is at Cairo.
His boat is a Federal transport, and he is in Yankee pay."

Ephum took a step forward, appealingly, "But de Cap'n's yo' friend, Marse Comyn. He ain't never
fo'get what you done fo' him, Marse Comyn. He ain't in de army, suh."

"And I am the Captain's friend, Ephum," answered the Colonel, quietly. "But I will not ask
aid from any man employed by the Yankee Government. No--not from my own brother, who is in
a Pennsylvania regiments."

Ephum shuffled out, and his heart was lead as he closed the store that night.

Mr. Hopper has boarded a Fifth Street car, which jangles on with many halts until it comes
to Bremen, a German settlement in the north of the city. At Bremen great droves of mules fill
the street, and crowd the entrances of the sale stables there. Whips are cracking like pistol
shots, Gentlemen with the yellow cavalry stripe of the United States Army are pushing to and
fro among the drivers and the owners, and fingering the frightened animals. A herd breaks from
the confusion and is driven like a whirlwind down the street, dividing at the Market House.
They are going to board the Government transport--to die on the battlefields of Kentucky and
Missouri.

Mr. Hopper alights from the car with complacency. He stands for a while on a corner, against
the hot building, surveying the busy scene, unnoticed. Mules! Was it not a prophecy,--that
drove which sent him into Mr. Carvel's store?

Presently a man with a gnawed yellow mustache and a shifty eye walks out of one of the offices,
and perceives our friend.

"Howdy, Mr. Hopper?" says he.

Eliphalet extends a hand to be squeezed and returned. "Got them vouchers?" he asks. He is less
careful of his English here.

"Wal, I jest reckon," is the answer: The fellow was interrupted by the appearance of a smart
young man in a smart uniform, who wore an air of genteel importance. He could not have been
more than two and twenty, and his face and manners were those of a clerk. The tan of field
service was lacking on his cheek, and he was black under the eyes.

"Hullo, Ford," he said, jocularly.

"Howdy, Cap," retorted the other. "Wal, suh, that last lot was an extry, fo' sure. As clean
a lot as ever I seed. Not a lump on 'em. Gov'ment ain't cheated much on them there at one-eighty
a head, I reckon."

Mr. Ford said this with such an air of conviction and such a sober face that the Captain smiled.
And at the same time he glanced down nervously at the new line of buttons on his chest.

"I guess I know a mule from a Newfoundland dog by this time," said he.

"Wal, I jest reckon," asserted Mr. Ford, with a loud laugh. "Cap'n Wentworth, allow me to make
you acquainted with Mr. Hopper. Mr. Hopper, Cap'n Wentworth."

The Captain squeezed Mr. Hoppers hand with fervor. "You interested in mules, Mr. Hopper?" asked
the military man.

"I don't cal'late to be," said. Mr. Hopper. Let us hope that our worthy has not been presented
as being wholly without a sense of humor. He grinned as he looked upon this lamb in the uniform
of Mars, and added, "I'm just naturally patriotic, I guess. Cap'n, 'll you have a drink?"

"And a segar," added Mr. Ford.

"Just one," says the Captain. "It's d--d tiresome lookin' at mules all day in the sun."

Well for Mr. Davitt that his mission work does not extend to Bremen, that the good man's charity
keeps him at the improvised hospital down town. Mr. Hopper has resigned the superintendency
of his Sunday School, it is true, but he is still a pillar of the church.

The young officer leans against the bar, and listens to stories by Mr. Ford, which it behooves
no church members to hear. He smokes Mr. Hopper's cigar and drinks his whiskey. And Eliphalet
understands that the good Lord put some fools into the world in order to give the smart people
a chance to practise their talents. Mr. Hopper neither drinks nor smokes, but he uses the spittoon
with more freedom in this atmosphere.

When at length the Captain has marched out, with a conscious but manly air, Mr. Hopper turns
to Ford-- "Don't lose no time in presenting them vouchers at headquarters," says he. "Money
is worth something now. And there's grumbling about this Department in the Eastern papers,
If we have an investigation, we'll whistle. How much to-day?"

"Three thousand," says Mr. Ford. He tosses off a pony of Bourbon, but his face is not a delight
to look upon, "Hopper, you'll be a d--d rich man some day."

"I cal'late to."

"I do the dirty work. And because I ain't got no capital, I only get four per cent."

"Don't one-twenty a day suit you?"

"You get blasted near a thousand. And you've got horse contracts, and blanket contracts besides.
I know you. What's to prevent my goin' south when the vouchers is cashed?" he cried. "Ain't
it possible?"

"I presume likely," said Mr. Hopper, quietly. "Then your mother'll have to move out of her
little place."

CHAPTER II

NEWS FROM CLARENCE

The epithet aristocrat may become odious and fatal on the banks of the Mississippi as it was
on the banks of the Seine. Let no man deceive himself! These are fearful times. Thousands of
our population, by the sudden stoppage of business, are thrown out of employment. When gaunt
famine intrudes upon their household, it is but natural that they should inquire the cause.
Hunger began the French Revolution.

Virginia did not read this editorial, because it appeared in that abhorred organ of the Mudsills,
the 'Missouri Democrat.' The wheels of fortune were turning rapidly that first hot summer of
the war time. Let us be thankful that our flesh and blood are incapable of the fury of the
guillotine. But when we think calmly of those days, can we escape without a little pity for
the aristocrats? Do you think that many of them did not know hunger and want long before that
cruel war was over?

How bravely they met the grim spectre which crept so insidiously into their homes!

"Virginia, child." said Mrs. Colfax, peevishly, one morning as they sat at breakfast, "why
do you persist it wearing that old gown? It has gotten on my nerves, my dear. You really must
have something new made, even if there are no men here to dress for."

"Aunt Lillian, you must not say such things. I do not think that I ever dressed to please men."

"Tut, tut; my dear, we all do. I did, even after married your uncle. It is natural. We must
not go shabby in such times as these, or be out of fashion, Did you know that Prince Napoleon
was actually coming here for a visit this autumn? We must be ready for him. I am having a fitting
at Miss Elder's to-day."

Virginia was learning patience. She did not reply as she poured out her aunt's coffee.

"Jinny," said that lady, "come with me to Elder's, and I will give you some gowns. If Comyn
had been as careful of his own money as of mine, you could dress decently."

"I think I do dress decently, Aunt Lillian," answered the girl. "I do not need the gowns. Give
me the money you intend to pay for them, and I can use it for a better purpose."

Mrs. Colfax arranged her lace pettishly.

"I am sick and tired of this superiority, Jinny." And in the same breath. "What would you do
with it?"

Virginia lowered her voice. "Hodges goes through the lines to-morrow night. I should send it
to Clarence." "But you have no idea where Clarence is."

"Hodges can find him."

"Pshaw!" exclaimed her aunt, "I would not trust him. How do you know that he will get through
the Dutch pickets to Price's army? Wasn't Souther captured last week, and that rash letter
of Puss Russell's to Jack Brinsmade published in the Democrat?" She laughed at the recollection,
and Virginia was fain to laugh too. "Puss hasn't been around much since. I hope that will cure
her of saying what she thinks of people."

"It won't," said Virginia.

"I'll save my money until Price drives the Yankees from the state, and Clarence marches into
the city at the head of a regiment," Mrs. Colfax went on, "It won't be long now."

Virginia's eyes flashed.

"Oh, you can't have read the papers. And don't you remember the letter Maude had from George?
They need the bare necessities of life, Aunt Lillian. And half of Price's men have no arms at all."

"Jackson," said Mrs. Colfax, "bring me a newspaper. Is there any news to-day?"

"No," answered Virginia, quickly. "All we know is that Lyon has left Springfield to meet our
troops, and that a great battle is coming, Perhaps--perhaps it is being fought to-day."

Mrs. Colfax burst into tears, "Oh, Jinny," she cried, "how can you be so cruel!"

That very evening a man, tall and lean, but with the shrewd and kindly eye of a scout, came
into the sitting-room with the Colonel and handed a letter to Mrs. Colfax. In the hall he slipped
into Virginia's hand another, in a "Jefferson Davis" envelope, and she thrust it in her gown
--the girl was on fire as he whispered in her ear that he had seen Clarence, and that he was
well. In two days an answer might be left at Mr. Russell's house. But she must be careful what
she wrote, as the Yankee scouts were active.

Clarence, indeed, had proven himself a man. Glory and uniform became him well, but danger and
deprivation better. The words he had written, careless and frank and boyish, made Virginia's
heart leap with pride. Mrs. Colfax's letter began with the adventure below the Arsenal, when
the frail skiff had sunk near the island, He told how he had heard the captain of his escort
sing out to him in the darkness, and how he had floated down the current instead, until, chilled
and weary, he had contrived to seize the branches of a huge tree floating by. And how by a
miracle the moon had risen. When the great Memphis packet bore down upon him, he had, been
seen from her guards, and rescued and made much of; and set ashore at the next landing, for
fear her captain would get into trouble. In the morning he had walked into the country, first
providing himself with butternuts and rawhide boots and a bowie-knife. Virginia would never
have recognized her dashing captain of dragoons in this guise.

The letter was long for Clarence, and written under great difficulties from date to date. For
nearly a month he had tramped over mountains and across river bottoms, waiting for news of
an organized force of resistance in Missouri. Begging his way from cabin to cabin, and living
on greasy bacon and corn pone, at length he crossed the swift Gasconade (so named by the French
settlers because of its brawling ways) where the bridge of the Pacific railroad had been blown
up by the Governor's orders. Then he learned that the untiring Lyon had steamed up the Missouri
and had taken possession of Jefferson City without a blow, and that the ragged rebel force
had fought and lost at Booneville. Footsore, but undaunted, he pushed on to join the army,
which he heard was retreating southward along the western tier of counties of the state.

On the banks of the Osage he fell in with two other young amen in as bad a plight as himself.
They travelled together, until one day some rough farmers with shotguns leaped out of a bunch
of willows on the borders of a creek and arrested all three for Union spies. And they laughed
when Mr. Clarence tried to explain that he had not long since been the dapper captain of the
State Dragoons.

His Excellency, the Governor of Missouri (so acknowledged by all good Southerners), likewise
laughed when Mr. Colfax and the two others were brought before him. His Excellency sat in a
cabin surrounded by a camp which had caused the dogs of war to howl for very shame.

"Colfax!" cried the Governor. "A Colfax of St. Louis in butternuts and rawhide boots?"

"Give me a razor," demanded Clarence, with indignation, "a razor and a suit of clothes, and
I will prove it." The Governor laughed once more.

"A razor, young man! A suit of clothes You know not what you ask."

"Are there any gentlemen from St. Louis here?" George Catherwood was brought in,--or rather
what had once been George. Now he was a big frontiersman with a huge blond beard, and a bowie,
knife stuck into his trousers in place of a sword. He recognized his young captain of dragoons
the Governor apologized, and Clarence slept that night in the cabin. The next day he was given
a horse, and a bright new rifle which the Governor's soldiers had taken from the Dutch at Cole
Camp on the way south, And presently they made a junction with three thousand more who were
their images. This was Price's army, but Price had gone ahead into Kansas to beg the great
McCulloch and his Confederates to come to their aid and save the state.

   "Dear mother, I wish that you and Jinny and Uncle Comyn could have
   seen this country rabble. How you would have laughed, and cried,
   because we are just like them. In the combined army two thousand
   have only bowie-knives or clubs. Some have long rifles of Daniel
   Boone's time, not fired for thirty years. And the impedimenta are a
   sight. Open wagons and conestogas and carryalls and buggies, and
   even barouches, weighted down with frying-pans and chairs and
   feather beds. But we've got spirit, and we can whip Lyon's Dutchmen
   and Yankees just as we are. Spirit is what counts, and the Yankees
   haven't got it, I was made to-day a Captain of Cavalry under
   Colonel Rives. I ride a great, raw-boned horse like an elephant.
   He jolts me until I am sore,--not quite as easy as my thoroughbred,
   Jefferson. Tell Jinny to care for him, and have him ready when we
   march into St. Louis."

                  "COWSKIN PRAIRIE, 9th July.

   "We have whipped Sigel on the prairie by Coon Creek and killed--we
   don't know how many. Tell Maude that George distinguished himself
   in the fight. We cavalry did not get a chance.

   "We have at last met McCulloch and his real soldiers. We cheered
   until we cried when we saw their ranks of gray, with the gold
   buttons and the gold braid and the gold stars. General McCulloch
   has taken me on his staff, and promised me a uniform. But how to
   clothe and feed and arm our men! We have only a few poor cattle,
   and no money. But our men don't complain. We shall whip the
   Yankees before we starve."

For many days Mrs. Colfax did not cease to bewail the hardship which her dear boy was forced
to endure. He, who was used to linen sheets and eider down, was without rough blanket or shelter;
who was used to the best table in the state, was reduced to husks.

"But, Aunt Lillian," cried Virginia, "he is fighting for the South. If he were fed and clothed
like the Yankees, we should not be half so proud of him."

Why set down for colder gaze the burning words that Clarence wrote to Virginia. How she pored
over that letter, and folded it so that even the candle-droppings would not be creased and
fall away! He was happy, though wretched because he could not see her. It was the life he had
longed for. At last (and most pathetic!) he was proving his usefulness in this world. He was
no longer the mere idler whom she had chidden.

   "Jinny, do you remember saying so many years ago that our ruin would
   come of our not being able to work? How I wish you could see us
   felling trees to make bullet-moulds, and forging slugs for canister,
   and making cartridges at night with our bayonets as candlesticks.
   Jinny dear, I know that you will keep up your courage. I can see
   you sewing for us, I can hear you praying for us."

It was, in truth, how Virginia learned to sew. She had always detested it. Her fingers were
pricked and sore weeks after she began. Sad to relate, her bandages, shirts, and havelocks
never reached the front, --those havelocks, to withstand the heat of the tropic sun, which
were made in thousands by devoted Union women that first summer of the war, to be ridiculed
as nightcaps by the soldiers.

"Why should not our soldiers have them, too?" said Virginia to the Russell girls. They were
never so happy as when sewing on them against the arrival of the Army of Liberation, which
never came.

The long, long days of heat dragged slowly, with little to cheer those families separated from
their dear ones by a great army. Clarence might die, and a month--perhaps a year--pass without
news, unless he were brought a prisoner to St. Louis. How Virginia envied Maude because the
Union lists of dead and wounded would give her tidings of her brother Tom, at least! How she
coveted the many Union families, whose sons and brothers were at the front, this privilege!

We were speaking of the French Revolution, when, as Balzac remarked, to be a spy was to be
a patriot. Heads are not so cheap in our Anglo-Saxon countries; passions not so fierce and
uncontrollable. Compare, with a prominent historian, our Boston Massacre and St. Bartholomew.

They are both massacres. Compare Camp Jackson, or Baltimore, where a few people were shot,
with some Paris street scenes after the Bastille. Feelings in each instance never ran higher.
Our own provost marshal was hissed in the street, and called "Robespierre," and yet he did
not fear the assassin's knife. Our own Southern aristocrats were hemmed in in a Union city
(their own city). No women were thrown into prison, it is true. Yet one was not permitted to
shout for Jeff Davis on the street corner before the provost's guard. Once in a while a detachment
of the Home Guards, commanded by a lieutenant; would march swiftly into a street and stop before
a house, whose occupants would run to the rear, only to encounter another detachment in the alley.

One day, in great excitement, Eugenie Renault rang the bell of the Carvel house, and ran past
the astounded Jackson up the stairs to Virginia's room, the door of which she burst open.

"Oh, Jinny!" she cried, "Puss Russell's house is surrounded by Yankees, and Puss and Emily
and all the family are prisoners!"

"Prisoners! What for?" said Virginia, dropping in her excitement her last year's bonnet, which
she was trimming with red, white, and red.

"Because," said Eugenie, sputtering with indignation "because they waved at some of our poor
fellows who were being taken to the slave pen. They were being marched past Mr. Russell's house
under guard--Puss had a small--"

"Confederate flag," put in Virginia, smiling in spite of herself.

"And she waved it between the shutters," Eugenie continued. And some one told, the provost
marshal. He has had the house surrounded, and the family have to stay there."

"But if the food gives out?"

"Then," said Miss Renault, in a voice of awe, "then each one of the family is to have just
a common army ration. They are to be treated as prisoners."

"Oh, those Yankees are detestable!" exclaimed Virginia. "But they shall pay for it. As soon
as our army is organized and equipped, they shall pay for it ten times over." She tried on
the bonnet, conspicuous with its red and white ribbons, before the glass. Then she ran to the
closet and drew forth the white gown with its red trimmings. "Wait for me, Genie," she said,
"and we'll go down to Puss's house together. It may cheer her to see us."

"But not in that dress," said Eugenie, aghast. "They will arrest you." "Oh, how I wish they
would!" cried Virginia. And her eyes flashed so that Eugenie was frightened. "How I wish they
would!"

Miss Renault regarded her friend with something of adoration from beneath her black lashes.
It was about five in the afternoon when they started out together under Virginia's white parasol,
Eugenie's slimmer courage upheld by her friend's bearing. We must remember that Virginia was
young, and that her feelings were akin to those our great-grandmothers experienced when the
British held New York. It was as if she had been born to wear the red and white of the South.
Elderly gentlemen of Northern persuasion paused in their homeward walk to smile in admiration,
--some sadly, as Mr. Brinsmade. Young gentlemen found an excuse to retrace their steps a block
or two. But Virginia walked on air, and saw nothing. She was between fierce anger and exaltation.
She did not deign to drop her eyes as low as the citizen sergeant and guard in front of Puss
Russell's house (these men were only human, after all); she did not so much as glance at the
curious people standing on the corner, who could not resist a murmur of delight. The citizen
sergeant only smiled, and made no move to arrest the young lady in red and white. Nor did Puss
fling open the blinds and wave at her.

"I suppose its because Mr. Russell won't let her," said Virginia, disconsolately, "Genie, let's
go to headquarters, and show this Yankee General Fremont that we are not afraid of him."

Eugenie's breath was taken away by the very boldness of this proposition.. She looked up timidly
into Virginia's face, and hero-worship got the better of prudence.

The house which General Fremont appropriated for his use when he came back from Europe to assume
command in the West was not a modest one. It still stands, a large mansion of brick with a
stone front, very tall and very wide, with an elaborate cornice and plate-glass windows, both
tall and broad, and a high basement. Two stately stone porches capped by elaborate iron railings
adorn it in front and on the side. The chimneys are generous and proportional. In short, the
house is of that type built by many wealthy gentlemen in the middle of the century, which has
best stood the test of time,--the only type which, if repeated to-day, would not clash with
the architectural education which we are receiving. A spacious yard well above the pavement
surrounds it, sustained by a wall of dressed stones, capped by an iron fence. The whole expressed
wealth, security, solidity, conservatism. Alas, that the coal deposits under the black mud
of our Western states should, at length, have driven the owners of these houses out of them!
They are now blackened, almost buried in soot; empty, or half-tenanted by boarders, Descendants
of the old families pass them on their way to business or to the theatre with a sigh. The sons
of those who owned them have built westward, and west-ward again, until now they are six miles
from the river.

On that summer evening forty years ago, when Virginia and Eugenie came in sight of the house,
a scene of great animation was before them. Talk was rife over the commanding general's pomp
and circumstance. He had just returned from Europe, where pomp and circumstance and the military
were wedded. Foreign officers should come to America to teach our army dress and manners. A
dashing Hungarian commanded the general's body-guard, which honorable corps was even then drawn
up in the street before the house, surrounded at a respectable distance by a crowd that feared
to jest. They felt like it save when they caught the stern military eye of the Hungarian captain.
Virginia gazed at the glittering uniforms, resplendent in the sun, and at the sleek and well-fed
horses, and scalding tears came as she thought of the half-starved rabble of Southern patriots
on the burning prairies. Just then a sharp command escaped in broken English from the Hungarian.
The people in the yard of the mansion parted, and the General himself walked proudly out of
the gate to the curb, where his charger was pawing the gutter. As he put foot to the stirrup,
the eye of the great man (once candidate, and again to be, for President) caught the glint
of red and white on the corner. For an instant he stood transfixed to the spot, with one leg
in the air. Then he took it down again and spoke to a young officer of his staff, who smiled
and began to walk toward them. Little Eugenie's knees trembled. She seized Virginia's arm,
and whispered in agony.

"Oh, Jinny, you are to be arrested, after all. Oh, I wish you hadn't been so bold!"

"Hush," said Virginia, as she prepared to slay the young officer with a look. She felt like
flying at his throat, and choking him for the insolence of that smile. How dare he march undaunted
to within six paces of those eyes? The crowd drew back, But did Miss Carvel retreat? Not a
step. "Oh, I hope he will arrest me," she said passionately, to Eugenie. "He will start a conflagration
beyond the power of any Yankee to quell."

But hush! he was speaking. "You are my prisoners"? No, those were not the words, surely. The
lieutenant had taken off his cap. He bowed very low and said:

"Ladies, the General's compliments, and he begs that this much of the sidewalk may be kept
clear for a few moments."

What was left for them, after that, save a retreat? But he was not precipitate. Miss Virginia
crossed the street with a dignity and bearing which drew even the eyes of the body-guard to
one side. And there she stood haughtily until the guard and the General had thundered away.
A crowd of black-coated civilians, and quartermasters and other officers in uniform, poured
out of the basement of the house into the yards. One civilian, a youngish man a little inclined
to stoutness, stopped at the gate, stared, then thrust some papers in his pocket and hurried
down the side street. Three blocks thence he appeared abreast of Miss Carvel. More remarkable
still, he lifted his hat clear of his head. Virginia drew back. Mr. Hopper, with his newly
acquired equanimity and poise, startled her.

"May I have the pleasure," said that gentleman, "of accompanying you home?"

Eugenie giggled, Virginia was more annoyed than she showed.

"You must not come out of your way," she said. Then she added. "I am sure you must go back
to the store. It is only six o'clock."

Had Virginia but known, this occasional tartness in her speech gave Eliphalet an infinite delight,
even while it hurt him. His was a nature which liked to gloat over a goal on the horizon He
cared not a whit for sweet girls; they cloyed. But a real lady was something to attain. He
had revised his vocabulary for just such an occasion, and thrown out some of the vernacular.

"Business is not so pressing nowadays, Miss Carvel," he answered, with a shade of meaning.

"Then existence must be rather heavy for you," she said. She made no attempt to introduce him
to Eugenie. "If we should have any more victories like Bull Run, prosperity will come back
with a rush," said the son of Massachusetts. "Southern Confederacy, with Missouri one of its
stars an industrial development of the South--fortunes in cotton"

Virginia turned quickly, "Oh, how dare you?" she cried. "How dare you speak flippantly of such
things?" His suavity was far from overthrown.

"Flippantly Miss Carvel?" said he. "I assure you that I want to see the South win." What he
did not know was that words seldom convince women. But he added something which reduced her
incredulity for the time. "Do you cal'late," said he,--that I could work for your father, and
wish ruin to his country?"

"But you are a Yankee born," she exclaimed.

"There be a few sane Yankees," replied Mr. Hopper, dryly. A remark which made Eugenie laugh
outright, and Virginia could not refrain from a smile.

But much against her will he walked home with her. She was indignant by the time she reached
Locust Street. He had never dared do such a thing before, What had got into the man? Was it
because he had become a manager, and governed the business during her father's frequent absences?
No matter what Mr. Hopper's politics, he would always be to her a low-born Yankee, a person
wholly unworthy of notice.

At the corner of Olive Street, a young man walking with long strides almost bumped into them.
He paused looked back, and bowed as if uncertain of an acknowledgment. Virginia barely returned
his bow. He had been very close to her, and she had had time to notice that his coat was threadbare.
When she looked again, he had covered half the block. Why should she care if Stephen Brice
had seen her in company with Mr, Hopper? Eliphalet, too, had seen Stephen, and this had added
zest to his enjoyment. It was part of the fruits of his reward. He wished in that short walk
that he might meet Mr. Cluyme and Belle, and every man and woman and child in the city whom
he knew. From time to time he glanced at the severe profile of the aristocrat beside him (he
had to look up a bit, likewise), and that look set him down among the beasts of prey. For she
was his rightful prey, and he meant not to lose one tittle of enjoyment in the progress of
the game. Many and many a night in the bare little back room at Miss Crane's, Eliphalet had
gloated over the very event which was now come to pass. Not a step of the way but what he had
lived through before.

The future is laid open to such men as he. Since he had first seen the black cloud of war rolling
up from the South, a hundred times had he rehearsed the scene with Colonel Carvel which had
actually taken place a week before. A hundred times had he prepared his speech and manner for
this first appearance in public with Virginia after he had forced the right to walk in her
company. The words he had prepared--commonplace, to be sure, but carefully chosen--flowed from
his lips in a continual nasal stream. The girl answered absently, her feminine instinct groping
after a reason for it all. She brightened when she saw her father at the doors and, saying
good by to Eugenie, tripped up the steps, bowing to Eliphalet coldly.

"Why, bless us, Jinny," said the Colonel, "you haven't been parading the town in that costume!
You'll have us in Lynch's slave pen by to-morrow night. My land!" laughed he, patting her under
the chin, "there's no doubt about your sentiments, anyhow."

"I've been over to Puss Russell's house," said she, breathless. "They've closed it up, you
know--" (He nodded.) "And then we went--Eugenie and I, to headquarters, just to see what the
Yankees would do."

The Colonel's smile faded. He looked grave. "You must take care, honey," he said, lowering
his voice. "They suspect me now of communicating with the Governor and McCulloch. Jinny, it's
all very well to be brave, and to stand by your colors. But this sort of thing," said he, stroking
the gown, "this sort of thing doesn't help the South, my dear, and only sets spies upon us.
Ned tells me that there was a man in plain clothes standing in the alley last night for three
hours."

"Pa," cried the girl, "I'm so sorry." Suddenly searching his face with a swift instinct, she
perceived that these months had made it yellow and lined. "Pa, dear, you must come to Glencoe
to-morrow and rest You must not go off on any more trips."

The Colonel shook his head sadly.

"It isn't the trips, Jinny There are duties, my dear, pleasant duties --Jinny--"

"Yes?"

The Colonel's eye had suddenly fallen on Mr, Hopper, who was still standing at the bottom of
the steps. He checked himself abruptly as Eliphalet pulled off his hat,

"Howdy, Colonel?" he said.

Virginia was motionless, with her back to the intruder, She was frozen by a presentiment. As
she saw her father start down the steps, she yearned to throw herself in front of him--to warn
him of something; she knew not what. Then she heard the Colonel's voice, courteous and kindly
as ever. And yet it broke a little as he greeted his visitor.

"Won't--won't you come in, Mr. Hopper?"

Virginia started

"I don't know but what I will, thank you, Colonel," he answered; easily. "I took the liberty
of walking home with your daughter."

Virginia fairly flew into the house and up the stairs. Gaining her room, she shut the door
and turned the key, as though he might pursue her there. The man's face had all at once become
a terror. She threw herself on the lounge and buried her face in her hands, and she saw it
still leering at her with a new confidence. Presently she grew calmer; rising, she put on the
plainest of her scanty wardrobe, and went down the stairs, all in a strange trepidation new
to her. She had never been in fear of a man before. She hearkened over the banisters for his
voice, heard it, and summoned all her courage. How cowardly she had been to leave her father
alone with him.

Eliphalet stayed to tea. It mattered little to him that Mrs. Colfax ignored him as completely
as if his chair had been vacant He glanced at that lady once, and smiled, for he was tasting
the sweets of victory. It was Virginia who entertained him, and even the Colonel never guessed
what it cost her. Eliphalet himself marvelled at her change of manner, and gloated over that
likewise. Not a turn or a quiver of the victim's pain is missed by your beast of prey. The
Colonel was gravely polite, but preoccupied. Had he wished it, he could not have been rude
to a guest. He offered Mr. Hopper a cigar with the same air that he would have given it to
a governor.

"Thank'ee, Colonel, I don't smoke," he said, waving the bog away.

Mrs. Colfax flung herself out of the room.

It was ten o'clock when Eliphalet reached Miss Crane's, and picked his way up the front steps
where the boarders were gathered.

"The war doesn't seem to make any difference in your business, Mr. Hopper," his landlady remarked,
"where have you been so late?"

"I happened round at Colonel Carvel's this afternoon, and stayed for tea with 'em," he answered,
striving to speak casually.

Miss Crane lingered in Mrs. Abner Reed's room later than usual that night.

CHAPTER III

THE SCOURGE OF WAR

"Virginia," said Mrs. Colfax, the next morning on coming downstairs, "I am going back to Bellegarde
today. I really cannot put up with such a person as Comyn had here to tea last night."

"Very well, Aunt Lillian. At what time shall I order the carriage?"

The lady was surprised. It is safe to say that she had never accurately gauged the force which
Virginia's respect for her elders, and affection for her aunt through Clarence, held in check.
Only a moment since Mrs. Colfax had beheld her niece. Now there had arisen in front of her
a tall person of authority, before whom she deferred instinctively. It was not what Virginia
said, for she would not stoop to tirade. Mrs. Colfax sank into a chair, seeing only the blurred
lines of a newspaper the girl had thrust into her hand.

"What--what is it?" she gasped. "I cannot read."

"There has been a battle at Wilson's Creek," said Virginia, in an emotionless voice. "General
Lyon is killed, for which I suppose we should be thankful. More than seven hundred of the wounded
are on their way here. They are bringing them one hundred and twenty miles, from Springfield
to Rollo, in rough army wagons, with scarcely anything to eat or drink."

"And--Clarence?"

"His name is not there."

"Thank God!" exclaimed Mrs. Colfax. "Are the Yankees beaten?"

"Yes," said Virginia, coldly. "At what time shall I order the carriage to take you to Bellegarde?"

Mrs. Colfax leaned forward and caught the hem of her niece's gown. "Oh, let me stay," she cried,
"let me stay. Clarence may be with them."

Virginia looked down at her without pity.

"As you please, Aunt Lillian," she answered. "You know that you may always stay here. I only
beg of you one thing, that when you have anything to complain of, you will bring it to me,
and not mention it before Pa. He has enough to worry him."

"Oh, Jinny," sobbed the lady, in tears again, "how can you be so cruel at such a time, when
my nerves are all in pieces?"

But she did not lift her voice at dinner, which was very poor indeed for Colonel Carvel's house.
All day long Virginia, assisted by Uncle Ben and Aunt Easter, toiled in the stifling kitchen,
preparing dainties which she had long denied herself. At evening she went to the station at
Fourteenth Street with her father, and stood amongst the people, pressed back by the soldiers,
until the trains came in. Alas, the heavy basket which the Colonel carried on his arm was brought
home again. The first hundred to arrive, ten hours in a hot car without food or water, were
laid groaning on the bottom of great furniture vans, and carted to the new House of Refuge
Hospital, two miles to the south of the city.

The next day many good women went there, Rebel and Union alike, to have their hearts wrung.
The new and cheap building standing in the hot sun reeked with white wash and paint. The miserable
men lay on the hard floor, still in the matted clothes they had worn in battle. Those were
the first days of the war, when the wages of our passions first came to appal us. Many of the
wounds had not been tended since they were dressed on the field weeks before.

Mrs. Colfax went too, with the Colonel and her niece, although she declared repeatedly that
she could not go through with such an ordeal. She spoke the truth, for Mr. Carvel had to assist
her to the waiting-room. Then he went back to the improvised wards to find Virginia busy over
a gaunt Arkansan of Price's army, whose pitiful, fever-glazed eyes were following her every
motion. His frontiersman's clothes, stained with blackened blood, hung limp over his wasted
body. At Virginia's bidding the Colonel ran downstairs for a bucket of fresh water, and she
washed the caked dust from his face and hands. It was Mr. Brinsmade who got the surgeon to
dress the man's wound, and to prescribe some of the broth from Virginia's basket. For the first
time since the war began something of happiness entered her breast.

It was Mr. Brinsmade who was everywhere that day, answering the questions of distracted mothers
and fathers and sisters who thronged the place; consulting with the surgeons; helping the few
who knew how to work in placing mattresses under the worst cases; or again he might have been
seen seated on the bare floor with a pad on his knee, taking down the names of dear ones in
distant states,--that he might spend his night writing to them.

They put a mattress under the Arkansan. Virginia did not leave him until he had fallen asleep,
and a smile of peace was come upon his sunken face. Dismayed at the fearful sights about her,
awed by the groans that rose on every side, she was choosing her way swiftly down the room
to join her father and aunt in the carriage below.

The panic of flight had seized her. She felt that another little while in this heated, horrible
place would drive her mad. She was almost at the door when she came suddenly upon a sight that
made her pause.

An elderly lady in widow's black was kneeling beside a man groaning in mortal agony, fanning
away the flies already gathering about his face. He wore the uniform of a Union sergeant,--dusty
and splotched and torn. A small Testament was clasped convulsively in the fingers of his right
band. The left sleeve was empty. Virginia lingered, whelmed in pity, thrilled by a wonderful
womanliness of her who knelt there. Her face the girl had not even seen, for it was bent over
the man. The sweetness of her voice held Virginia as in a spell, and the sergeant stopped groaning
that he might listen:

"You have a wife?"

"Yes, ma'am."

"And a child?"

The answer came so painfully.

"A boy, ma'am--born the week--before I came--away."

"I shall write to your wife," said the lady, so gently that Virginia could scarce hear, "and
tell her that you are cared for. Where does she live?"

He gave the address faintly--some little town in Minnesota. Then he added, "God bless you, lady."

Just then the chief surgeon came and stood over them. The lady turned her face up to him, and
tears sparkled in her eyes. Virginia felt them wet in her own. Her worship was not given to
many. Nobility, character, efficiency,-all were written on that face. Nobility spoke in the
large features, in the generous mouth, in the calm, gray eyes. Virginia had seen her often
before, but not until now was the woman revealed to her.

"Doctor, could this man's life be saved if I took him to my home?"

The surgeon got down beside her and took the man's pulse. The eyes closed. For a while the
doctor knelt there, shaking his head. "He has fainted," he said.

"Do you think he can be saved?" asked the lady again. The surgeon smiled,--such a smile as
a good man gives after eighteen hours of amputating, of bandaging, of advising,--work which
requires a firm hand, a clear eye and brain, and a good heart.

"My dear Mrs. Brice," he said, "I shall be glad to get you permission to take him, but we must
first make him worth the taking. Another hour would have been too late." He glanced hurriedly
about the busy room, and then added, "We must have one more to help us."

Just then some one touched Virginia's arm. It was her father.

"I am afraid we must go, dear," he said, "your aunt is getting impatient."

"Won't you please go without me, Pa?" she asked. "Perhaps I can be of some use."

The Colonel cast a wondering glance at the limp uniform, and went away. The surgeon, who knew
the Carvel family, gave Virginia a look of astonishment. It was Mrs. Brice's searching gaze
that brought the color to the girl's, face.

"Thank you, my dear," she said simply.

As soon as he could get his sister-in-law off to Locust Street in the carriage, Colonel Carvel
came back. For two reeking hours he stood against the newly plastered wall. Even he was surprised
at the fortitude and skill Virginia showed from the very first, when she had deftly cut away
the stiffened blue cloth, and helped to take off the rough bandages. At length the fearful
operation was finished, and the weary surgeon, gathering up his box, expressed with all the
energy left to him, his thanks to the two ladies.

Virginia stood up, faint and dizzy. The work of her hands had sustained her while it lasted,
but now the ordeal was come. She went down the stairs on her father's arm, and out into the
air. All at once she knew that Mrs. Brice was beside her, and had taken her by the hand.

"My dear?" she was saying, "God will reward you for this act. You have taught many of us to-day
a lesson we should have learned in our Bibles."

Virginia trembled with many emotions, but she answered nothing. The mere presence of this woman
had a strange effect upon the girl,--she was filled with a longing unutterable. It was not
because Margaret Brice was the mother of him whose life had been so strangely blended with
hers --whom she saw in her dreams. And yet now some of Stephen's traits seemed to come to her
understanding, as by a revelation. Virginia had labored through the heat of the day by Margaret
Brice's side doing His work, which levels all feuds and makes all women sisters. One brief
second had been needful for the spell.

The Colonel bowed with that courtesy and respect which distinguished him, and Mrs. Brice left
them to go back into the room of torment, and watch by the sergeant's pallet. Virginia's eyes
followed her up the stairs, and then she and her father walked slowly to the carriage. With
her foot on the step Virginia paused.

"Pa," she said, "do you think it would be possible to get them to let us take that Arkansan
into our house?"

"Why, honey, I'll ask Brinsmade if you like," said the Colonel. "Here he comes now, and Anne."

It was Virginia who put the question to him.

"My dear," replied that gentleman, patting her, "I would do anything in the world for you.
I'll see General Fremont this very afternoon. Virginia," he added, soberly, "it is such acts
as yours to-day that give us courage to live in these times."

Anne kissed her friend.

"Oh, Jinny, I saw what you were doing for one of our men. What am I saying?" she cried. "They
are your men, too. This horrible war cannot last. It cannot last. It was well that Virginia
did not see the smile on the face of the commanding general when Mr. Brinsmade at length got
to him with her request. This was before the days when the wounded arrived by the thousands,
when the zeal of the Southern ladies threatened to throw out of gear the workings of a great
system. But the General, had had his eye on Mr. Carvel from the first. Therefore he smiled.

"Colonel Carvel," said Mr. Brinsmade, with dignity, "is a gentleman. When he gives his word,
it is sacred, sir."

"Even to an enemy," the General put in, "By George, Brinsmade, unless I knew you, I should
think that you were half rebel yourself. Well, well, he may have his Arkansan."

Mr. Brinsmade, when he conveyed the news to the Carvel house, did not say that he had wasted
a precious afternoon in the attempt to interview his Excellency, the Commander in-chief. It
was like obtaining an audience with the Sultan or the Czar. Citizens who had been prominent
in affairs for twenty years, philanthropists and patriotic-spirited men like Mr. Brinsmade,
the mayor, and all the ex-mayors mopped their brows in one of the general's anterooms of the
big mansion, and wrangled with beardless youths in bright uniforms who were part of the chain.
The General might have been a Richelieu, a Marlborough. His European notions of uniformed inaccessibility
he carried out to the letter. He was a royal personage, seldom seen, who went abroad in the
midst of a glittering guard. It did not seem to weigh with his Excellency that these simple
and democratic gentlemen would not put up with this sort of thing. That they who had saved
the city to the Union were more or less in communication with a simple and democratic President;
that in all their lives they had never been in the habit of sitting idly for two hours to mop
their brows.

On the other hand, once you got beyond the gold lace and the etiquette, you discovered a good
man and a patriot. It was far from being the General's fault that Mr. Hopper and others made
money in mules and worthless army blankets. Such things always have been, and always will be
unavoidable when this great country of ours rises from the deep sleep of security into which
her sons have lulled her, to demand her sword. We shall never be able to realize that the maintenance
of a standing army of comfortable size will save millions in the end. So much for Democracy
when it becomes a catchword.

The General was a good man, had he done nothing else than encourage the Western Sanitary Commission,
that glorious army of drilled men and women who gave up all to relieve the suffering which
the war was causing. Would that a novel--a great novel--might be written setting forth with
truth its doings. The hero of it could be Calvin Brinsmade, and a nobler hero than he was never
under a man's hand. For the glory of generals fades beside his glory.

It was Mr. Brinsmade's carriage that brought Mrs. Brice home from her trying day in the hospital.
Stephen, just returned from drill at Verandah hall, met her at the door. She would not listen
to his entreaties to rest, but in the evening, as usual, took her sewing to the porch behind
the house, where there was a little breeze.

"Such a singular thing happened to-day, Stephen," she said. "It was while we were trying to
save the life of a poor sergeant who had lost his arm. I hope we shall be allowed to have him
here. He is suffering horribly."

"What happened, mother?" he asked.

"It was soon after I had come upon this poor fellow," she said. "I saw the--the flies around
him. And as I got down beside him to fan them away I had such a queer sensation. I knew that
some one was standing behind me, looking at me. Then Dr. Allerdyce came, and I asked him about
the man, and he said there was a chance of saving him if we could only get help. Then some
one spoke up,--such a sweet voice. It was that Miss Carvel my dear, with whom you had such
a strange experience when you bought Hester, and to whose party you once went. Do you remember
that they offered us their house in Glencoe when the Judge was so ill?"

"Yes," said Stephen.

"She is a wonderful creature," his mother continued. "Such personality, such life! And wasn't
it a remarkable offer for a Southern woman to make? They feel so bitterly, and--and I do not
blame them." The good lady put down on her lap the night-shirt she was making. "I saw how it
happened. The girl was carried away by her pity. And, my dear, her capability astonished me.
One might have thought that she had always been a nurse. The experience was a dreadful one
for me--what must it have been for her. After the operation was over, I followed her downstairs
to where she was standing with her father in front of the building, waiting for their carriage.
I felt that I must say something to her, for in all my life I have never seen a nobler thing
done. When I saw her there, I scarcely knew what to say. Words seemed so inadequate. It was
then three o'clock, and she had been working steadily in that place since morning. I am sure
she could not have borne it much longer. Sheer courage carried her through it, I know, for
her hand trembled so when I took it, and she was very pale. She usually has color, I believe.
Her father, the Colonel, was with her, and he bowed to me with such politeness. He had stood
against the wall all the while we had worked, and he brought a mattress for us. I have heard
that his house is watched, and that they have him under suspicion for communicating with the
Confederate leaders." Mrs. Brice sighed. He seems such a fine character. I hope they will not
get into any trouble."

"I hope not, mother," said Stephen.

It was two mornings later that Judge Whipple and Stephen drove to the Iron Mountain depot,
where they found a German company of Home Guards drawn up. On the long wooden platform under
the sheds Stephen caught sight of Herr Korner and Herr Hauptmann amid a group of their countrymen.
Little Korner came forward to clasp his hands. The tears ran on his cheeks, and he could not
speak for emotion. Judge Whipple, grim and silent, stood apart. But he uncovered his head with
the others when the train rolled in. Reverently they entered a car where the pine boxes were
piled one on another, and they bore out the earthly remains of Captain Carl Richter.

Far from the land of his birth, among those same oaks on Bloody Hill where brave Lyon fell,
he had gladly given up his life for the new country and the new cause he had made his own.

That afternoon in the cemetery, as the smoke of the last salute to a hero hung in the flickering
light and drifted upward through the great trees, as the still air was yet quivering with the
notes of the bugle-call which is the soldiers requiem, a tall figure, gaunt and bent, stepped
out from behind the blue line of the troops. It was that of Judge Whipple. He carried in his
hand a wreath of white roses--the first of many to be laid on Richter's grave.

Poor Richter! How sad his life had been! And yet he had not filled it with sadness. For many
a month, and many a year, Stephen could not look upon his empty place without a pang. He missed
the cheery songs and the earnest presence even more than he had thought. Carl Richter,--as
his father before him,--had lived for others. Both had sacrificed their bodies for a cause.
One of them might be pictured as he trudged with Father Jahn from door to door through the
Rhine country, or shouldering at sixteen a heavy musket in the Landwehr's ranks to drive the
tyrant Napoleon from the beloved Fatherland Later, aged before his time, his wife dead of misery,
decrepit and prison-worn in the service of a thankless country, his hopes lived again in Carl,
the swordsman of Jena. Then came the pitiful Revolution, the sundering of all ties, the elder
man left to drag out his few weary days before a shattered altar. In Carl a new aspiration
had sprung up, a new patriotism stirred. His, too, had been the sacrifice. Happy in death,
for he had helped perpetuate that great Union which should be for all time the refuge of the
oppressed. 

I'm not afraid of their God.

There is no God.

There is nature. Up to the place where man puts on trousers it's a battle of thews and teeth.
And nature never intended pants to mark the line where she changes the order of things. And the
servile, weakling, groveling, charitable, cowardly philosophy of Christ--it doesn't fool me,
Henry. I'm a pagan and I want the advantage of all the force, all the power, that nature gave
me, to live life as a dangerous, exhilarating experience. I shall live life to the full--live
it hard--live it beautifully, but live it! live it! Henry, live it like a gentleman and not like
an understrapper and bootlicker! I intend to command, not obey! Rule, not serve! I shall take and
not give--not give save as it pleases me to have my hand licked now and then! As for Lizzie
and Jared," young Mr. Van Dorn waved a gay hand, "let them look out for themselves. They're
not my worries!"

"But, Tom," remonstrated Henry as he looked at the ground, "it's nothing to me of course, but Lizzie--"

"Ah,
Henry," Van Dorn laughed gayly, "I'm not going to hurt Lizzie. She's good fun: that's all. And
now look here, Mr. Preacher--you come moralizing around me about what I'm doing to some one else,
which after all is not my business but hers; and I'm right here to tell you, what you're doing
to yourself, and that's your business and no one's else. You're drinking too much. People are
talking about it. Quit it! Whisky never won a jury. In the Morse case you loaded up for your
speech and I beat you because in all your agonizing about the wrong
to old man Müller and his 'pretty brown-eyed daughter' as you called
her, you forgot slick and clean the flaw in Morse's deed."

"I suppose you're right, Tom. But I was feeling kind of off that day,
mother'd been sick the night before and--"

"And so you filled up with a lot of bad whisky and driveled and wept
and stumbled through the case and I beat you.

I tell you, Henry, I keep myself fit. I have no time to look after others. My job is myself
and you'll find that unless you look after yourself no one else will,
at least whisky won't. If I find girling is beating me in my law cases
I quit girling.

But it doesn't. Lord, man, the more I know of human nature, the more I pick over the souls of these
country girls and blow open the petals of their pretty hearts, the wiser I am."

"But the girls, Tom--the girls--" protested the somber-eyed Mr. Fenn.

"Ah, I don't hurt 'em and they like it.

And so long as your whisky hamestrings you and my girls give me what I need in my business--don't
talk to me."

Tom Van Dorn left Fenn at his mother's door and as Fenn saw his friend turn toward the south he
called, "Aren't you going to your room?"

"Why, it's only eleven o'clock," answered Van Dorn. To the inquiring silence Van Dorn called, "I'm
going down to see Lizzie."

Henry Fenn stood looking at his friend, who explained: "That's all right. I said I'd be down
to-night and she'll wait."

"Well--" said Fenn. But Van Dorn cut him short with "Now, Henry, I can take care of myself. Lizzie
can take care of herself--and you're the only one of us who, as I
see it, needs careful nursing!"

And with that he went striding away.

And three hours later when the moon was waning in the west a girl sitting by her window gazed at the
red orb and dreamed beautiful dreams, such as a girl may dream but
once, of the prince who had come to her so gloriously.

While the prince strolled up the street with his coat over his arm, his hat in his hand, letting
the night wind flutter the raven's wing of hair on his brow, and as he went he laughed to himself
softly and laughed and laughed. For are we not told of old to put not our trust in princes!

[Footnote 1: The reader may be interested in seeing one of Mary Adams's clippings with a note
attached. Here is one concerning Mrs. John Kollander.

The clipping from the Harvey Tribune of June, 1871, reads:

"Mrs. Rhoda Byrd Kollander arrived to-day from Elyria, Ohio. It is her first visit to Harvey
and she was greeted by her husband, Hon. John Kollander, Register of Deeds of Greeley County,
with a handsome new home in Elm Street."

Then under it is this note:

"Of all the women of the Elyria settlers, Rhoda Kollander would not come with us and face the hardships
of pioneer life; but she made John come out, get an office and build her a cabin before she
would come. Rhoda will not be happy as an angel unless they have rocking chairs in Heaven."]

[Footnote 2: Let us read Mary Adams's clipping and note on the arrival of young Thomas Van Dorn in
Harvey. The clipping which is from the local page of the paper reads:

"Thomas Van Dorn, son of the late General Nicholas Van Dorn of Schenectady,
New York, has located in Harvey for the practice of law and his advertising
card appears elsewhere.

Mr. Van Dorn is a Yale man and a law graduate of that school as well
as an alumnus of the college.

As a youth with his father young Thomas stopped in Harvey the day
the town was founded.

He was a member of the hunting party organized by Wild Bill which
under General Van Dorn's patronage escorted the Russian Grand Duke
Alexis over this part of the state after buffalo and wild game.

Mr. Thomas Van Dorn remembers the visit well, and old settlers will
recall the fact that Daniel Sands that day sold for $100 in gold to
the General the plot now known as Van Dorn's addition to Harvey.

Mr. Thomas Van Dorn still has the deed to the plot and will soon
put the lots on the market.

He was a pleasant caller at the Tribune office this week.

Come again, say we."

And upon a paper whereon the clipping is pasted is this in Mary Adams's
hand:

"The famous Van Dorn baby!

How the years have flown since the scandal of his mother's elopement and his father's duel with
Sir Charles shook two continents.

What an old rake the General was.

And the boy's mother after two other marriages and a sad period on
the variety stage died alone in penury!

And Amos says that the General was so insolent to his men in the war, that he dared not go into
action with them for fear they would shoot him in the back. Yet the boy is as lovely and gentle a
creature as one could ask to meet.

This is as it should be."]

CHAPTER III

IN WHICH WE CONSIDER THE
LADIES--GOD BLESS 'EM!

During those years in the late seventies and the early eighties, the genii on the Harvey job
grunted and grumbled as they worked, for the hours were long and
tedious and the material was difficult to handle.

Kyle Perry's wife died, and it was all the genii could do to find him a cook who would stay
with him and his lank, slab-sided son, and when the genii did produce a cook--the famous Katrina,
they wished her on Kyle and the boy for life, and she ruled them with an iron rod. And to even
things up, they let Kyle stutter himself into a partnership with Ahab Wright--though Kyle was
trying to tell Ahab that they should have a partition in their stable.

But partition was too much of a mouthful and poor Kyle fell to stuttering on it and found himself sold
into bondage for life by the genii, dispensing nails and cod-fish and calico as Ahab's partner,
before Kyle could get rid of the word partition.

The genii also had to break poor Casper Herdicker's heart--and he had one, and a big one, despite
his desire for blood and plunder; and they broke it when his wife Brunhilde deserted the hearthstone
back of the shoe-shop, rented a vacant store room on Market Street and went into the millinery
way of life.

And it wasn't enough that the tired genii had to gouge out the streets of Harvey; to fill
in the gulleys and ravines; to dab in scores of new houses; to toil
and moil over the new hotel, witching up four bleak stories upon the
prairie.

It wasn't enough that they had to cast a spell on people all over the earth, dragging strangers
to Harvey by trainloads; it wasn't enough that the overworked genii should have to bring big George
Brotherton to town with the railroad--and he was load enough for any engine; his heart itself
weighed ten stone; it wasn't enough that they had to find various
and innumerable contraptions for Captain Morton to peddle, but there
was Tom Van Dorn's new black silk mustache to grow, and to be oiled
and curled daily; so he had to go to the Palace Hotel barber shop
at least once every day, and passing the cigar counter, he had to
pass by Violet Mauling--pretty, empty-faced, doll-eyed Violet Mauling
at the cigar stand.

And all the long night and all the long day, the genii, working on the Harvey job, cast spells,
put on charms, and did their deepest sorcery to take off the power of the magic runes that young
Tom's black art were putting upon her; and day after day the genii felt their highest potencies
fail. So no wonder they mumbled and grumbled as they bent over their
chores.

For a time, the genii had tried to work on Tom Van Dorn's heart after he dropped Lizzie Coulter
and sent her away on a weary life pilgrimage with Jared Thurston,
as the wife of an itinerant editor; but they found nothing to work
on under Tom's cigar holder--that is, nothing in the way of a heart.

There was only a kind of public policy.

So the genii made the public policy as broad and generous as they could and let it go at that.

Tom
Van Dorn and Henry Fenn rioted in their twenties.

John Hollander saved a bleeding country, pervaded the courthouse
and did the housework at home while Rhoda, his wife, who couldn't
cook hard boiled eggs, organized the French Cooking Club.

Captain Ezra Morton spent his mental energy upon the invention of a self-heating molasses
spigot, which he hoped would revolutionize the grocery business while his physical energy
was devoted to introducing a burglar proof window fastener into the proud homes that were
dotting the tall grass environs of Harvey. Amos Adams was hearing rappings and holding-high communion
with great spirits in the vasty deep.

Daniel Sands, having buried his second wife, was making eyes at a third and spinning his financial web
over the town. Dr. and Mrs. Nesbit were marvelling at the mystery of a child's soul, a maiden's
soul, reaching out tendril after tendril as the days made years.

The Dick Bowman's were holding biennial receptions to the little
angels who came to the house in the Doctor's valise--and welcomed,
hilariously welcomed babies they were--welcomed with cigars and free
drinks at Riley's saloon by Dick, and in awed silence by Lida, his
wife--welcomed even though the parents never knew exactly how the
celestial guests were to be robed and harped; while the Joe Calvins
of proud Elm Street, opulent in an eight room house, with the town's
one bath tub, scowled at the angels who kept on coming nevertheless--for
such is the careless and often captious way of angels that come to
the world in the doctor's black bag--kept on coming to the frowning
house of Calvin as frequently and as idly as they came to the gay
Bowmans.

Looking back on those days a generation later, it would seem as if
the whole town were a wilderness of babies.

They came on the hill in Elm Street, a star-eyed baby named Ann even came to the Daniel Sandses,
and a third baby to the Ezra Mortons and another to the Kollanders
(which gave Rhoda an excuse for forming a lifelong habit of making
John serve her breakfast in bed to the scorn of Mrs. Nesbit and Mrs.
Herdicker who for thirty years sniffed audibly about Rhoda's amiable
laziness) and the John Dexters had one that came and went in the night.

But down by the river--there they came in flocks.

The Dooleys, the McPhersons, the Williamses and the hordes of unidentified
men and women who came to saw boards, mix mortar, make bricks and
dig--to them the kingdom of Heaven was very near, for they suffered
little children and forbade them not.

And also, because the kingdom was so near--so near even to homes
without sewers, homes where dirt and cold and often hunger came--the
children were prone to hurry back to the Kingdom discouraged with
their little earthly pilgrimages.

For those who had dragged chains and hewed wood and drawn water in the town's first days seemed
by some specific gravity of the social system to be holding their
places at those lower levels--always reaching vainly and eagerly,
but always reaching a little higher and a little further from them
for that equality of opportunity which seemed to lie about them that
first day when the town was born.

In the upper reaches of the town Henry Fenn's bibulous habits became accepted matters to a wider
and wider circle and Tom Van Dorn still had his way with the girls
while the town grinned at the two young men in gay reproval.

But Amos Adams through his familiar spirits got solemn, cryptic messages for the young men--from
Tom's mother and Henry's father.

Amos, abashed, but never afraid, used to deliver these messages with
incidental admonitions of his own--kind, gentle and gorgeously ineffective.

Then he would return to his office with a serene sense of a duty well
done, and meet and feast upon the eyes of Mary, his wife, keen, hungry
eyes, filled with more or less sinful pride in his strength.

No defeat that ever came to Amos Adams, and because he was born out of his time, defeat was his
common portion, and no contumely ever was his in a time when men scorned the evidence of things
not seen, no failure, no apparent weakness in her husband's nature,
ever put a tremor in her faith in him.

For she knew his heart. She could hear his armor clank and see it shine; she could feel the
force and the precision of his lance when all the world of Harvey saw only a dreamer in rusty
clothes, fumbling with some stupid and ponderous folly that the world
did not understand.

The printing office that Mary and Amos thought so grand was really a little pine shack, set on
wooden piers on a side street. Inside in the single room, with the rough-coated walls above the
press and type-cases covered with inky old sale bills, and specimens of the Tribune's printing--inside
the office which seemed to Mary and Amos the palace of a race of giants, others saw only a
shabby, inky, little room, with an old fashioned press and a jobber among the type racks in
the gloom to the rear. Through the front window that looked into a street filled with loads
of hay and wood, and with broken wagons, and scrap iron from a wheelwright's shop, Amos Adams looked
for the everlasting sunrise, and Mary saw it always in his face.

But this is idling; it is not getting on with the Book. A score of men and women are crowding
up to these pages waiting to get into the story. And the town of Harvey, how it is bursting
its bounds, how it is sprawling out over the white paper, tumbling
its new stores and houses and gas mains and water pipes all over the
table; with what a clatter and clamor and with what vain pride!

Now the pride of those years in Harvey came with the railroad, and here, pulling at the paper,
stands big George Brotherton with his ten stone heart.

He has been sputtering and nagging for a dozen pages to swing off
the front platform of the first passenger car that came to town.

He was a fat, overgrown youth in his late teens, but he wore the
uniform of a train newsboy, and any uniform is a uniform.

His laugh was like the crash of worlds--and it is to-day after thirty years. When the road pushed
on westward Brotherton remained in Harvey and even though the railroad roundhouse employed
five hundred men and even though the town's population doubled and then trebled, still George
Brotherton was better than everything else that the railroad brought. He found work in a pool
and billiard hall; but that was a pent-up Utica for him and his contracted powers sent him to
Daniel Sands for a loan of twenty-five dollars

.
 He wondered what Mr. Whipple wanted with fine
furniture. And, if he really wished to bid, Stephen knew likewise that no consideration would
stop him.

"You don't approve of this proceeding, sir, I suppose," said the Judge.

"Yes, sir, on large grounds. War makes many harsh things necessary."

"Then," said the Judge, tartly, "by bidding, we help to support starving Union families. You
should not be afraid to bid, sir."

Stephen bit his lip. Sometimes Mr. Whipple made him very angry.

"I am not afraid to bid, Judge Whipple." He did not see the smile on the Judge's face.

"Then you will bid in certain things for me," said Mr. Whipple. Here he hesitated, and shook
free the rest of the sentence with a wrench. "Colonel Carvel always had a lot of stuff I wanted.
Now I've got the chance to buy it cheap."

There was silence again, for the space of a whole block. Finally, Stephen managed to say:--
"You'll have to excuse me, sir. I do not care to do that."

"What?" cried the Judge, stopping in the middle of a cross-street, so that a wagon nearly ran
over his toes.

"I was once a guest in Colonel Carvel's house, sir. And--"

"And what?"

Neither the young man nor the old knew all it was costing the other to say these things. The
Judge took a grim pleasure in eating his heart. And as for Stephen, he often went to his office
through Locust Street, which was out of his way, in the hope that he might catch a glimpse
of Virginia. He had guessed much of the privations she had gone through. He knew that the Colonel
had hired out most of his slaves, and he had actually seen the United States Police drive across
Eleventh Street with the piano that she had played on.

The Judge was laughing quietly,--not a pleasant laugh to hear,--as they came to Morgan's great
warerooms. A crowd blocked the pavement, and hustled and shoved at the doors,--roughs, and
soldiers off duty, and ladies and gentlemen whom the Judge and Stephen knew, and some of whom
they spoke to. All of these were come out of curiosity, that they might see for themselves
any who had the temerity to bid on a neighbor's household goods. The long hall, which ran from
street to street, was packed, the people surging backward and forward, and falling roughly
against the mahogany pieces; and apologizing, and scolding, and swearing all in a breath. The
Judge, holding tightly to Stephen, pushed his way fiercely to the stand, vowing over and over
that the commotion was a secession trick to spoil the furniture and stampede the sale. In truth,
it was at the Judge's suggestion that a blue provost's guard was called in later to protect
the seized property.

How many of those mahogany pieces, so ruthlessly tumbled about before the public eye, meant
a heartache! Wedding presents of long ago, dear to many a bride with silvered hair, had been
torn from the corner where the children had played--children who now, alas, were grown and
gone to war. Yes, that was the Brussels rug that had lain before the fire, and which the little
feet had worn in the corner. Those were the chairs the little hands had harnessed, four in
a row, and fallen on its side was the armchair--the stage coach itself. There were the books,
held up to common gaze, that a beloved parent had thumbed with affection. Yes, and here in
another part of the hall were the family horses and the family carriage that had gone so often
back and forth from church with the happy brood of children, now scattered and gone to war.

As Stephen reached his place beside the Judge, Mr. James's effects were being cried. And, if
glances could have killed, many a bidder would have dropped dead. The heavy dining-room table
which meant so much to the family went for a song to a young man recently come from Yankeeland,
whose open boast it was--like Eliphalet's secret one--that he would one day grow rich enough
to snap his fingers in the face of the Southern aristocrats. Mr. James was not there. But Mr.
Catherwood, his face haggard and drawn, watched the sideboard he had given his wife on her
silver wedding being sold to a pawnbroker.

Stephen looked in vain for Colonel Carvel--for Virginia. He did not want to see them there.
He knew by heart the list of things which had been taken from their house. He understood the
feeling which had sent the Judge here to bid them in. And Stephen honored him the more.

When the auctioneer came to the Carvel list, and the well-known name was shouted out, the crowd
responded with a stir and pressed closer to the stand. And murmurs were plainly heard in more
than one direction.

"Now, gentlemen, and ladies," said the seller, "this here is a genuine English Rothfield piano
once belonging to Colonel Carvel, and the celebrated Judge Colfax of Kaintucky." He lingered
fondly over the names, that the impression might have time to sink deep. "This here magnificent
instrument's worth at the very least" (another pause) "twelve hundred dollars. What am I bid?"

He struck a base note of the keys, then a treble, and they vibrated in the heated air of the
big hall. Had he hit the little C of the top octave, the tinkle of that also might have been heard.

"Gentlemen and ladies, we have to begin somewheres. What am I bid?"

A menacing murmur gave place to the accusing silence. Some there were who gazed at the Rothfield
with longing eyes, but who had no intention of committing social suicide. Suddenly a voice,
the rasp of which penetrated to St. Charles Street, came out with a bid. The owner was a seedy
man with a straw-colored, drunkard's mustache. He was leaning against the body of Mrs. Russell's
barouche (seized for sale), and those about him shrank away as from smallpox. His hundred-dollar
offer was followed by a hiss. What followed next Stephen will always remember. When Judge Whipple
drew himself up to his full six feet, that was a warning to those that knew him. As he doubled
the bid, the words came out with the aggressive distinctness of a man who through a long life
has been used to opposition. He with the gnawed yellow mustache pushed himself clear of the
barouche, his smouldering cigar butt dropping to the floor. But there were no hisses now.

And this is how Judge Whipple braved public opinion once more. As he stood there, defiant,
many were the conjectures as to what he could wish to do with the piano of his old friend.
Those who knew the Judge (and there were few who did not) pictured to themselves the dingy
little apartment where he lived, and smiled. Whatever his detractors might have said of him,
no one was ever heard to avow that he had bought or sold anything for gain.

A tremor ran through the people. Could it have been of admiration for the fine old man who
towered there glaring defiance at those about him? "Give me a strong and consistent enemy,"
some great personage has said, "rather than a lukewarm friend." Three score and five years
the Judge had lived, and now some were beginning to suspect that he had a heart. Verily he
had guarded his secret well. But it was let out to many more that day, and they went home praising
him who had once pronounced his name with bitterness.

This is what happened. Before he of the yellow mustache could pick up his cigar from the floor
and make another bid, the Judge had cried out a sum which was the total of Colonel Carvel's
assessment. Many recall to this day how fiercely he frowned when the applause broke forth of
itself; and when he turned to go they made a path for him, in admiration, the length of the
hall, down which he stalked, looking neither to the right nor left. Stephen followed him, thankful
for the day which had brought him into the service of such a man.

And so it came about that the other articles were returned to Colonel Carvel with the marshal's
compliments, and put back into the cold parlor where they had stood for many years. The men
who brought them offered to put down the carpet, but by Virginia's orders the rolls were stood
up in the corner, and the floor left bare. And days passed into weeks, and no sign or message
came from Judge Whipple in regard to the piano he had bought. Virginia did not dare mention
it to the Colonel.

Where was it? It had been carried by six sweating negroes up the narrow stairs into the Judge's
office. Stephen and Shadrach had by Mr. Whipple's orders cleared a corner of his inner office
and bedroom of papers and books and rubbish, and there the bulky instrument was finally set
up. It occupied one-third of the space. The Judge watched the proceeding grimly, choking now
and again from the dust that was raised, yet uttering never a word. He locked the lid when
the van man handed him the key, and thrust that in his pocket.

Stephen had of late found enough to do in St. Louis. He was the kind of man to whom promotions
came unsought, and without noise. In the autumn he had been made a captain in the Halleck Guards
of the State Militia, as a reward for his indefatigable work in the armories and his knowledge
of tactics. Twice his company had been called out at night, and once they made a campaign as
far as the Merimec and captured a party of recruits who were destined for Jefferson Davis.
Some weeks passed before Mr. Brinsmade heard of his promotion and this exploit, and yet scarcely
a day went by that he did not see the young man at the big hospital. For Stephen helped in
the work of the Sanitary Commission too, and so strove to make up in zeal for the service in
the field which he longed to give.

After Christmas Mr. and Mrs. Brinsmade moved out to their place on the Bellefontaine Road.
This was to force Anne to take a rest. For the girl was worn out with watching at the hospitals,
and with tending the destitute mothers and children from the ranks of the refugees. The Brinsmade
place was not far from the Fair Grounds,--now a receiving camp for the crude but eager regiments
of the Northern states. To Mr. Brinsmade's, when the day's duty was done, the young Union officers
used to ride, and often there would be half a dozen of them to tea. That house, and other great
houses on the Bellefontaine Road with which this history has no occasion to deal, were as homes
to many a poor fellow who would never see home again. Sometimes Anne would gather together
such young ladies of her acquaintance from the neighbor hood and the city as their interests
and sympathies permitted to waltz with a Union officer, and there would be a little dance.
To these dances Stephen Brice was usually invited.

One such occasion occurred on a Friday in January, and Mr. Brinsmade himself called in his
buggy and drove Stephen to the country early in the afternoon. He and Anne went for a walk
along the river, the surface of which was broken by lumps of yellow ice. Gray clouds hung low
in the sky as they picked their way over the frozen furrows of the ploughed fields. The grass
was all a yellow-brown, but the north wind which swayed the bare trees brought a touch of color
to Anne's cheeks. Before they realized where they were, they had nearly crossed the Bellegarde
estate, and the house itself was come into view, standing high on the slope above the withered
garden. They halted.

"The shutters are up," said Stephen. "I understood that Mrs. Colfax had come out here not long a--"

"She came out for a day just before Christina," said Anne, smiling, "and then she ran off to
Kentucky. I think she was afraid that she was one of the two women on the list of Sixty."

"It must have been a blow to her pride when she found that she was not," said Stephen, who
had a keen remembrance of her conduct upon a certain Sunday not a year gone.

Impelled by the same inclination, they walked in silence to the house and sat down on the edge
of the porch. The only motion in the view was the smoke from the slave quarters twisting in
the wind, and the hurrying ice in the stream.

"Poor Jinny!" said Anne, with a sigh, "how she loved to romp! What good times we used to have
here together!"

"Do you think that she is unhappy?" Stephen demanded, involuntarily.

"Oh, yes," said Anne. "How can you ask? But you could not make her show it. The other morning
when she came out to our house I found her sitting at the piano. I am sure there were tears
in her eyes, but she would not let me see them. She made some joke about Spencer Catherwood
running away. What do you think the Judge will do with that piano, Stephen?"

He shook his head.

"The day after they put it in his room he came in with a great black cloth, which he spread
over it. You cannot even see the feet."

There was a silence. And Anne, turning to him timidly, gave him a long, searching look.

"It is growing late," she said. "I think that we ought to go back."

They went out by the long entrance road, through the naked woods. Stephen said little. Only
a little while before he had had one of those vivid dreams of Virginia which left their impression,
but not their substance, to haunt him. On those rare days following the dreams her spirit had
its mastery over his. He pictured her then with a glow on her face which was neither sadness
nor mirth,--a glow that ministered to him alone. And yet, he did not dare to think that he
might have won her, even if politics and war had not divided them.

When the merriment of the dance was at its height that evening, Stephen stood at the door of
the long room, meditatively watching the bright gowns and the flash of gold on the uniforms
as they flitted past. Presently the opposite door opened, and he heard Mr. Brinsmade's voice
mingling with another, the excitable energy of which recalled some familiar episode. Almost--so
it seemed--at one motion, the owner of the voice had come out of the door and had seized Stephen's
hand in a warm grasp,--a tall and spare figure in the dress of a senior officer. The military
frock, which fitted the man's character rather than the man, was carelessly open, laying bare
a gold-buttoned white waistcoat and an expanse of shirt bosom which ended in a black stock
tie. The ends of the collar were apart the width of the red clipped beard, and the mustache
was cropped straight along the line of the upper lip. The forehead rose high, and was brushed
carelessly free of the hair. The nose was almost straight, but combative. A fire fairly burned
in the eyes.

"The boy doesn't remember me," said the gentleman, in quick tones, smiling at Mr. Brinsmade.

"Yes, sir, I do," Stephen made haste to answer. He glanced at the star on the shoulder strap,
and said. "You are General Sherman."

"First rate!" laughed the General, patting him. "First rate!"

"Now in command at Camp Benton, Stephen," Mr. Brinsmade put in. "Won't you sit down, General?"

"No," said the General, emphatically waving away the chair. "No, rather stand." Then his keen
face suddenly lighted with amusement,--and mischief, Stephen thought. "So you've heard of me
since we met, sir?" "Yes, General."

"Humph! Guess you heard I was crazy," said the General, in his downright way. 

Some of the last letters written by Frohman were filled with a curious
tenderness and affection.

In the light of what happened after he sailed they seem to be overcast with a strange foreboding
of his doom. The most striking example of this is furnished in a letter he wrote to Henry Miller
on April 29th, a few days before he went aboard the Lusitania. He had not written to Miller for
a year, yet this is what he said:

Dear Henry: I am going to London Saturday A.M. I want to say good-by to you with this--and tell
you how glad I am you've had a good season.

Affectionately, C. F.

Miller was immensely touched by this communication. He wired to his son Gilbert to find out what
steamer Frohman was taking, and send him a wireless. This message was probably the last ever received
by Frohman, for no other similar telegram was sent him in care of the Lusitania.

The last letter written by Frohman, before leaving the Hotel Knickerbocker on the morning the
Lusitania sailed, was to his intimate friend and companion Paul Potter. Potter, who had telephoned
that he expected to meet him at the steamer, was much depressed, which explains one of the sentences
in Frohman's letter:
Saturday A.M., May 1, 1915.

Dear Paul: We had a fine time this winter.
I hope all will go well with you. And I think luck is coming to you.
I hope another "Trilby." It's fine of you to come to the steamer with
all these dark, sad conditions.

C. F.

On his way to the Lusitania
Frohman stopped for a moment at his office in the Empire Theater.
There he dictated a note to Porter Emerson Browne, the playwright.
It was his last dictation. The note merely said, "Good-by. Keep me
posted." He referred to a new play that Browne was writing for him.

Stephen, who had in truth read the stories in question a month or two before, could not conceal
his embarrassment He looked at the man in front of him,--alert, masterful intelligent, frank
to any stranger who took his fancy,--and wondered how any one who had talked to him could believe
them.

Mr. Brinsmade smiled. "They have to print something, General," he said.

"I'll give 'em something to print later on," answered the General, grimly. Then his expression
changed. "Brinsmade, you fellows did have a session with Fremont, didn't you? Anderson sent
me over here last September, and the first man I ran across at the Planters' House was Appleton.
'--What are you in town for?' says he. 'To see Fremont,' I said. You ought to have heard Appleton
laugh. 'You don't think Fremont'll see you, do you?' says he. 'Why not?' 'Well,' says Tom,
'go 'round to his palace at six to-morrow morning and bribe that Hungarian prince who runs
his body-guard to get you a good place in the line of senators and governors and first citizens,
and before nightfall you may get a sight of him, since you come from Anderson. Not one man
in a hundred,' says Appleton, I not one man in a hundred, reaches his chief-of-staff.' Next
morning," the General continued in a staccato which was often his habit, "had breakfast before
daybreak and went 'round there. Place just swarming with Californians--army contracts." (The
General sniffed.) Saw Fremont. Went back to hotel. More Californians, and by gad--old Baron
Steinberger with his nose hanging over the register."

"Fremont was a little difficult to get at, General," said Mr. Brinsmade. "Things were confused
and discouraged when those first contracts were awarded. Fremont was a good man, and it wasn't
his fault that the inexperience of his quartermasters permitted some of those men to get rich."

"No," said the General. "His fault! Certainly not. Good man! To be sure he was--didn't get
along with Blair. These court-martials you're having here now have stirred up the whole country.
I guess we'll hear now how those fortunes were made. To listen to those witnesses lie about
each other on the stand is better than the theatre."

Stephen laughed at the comical and vivid manner in which the General set this matter forth.
He himself had been present one day of the sittings of the court-martial when one of the witnesses
on the prices of mules was that same seedy man with the straw-colored mustache who had bid
for Virginia's piano against the Judge.

"Come, Stephen," said the General, abruptly, "run and snatch one of those pretty girls from
my officers. They're having more than their share."

"They deserve more, sir," answered Stephen. Whereupon the General laid his hand impulsively
on the young man's shoulder, divining what Stephen did not say.

"Nonsense!" said be; "you are doing the work in this war, not we. We do the damage--you repair
it. If it were not for Mr. Brinsmade and you gentlemen who help him, where would our Western
armies be? Don't you go to the front yet a while, young man. We need the best we have in reserve."
He glanced critically at Stephen. "You've had military training of some sort?"

"He's a captain in the Halleck Guards, sir," said Mr. Brinsmade, generously, "and the best
drillmaster we've had in this city. He's seen service, too, General."

Stephen reddened furiously and started to protest, when the General cried:-- "It's more than
I have in this war. Come, come, I knew he was a soldier. Let's see what kind of a strategist
he'll make. Brinsmade, have you got such a thing as a map?" Mr. Brinsmade had, and led the
way back into the library. The General shut the door, lighted a cigar with a single vigorous
stroke of a match, and began to smoke with quick puffs. Stephen was puzzled how to receive
the confidences the General was giving out with such freedom.

When the map was laid on the table, the General drew a pencil from his pocket and pointed to
the state of Kentucky. Then he drew a line from Columbus to Bowling Green, through Forts Donelson
and Henry.

"Now, Stephen," said he, "there's the Rebel line. Show me the proper place to break it."

Stephen hesitated a while, and then pointed at the centre.

"Good!" said the General. "Very good!" He drew a heavy line across the first, and it ran almost
in the bed of the Tennessee River. He swung on Mr. Brinsmade. "Very question Halleck asked
me the other day, and that's how I answered it. Now, gentlemen, there's a man named Grant down
in that part of the country. Keep your eyes on him. Ever heard of him, Brinsmade? He used to
live here once, and a year ago he was less than I was. Now he's a general."

The recollection of the scene in the street by the Arsenal that May morning not a year gone
came to Stephen with a shock.

"I saw him," he cried; "he was Captain Grant that lived on the Gravois Road. But surely this
can't be the same man who seized Paducah and was in that affair at Belmont."

"By gum!" said the General, laughing. "Don't wonder you're surprised. Grant has stuff in him.
They kicked him around Springfield awhile, after the war broke out, for a military carpet-bagger.
Then they gave him for a regiment the worst lot of ruffians you ever laid eyes on. He fixed
'em. He made 'em walk the plank. He made 'em march halfway across the state instead of taking
the cars the Governor offered. Belmont! I guess he is the man that chased the Rebs out of Belmont.
Then his boys broke loose when they got into the town. That wasn't Grant's fault. The Rebs
came back and chased 'em out into their boats on the river. Brinsmade, you remember hearing
about that.

"Grant did the coolest thing you ever saw. He sat on his horse at the top of the bluff while
the boys fell over each other trying to get on the boat. Yes, sir, he sat there, disgusted,
on his horse, smoking a cigar, with the Rebs raising pandemonium all around him. And then,
sir," cried the General, excitedly, "what do you think he did? Hanged if he didn't force his
horse right on to his haunches, slide down the whole length of the bank and ride him across
a teetering plank on to the steamer. And the Rebs just stood on the bank and stared. They were
so astonished they didn't even shoot the man. You watch Grant," said the General. "And now,
Stephen," he added, "just you run off and take hold of the prettiest girl you can find. If
any of my boys object, say I sent you."

The next Monday Stephen had a caller. It was little Tiefel, now a first lieutenant with a bristly
beard and tanned face, come to town on a few days' furlough. He had been with Lyon at Wilson's
Creek, and he had a sad story to tell of how he found poor Richter, lying stark on that bloody
field, with a smile of peace upon his face. Strange that he should at length have been killed
by a sabre!

It was a sad meeting for those two, since each reminded the other of a dear friend they would
see no more on earth. They went out to sup together in the German style; and gradually, over
his beer, Tiefel forgot his sorrow. Stephen listened with an ache to the little man's tales
of the campaigns he had been through. So that presently Tiefel cried out:

"Why, my friend, you are melancholy as an owl. I will tell you a funny story. Did you ever
hear of one General Sherman? He that they say is crazy?"

"He is no more crazy than I am," said Stephen, warmly--

"Is he not?" answered Tiefel, "then I will show you a mistake. You recall last November he
was out to Sedalia to inspect the camp there, and he sleeps in a little country store where
I am quartered. Now up gets your General Sherman in the middle of the night,--midnight,--and
marches up and down between the counters, and waves his arms. So, says he, 'land so,' says
he, 'Sterling Price will be here, and Steele here, and this column will take that road, and
so-and-so's a damned fool. Is not that crazy? So he walks up and down for three eternal hours.
Says he, 'Pope has no business to be at Osterville, and Steele here at Sedalia with his regiments
all over the place. They must both go into camp at La Mine River, and form brigades and divisions,
that the troops may be handled.'"

"If that's insanity," cried Stephen so strongly as to surprise the little man; "then I wish
we had more insane generals. It just shows how a malicious rumor will spread. What Sherman
said about Pope's and Steele's forces is true as Gospel, and if you ever took the trouble to
look into that situation, Tiefel, you would see it." And Stephen brought down his mug on the
table with a crash that made the bystanders jump.

"Himmel!" exclaimed little Tiefel. But he spoke in admiration.

It was not a month after that that Sherman's prophecy of the quiet general who had slid down
the bluff at Belmont came true. The whole country bummed with Grant's praises. Moving with
great swiftness and secrecy up the Tennessee, in company with the gunboats of Commodore Foote,
he had pierced the Confederate line at the very point Sherman had indicated. Fort Henry had
fallen, and Grant was even then moving to besiege Donelson.

Mr. Brinsmade prepared to leave at once for the battlefield, taking with him too Paducah physicians
and nurses. All day long the boat was loading with sanitary stores and boxes of dainties for
the wounded. It was muggy and wet--characteristic of that winter--as Stephen pushed through
the drays on the slippery levee to the landing.

He had with him a basket his mother had put up. He also bore a message to Mr. Brinsmade from
the Judge It was while he was picking his way along the crowded decks that he ran into General
Sherman. The General seized him unceremoniously by the shoulder.

"Good-by, Stephen," he said.

"Good-by, General," said Stephen, shifting his basket to shake hands. "Are you going away?"

"Ordered to Paducah," said the General. He pulled Stephen off the guards into an empty cabin.
"Brice," said he, earnestly, "I haven't forgotten how you saved young Brinsmade at Camp Jackson.
They tell me that you are useful here. I say, don't go in unless you have to. I don't mean
force, you understand. But when you feel that you can go in, come to me or write me a letter.
That is," he added, seemingly inspecting Stephen's white teeth with approbation, "if you're
not afraid to serve under a crazy man."

It has been said that the General liked the lack of effusiveness of Stephen's reply.

CHAPTER VI

ELIPHALET PLAYS HIS TRUMPS

Summer was come again. Through interminable days, the sun beat down upon the city; and at night
the tortured bricks flung back angrily the heat with which he had filled them. Great battles
had been fought, and vast armies were drawing breath for greater ones to come.

"Jinny," said the Colonel one day, "as we don't seem to be much use in town, I reckon we may
as well go to Glencoe."

Virginia, threw her arms around her father's neck. For many months she had seen what the Colonel
himself was slow to comprehend--that his usefulness was gone. The days melted into weeks, and
Sterling Price and his army of liberation failed to come. The vigilant Union general and his
aides had long since closed all avenues to the South. For, one fine morning toward the end
of the previous summer, when the Colonel was contemplating a journey, he had read that none
might leave the city without a pass, whereupon he went hurriedly to the office of the Provost
Marshal. There he had found a number of gentlemen in the same plight, each waving a pass made
out by the Provost Marshal's clerks, and waiting for that officer's signature. The Colonel
also procured one of these, and fell into line. The Marshal gazed at the crowd, pulled off
his coat, and readily put his name to the passes of several gentlemen going east. Next came
Mr. Bub Ballington, whom the Colonel knew, but pretended not to.

"Going to Springfield?" asked the Marshal, genially.

"Yes," said Bub.

"Not very profitable to be a minute-man, eh?" in the same tone.

The Marshal signs his name, Mr, Ballington trying not to look indignant as he makes for the
door. A small silver bell rings on the Marshal's desk, the one word: "Spot!" breaks the intense
silence, which is one way of saying that Mr. Ballington is detained, and will probably be lodged
that night at Government expense.

"Well, Colonel Carvel, what can I do for you this morning?" asked the Marshal, genially.

The Colonel pushed back his hat and wiped his brow. "I reckon I'll wait till next week, Captain,"
said Mr. Carvel. "It's pretty hot to travel just now."

The Provost Marshal smiled sweetly. There were many in the office who would have liked to laugh,
but it did not pay to laugh at some people. Colonel Carvel was one of them.

In the proclamation of martial law was much to make life less endurable than ever. All who
were convicted by a court-martial of being rebels were to have property confiscated, and slaves
set free. Then there was a certain oath to be taken by all citizens who did not wish to have
guardians appointed over their actions. There were many who swallowed this oath and never felt
any ill effects. Mr. Jacob Cluyme was one, and came away feeling very virtuous. It was not
unusual for Mr. Cluyme to feel virtuous. Mr. Hopper did not have indigestion after taking it,
but Colonel Carvel would sooner have eaten, gooseberry pie, which he had never tasted but once.

That summer had worn away, like a monster which turns and gives hot gasps when you think it
has expired. It took the Arkansan just a month, under Virginia's care, to become well enough
to be sent to a Northern prison He was not precisely a Southern gentleman, and he went to sleep
over the "Idylls of the King." But he was admiring, and grateful, and wept when he went off
to the boat with the provost's guard, destined for a Northern prison. Virginia wept too. He
had taken her away from her aunt (who would have nothing to do with him), and had given her
occupation. She nor her father never tired of hearing his rough tales of Price's rough army.

His departure was about the time when suspicions were growing set. The favor had caused comment
and trouble, hence there was no hope of giving another sufferer the same comfort. The cordon
was drawn tighter. One of the mysterious gentlemen who had been seen in the vicinity of Colonel
Carvel's house was arrested on the ferry, but he had contrived to be rid of the carpet-sack
in which certain precious letters were carried.

Throughout the winter, Mr. Hopper's visits to Locust Street had continued at intervals of painful
regularity. It is not necessary to dwell upon his brilliant powers of conversation, nor to
repeat the platitudes which he repeated, for there was no significance in Mr. Hopper's tales,
not a particle. The Colonel had found that out, and was thankful. His manners were better;
his English decidedly better.

It was for her father's sake, of course, that Virginia bore with him. Such is the appointed
lot of women. She tried to be just, and it occurred to her that she had never before been just.
Again and again she repeated to herself that Eliphalet's devotion to the Colonel at this low
ebb of his fortunes had something in it of which she did not suspect him. She had a class contempt
for Mr. Hopper as an uneducated Yankee and a person of commercial ideals. But now he was showing
virtues,--if virtues they were,--and she tried to give him the benefit of the doubt. With his
great shrewdness and business ability, why did he not take advantage of the many opportunities
the war gave to make a fortune? For Virginia had of late been going to the store with the Colonel,--who
spent his mornings turning over piles of dusty papers, and Mr. Hopper had always been at his desk. 

It was in that season while Grant was just coming into shoeblacking and paper collars, that
in some indefinite way, Laura Nesbit, daughter of the Doctor and Bedelia Satterthwaite, his blue
blooded Maryland wife, separated herself from the general beauty of the universe and for Grant,
Laura became a particular person. In Mary Adams's note book she writes with maternal pride
of his fancy for Laura: "It is the only time in Grant's life when he has looked up instead of
down for something to love." And the mother sets down a communication from Socrates through the planchette
to Amos, declaring that "Love is a sphere center"--a message which
doubtless the fond parents worked into tremendous import for their
child.

Though a communication from some anonymous sage called the Peach
Blow Philosopher, who began haunting Amos as a familiar spirit about
this time recorded the oracle, also carefully preserved by Mary in
her book among the prophecies for Grant that, "Carrots, while less
fragrant than roses, are better for the blood."

And while the cosmic forces were wrestling with these problems for Grant and Laura, the children
were tripping down their early teens all innocent of the uproar they were making among the sages
and statesmen and conquerors who flocked about the planchette board for Amos every night. For
Laura, Grant carved tiny baskets from peach-pits and coffee beans;
for her he saved red apples and candy globes that held in their precious
insides gorgeous pictures; for her he combed his hair and washed his
neck; for her he scribbled verses wherein eyes met skies, and arts
met hearts, and beams met dreams and loves the doves.

The joy of first love that comes in early youth--and always it does come then, though it is not
always confessed--is a gawky and somewhat guilty joy that spends itself in sighs and blushes and
Heaven knows what of self-discovery. Thus Grant in Laura's autograph album after all his versifying
on the kitchen table could only write "Truly Yours" and leave her to define the deep significance
of the phrase so obviously inverted. And she in his autograph album could only trust herself--though
naturally being female she was bolder--to the placid depths of "As ever your friend." Though
in lean, hungry-eyed Nathan Perry's book she burst into glowing words of deathless remembrance
and Grant wrote in Emma Morton's album fervid stanzas wherein "you" rimed with "the wandering Jew"
and "me" with "eternity." At school where the subtle wisdom of childhood reads many things not
writ in books, the names of Grant and Laura were linked together,
in the innocent gossip of that world.

They say that modern thought deems these youthful experiences dangerous
and superfluous; and so probably they will end, and the joy of this
earliest mating season will be bottled up and stored for a later maturity.

God is wise and good. Doubtless some new and better thing will take the place of this first moving
of the waters of life in the heart; but for us of the older generation
that is beginning to fade, we are glad that untaught and innocent,
our lips tasted from that spring when in the heart was no knowledge
of the poison that might come with the draft.

A tall, shy, vivid girl, but above everything else, friendly, was Laura Nesbit in her middle teens;
and though Grant in later years remembered her as having wonderful gray eyes, the elder town of Harvey
for the most part recollects her only as a gay and kindly spirit looking out into the world through
a happy, inquiring face.

But the elder town could not in the nature of things know Laura Nesbit as the children knew her. For the
democracy of childhood has its own estimates of its own citizens and the children of Harvey--the
Dooleys and the Williamses and the Bowmans as well as the Calvins, the Mortons, the Sandses
and the Kollanders, remember Laura Nesbit for something more than
her rather gawky body.

To the children, she was a bright soul.

They remember--and the Bowmans better than any one else--that Laura
Nesbit shared what she had with every one.

She never ate a whole stick of candy in her life.

From her school lunch-basket, the Dooleys had their first oranges
and the Williamses their first bananas.

Apples for the Bowmans and maple sugar--a rare delicacy on the prairies
in those days--for every one came from her wonderful basket.

And though her mother kept Laura in white aprons when the other girls
were in ginghams and in little red and black woolen, though the child's
wonderful yellow hair, soft and wavy like her father's plumey roach,
was curled with great care and much pride, it was her mother's pride--the
grim Satterthwaite demand for caste in any democracy.

 After that Virginia took long drives with her
father, and coming home, they would sit in the summer house high above the Merimec, listening
to the crickets' chirp, and watching the day fade upon the water. The Colonel, who had always
detested pipes, learned to smoke a corncob. He would sit by the hour, with his feet on the
rail of the porch and his hat tilted back, while Virginia read to him. Poe and Wordsworth and
Scott he liked, but Tennyson was his favorite. Such happiness could not last.

One afternoon when Virginia was sitting in the summer house alone, her thoughts wandering back,
as they sometimes did, to another afternoon she had spent there,--it seemed so long ago,--when
she saw Mammy Easter coming toward her.

"Honey, dey's comp'ny up to de house. Mister Hopper's done arrived. He's on de porch, talkin'
to your Pa. Lawsey, look wha he come!"

In truth, the solid figure of Eliphalet himself was on the path some twenty yards behind her.
His hat was in his hand; his hair was plastered down more neatly than ever, and his coat was
a faultless and sober creation of a Franklin Avenue tailor. He carried a cane, which was unheard
of. Virginia sat upright, and patted her skirts with a gesture of annoyance--what she felt
was anger, resentment. Suddenly she rose, swept past Mammy, and met him ten paces from the
summer house.

"How-dy-do, Miss Virginia," he cried pleasantly. "Your father had a notion you might be here."
He said fayther.

Virginia gave him her hand limply. Her greeting would have frozen a man of ardent temperament.
But it was not precisely ardor that Eliphalet showed. The girl paused and examined him swiftly.
There was something in the man's air to-day.

"So you were not caught?" she said.

Her words seemed to relieve some tension in him. He laughed noiselessly.

"I just guess I wahn't."

"How did you escape?" she asked, looking at him curiously.

"Well, I did, first of all. You're considerable smart, Miss Jinny, but I'll bet you can't tell
me where I was, now."

"I do not care to know. The place might save you again."

He showed his disappointment. "I cal'lated it might interest you to know how I dodged the Sovereign
State of Missouri. General Halleck made an order that released a man from enrolling on payment
of ten dollars. I paid. Then I was drafted into the Abe Lincoln Volunteers; I paid a substitute.
And so here I be, exercising life, and liberty, and the pursuit of happiness."

"So you bought yourself free?" said Virginia. "If your substitute gets killed, I suppose you
will have cause for congratulation."

Eliphalet laughed, and pulled down his cuffs. "That's his lookout, I cal'late," said he. He
glanced at the girl in a way that made her vaguely uneasy. She turned from him, back toward
the summer house. Eliphalet's eyes smouldered as they rested upon her figure. He took a step
forward.

"Miss Jinny?" he said.

"Yes?"

"I've heard considerable about the beauties of this place. Would you mind showing me 'round
a bit?" Virginia started. It was his tone now. Not since that first evening in Locust Street
had it taken on such assurance, And yet she could not be impolite to a guest.

"Certainly not," she replied, but without looking up. Eliphalet led the way. He came to the
summer house, glanced around it with apparent satisfaction, and put his foot on the moss-grown
step. Virginia did a surprising thing. She leaped quickly into the doorway before him, and
stood facing him, framed in the climbing roses.

"Oh, Mr. Hopper!" she cried. "Please, not in here." He drew back, staring in astonishment at
the crimson in her face.

"Why not?" he asked suspiciously--almost brutally. She had been groping wildly for excuses,
and found none.

"Because," she said, "because I ask you not to." With dignity: "That should be sufficient."

"Well," replied Eliphalet, with an abortive laugh, "that's funny, now. Womenkind get queer
notions, which I cal'late we've got to respect and put up with all our lives--eh?"

Her anger flared at his leer and at his broad way of gratifying her whim. And she was more
incensed than ever at his air of being at home--it was nothing less.

The man's whole manner was an insult. She strove still to hide her resentment.

"There is a walk along the bluff," she said, coldly, "where the view is just as good."

But she purposely drew him into the right-hand path, which led, after a little, back to the
house. Despite her pace he pressed forward to her side.

"Miss Jinny," said he, precipitately, "did I ever strike you as a marrying man?"

Virginia stopped, and put her handkerchief to her face, the impulse strong upon her to laugh.
Eliphalet was suddenly transformed again into the common commercial Yankee. He was in love,
and had come to ask her advice. She might have known it.

"I never thought of you as of the marrying kind, Mr. Hopper," she answered, her voice quivering.

Indeed, he was irresistibly funny as he stood hot and ill at ease. The Sunday coat bore witness
to his increasing portliness by creasing across from the buttons; his face, fleshy and perspiring,
showed purple veins, and the little eyes receded comically, like a pig's.

"Well, I've been thinking serious of late about getting married," he continued, slashing the
rose bushes with his stick. "I don't cal'late to be a sentimental critter. I'm not much on
high-sounding phrases, and such things, but I'd give you my word I'd make a good husband."

"Please be careful of those roses, Mr. Hopper."

"Beg pardon," said Eliphalet. He began to lose track of his tenses--that was the only sign
he gave of perturbation. "When I come to St. Louis without a cent, Miss Jinny, I made up my
mind I'd be a rich man before I left it. If I was to die now, I'd have kept that promise. I'm
not thirty-four, and I cal'late I've got as much money in a safe place as a good many men you
call rich. I'm not saying what I've got, mind you. All in proper time.

"I'm a pretty steady kind. I've stopped chewing--there was a time when I done that. And I don't
drink nor smoke."

"That is all very commendable, Mr. Hopper," Virginia said, stifling a rebellious titter. "But,--but
why did you give up chewing?"

"I am informed that the ladies are against it," said Eliphalet,--"dead against it. You wouldn't
like it in a husband, now, would you?"

This time the laugh was not to be put down. "I confess I shouldn't," she said.

"Thought so," he replied, as one versed. His tones took on a nasal twang. "Well, as I was saying,
I've about got ready to settle down, and I've had my eye on the lady this seven years."

"Marvel of constancy!" said Virginia. "And the lady?"

"The lady," said Eliphalet, bluntly, "is you." He glanced at her bewildered face and went on
rapidly: "You pleased me the first day I set eyes on you in the store I said to myself, 'Hopper,
there's the one for you to marry.' I'm plain, but my folks was good people. I set to work right
then to make a fortune for you, Miss Jinny. You've just what I need. I'm a plain business man
with no frills. You'll do the frills. You're the kind that was raised in the lap of luxury.
You'll need a man with a fortune, and a big one; you're the sort to show it off. I've got the
foundations of that fortune, and the proof of it right here. And I tell you,"--his jaw was
set,--"I tell you that some day Eliphalet Hopper will be one of the richest men in the West."

He had stopped, facing her in the middle of the way, his voice strong, his confidence supreme.
At first she had stared at him in dumb wonder. Then, as she began to grasp the meaning of his
harangue, astonishment was still dominant,--sheer astonishment. She scarcely listened. But,
as he finished, the thatch of the summer house caught her eye. A vision arose of a man beside
whom Eliphalet was not worthy to crawl. She thought of Stephen as he had stood that evening
in the sunset, and this proposal seemed a degradation. This brute dared to tempt her with money.
Scalding words rose to her lips. But she caught the look on Eliphalet's face, and she knew
that he would not understand. This was one who rose and fell, who lived and loved and hated
and died and was buried by--money.

For a second she looked into his face as one who escapes a pit gazes over the precipice, and
shuddered. As for Eliphalet, let it not be thought that he had no passion. This was the moment
for which he had lived since the day he had first seen her and been scorned in the store. That
type of face, that air,--these were the priceless things he would buy with his money. Crazed
with the very violence of his long-pent desire, he seized her hand. She wrung it free again.

"How--how dare you!" she cried.

He staggered back, and stood for a moment motionless, as though stunned. Then, slowly, a light
crept into his little eyes which haunted her for many a day.

"You--won't--marry me?" he said.

"Oh, how dare you ask me!" exclaimed Virginia, her face burning with the shame of it. She was
standing with her hands behind her, her back against a great walnut trunk, the crusted branches
of which hung over the bluff. Even as he looked at her, Eliphalet lost his head, and indiscretion
entered his soul.

"You must!" he said hoarsely. "You must! You've got no notion of my money, I say."

"Oh!" she cried, "can't you understand? If you owned the whole of California, I would not marry
you." Suddenly he became very cool. He slipped his hand into a pocket, as one used to such
a motion, and drew out some papers.

"I cal'late you ain't got much idea of the situation, Miss Carvel," he said; "the wheels have
been a-turning lately. You're poor, but I guess you don't know how poor you are,--eh? The Colonel's
a man of honor, ain't he?"

For her life she could not have answered,--nor did she even know why she stayed to listen.

"Well," he said, "after all, there ain't much use in your lookin' over them papers. A woman
wouldn't know. I'll tell you what they say: they say that if I choose, I am Carvel & Company."

The little eyes receded, and he waited a moment, seemingly to prolong a physical delight in
the excitement and suffering of a splendid creature. The girl was breathing fast and deep.

"I cal'late you despise me, don't you?" he went on, as if that, too, gave him pleasure. "But
I tell you the Colonel's a beggar but for me. Go and ask him if I'm lying. All you've got to
do is to say you'll be my wife, and I tear these notes in two. They go over the bluff." (He
made the motion with his hands.) "Carvel & Company's an old firm,--a respected firm. You wouldn't
care to see it go out of the family, I cal'late."

He paused again, triumphant. But she did none of the things he expected. She said, simply:--"Will
you please follow me, Mr. Hopper."

And he followed her,--his shrewdness gone, for once.

Save for the rise and fall of her shoulders she seemed calm. The path wound through a jungle
of waving sunflowers and led into the shade in front of the house. There was the Colonel sitting
on the porch. His pipe lay with its scattered ashes on the boards, and his head was bent forward,
as though listening. When he saw the two, he rose expectantly, and went forward to meet them.
Virginia stopped before him.

"Pa," she said, "is it true that you have borrowed money from this man?"

Eliphalet had seen Mr. Carvel angry once, and his soul had quivered. Terror, abject terror,
seized him now, so that his knees smote together. As well stare into the sun as into the Colonel's
face. In one stride he had a hand in the collar of Eliphalet's new coat, the other pointing
down the path.

"It takes just a minute to walk to that fence, sir," he said sternly. "If you are any longer
about it, I reckon you'll never get past it. You're a cowardly hound, sir!" Mr. Hopper's gait
down the flagstones was an invention of his own. It was neither a walk, nor a trot, nor a run,
but a sort of sliding amble, such as is executed in nightmares. Singing in his head was the
famous example of the eviction of Babcock from the store, --the only time that the Colonel's
bullet had gone wide. And down in the small of his back Eliphalet listened for the crack of
a pistol, and feared that a clean hole might be bored there any minute. Once outside, he took
to the white road, leaving a trail of dust behind him that a wagon might have raised. Fear
lent him wings, but neglected to lift his feet.

The Colonel passed his arm around his daughter, and pulled his goatee thoughtfully. And Virginia,
glancing shyly upward, saw a smile in the creases about his mouth: She smiled, too, and then
the tears hid him from her.

Strange that the face which in anger withered cowards and made men look grave, was capable
of such infinite tenderness,--tenderness and sorrow. The Colonel took Virginia in his arms,
and she sobbed against his shoulder, as of old.

"Jinny, did he--?"

"Yes--"

"Lige was right, and--and you, Jinny--I should never have trusted him. The sneak!"

Virginia raised her head. The sun was slanting in yellow bars through the branches of the great
trees, and a robin's note rose above the bass chorus of the frogs. In the pauses, as she listened,
it seemed as if she could hear the silver sound of the river over the pebbles far below.

"Honey," said the Colonel,--"I reckon we're just as poor as white trash."

Virginia smiled through her tears.

"Honey," he said again, after a pause, "I must keep my word and let him have the business."

She did not reproach him.

"There is a little left, a very little," he continued slowly, painfully. "I thank God that
it is yours. It was left you by Becky--by your mother. It is in a railroad company in New York,
and safe, Jinny."

"Oh, Pa, you know that I do not care," she cried. "It shall be yours and mine together. And
we shall live out here and be happy."

But she glanced anxiously at him nevertheless. He was in his familiar posture of thought, his
legs slightly apart, his felt hat pushed back, stroking his goatee. But his clear gray eyes
were troubled as they sought hers, and she put her hand to her breast.

"Virginia," he said, "I fought for my country once, and I reckon I'm some use yet awhile. It
isn't right that I should idle here, while the South needs me, Your Uncle Daniel is fifty-eight,
and Colonel of a Pennsylvania regiment.--Jinny, I have to go."

Virginia said nothing. It was in her blood as well as his. The Colonel had left his young wife,
to fight in Mexico; he had come home to lay flowers on her grave. She knew that he thought
of this; and, too, that his heart was rent at leaving her. She put her hands on his shoulders,
and he stooped to kiss her trembling lips.

They walked out together to the summer-house, and stood watching the glory of the light on
the western hills. "Jinn," said the Colonel, "I reckon you will have to go to your Aunt Lillian.
It--it will be hard. But I know that my girl can take care of herself. In case--in case I do
not come back, or occasion should arise, find Lige. Let him take you to your Uncle Daniel.
He is fond of you, and will be all alone in Calvert House when the war is over. And I reckon
that is all I have to say. I won't pry into your heart, honey. If you love Clarence, marry
him. I like the boy, and I believe he will quiet down into a good man."

Virginia did not answer, but reached out for her father's hand and held its fingers locked
tight in her own. From the kitchen the sound of Ned's voice rose in the still evening air.

     "Sposin' I was to go to N' Orleans an' take sick and die,
     Laik a bird into de country ma spirit would fly."

And after a while down the path the red and yellow of Mammy Easter's bandanna was seen.

"Supper, Miss Jinny. Laws, if I ain't ramshacked de premises fo' you bof. De co'n bread's gittin'
cold." 

"Well, I can. Watch me," he cried arrogantly. "Henry, I want the advantage of my strength in
this world and I'm not going to go puling around, golden-ruling and bending my back to give the
weak and worthless a ride. Let 'em walk. Let 'em fall.

Half an hour later he held her in his arms at the gate, and she heard his firm tread die in
the dust of the road. The South had claimed him at last.

