But the most remarkable feature in the whole occasion was the excessive liberality of the archdeacon.
He literally made presents to everybody. As Mr Arabin had already moved out of the parsonage
of St Ewold's, that scheme of elongating the dining-room was of course abandoned; but he would
have refurnished the whole deanery had he been allowed. He sent down a magnificent piano by
Erard, gave Mr Arabin a cob which any dean in the land might have been proud to bestride, and
made a special present to Eleanor of a new pony chair that had gained a prize in the Exhibition.
Nor did he even stay his hand here; he bought a set of cameos for his wife, and a sapphire
bracelet for Miss Bold; showered pearls and workboxes on is daughters, and to each of his sons
he presented a cheque for 20 pounds. On Mr Harding he bestowed a magnificent violoncello with
all the new-fashioned arrangements and expensive additions, which, on account of these novelties,
that gentleman could never use with satisfaction to his audience or pleasure to himself.

Those who knew the archdeacon well, perfectly understood the cause of his extravagance. 'Twas
thus that he sang his song of triumph over Mr Slope. This was his paean, his hymn of thanksgiving,
his loud oration. He had girded himself with his sword, and gone forth to the war; now he was
returning from the field laden with the spoils of the foe. The cob, the cameos, the violoncello
and the pianoforte, were all as it were trophies reft from the tent of his now conquered enemy.

The Arabins after their marriage went abroad for a couple of months, according the custom in
such matters now duly established, and then commenced their deanery life under good auspices.
And nothing can be more pleasant than the present arrangement of ecclesiastical affairs in
Barchester. The titular bishop never interfered, and Mrs Proudie not often. Her sphere is more
extended, more noble, and more suited to her ambition than that of a cathedral city. As long
as she can do what she pleases with the diocese, she is willing to leave the dean and chapter
to themselves. Mr Slope tried his hand at subverting the old-established customs of the close,
and from his failure she has learnt experience. The burly chancellor and the meagre little
prebendary are not teased by any application respecting Sabbath-day schools, the dean is left
to his own dominions, and the intercourse between Mrs Proudie and Mrs Arabin is confined to
a yearly dinner by each to the other. At these dinners Dr Grantly will not take a part; but
he never fails to ask for and receive a full account of all that Mrs Proudie does or says.

His ecclesiastical authority has been greatly shorn since the palmy days in which he reigned
supreme as mayor of the palace to his father, but nevertheless such authority as is now left
to him he can enjoy without interference. He can walk down High Street of Barchester without
feeling that those who see him are comparing his claims with those of Mr Slope. The intercourse
between Plumstead and the deanery is of the most constant and familiar description. Since Eleanor
has been married to a clergyman, and especially to a dignitary of the church, Mrs Grantly has
found many more points of sympathy with her sister; and on a coming occasion, which is much
looked forward to by all parties, she intends to spend a month or two at the deanery. She never
thought of spending a month in Barchester when little Johnny Bold was born!

