Of such was Shelley's philosophy of love, and I would ask if it be conceivable that the abominable
calumny prompted by theological virus, that he kept a seraglio, as his friend Leigh Hunt informs
us was reported, had any real existence. Shelley was too pure for any such idea as that of
promiscuous sexual intercourse to be acted on by himself; his life, which lies open before
us, refutes the diabolical invention. The fact was, that at the early age of nineteen he married
Harriet Westbrook, the daughter of a retired tavern keeper, a woman without soul and that congeniality
of disposition which a man overflowing with the pulses of genius should have chosen. After
a wretched existence without intellectual sympathy, and on the advice of her father, who did
not agree with his ideas on religion, they parted by mutual consent, never to meet again. Shelley
about this period met his second wife, a woman of the highest powers of mind and charm of body,
Mary Wolstonecraft Godwin, the authoress of Frankenstein and other works, daughter of William
Godwin, the novelist, and author of Political Justice and Mary Wolstonecraft, the gifted writer
of The Rights of Women. 

Then Ada asked the girl whether she intended to come back to her old place.
"If I'm let," said the girl, bursting into tears.

"Where are the
shoes and stockings?" said Ada.

But the girl only wept.

"Of course
you shall come back, shoes or no shoes. After looking on this episode,
in the most charitable manner, I am confident the sternest moralist cannot but "acknowledge
that the passionate love of a boy should not be held a serious blemish, in a man whose subsequent
life was exceptional in virtue and beneficence."

Believing, as I have explained, in the divinity of love, Shelley
regarded everything in the relation of the sexes with the most intense
horror, which was not consistent with "freedom;" and by which he most
certainly did not signify the license attributed by many. To promise forever to
     love the same woman, is not less absurd than to promise to
     believe the same creed."

He conceived from the re-arrangement of the marriage relation by greater facility of divorce
than was to be had sixty years ago,[F]

     "A fit and natural arrangement would result."

[Footnote F: It should be remembered that in Shelley's day divorce was obtainable by the most
wealthy only, at an enormous cost and by a lengthy process, precluding the slightest opportunity
for the middle and poorer classes to avail themselves thereof.]

Shelley by no means asserts that the intercourse would be promiscuous, but on the contrary
believed that from the relation of parent to child a union is generally of longer duration,
placed on such a footing, and marked above all others with generosity and self-devotion.

We are on the eve of great religious changes, which must consequently disturb all the social
relations. Historical Christianity still holds to her old text, of marriage being a sacrament,
and therefore indissoluble. The founder of Comtism developing this dogma, urges that after
the death of either husband or wife the duty of the survivor is not to re-marry. Great Britain
and many of the American States have conceded greater freedom in divorce, so as to carry out
in a large measure the arguments of Shelley, while the theory of what is termed the "sovereignty
of the individual" is propounded by the leaders of the free love party, as a cure for the present
and former difficulties.

Whatever may be the outcome of the present widespread discussions I know not, but I have belief
in the supreme intelligence and in humanity, and am certain that neither the home nor the race
will suffer, but that out of all this agitation will come more refined sentiment and truer
morality.

I must now conclude. It has been said that there are two things in which the professors of
all theologies have agreed-"To persecute all other sects, and plunder their own."

Do we misunderstand him? I think not, and William Howitt, a representative of the people, shall
answer for them: "For liberty of every kind he was ready to die. For knowledge, and truth,
and kindness, he desired only to live. He was a rare instance of the union of the finest moral
nature and the finest genius. If he erred, the world took ample revenge upon him for it, while
he conferred in return his amplest blessing on the world. It was long a species of heresy to
mention his name in society; that is passing fast away. It was next said that he never could
become popular, and therefore the mischief he could do was limited. He has become popular,
and the good he is likely to do will be unlimited. The people read him, though we may wonder
at it, and they comprehend him."

This estimate is not overrated, for, having confidence in his mission to humanity, he was fortified
by the belief of his existing as an indestructible portion of interminable nature and the universal
mind, which in all high intelligences lives through the ages, not only in the individual consciousness
of the spirit, but in that immortality of soul or mind, which lives in the race.

He hated the superstitions of Christian Fetishism and tyranny over the intellect, but loved
Christ and the other philosophers with a genuine affection; he loved humanity, and was ever
fond of examining its highest phases, as, for instance, through the doctrines of perfect equality
in the sexes--yet he recognised that sudden changes were prejudicial before sufficient progress
had been accomplished. "To destroy, you must replace." Justice he considered the sole guide,
reason and duty the only law. His morality was not that of pharasaical tartuffes, nor of prudish
knickerbockers, who with wide phylacteries, sit in the high places to be seen of men. He only
combatted evil principles and fought hard in favor of good.

He has been quoted as being too transcendental; he may be to dullards with imperfect reasoning
faculties, or theologians, who only see through fanatical and green-monsterish spectacles,
but to men who have a live philosophy equally adapted to modern as well as ancient thought,
he is as clear as the noon-day sun. All that is required, to comprehend Percy Bysshe Shelley,
is integralism of that high order which has ever believed in the ultimate perfectibility of
human nature, and looked "forward to a period when a new golden age would return to earth,
when all the different creeds and systems of the world would be amalgamated into one, crime
disappear, and man, freed from shackles, civil and religious, bow before the throne 'of his
own awless soul,' or 'of the power unknown,'" whose veil it is the ambition of theosophy to
raise for humanity, and remain the "inscrutable" no longer.

I have completed my task, and with humility I make the statement, knowing that before me are
many who could have performed it as completely as I have crudely. I look upon my essay, in
which I have treated my subject popularly, with intention, as a beacon, whence a little light
may be shed dimly, hoping that others, better qualified, will bring you face to face with the
full rays.

