CHAPULTEPEC. On the 11th of September, I received orders to furnish details of men from the
company to assist engineer officers in supervising the construction of batteries against Chapultepec.
I was placed in charge of Battery No. 1, on the Tacubaya road, against the southern face of
the Castle; and Lieutenant McClellan in charge of Battery No. 2, against the southwestern angle.
On the night of the 12th, the details were all called in, and I was directed to furnish implements
to the different storming parties which were to assault the castle of Chapultepec on the morning
of the 13th.

SAN COSME GARITA. At 3 P. M., that day, I received orders to join the siege train, and report
to General Worth whose column was to attack the city by the San Cosme route.

At 4 P. M., I reported to General Worth, who was then with his forces, in the suburbs of the
city, on the San Cosme causeway, at the point where it changes direction, at an angle of nearly
ninety degrees, and is then nearly straight for about six hundred yards to the fortified Garita
in our front. He informed me that Lieutenant Stevens had just been severely wounded and this
made me the senior engineer with Worth's division. He directed me to go forward in person,
closely examine the condition of affairs at the front, endeavor to determine the best method
of operating against the fortified Garita, and report to him the result of my observations
as soon as possible. He directed me, particularly, to have in view the question whether it
would be advisable to bring the siege guns forward against the embrasured battery at the Garita.
Just as I was leaving him, he said: "If you find there are two different methods by which the
Garita can be carried, one in a shorter time at a sacrifice of men, the other in longer time,
but a saving of men, choose the latter". And he added: "There have been too many valuable lives,
of officers and men, lost recently in my division, for nothing".

Though he did not specify the action referred to, he meant the battle of Molino Del Rey. Under
these instructions, I proceeded to the extreme front, made the requisite examination of our
position and that of the enemy, and soon came back. I reported that the houses on the left
of the causeway were built up continuously to the battery at the Garita, we could easily break
through the walls from house to house; and, under perfect cover, reach the top of a three-story
building, with flat roof and stone parapet, within 40 yards of the battery. A fire of musketry
from that roof would make the works untenable; and we could thus in a short time drive the
enemy from the fortified Garita, and secure a good lodgement within the city, without material
loss and without using the siege guns.

General Worth directed me to bring forward the engineer company, which was with the siege train
a short distance to the rear, and commence operations on the proposed plan; and at the same
time ordered that Clarke's brigade should render any assistance I might call for.

An hour or more before sunset we reached the top of the house above referred to. From that
position the inside of the enemy's works could be plainly seen almost to the foot of the interior
slope of the parapet. Our first fire upon the Mexicans, who were unconscious of the impending
peril, was very deadly. Those who were not killed or disabled by that fire seemed dazed for
an instant; but in a few moments, they precipitately retreated, leaving the San Cosme Garita
without a single defender in the works. One of their pieces of artillery was withdrawn a few
hundred yards, but was then abandoned.

Immediately after that first fire, a portion of the force with me on the roof became engaged
with the enemy who appeared on house tops in rear of their battery. We soon drove them from
their position. The other portion of our men fell back to the stairs, made their way to the
lower story, broke open the thick, heavily barred, strong door, passed into the street, entered
the abandoned works, and pursued the enemy. In the meantime, some of our troops from the right
of the causeway had come forward and, a very small number of them, were slightly in advance
of us in reaching the abandoned battery.

Colonel Garland, commander of the first brigade of Worth's division, on the right of the causeway,
says, in his official report: "The enemy then took position at the Garita San Cosme, where
they were supported by two pieces of artillery which raked the streets with grape and canister.
Finding a secure position to the right of the second defence, [about 350 yards in front of
the Garita], I reorganized the command as it came up; mounted a howitzer on the top of a convent,
which, under the direction of Lieutenant [U. S.] Grant, Quartermaster, 4th Infantry, and Lieutenant
Lendrum, 3rd Artillery, annoyed the enemy considerably. About this time, report was made to
me that considerable progress had been made by the troops on the other side of the street by
means of crowbars and pickaxes, working through houses and yards. This caused me to watch closely
for the first movement of the enemy indicative of retreat. The moment this was discovered,
the 4th Infantry, followed by detachments of the 2nd and 3rd Artillery, under Colonel Belton,
rushed up the road, when they entered the work simultaneously with the forces operating to
the right and left, Captain McKenzie's storming party slightly in advance". (Ex. Doc. No. 1,
Appendix, p. 170.)

Referring to this operation, General Worth, in his official report, says; "the moment had now
arrived for the final and combined attack upon the last stronghold of the enemy in my quarter;
it was made, by our men springing, as if by magic, to the tops of the houses into which they
had patiently and quietly made their way with the bar and pick, and to the utter surprise and
consternation of the enemy, opening upon him, within easy range, a destructive fire of musketry.
A single discharge, in which many of his gunners were killed at their pieces, was sufficient
to drive him in confusion from the breastworks; when a prolonged shout from our brave fellows
announced that we were in possession of the Garita of San Cosme and already in the city of
Mexico". (Ex. Doc. No. 1, p. 392.)

The American army having thus captured the fortifications of the capital of the enemy's country,
a magnificent city of nearly 200,000 inhabitants, a secure lodgement was immediately effected
in large houses, on the left of the street, a few hundred yards from the Garita. I then proceeded,
with the engineer company and an infantry detachment, several hundred yards farther; and found
a strong position, on the right of the street where the troops could rest protected from fire.
Going farther to the front, I discovered that, 150 yards in advance there was a large convent,
on the left of the street, occupied by a strong force. The next cross street, the Paseo, had
batteries upon it. These facts were reported to General Worth, who ordered forward two brigades--one
to occupy each of the positions selected--and, directed me to place those troops, station the
picket-guards, and then, with Lieutenant McClellan, report at his headquarters which was several
hundred yards within the Garita.

The aqueduct, in the middle of the street along which we advanced, was an open stone trough,
supported at a height of ten feet, or more, by pillars and arches. There was a good deal of
firing down the street from Mexican detachments; but, by taking shelter under the arches, between
the pillars, our men, in small groups, were quite well protected. A little before dark, whilst
I was under one of the arches at the extreme front, endeavoring to get a closer view of the
enemy at the convent and on the Paseo, I was joined by Lieutenant Sydney Smith, of the Fourth
Infantry, who had borne several messages from me to General Worth during the afternoon. In
a few moments after he joined me we heard horses feet rapidly approaching us from the direction
of the citadel. These horsemen were captured, and proved to be three Mexican officers, one
of whom was Adjutant-General on the staff of Santa Anna.

Accompanied by Lieutenant McClellan, I reported to General Worth at 10 P. M., and was ordered
by him to suspend operations for the night and resume them at daylight. He received us both
very kindly, expressed satisfaction with the manner in which the works at the Garita had been
carried, and approved of all the dispositions that had been subsequently made of the troops
at the front. I called his attention again to the convent, told him that the large Mexican
force in that position might give us a great deal of trouble next morning, and asked him to
permit me, with the engineer company supported by a detachment of about five hundred men, to
pass the convent that night, get into a strong position beyond it, and thus induce the enemy
to abandon that position before morning; and said I thought it probable a detachment of five
hundred men could reach the main plaza of the city, that night, without material difficulty;
and that, in case this force encountered serious opposition, they could take possession of
some one of the many large, strong buildings on the way, and hold their own against the whole
Mexican army until relief could reach them.

General Worth not only refused to comply with my request; but, ordered both myself and Lieutenant
McClellan to remain at his headquarters until 3 A. M., at which hour he said he would have
us called, and we could then go to the front and resume our duties.

That arrangement left the engineer company, for the night, at the extreme front, without an
officer. In spite of my earnest remonstrances General Worth insisted that we should remain.
On the latter point he was inexorable. I finally asked him if I was under arrest. He said "No"
and added: "You soon will be if you show further hesitation in obeying my order for you to
remain here".

Being awakened by one of General Worth's aides, I asked if it was already 3 o'clock. It seemed
to me that I had not been asleep five minutes. The aide said: "It is about 1 o'clock. A deputation
from the civil authorities has just informed General Worth that Santa Anna's army evacuated
the city before midnight, and they offered to surrender the city. They have been passed on
to General Scott, at Tacubaya; and General Worth wishes to see you at once".

The latter told me more fully about the deputation and their proposal to surrender; expressed
some doubt in reference to the evacuation of the city by the Mexican army; directed me to return
to the front; take the engineer company and a detachment of infantry; proceed carefully forward,
using every precaution; and report to him the slightest indication that the city had not been
evacuated. I was directed to examine closely every large building and strong position along
our route; and not pass them until thoroughly satisfied that they were not occupied by Mexican
soldiers.

This forward movement commenced about 2 A. M. There was some delay in determining whether the
strong convent, mentioned above, had been evacuated. Accounts on that subject were conflicting;
but a thorough examination of the whole position showed that it was abandoned. I reported that
fact to General Worth, and informed him that we would move on with great care, in strict compliance
with his instructions.

All buildings of importance were broken open. None of them were occupied by the enemy. From
time to time, I reported these facts to General Worth; and, at daylight, I informed him that,
from a church steeple near the Alameda, I could see that the Citadel, which had stopped the
advance of General Quitman's troops early in the afternoon of the 13th, was deserted. At that
time, Lieutenant McClellan reported to me there were no signs of the enemy in any portion of
the Alameda; and I suggested to General Worth that his whole division be moved forward.

In the meantime, with the engineer company and the infantry detachment, I passed beyond the
Alameda, breaking open, as before, and examining all strong buildings on our route. We had
gone more than two blocks in advance of the Alameda, and were closely approaching the Main
Plaza and the National Palace, when I received a positive order to countermarch my command,
and report to General Worth at the Alameda. I demurred, and told the aide, who bore the order,
that I had obeyed all of General Worth's cautionary instructions; that there was no enemy in
our front, and no reason for calling us back. The aide replied: "The order is positive. You
must go back." I then gave the order to countermarch. On our way, the aide, who was a classmate
and intimate friend of mine, said to me; "General Worth is very cross, he is angry. My opinion
is that he has received orders from the headquarters of the army which have riled him up badly".

A few days later I learned from General Worth that he received a peremptory order from General
Scott not to permit any one under his command to pass beyond the Alameda, until further instructions
were received from the General-in-Chief.

For several hours after the engineer company took its place on the right of Worth's division,
at the Alameda, all seemed to be quiet in the city. General Quitman's troops, from the Belen
Gate, had passed the abandoned citadel, reached the Main Plaza, and took possession of the
National Palace. Later, General Scott, with his staff officers and mounted escort, entered
the city.

About that time a shot was fired, evidently aimed at General Worth, from a narrow street or
lane, opposite the head of the division. The shot missed Worth, but very severely wounded Colonel
Garland. General Worth, immediately ordered me to take the engineer company, go into the lane,
find the man who fired the shot, and hang him.

Within fifty yards we found the man who I believed fired the shot, a rope was placed around
his neck, but I did not order my men to hang him. I had no positive proof against him. I took
the man to General Worth, reported the circumstances of the case, in full; stated the reasons
for my belief that the prisoner fired the shot which severely wounded Colonel Garland; and
added: "In the absence of specific proof against this man I have brought him to you, and await
your further instructions".

To which General Worth replied, in a cold and haughty manner: "This is not the way in which
my orders are obeyed by officers of my division".

Colonel Duncan, who was close beside General Worth, both mounted, whilst I was on foot, said,
at once, before I could make any reply to the foregoing censure: "General Worth, you are wrong;
Lieutenant Smith is right. Under the circumstances he ought not to have hanged this man. It
is for you, the Major-General commanding these forces, to decide that matter. Give the order.
You see he and his men are ready to obey you. Give the order".

In the meantime, the men of the engineer company, without instructions from me, had passed
the rope over an adjacent large lantern iron; and stood ready to string the man up. General
Worth did not give the order. The man was not hanged.

In less than an hour after Colonel Garland was wounded, lawless bands of armed Mexicans commenced
firing from the parapet roofs of houses, from church steeples and windows, in various parts
of the city, upon our troops in the open streets. An order was then given, by General Scott,
for Worth's forces to move beyond the Alameda and join with the rest of the army, in putting
down the rising of armed outlaws who made this murderous attack upon us eight or ten hours
after the city surrendered. In these operations the engineer company was with Worth's division
until the recall was sounded late that afternoon.

General Scott, in his official report, says: "I communicated, about daylight [on the 14th],
orders to Worth and Quitman to advance slowly and cautiously [to guard against treachery] towards
the heart of the city, and to occupy its stronger and more commanding points. Quitman proceeded
to the great plaza or square, planted guards and hoisted the colors of the United States on
the national palace, containing the halls of Congress and executive apartments of Federal Mexico.
In this grateful service, Quitman might have been anticipated by Worth, but for my express
orders halting the latter at the head of the Alameda, [a green park] within three squares of
that goal of general ambition". (Ex. Doc. No. 1, p. 383.)

General Worth, in his official report, says: "At 5 A. M., on the 14th, my troops and heavy
guns advanced into the city, and occupied the Alameda to the point where it fronts the palace,
and there halted at 6 o'clock, the general-in-chief having instructed me to take a position
and await his further orders. Shortly afterwards a straggling assassin-like fire commenced
from the house-tops, which continued, in various parts of the city through the day, causing
us some loss. The first shot, fired at a group of officers at the head of my column, struck
down Colonel Garland, badly wounded. About the time of our entrance into the city, the convicts
in the different prisons, to the number of some thirty thousand men, were liberated by order
of the flying government, armed and distributed in the most advantageous houses, including
the churches, convents, and even the hospitals, for the purpose of exciting, if possible, the
city to revolt".

In speaking of the general operations of his forces in the capture of the city, General Worth adds:

"Officers and men of every corps carried themselves with wonted gallantry and conduct. Of the
staff; Lieutenants Stevens, Smith, and McClellan, engineers, displayed the gallantry, skill
and conduct, which so eminently distinguished their corps". (Ex. Doc. No. 1, pp. 393-4.)

General Scott adds: "Captain Lee, engineer, so constantly distinguished, also bore important
orders from me [September 13] until he fainted from a wound and the loss of two nights' sleep
at the batteries. Lieutenants Beauregard, Stevens, and Tower, all wounded, were employed with
the divisions, and Lieutenants G. W. Smith and G. B. McClellan with the company of sappers
and miners. Those five lieutenants of engineers, like their captain, won the admiration of
all about them". (Ex. Doc. No. 1, p. 385.)

Major John L. Smith, senior engineer, says: "Lieutenant Smith reports all the sappers who were
engaged on the 13th and 14th, to have conducted themselves with intelligence and intrepidity
altogether satisfactory; but, he mentions the orderly sergeant, Hastings, who was wounded,
as being eminently distinguished, and he mentions also artificer Gerber, as having been particularly
distinguished". (Ex. Doc. No. 1, p. 430.)

Without dwelling upon details of the fighting in the streets and houses on the 14th, it may
be stated that, a short time before the recall was sounded, when Orderly Sergeant Hastings
fell, Lieutenant McClellan seized the Sergeant's musket, fired at, and killed the man who shot
Hastings. In a few moments thereafter the company passed the dead body of that "liberated",
convict Mexican.

The unoccupied private house in which we were quartered that night was near the place at which
the man, who shot Colonel Garland, had been left tied to a lantern iron with a rope around
his neck. When we returned the man was gone. Nothing further was said or done upon our side,
in his case.

An hour or more after we were comfortably "settled in our new home", I noticed that McClellan
was very quiet for a considerable time, evidently thinking of matters which deeply interested
him. An occasional marked change seemed to come over the spirit of his dream. Finally I awakened
him from his reverie, saying: "A penny for your thoughts. I have been watching you for half
an hour or more, and would like much to know, honor bright, what you have been thinking about".

To which he replied: "I have been making a 'general review' of what we have gone through since
we left West Point, one year ago this month, bound for the 'Halls of the Montezumas'; have
been again on the Rio Grande, that grave-yard of our forces; have gone over the road from Matamoros
to Victoria and Tampico, where we had so much hard work; went through the siege of Vera Cruz,
where we were left out in the cold during the ceremonies of surrender, and later, had to make
our way as best we could, with the engineer train through the horrid sand; glanced at Cerro
Gordo, where it was my misfortune to be with General Pillow's 'whipped community'; stopped
again with our friends, the Monks, in the convent at Puebla; crossed over the mountains; came
by way of San Antonio, Contreras, Churubusco, Chapultepec and the San Cosme Garita, into this
city. Here we are--the deed is done--I am glad no one can say 'poor Mac' over me".

The capture of the city, and its occupation by General Scott's army, virtually ended the war
made by the United States against Mexico.

CHAPTER VI.

IN THE CITY OF MEXICO--RETURN TO WEST POINT.

After the street fighting on the 14th, the city was quiet and remained so. The men of the company
were fairly entitled to a good rest and a new outfit of clothing; but the quartermaster could
not then furnish the latter. At their request, I authorized them to purchase a better quality
of cloth than that furnished by the government, and to have finer material for trimmings than
the coarse cotton braid allowed by the regulations. The clothing was made by good tailors and
paid for by the men. In the course of a month or six weeks, the company was provided with handsome,
well-fitting uniforms.

In the meantime, drills were suspended for about a month. During that period the only duty
required of the men, other than that of ordinary guard over their quarters and the engineer
train of the army, was that of details to assist engineer officers in making surveys of the
recent battlefields.

In the latter part of October, the surveys of the battlefields being completed, and the men
provided with new and well-fitting uniforms, infantry drills were resumed. An order was issued
requiring the company to be formed without arms, the next day, in the Alameda, for squad drill.
Immediately thereafter, one of my most trusted sergeants informed me that this order caused
great dissatisfaction in the company. He said the men felt they would be degraded if now turned
back to the beginning--at squad drill without arms--thus placing them in the position of raw
recruits, whilst the rest of the army were being exercised at brigade and division drill, "evolutions
of the line," with all attendant "pomp and circumstance".

The sergeant warned me that the state of feeling in the company would, in his opinion, lead
to serious trouble if the order was carried into effect. I thanked him for the information.

When the men were formed on the drill ground next day, I told them I was aware of their opposition
to the order; but, that I was under the impression I commanded that company, and if there was
a man amongst them who felt disposed to dispute my legal authority he was requested to step
to the front. No one moved. I then directed the artificers and privates to go to their quarters,
and inform the sergeant of the guard they had my permission to be absent until evening parade.
Turning to the non-commissioned officers, I stated that, in my judgment, there was no occasion
for them to feel degraded if drilled by their own officers at squad drill without arms.

I drilled the sergeants, McClellan the corporals. Whilst the non-commissioned officers were
being thus drilled, the men were allowed daily liberty from quarters. Later, the non-commissioned
officers drilled the men in squads under the supervision of the officers. Instruction and practice
in the infantry "School of the Company" was then resumed; and, after a time, each non-commissioned
officer was required, in turn, to take his place by my side and drill the company. On those
occasions, the men were warned that no inattention or remissness on their part would be tolerated;
no matter how lenient with them I might choose to be when commanding in person.

It is safe to say that within six weeks from the time squad drills without arms were commenced
in the engineer company, in the City of Mexico, that company as Infantry, was better drilled
than any other in the army. In that respect, and in discipline, they were pattern soldiers.
Regular instruction in the "School of the Engineer Soldier" was then resumed.

From raw recruits, on the Rio Grande, disturbed by the epithet, "pick and shovel brigade" applied
to them, at that time, by the soldiers of the line, the engineer company had become veterans
of more than half a dozen important battles; had always been in the front of the fighting;
and had often been called upon to direct large working parties of soldiers, detailed to use
the "pick and shovel".

About two months after we entered the city of Mexico, it was reported to me, by the sergeant
of the guard, that Artificer Gerber was then absent, two hours beyond the time limit of his
pass. I directed the sergeant to send Gerber to me, in my quarters, as soon as he returned.

Frederick W. Gerber was one of the four men, enlisted by Captain Swift, who had served in the
old regular army. He was enlisted as musician, and was the finest bugler in the service. He
was soon made company clerk, and had thorough knowledge of routine "company papers". He was
German by birth. As company clerk his duties brought him in close relations with the commander
of the company; and I soon formed a very high estimate of his qualities as a soldier--and as
a man in every respect; except that he would, on occasion, at intervals, when off duty, indulge
too freely in strong drink.

I had repeatedly threatened to deprive him of his warrant as artificer, if he did not quit
drinking to excess; but I was reluctant to do so, especially because his promotion to that
grade was in reward for distinguished gallantry in the attack on the "key-point" of the Mexican
position at the battle of Cerro Gordo.

When it was reported to me that he had not returned within the time of his "pass", I was quite
sure he was again "on a spree". It was several hours later when he reported to me as ordered
by the sergeant of the guard.

I was alone when he entered my room. He had evidently been drinking to excess; but was to some
extent recovering. I charged him with being drunk; told him he had behaved so well in that
respect lately that I had made up my mind to recommend his being promoted to the grade of corporal;
and even to that of sergeant, when opportunity was afforded me, and added: "You know I cannot
make such recommendation whilst you continue this habit of getting drunk". He replied: "The
lieutenant is mistaken; I am not drunk, and, if he will allow me, I will satisfy him on that
point; and explain to him how I happened to overstay my pass". I told him to go on with his
explanation.

He said that soon after he left the company quarters, early that morning, with permission to
be absent for four hours, he met with a sergeant he had known as a private in the old regular
service long before the war. They were glad to see each other, took a few drinks, and then
hired a carriage for a drive of several hours in the great city they had helped to capture.
He added: "During the drive the sergeant got mad and threatened to have me arrested. I told
him that 'no d----d infantry sergeant had rank enough to arrest an artificer of engineers'.
He then offered to fight me. We stopped the carriage, got out, drew our swords, and I told
him to come on, and we would soon settle the matter. He attacked me, and I disarmed him, kept
his sword, made him get into the carriage, drove to General Twiggs's headquarters, reported
to the sergeant of his guard, told him what had occurred; and asked him to hold, as a prisoner,
the sergeant that had attacked me".

"But he, being also an infantry sergeant, released the sergeant I had brought there, made me
a prisoner, and demanded my sword. I gave it to him; but, when he ordered me to give up the
sword I had captured, I told him I would see him d----d first; and I kept it. I then asked
to be taken before General Twiggs. They told me he was out".

"In three or four hours General Twiggs returned, and when he was passing through the sally-port,
the guard all in line, at present-arms, saluting him, I rushed in front of his horse, and calling
him by name, told him his guard had made me a prisoner, and I asked for justice at his hands.
He ordered me to get out of his way. Still standing in front of his horse, I again asked for
justice. To which he replied: 'Who in the h--ll are you?' When I told him who I was, he said:
'How is it that you are a prisoner in my guard-house?' I told General Twiggs the whole story:
and showed him the infantry Sergeant's sword I had captured; and which his guard tried to make
me give up. General Twiggs then asked me if I was willing to hand that sword to him. I gave
it to him at once; and he ordered the sergeant of the guard to release me and give me back
my own sword. I then came straight home."

After hearing Gerber's story, on which I placed implicit reliance, I strongly advised him to
let liquor alone in future: and, again told him I would gladly have him promoted, if he would
quit drinking.

Some time after we returned to the United States, and I had left the company, I learned that,
during the time Gerber was closeted with me, opinion in the company was divided, and ran high
in regard to the course I would take in his case. All the men knew that he was deservedly a
great favorite of mine. Some of them said I would let him off; others that I would deprive
him of his warrant as artificer, and otherwise punish him.

These conflicting opinions as to what I would do in Gerber's case, were freely backed by heavy
bets among the men. When he joined them, all were anxious to know what "the lieutenant" was
going to do--"what did he say?" To which he replied: "It is none of your business". For some
time they could get nothing more from him. But he finally said: "D----n it, if you must know;
the lieutenant told me he would make me a corporal".

The sergeant who gave me the facts just related, added: "Previous to that time, Gerber was
believed, by the whole company, to be a perfectly truthful man. But many of the men thought
he lied on that occasion. Although he has been truthful ever since, there is still, amongst
us, very grave suspicion in regard to the correctness of his assertion that you then told him
you would make him a corporal. I would like very much to know the truth in regard to that matter".
I replied: "Gerber told the truth".

