It was set before him. Holding the musket in his arm, he took the glass, drank, wiped his mouth
with the back of his hand, and then, spinning a silver dollar into the air, said, as it rang
upon the floor,--

"I stand treat to-day; let the rest o' the gentlemen drink at my expense!"

He then walked out, and slowly retreated backwards towards the corner-house, covering his retreat
with the levelled pistol, and the flash of his dauntless eye.

He had nearly reached the corner, when Gilbert Potter dashed up behind him, with Roger all
in a foam. Joe Fairthorn, seized with deadly terror when he heard the terrible name, had set
off at full speed for home; but descrying Gilbert approaching on a gallop, changed his course,
met the latter, and gasped out the astounding intelligence. All this was the work of a minute,
and when Gilbert reached the corner, a single glance showed him the true state of affairs.
The confused group in front of the tavern, some faces sallow with cowardice, some red with
indignation and shame; the solitary, retreating figure, alive in every nerve with splendid
courage, told him the whole story, which Joe's broken words had only half hinted.

Flinging himself from his horse, he levelled his musket, and cried out,--

"Surrender!"

Sandy Flash, with a sudden spring, placed his back against the house, pointed his pistol at
Gilbert, and said: "Drop your gun, or I fire!"

For answer, Gilbert drew the trigger; the crack of the explosion rang sharp and clear, and
a little shower of mortar covered Sandy Flash's cocked hat. The ball had struck the wall about
four inches above his head.

He leaped forward; Gilbert clubbed his musket and awaited him. They were scarcely two yards
apart; the highwayman's pistol-barrel was opposite Gilbert's heart, and the two men were looking
into each other's eyes. The group in front of the tavern stood as if paralyzed, every man holding
his breath.

"Halt!" said Sandy Flash. "Halt! I hate bloodshed, and besides that, young Potter, you're not
the man that'll take me prisoner. I could blow your brains out by movin' this finger, but you're
safe from any bullet o' mine, whoever a'n't!"

At the last words a bright, mocking, malicious grin stole over his face. Gilbert, amazed to
find himself known to the highwayman, and puzzled with certain familiar marks in the latter's
countenance, was swiftly enlightened by this grin. It was Fortune's face before him, without
the black hair and whiskers,--and Fortune's voice that spoke!

Sandy Flash saw the recognition. He grinned again. "You'll know your friend, another time,"
he said, sprang five feet backward, whirled, gained the cover of the house, and was mounting
his horse among the bushes at the bottom of the garden, before any of the others reached Gilbert,
who was still standing as if thunder-struck.

By this time Sandy Flash had leaped the hedge and was careering like lightning towards the
shelter of the woods. The interest now turned upon Gilbert Potter, who was very taciturn and
thoughtful, and had little to relate. They noticed, however, that his eyes were turned often
and inquiringly upon Alfred Barton, and that the latter as steadily avoided meeting them.

When Gilbert went to bring Roger, who had quietly waited at the crossing of the roads, Deb.
Smith suddenly made her appearance.

"I seen it all," she said. "I was a bit up the road, but I seen it. You shouldn't ha' shot,
Mr. Gilbert, though it isn't him that's born to be hit with a bullet; but you're safe enough
from his bullets, anyhow-- whatever happens, you're safe!"

"What do you mean, Deborah?" he exclaimed, as she almost repeated to him Sandy Flash's very words.

"I mean what I say," she answered. "You wouldn't be afeard, but it'll be a comfort to your
mother. I must have a drink o' whiskey after that sight."

With these words she elbowed her way into the barroom. Most of the Kennett Volunteers were
there engaged in carrying out a similar resolution. They would gladly have kept the whole occurrence
secret, but that was impossible. It was known all over the country, in three days, and the
story of it has not yet died out of the local annals.

CHAPTER XIX.

THE HUSKING FROLIC.

Jake Fairthorn rushed into Dr. Deane's door with a howl of terror.

"Cousin Martha! Betsy!" he cried; "he's goin' to shoot Gilbert!"

"None o' your tricks, boy!" Betsy Lavender exclaimed, in her most savage tone, as she saw the
paleness of Martha's face. "I'm up to 'em. Who'd shoot Gilbert Potter? Not Alf Barton, I'll
be bound; he'd be afeard to shoot even Sandy Flash!"

"It's Sandy Flash,--he's there! Gilbert shot his hat off!" cried Jake.

"The Lord have mercy!" And the next minute Miss Betsy found herself, she scarcely knew how,
in the road.

Both had heard the shot, but supposed that it was some volunteer discharging an old load from
his musket; they knew nothing of Sandy's visit to the Unicorn, and Jake's announcement seemed
simply incredible.

"O you wicked boy! What'll become o' you?" cried Miss Lavender, as she beheld Gilbert Potter
approaching, leading Roger by the bridle. But at the same instant she saw, from the faces of
the crowd, that something unusual had happened. While the others instantly surrounded Gilbert,
the young volunteer who alone had made any show of fight, told the story to the two ladies.
Martha Deane's momentary shock of terror disappeared under the rush of mingled pride and scorn
which the narrative called up in her heart.

"What a pack of cowards!" she exclaimed, her cheeks flushing,--"to stand still and see the
life of the only man that dares to face a robber at the mercy of the robber's pistol!"

Gilbert approached. His face was grave and thoughtful, but his eye brightened as it met hers.
No two hands ever conveyed so many and such swift messages as theirs, in the single moment
when they touched each other. The other women of the village crowded around, and he was obliged,
though with evident reluctance, to relate his share in the event.

In the mean time the volunteers had issued from the tavern, and were loudly discussing what
course to pursue. The most of them were in favor of instant pursuit. To their credit it must
be said that very few of them were actual cowards; they had been both surprised by the incredible
daring of the highwayman, and betrayed by the cowardly inefficiency of their own leader. Barton,
restored to his usual complexion by two glasses of whiskey, was nearly ready to head a chase
which he suspected would come to nothing; but the pert young volunteer, who had been whispering
with some of the younger men, suddenly cried out,--

"I say, fellows, we've had about enough o' Barton's command; and I, for one, am a-goin' to
enlist under Captain Potter."

"Good!" "Agreed!" responded a number of others, and some eight or ten stepped to one side.
The few remaining around Alfred Barton began to look doubtful, and all eyes were turned curiously
upon him.

Gilbert, however, stepped forward and said: "It's bad policy to divide our forces just now,
when we ought to be off on the hunt. Mr. Barton, we all know, got up the company, and I am
willing to serve under him, if he'll order us to mount at once! If not, rather than lose more
time, I'll head as many as are ready to go."

Barton saw how the tide was turning, and suddenly determined to cover up his shame, if possible,
with a mantle of magnanimity.

"The fellows are right, Gilbert!" he said. "You deserve to take the lead to-day, so go ahead;
I'll follow you!"

"Mount, then, all of you!" Gilbert cried, without further hesitation. In a second he was on
Roger's back. "You, Barton," he ordered, "take three with you and make for the New-Garden cross-road
as fast as you can. Pratt, you and three more towards the Hammer-and-Trowel; while I, with
the rest, follow the direct trail."

No more time was wasted in talking. The men took their guns and mounted, the two detached commands
were told off, and in five minutes the village was left to its own inhabitants.

Gilbert had a long and perplexing chase, but very little came of it. The trail of Sandy Flash's
horse was followed without much difficulty until it struck the west branch of Redley Creek.
There it suddenly ceased, and more than an hour elapsed before some one discovered it, near
the road, a quarter of a mile further up the stream. Thence it turned towards the Hammer-and-Trowel,
but no one at the farm-houses on the road had seen any one pass except a Quaker, wearing the
usual broad-brimmed hat and drab coat, and mounted on a large, sleepy-looking horse.

About the middle of the afternoon, Gilbert detected, in one of the lanes leading across to
the Street Road, the marks of a galloping steed, and those who had a little lingering knowledge
of wood-craft noticed that the gallop often ceased suddenly, changed to a walk, and was then
as suddenly resumed. Along the Street Road no one had been seen except a Quaker, apparently
the same person. Gilbert and his hunters now suspected the disguise, but the difficulty of
following the trail had increased with every hour of lost time; and after scouring along the
Brandywine and then crossing into the Pocopsin valley, they finally gave up the chase, late
in the day. It was the general opinion that Sandy had struck northward, and was probably safe
in one of his lairs among the Welch Mountains.

When they reached the Unicorn tavern at dusk, Gilbert found Joe Fairthorn impatiently waiting
for him. Sally had been "tearin' around like mad," (so Joe described his sister's excitement,)
having twice visited the village during the afternoon in the hope of seeing the hero of the
day--after Sandy Flash, of course, who had, and deserved, the first place.

"And, Gilbert," said Joe, "I wasn't to forgit to tell you that we're a-goin' to have a huskin'
frolic o' Wednesday night,--day after to-morrow, you know. Dad's behindhand with huskin', and
the moon's goin' to be full, and Mark he said Let's have a frolic, and I'm comin' home to meet
Gilbert anyhow, and so I'll be there. And Sally she said I'll have Martha and lots o' girls,
only we shan't come out into the field till you're nigh about done. Then Mark he said That
won't take long, and if you don't help me with my shocks I won't come, and Sally she hit him,
and so it's all agreed. And you'll come, Gilbert, won't you?"

"Yes, yes, Joe," Gilbert answered, a little impatiently; "tell Sally I'll come." Then he turned
Roger's head towards home.

He was glad of the solitary ride which allowed him to collect his thoughts. Fearless as was
his nature, the danger he had escaped might well have been cause for grave self-congratulation;
but the thought of it scarcely lingered beyond the moment of the encounter. The astonishing
discovery that the stranger, Fortune, and the redoubtable Sandy Flash were one and the same
person; the mysterious words which this person had addressed to him; the repetition of the
same words by Deb. Smith,--all these facts, suggesting, as their common solution, some secret
which concerned himself, perplexed his mind, already more than sufficiently occupied with mystery.

It suddenly flashed across his memory, as he rode homeward, that on the evening when he returned
from the fox-chase, his mother had manifested an unusual interest in the strange huntsman,
questioning him minutely as to the latter's appearance. Was she--or, rather, had she been,
at one time of her life--acquainted with Sandy Flash? And if so--

"No!" he cried aloud, "it is impossible! It could not--cannot be!" The new possibility which
assailed him was even more terrible than his previous belief in the dishonor of his birth.
Better, a thousand times, he thought, be basely born than the son of an outlaw! It seemed that
every attempt he made to probe his mother's secret threatened to overwhelm him with a knowledge
far worse than the fret of his ignorance. Why not be patient, therefore, leaving the solution
to her and to time?

Nevertheless, a burning curiosity led him to relate to his mother, that evening, the events
of the day. He watched her closely as he described his encounter with the highwayman, and repeated
the latter's words. It was quite natural that Mary Potter should shudder and turn pale during
the recital--quite natural that a quick expression of relief should shine from her face at
the close; but Gilbert could not be sure that her interest extended to any one except himself.
She suggested no explanation of Sandy Flash's words, and he asked none.

"I shall know no peace, child," she said, "until the money has been paid, and the mortgage
is in your hands."

"You won't have long to wait, now, mother," he answered cheerily. "I shall see Mark on Wednesday
evening, and therefore can start for Chester on Friday, come rain or shine. As for Sandy Flash,
he's no doubt up on the Welch Mountain by this time. It isn't his way to turn up twice in succession,
in the same place."

"You don't know him, Gilbert. He won't soon forget that you shot at him."

"I seem to be safe enough, if he tells the truth." Gilbert could not help remarking.

Mary Potter shook her head, and said nothing.

Two more lovely Indian-summer days went by, and as the wine-red sun slowly quenched his lower
limb in the denser smoke along the horizon, the great bronzed moon struggled out of it, on
the opposite rim of the sky. It was a weird light and a weird atmosphere, such as we might
imagine overspreading Babylonian ruins, on the lone plains of the Euphrates; but no such fancies
either charmed or tormented the lusty, wide-awake, practical lads and lasses, whom the brightening
moon beheld on their way to the Fairthorn farm. "The best night for huskin' that ever was,"
comprised the sum of their appreciation.

At the old farm-house there was great stir of preparation. Sally, with her gown pinned up,
dodged in and out of kitchen and sitting-room, catching herself on every door-handle, while
Mother Fairthorn, beaming with quiet content, stood by the fire, and inspected the great kettles
which were to contain the materials for the midnight supper. Both were relieved when Betsy
Lavender made her appearance, saying,--

"Let down your gownd, Sally, and give me that ladle. What'd be a mighty heap o' work for you,
in that flustered condition, is child's-play to the likes o' me, that's as steady as a cart-horse,--not
that self-praise, as the sayin' is, is any recommendation,--but my kickin' and prancin' days
is over, and high time, too."

"No, Betsy, I'll not allow it!" cried Sally. "You must enjoy yourself, too." But she had parted
with the ladle, while speaking, and Miss Lavender, repeating the words "Enjoy yourself, too!"
quietly took her place in the kitchen.

The young men, as they arrived, took their way to the corn-field, piloted by Joe and Jake Fairthorn.
These boys each carried a wallet over his shoulders, the jug in the front end balancing that
behind, and the only casualty that occurred was when Jake, jumping down from a fence, allowed
his jugs to smite together, breaking one of them to shivers.

"There, that'll come out o' your pig-money," said Joe.

"I don't care," Jake retorted, "if daddy only pays me the rest."

The boys, it must be known, received every year the two smallest pigs of the old sow's litter,
with the understanding that these were to be their separate property, on condition of their
properly feeding and fostering the whole herd. This duty they performed with great zeal and
enthusiasm, and numberless and splendid were the castles which they built with the coming money;
yet, alas! when the pigs were sold, it always happened that Farmer Fairthorn found some inconvenient
debt pressing him, and the boys' pig-money was therefore taken as a loan,--only as a loan,--and
permanently invested.

There were between three and four hundred shocks to husk, and the young men, armed with husking-pegs
of hickory, fastened by a leathern strap over the two middle fingers, went bravely to work.
Mark Deane, who had reached home that afternoon, wore the seventy-five dollars in a buckskin
belt around his waist, and anxiously awaited the arrival of Gilbert Potter, of whose adventure
he had already heard. Mark's presumed obligations to Alfred Barton prevented him from expressing
his overpowering contempt for that gentleman's conduct, but he was not obliged to hold his
tongue about Gilbert's pluck and decision, and he did not.

The latter, detained at the house by Mother Fairthorn and Sally,--both of whom looked upon
him as one arisen from the dead,--did not reach the field until the others had selected their
rows, overturned the shocks, and were seated in a rustling line, in the moonlight.

"Gilbert!" shouted Mark, "come here! I've kep' the row next to mine, for you! And I want to
get a grip o' your hand, my bold boy!"

He sprang up, flinging an armful of stalks behind him, and with difficulty restrained an impulse
to clasp Gilbert to his broad breast. It was not the custom of the neighborhood; the noblest
masculine friendship would have been described by the people in no other terms than "They are
very thick," and men who loved each other were accustomed to be satisfied with the knowledge.
The strong moonlight revealed to Gilbert Potter the honest heart which looked out of Mark's
blue eyes, as the latter held his hand like a vice, and said,--

"I've heard all about it."

"More than there was occasion for, very likely," Gilbert replied. "I'll tell you my story some
day, Mark; but tonight we must work and not talk."

"All right, Gilbert. I say, though, I've got the money you wanted; we'll fix the matter after
supper."

The rustling of the corn-stalks recommenced, and the tented lines of shocks slowly fell as
the huskers worked their way over the brow of the hill, whence the ground sloped down into
a broad belt of shade, cast by the woods in the bottom. Two or three dogs which had accompanied
their masters coursed about the field, or darted into the woods in search of an opossum-trail.
Joe and Jake Fairthorn would gladly have followed them, but were afraid of venturing into the
mysterious gloom; so they amused themselves with putting on the coats which the men had thrown
aside, and gravely marched up and down the line, commending the rapid and threatening the tardy
workers.

Erelong, the silence was broken by many a shout of exultation or banter, many a merry sound
of jest or fun, as the back of the night's task was fairly broken. One husker mimicked the
hoot of an owl in the thickets below; another sang a melody popular at the time, the refrain
of which was,--

  "Be it late or early, be it late or soon,
   It's I will enjoy the sweet rose in June!"

"Sing out, boys!" shouted Mark, "so the girls can hear you! It's time they were comin' to look
after us."

"Sing, yourself!" some one replied. "You can out-bellow the whole raft."

Without more ado, Mark opened his mouth and began chanting, in a ponderous voice,--

  "On yonder mountain summit
     My castle you will find,
   Renown'd in ann-cient historee,--
     My name it's Rinardine!"

Presently, from the upper edge of the wood, several feminine voices were heard, singing another
part of the same song:--

  "Beware of meeting Rinar,
    All on the mountains high!"

Such a shout of fun ran over the field, that the frighted owl ceased his hooting in the thicket.
The moon stood high, and turned the night-haze into diffused silver. Though the hollows were
chill with gathering frost, the air was still mild and dry on the hills, and the young ladies,
in their warm gowns of home-made flannel, enjoyed both the splendor of the night and the lively
emulation of the scattered laborers.

"Turn to, and give us a lift, girls," said Mark.

"Beware of meeting Rinar!" Sally laughed.

"Because you know what you promised him, Sally," he retorted. "Come, a bargain's a bargain;
there's the outside row standin'--not enough of us to stretch all the way acrost the field--so
let's you and me take that and bring it down square with th' others. The rest may keep my row
a-goin', if they can."

Two or three of the other maidens had cut the supporting stalks of the next shock, and overturned
it with much laughing. "I can't husk, Mark," said Martha Deane, "but I'll promise to superintend
these, if you will keep Sally to her word."

There was a little running hither and thither, a show of fight, a mock scramble, and it ended
by Sally tumbling over a pumpkin, and then being carried off by Mark to the end of the outside
row of shocks, some distance in the rear of the line of work. Here he laid the stalks straight
for her, doubled his coat and placed it on the ground for a seat, and then took his place on
the other side of the shock.

Sally husked a few ears in silence, but presently found it more agreeable to watch her partner,
as he bent to the labor, ripping the covering from each ear with one or two rapid motions,
snapping the cob, and flinging the ear over his shoulder into the very centre of the heap,
without turning his head. When the shock was finished, there were five stalks on her side,
and fifty on Mark's.

He laughed at the extent of her help, but, seeing how bright and beautiful her face looked
in the moonlight, how round and supple her form, contrasted with his own rough proportions,
he added, in a lower tone,--

"Never mind the work, Sally--I only wanted to have you with me."

Sally was silent, but happy, and Mark proceeded to overthrow the next shock.

When they were again seated face to face, he no longer bent so steadily over the stalks, but
lifted his head now and then to watch the gloss of the moon on her black hair, and the mellow
gleam that seemed to slide along her cheek and chin, playing with the shadows, as she moved.

"Sally!" he said at last, "you must ha' seen, over and over ag'in, that I like to be with you.
Do you care for me, at all?"

She flushed and trembled a little as she answered,--"Yes, Mark, I do."

He husked half a dozen ears rapidly, then looked up again and asked,--

"Do you care enough for me, Sally, to take me for good and all? I can't put it into fine speech,
but I love you dearly and honestly; will you marry me?"

Sally bent down her head, so choked with the long-delayed joy that she found it impossible
to speak. Mark finished the few remaining stalks and put them behind him; he sat upon the ground
at her feet.

"There's my hand, Sally; will you take it, and me with it?"

Her hand slowly made its way into his broad, hard palm. Once the surrender expressed, her confusion
vanished; she lifted her head for his kiss, then leaned it on his shoulder and whispered,--

"Oh, Mark, I've loved you for ever and ever so long a time!"

"Why, Sally, deary," said he, "that's my case, too; and I seemed to feel it in my bones that
we was to be a pair; only, you know, I had to get a foothold first. I couldn't come to you
with empty hands--though, faith! there's not much to speak of in 'em!"

"Never mind that, Mark,--I'm so glad you want me!"

And indeed she was; why should she not, therefore, say so?

"There's no need o' broken sixpences, or true-lovers' knots, I guess," said Mark, giving her
another kiss. "I'm a plain-spoken fellow, and when I say I want you for my wife, Sally, I mean
it. But we mustn't be settin' here, with the row unhusked; that'll never do. See if I don't
make the ears spin! And I guess you can help me a little now, can't you?"

With a jolly laugh, Mark picked up the corn-cutter and swung it above the next shock. In another
instant it would have fallen, but a loud shriek burst out from the bundled stalks, and Joe
Fairthorn crept forth on his hands and knees.

The lovers stood petrified. "Why, you young devil!" exclaimed Mark, while the single word "JOE!"
which came from Sally's lips, contained the concentrated essence of a thousand slaps.

"Don't--don't!" whimpered Joe. "I'll not tell anybody, indeed I wont!"

"If you do," threatened Mark, brandishing the corn-cutter, "it isn't your legs I shall cut
off, but your head, even with the shoulders. What were you doin' in that shock?"

"I wanted to hear what you and Sally were savin' to each other. Folks said you two was a-courtin',"
Joe answered.

The comical aspect of the matter suddenly struck Mark, and he burst into a roar of laughter.

"Mark, how can you?" said Sally, bridling a little.

"Well,--it's all in the fam'ly, after all. Joe, tarnation scamp as he is, is long-headed enough
to keep his mouth shut, rather than have people laugh at his relations--eh, Joe?"

"I said I'd never say a word," Joe affirmed, "and I won't. You see if I even tell Jake. But
I say, Mark, when you and Sally get married, will you be my uncle?"

"It depends on your behavior," Mark gravely answered, seating himself to husk. Joe magnanimously
left the lovers, and pitched over the third shock ahead, upon which he began to husk with might
and main, in order to help them out with their task.

By the time the outside row was squared, the line had reached the bottom of the slope, where
the air was chill, although the shadows of the forest had shifted from the field. Then there
was a race among the huskers for the fence, the girls promising that he whose row was first
husked out, should sit at the head of the table, and be called King of the Corn-field. The
stalks rustled, the cobs snapped, the ears fell like a shower of golden cones, and amid much
noise and merriment, not only the victor's row but all the others were finished, and Farmer
Fairthorn's field stood husked from end to end.

Gilbert Potter had done his share of the work steadily, and as silently as the curiosity of
the girls, still excited by his recent adventure, would allow. It was enough for him that he
caught a chance word, now and then, from Martha. The emulation of the race with which the husking
closed favored them, and he gladly lost a very fair chance of becoming King of the Corn-field
for the opportunity of asking her to assist him in contriving a brief interview, on the way
to the house.

Where two work together to the same end, there is no doubt about the result, especially as,
in this case, the company preferred returning through the wood instead of crossing the open,
high-fenced fields. When they found themselves together, out of ear-shot of the others, Gilbert
lost no time in relating the particulars of his encounter with Sandy Flash, the discovery he
had made, and the mysterious assurance of Deb. Smith.

Martha listened with the keenest interest. "It is very, very strange," she said, "and the strangest
of all is that he should be that man, Fortune. As for his words, I do not find them so singular.
He has certainly the grandest courage, robber as he is, and he admires the same quality in
you; no doubt you made a favorable impression upon him on the day of the fox-chase; and so,
although you are hunting him down, he will not injure you, if he can help it. I find all that
very natural, in a man of his nature."

"But Deb. Smith?" Gilbert asked.

"That," said Martha, "is rather a curious coincidence, but nothing more, I think. She is said
to be a superstitious creature, and if you have ever befriended her,--and you may have done
so, Gilbert, without your good heart being aware of it,--she thinks that her spells, or charms,
or what not, will save you from harm. No, I was wrong; it is not so very strange, except Fortune's
intimacy with Alfred Barton, which everybody was talking about at the time."

Gilbert drew a deep breath of relief. How the darkness of his new fear vanished, in the light
of Martha's calm, sensible words! "How wonderfully you have guessed the truth!". he cried.
"So it is; Deb. Smith thinks she is beholden to me for kind treatment; she blew upon my palm,
in a mysterious way, and said she would stand by me in time of need! But that about Fortune
puzzles me. I can see that Barton is very shy of me since he thinks I've made the discovery."

"We must ask Betsy Lavender's counsel, there," said Martha. "It is beyond my depth."

The supper smoked upon the table when they reached the farm-house. It had been well earned,
and it was enjoyed, both in a physical and a social sense, to the very extent of the guests'
capacities. The King sat at the head of the table, and Gilbert Potter--forced into that position
by Mark--at the foot. Sally Fairthorn insisted on performing her duty as handmaiden, although,
as Betsy Lavender again and again declared, her room was better than her help. Sally's dark
eyes fairly danced and sparkled; her full, soft lips shone with a scarlet bloom; she laughed
with a wild, nervous joyousness, and yet rushed about haunted with a fearful dread of suddenly
bursting into tears. Her ways were so well known, however, that a little extra impulsiveness
excited no surprise. Martha Deane was the only person who discovered what had taken place.
As the girls were putting on their hats and cloaks in the bedroom, Sally drew her into the
passage, kissed her a number of times with passionate vehemence, and then darted off without
saying a word.

Gilbert rode home through the splendid moonlight, in the small hours of the morning, with a
light heart, and Mark's money-belt buckled around his waist.

CHAPTER XX.

GILBERT ON THE ROAD TO CHESTER.

Being now fully prepared to undertake his journey to Chester, Gilbert remembered his promise
to Alfred Barton. As the subject had not again been mentioned between them,--probably owing
to the excitement produced by Sandy Flash's visit to Kennett Square, and its consequences,--he
felt bound to inform Barton of his speedy departure, and to renew his offer of service.

He found the latter in the field, assisting Giles, who was hauling home the sheaves of corn-fodder
in a harvest-wagon. The first meeting of the two men did not seem to be quite agreeable to
either. Gilbert's suspicions had been aroused, although he could give them no definite form,
and Barton shrank from any reference to what had now become a very sore topic.

"Giles," said the latter, after a moment of evident embarrassment, "I guess you may drive home
with that load, and pitch it off; I'll wait for you here."

When the rustling wain had reached a convenient distance, Gilbert began,--

"I only wanted to say that I'm going to Chester tomorrow."

"Oh, yes!" Barton exclaimed, "about that money? I suppose you want all o' yours?"

"It's as I expected. But you said you could borrow elsewhere, and send it by me."

"The fact is," said Barton, "that I've both borrowed and sent. I'm obliged to you, all the
same, Gilbert; the will's as good as the deed, you know; but I got the money from--well, from
a friend, who was about going down on his own business, and so that stone killed both my birds.
I ought to ha' sent you word, by rights."

"Is your friend," Gilbert asked, "a safe and trusty man?"

"Safe enough, I guess--a little wild, at times, maybe; but he's not such a fool as to lose
what he'd never have a chance of getting again."

"Then," said Gilbert, "it's hardly likely that he's the same friend you took such a fancy to,
at the Hammer-and-Trowel, last spring?"

Alfred Barton started as if he had been shot, and a deep color spread over his face. His lower
jaw slackened and his eyes moved uneasily from side to side.

"Who--who do you mean?" he stammered.

The more evident his embarrassment became, the more Gilbert was confirmed in his suspicion
that there was some secret understanding between the two men. The thing seemed incredible,
but the same point, he remembered had occurred to Martha Deane's mind, when she so readily
explained the other circumstances.

"Barton," he said, sternly, "you know very well whom I mean. What became of your friend Fortune?
Didn't you see him at the tavern, last Monday morning?"

"Y-yes--oh, yes! I know who he is now, the damned scoundrel! I'd give a hundred dollars to
see him dance upon nothing!"

He clenched his fists, and uttered a number of other oaths, which need not be repeated. His
rage seemed so real that Gilbert was again staggered. Looking at the heavy, vulgar face before
him,--the small, restless eyes, the large sensuous mouth, the forehead whose very extent, in
contradiction to ordinary laws, expressed imbecility rather than intellect, it was impossible
to associate great cunning and shrewdness with such a physiognomy. Every line, at that moment,
expressed pain and exasperation. But Gilbert felt bound to go a step further.

"Barton," he said, "didn't you know who Fortune was, on that day?"

"N-no--no! On that day--NO! Blast me if I did!"

"Not before you left him?"

"Well, I'll admit that a suspicion of it came to me at the very last moment--too late to be
of any use. But come, damme! that's all over, and what's the good o' talking? You tried your
best to catch the fellow, too, but he was too much for you! 'T isn't such an easy job, eh?"

This sort of swagger was Alfred Barton's only refuge, when he was driven into a corner. Though
some color still lingered in his face, he spread his shoulders with a bold, almost defiant
air, and met Gilbert's eye with a steady gaze. The latter was not prepared to carry his examination
further, although he was still far from being satisfied.

"Come, come, Gilbert!" Barton presently resumed, "I mean no offence. You showed yourself to
be true blue, and you led the hunt as well as any man could ha' done; but the very thought
o' the fellow makes me mad, and I'll know no peace till he's strung up. If I was your age,
now! A man seems to lose his spirit as he gets on in years, and I'm only sorry you weren't
made captain at the start, instead o' me. You shall be, from this time on; I won't take it again!"

"One thing I'll promise you," said Gilbert, with a meaning look, "that I won't let him walk
into the bar-room of the Unicorn, without hindrance."

"I'll bet you won't!" Barton exclaimed. "All I'm afraid of is, that he won't try it again."

"We'll see; this highway-robbery must have an end. I must now be going. Good-bye!"

"Good-bye, Gilbert; take care o' yourself!" said Barton, in a very good humor, now that the
uncomfortable interview was over. "And, I say," he added, "remember that I stand ready to do
you a good turn, whenever I can!"

"Thank you!" responded Gilbert, as he turned Roger's head; but he said to himself,--"when all
other friends fail, I may come to you, not sooner."

The next morning showed signs that the Indian Summer had reached its close. All night long
the wind had moaned and lamented in the chimneys, and the sense of dread in the outer atmosphere
crept into the house and weighed upon the slumbering inmates. There was a sound in the forest
as of sobbing Dryads, waiting for the swift death and the frosty tomb. The blue haze of dreams
which had overspread the land changed into an ashy, livid mist, dragging low, and clinging
to the features of the landscape like a shroud to the limbs of a corpse.

The time, indeed, had come for a change. It was the 2nd of November; and after a summer and
autumn beautiful almost beyond parallel, a sudden and severe winter was generally anticipated.
In this way, even the most ignorant field-hand recognized the eternal balance of Nature.

Mary Potter, although the day had arrived for which she had so long and fervently prayed, could
not shake off the depressing influence of the weather. After breakfast, when Gilbert began
to make preparations for the journey, she found herself so agitated that it was with difficulty
she could give him the usual assistance. The money, which was mostly in silver coin, had been
sewed into tight rolls, and was now to be carefully packed in the saddle-bags: the priming
of the pistols was to be renewed, and the old, shrivelled covers of the holsters so greased,
hammered out, and padded that they would keep the weapons dry in case of rain. Although Gilbert
would reach Chester that evening,--the distance being not more than twenty-four miles,--the
preparations, principally on account of his errand, were conducted with a grave and solemn
sense of their importance.

When, finally, everything was in readiness,--the saddle-bags so packed that the precious rolls
could not rub or jingle; the dinner of sliced bread and pork placed over them, in a folded
napkin; the pistols, intended more for show than use, thrust into the antiquated holsters;
and all these deposited and secured on Roger's back,--Gilbert took his mother's hand, and said,--

"Good-bye, mother! Don't worry, now, if I shouldn't get back until late to-morrow evening;
I can't tell exactly how long the business will take."

He had never looked more strong and cheerful. The tears came to Mary Potter's eyes, but she
held them hack by a powerful effort. All she could say--and her voice trembled in spite of
herself--was,--

"Good-bye, my boy! Remember that I've worked, and thought, and prayed, for you alone,--and
that I'd do more--I'd do all, if I only could!"

His look said, "I do not forget!" He sat already in the saddle, and was straightening the folds
of his heavy cloak, so that it might protect his knees. The wind had arisen, and the damp mist
was driving down the glen, mixed with scattered drops of a coming rain-storm. As he rode slowly
away, Mary Potter lifted her eyes to the dense gray of the sky, darkening from moment to moment,
listened to the murmur of the wind over the wooded hills opposite, and clasped her hands with
the appealing gesture which had now become habitual to her.

"Two days more!" she sighed, as she entered the house,--"two days more of fear and prayer!
Lord forgive me that I am so weak of faith--that I make myself trouble where I ought to be
humble and thankful!"

Gilbert rode slowly, because he feared the contents of his saddle-bags would be disturbed by
much jolting. Proof against wind and weather, he was not troubled by the atmospheric signs,
but rather experienced a healthy glow and exhilaration of the blood as the mist grew thicker
and beat upon his face like the blown spray of a waterfall. By the time he had reached the
Carson farm, the sky contracted to a low, dark arch of solid wet, in which there was no positive
outline of cloud, and a dull, universal roar, shorn of all windy sharpness, hummed over the land.

From the hill behind the farm-house, whence he could overlook the bottom-lands of Redley Creek,
and easily descry, on a clear day, the yellow front of Dr. Deane's house in Kennett Square,
he now beheld a dim twilight chaos, wherein more and more of the distance was blotted out.
Yet still some spell held up the suspended rain, and the drops that fell seemed to be only
the leakage of the airy cisterns before they burst. The fields on either hand were deserted.
The cattle huddled behind the stacks or crouched disconsolately in fence-corners. Here and
there a farmer made haste to cut and split a supply of wood for his kitchen-fire, or mended
the rude roof on which his pigs depended for shelter; but all these signs showed how soon he
intended to be snugly housed, to bide out the storm.

It was a day of no uncertain promise. Gilbert confessed to himself, before he reached the Philadelphia
road, that he would rather have chosen another day for the journey; yet the thought of returning
was farthest from his mind. Even when the rain, having created its little pools and sluices
in every hollow of the ground, took courage, and multiplied its careering drops, and when the
wet gusts tore open his cloak and tugged at his dripping hat, he cheerily shook the moisture
from his cheeks and eyelashes, patted Roger's streaming neck, and whistled a bar or two of
an old carol.

There were pleasant hopes enough to occupy his mind, without dwelling on these slight external
annoyances. He still tried to believe that his mother's release would be hastened by the independence
which lay folded in his saddle-bags, and the thud of the wet leather against Roger's hide was
a sound to cheer away any momentary foreboding. Then, Martha--dear, noble girl! She was his;
it was but to wait, and waiting must be easy when the end was certain. He felt, moreover, that
in spite of his unexplained disgrace, he had grown in the respect of his neighbors; that his
persevering integrity was beginning to bring its reward, and he thanked God very gratefully
that he had been saved from adding to his name any stain of his own making.

In an hour or more the force of the wind somewhat abated, but the sky seemed to dissolve into
a massy flood. The rain rushed down, not in drops, but in sheets, and in spite of his cloak,
he was wet to the skin. For half an hour he was obliged to halt in the wood between Old Kennett
and Chadd's Ford, and here he made the discovery that with all his care the holsters were nearly
full of water. Brown streams careered down the long, meadowy hollow on his left, wherein many
Hessian soldiers lay buried. There was money buried with them, the people believed, but no
one cared to dig among the dead at midnight, and many a wild tale of frighted treasure-seekers
recurred to his mind.

At the bottom of the long hill flowed the Brandywine, now rolling swift and turbid, level with
its banks. Roger bravely breasted the flood, and after a little struggle, reached the opposite
side. Then across the battle-meadow, in the teeth of the storm, along the foot of the low hill,
around the brow of which the entrenchments of the American army made a clayey streak, until
the ill-fated field, sown with grape-shot and bullets which the farmers turned up every spring
with their furrows, lay behind him. The story of the day was familiar to him, from the narratives
of scores of eye-witnesses, and he thought to himself, as he rode onward, wet, lashed by the
furious rain, yet still of good cheer,--"Though the fight was lost, the cause was won."

After leaving the lovely lateral valley which stretches eastward for two miles, at right angles
to the course of the Brandywine, he entered a rougher and wilder region, more thickly wooded
and deeply indented with abrupt glens. Thus far he had not met with a living soul. Chester
was now not more than eight or ten miles distant, and, as nearly as he could guess, it was
about two o'clock in the afternoon. With the best luck, he could barely reach his destination
by nightfall, for the rain showed no signs of abating, and there were still several streams
to be crossed.

His blood leaped no more so nimbly along his veins; the continued exposure had at last chilled
and benumbed him. Letting the reins fall upon Roger's neck, he folded himself closely in his
wet cloak, and bore the weather with a grim, patient endurance. The road dropped into a rough
glen, crossed a stony brook, and then wound along the side of a thickly wooded hill. On his
right the bank had been cut away like a wall; on the left a steep slope of tangled thicket
descended to the stream.

One moment, Gilbert knew that he was riding along this road, Roger pressing close to the bank
for shelter from the wind and rain; the next, there was a swift and tremendous grip on his
collar, Roger slid from under him, and he was hurled backwards, with great force, upon the
ground. Yet even in the act of falling, he seemed to be conscious that a figure sprang down
upon the road from the bank above.

It was some seconds before the shock, which sent a crash through his brain and a thousand fiery
sparkles into his eyes, passed away. Then a voice, keen, sharp, and determined, which it seemed
that he knew, exclaimed,--

"Damn the beast! I'll have to shoot him."

Lifting his head with some difficulty, for he felt weak and giddy, and propping himself on
his arm, he saw Sandy Flash in the road, three or four paces off, fronting Roger, who had whirled
around, and with levelled ears and fiery eyes, seemed to be meditating an attack.

The robber wore a short overcoat, made entirely of musk-rat skins, which completely protected
the arms in his belt. He had a large hunting-knife in his left hand, and appeared to be feeling
with his right for the stock of a pistol. It seemed to Gilbert that nothing but the singular
force of his eye held back the horse from rushing upon him.

"Keep as you are, young man!" he cried, without turning his head, "or a bullet goes into your
horse's brain. I know the beast, and don't want to see him slaughtered. If you don't, order
him to be quiet!"

Gilbert, although he knew every trait of the noble animal's nature better than those of many
a human acquaintance, was both surprised and touched at the instinct with which he had recognized
an enemy, and the fierce courage with which he stood on the defensive. In that moment of bewilderment,
he thought only of Roger, whose life hung by a thread, which his silence would instantly snap.
He might have seen--had there been time for reflection--that nothing would have been gained,
in any case, by the animal's death; for, stunned and unarmed as he was, he was no match for
the powerful, wary highwayman.

Obeying the feeling which entirely possessed him, he cried,--"Roger! Roger, old boy!"

The horse neighed a shrill, glad neigh of recognition, and pricked up his ears. Sandy Flash
stood motionless; he had let go of his pistol, and concealed the knife in a fold of his coat.

"Quiet, Roger, quiet!" Gilbert again commanded.

The animal understood the tone, if not the words. He seemed completely reassured, and advanced
a step or two nearer. With the utmost swiftness and dexterity, combined with an astonishing
gentleness,--making no gesture which might excite Roger's suspicion,--Sandy Flash thrust his
hand into the holsters, smiled mockingly, cut the straps of the saddle-bags with a single movement
of his keen-edged knife, tested the weight of the bags, nodded, grinned, and then, stepping
aside, he allowed the horse to pass him. But he watched every motion of the head and ears,
as he did so.

Roger, however, seemed to think only of his master. Bending down his head, he snorted warmly
into Gilbert's pale face, and then swelled his sides with a deep breath of satisfaction. Tears
of shame, grief, and rage swam in Gilbert's eyes. "Roger," he said, "I've lost everything but you!"

He staggered to his feet and leaned against the bank. The extent of his loss--the hopelessness
of its recovery--the impotence of his burning desire to avenge the outrage--overwhelmed him.
The highwayman still stood, a few paces off, watching him with a grim curiosity.

With a desperate effort, Gilbert turned towards him. "Sandy Flash," he cried, "do you know
what you are doing?"

"I rather guess so,"--and the highwayman grinned. "I've done it before, but never quite so
neatly as this time."

"I've heard it said, to your credit," Gilbert continued, "that, though you rob the rich, you
sometimes give to the poor. This time you've robbed a poor man."

"I've only borrowed a little from one able to spare a good deal more than I've got,--and the
grudge I owe him isn't paid off yet."

"It is not so!" Gilbert cried. "Every cent has been earned by my own and my mother's hard work.
I was taking it to Chester, to pay off a debt upon the farm; and the loss and the disappointment
will well nigh break my mother's heart. According to your views of things, you owe me a grudge,
but you are outside of the law, and I did my duty as a lawful man by trying to shoot you!"

"And I, bein' outside o' the law, as you say, have let you off mighty easy, young man!" exclaimed
Sandy Flash, his eyes shining angrily and his teeth glittering. "I took you for a fellow o'
pluck, not for one that'd lie, even to the robber they call me! What's all this pitiful story
about Barton's money?"

"Barton's money!"

"Oh--ay! You didn't agree to take some o' his money to Chester?" The mocking expression on
the highwayman's face was perfectly diabolical. He slung the saddle-bags over his shoulders,
and turned to leave.

Gilbert was so amazed that for a moment he knew not what to say. Sandy Flash took three strides
up the road, and then sprang down into the thicket.

"It is not Barton's money!" Gilbert cried, with a last desperate appeal,--"it is mine, mine
and my mother's!"

A short, insulting laugh was the only answer.

"Sandy Flash!" he cried again, raising his voice almost to a shout, as the crashing of the
robber's steps through the brushwood sounded farther and farther down the glen, "Sandy Flash!
You have plundered a widow's honest earnings to-day, and a curse goes with such plunder! Hark
you! if never before, you are cursed from this hour forth! I call upon God, in my mother's
name, to mark you!"

There was no sound in reply, except the dull, dreary hum of the wind and the steady lashing
of the rain. The growing darkness of the sky told of approaching night, and the wild glen,
bleak enough before, was now a scene of utter and hopeless desolation to Gilbert's eyes. He
was almost unmanned, not only by the cruel loss, but also by the stinging sense of outrage
which it had left behind. A mixed feeling of wretched despondency and shame filled his heart,
as he leaned, chill, weary, and still weak from the shock of his fall, upon Roger's neck.

The faithful animal turned his head from time to time, as if to question his master's unusual
demeanor. There was a look of almost human sympathy in his large eyes; he was hungry and restless,
yet would not move until the word of command had been given.

"Poor fellow!" said Gilbert, patting his cheek, "we've both fared ill to-day. But you mustn't
suffer any longer for my sake."

He then mounted and rode onward through the storm.

CHAPTER XXI.

ROGER REPAYS HIS MASTER.

A mile or more beyond the spot where Gilbert Potter had been waylaid, there was a lonely tavern,
called the "Drovers' Inn." Here he dismounted, more for his horse's sake than his own, although
he was sore, weary, and sick of heart. After having carefully groomed Roger with his own hands,
and commended him to the special attentions of the ostler, he entered the warm public room,
wherein three or four storm-bound drovers were gathered around the roaring fire of hickory logs.

