In the meantime he was to have a change of scene.  Isabella followed Ferdinand to the siege
of Malaga, where the Court was established; and as there were intervals in which other than
military business might be transacted, Columbus was ordered to follow them in case his affairs
should come up for consideration.  They did not; but the man himself had an experience that
may have helped to keep his thoughts from brooding too much on his unfulfilled ambition.  Years
afterwards, when far away on lonely seas, amid the squalor of a little ship and the staggering
buffets of a gale, there would surely sometimes leap into his memory a brightly coloured picture
of this scene in the fertile valley of Malaga: the silken pavilions of the Court, the great
encampment of nobility with its arms and banners extending in a semicircle to the seashore,
all glistening and moving in the bright sunshine.  There was added excitement at this time
at an attempt to assassinate Ferdinand and Isabella, a fanatic Moor having crept up to one
of the pavilions and aimed a blow at two people whom he mistook for the King and Queen.  They
turned out to be Don Alvaro de Portugal, who was dangerously wounded, and Columbus's friend,
the Marquesa de Moya, who was unhurt; but it was felt that the King and Queen had had a narrow
escape.  The siege was raised on the 18th of August, and the sovereigns went to spend the winter
at Zaragoza; and Columbus, once more condemned to wait, went back to Cordova.

It was here that he contracted his second and, so far as we know, his last romantic attachment.
The long idle days of summer and autumn at Cordova, empty of all serious occupation, gave nature
an opportunity for indulging her passion for life and continuity. It was difficult to get from one
tract to another, but the tracts themselves were quite clear of ice. I noticed with rather a
sinking that the floes on either side of us were assuming gigantic areas; one or two could not
have been less than 2 or 3 miles across. 
Three members of this family are known to us--two brothers, Diego and Pedro, both of whom commanded
ships in Columbus's expeditions, and a sister Beatriz.  Columbus was now a man of six-and-thirty,
while she was little more than a girl; he was handsome and winning, distinguished by the daring
and importance of his scheme, full of thrilling and romantic talk of distant lands; a very
interesting companion, we may be sure.  No wonder she fell in love with Christopher; no wonder
that he, feeling lonely and depressed by the many postponements of his suit at Court, and in
need of sympathy and encouragement, fell in these blank summer days into an intimacy that flamed
into a brief but happy passion.  Why Columbus never married Beatriz de Arana we cannot be sure,
for it is almost certain that his first wife had died some time before.  Perhaps he feared
to involve himself in any new or embarrassing ties; perhaps he loved unwillingly, and against
his reason; perhaps--although the suggestion is not a happy one--he by this time did not think
poor Beatriz good enough for the Admiral-elect of the Ocean Seas; perhaps (and more probably)
Beatriz was already married and deserted, for she bore the surname of Enriquez; and in that
case, there being no such thing as a divorce in the Catholic Church, she must either sin or
be celibate.  But however that may be, there was an uncanonical alliance between them which
evidently did not in the least scandalise her brothers and which resulted in the birth of Ferdinand
Columbus in the following year.  Christopher, so communicative and discursive upon some of
his affairs, is as reticent about Beatriz as he was about Philippa.  Beatriz shares with his
legitimate wife the curious distinction of being spoken of by Columbus to posterity only in
his will, which was executed at Valladolid the day before he died.  In the dry ink and vellum
of that ancient legal document is his only record of these two passions.  The reference to
Beatriz is as follows:

     "And I direct him [Diego] to make provision for Beatriz Enriquez,
     mother of D. Fernando, my son, that she may be able to live
     honestly, being a person to whom I am under very great obligation.
     And this shall be done for the satisfaction of my conscience,
     because this matter weighs heavily upon my soul.  The reason for
     which it is not fitting to write here."

About the condition of Beatriz, temporal and spiritual, there has been much controversy; but
where the facts are all so buried and inaccessible it is unseemly to agitate a veil which we
cannot lift, and behind which Columbus himself sheltered this incident of his life.  "Acquainted
with poverty" is one fragment of fact concerning her that has come down to us; acquainted also
with love and with happiness, it would seem, as many poor persons undoubtedly are.  Enough
for us to know that in the city of Cordova there lived a woman, rich or poor, gentle or humble,
married or not married, who brought for a time love and friendly companionship into the life
of Columbus; that she gave what she had for giving, without stint or reserve, and that she
became the mother of a son who inherited much of what was best in his father, and but for whom
the world would be in even greater darkness than it is on the subject of Christopher himself. 'You
know how carefully everything had been lashed, but no lashings could have withstood the onslaught
of these coal sacks for long'; they acted like battering rams.

'There was nothing for it but to grapple with the evil, and nearly all hands were labouring
for hours in the waist of the ship, heaving coal sacks overboard and re-lashing the petrol cases,
etc., in the best manner possible under such difficult and dangerous circumstances. The seas
were continually breaking over these people and now and again they would be completely submerged.
  Columbus attended it in one or other of these places,
but without result.  In August Beatriz gave birth to a son, who was christened Ferdinand, and
who lived to be a great comfort to his father, if not to her also.  But the miracle of paternity
was not now so new and wonderful as it had been; the battle of life, with its crosses and difficulties,
was thick about him; and perhaps he looked into this new-comer's small face with conflicting
thoughts, and memories of the long white beach and the crashing surf at Porto Santo, and regret
for things lost--so strangely mingled and inconsistent are the threads of human thought.  At
last he decided to turn his face elsewhere.  In September 1488 he went to Lisbon, for what
purpose it is not certain; possibly in connection with the affairs of his dead wife; and probably
also in the expectation of seeing his brother Bartholomew, to whom we may now turn our attention
for a moment.

After the failure of Columbus's proposals to the King of Portugal in 1486, and the break-up
of his home there, Bartholomew had also left Lisbon.  Bartholomew Diaz, a famous Portuguese
navigator, was leaving for the African coast in August, and Bartholomew Columbus is said to
have joined his small expedition of three caravels.  As they neared the latitude of the Cape
which he was trying to make, he ran into a gale which drove him a long way out of his course,
west and south.

The wind veered round from north-east to north-west, and he did not strike the land again until
May 1487.  When he did so his crew insisted upon his returning, as they declined to go any
further south.  He therefore turned to the west, and then made the startling discovery that
in the course of the tempest he had been blown round the Cape, and that the land he had made
was to the eastward of it; and he therefore rounded it on his way home.  He arrived back in
Lisbon in December 1488, when Columbus met his brother again, and was present at the reception
of Diaz by the King of Portugal.  They had a great deal to tell each other, these two brothers;
in the two years and a half that had gone since they had parted a great deal had happened to
them; and they both knew a good deal more about the great question in which they, were interested
than they had known when last they talked. 

We left the wharf at 2.30--bright sunshine--very gay scene. If anything more craft following
us than at Lyttelton--Mrs. Wilson, Mrs. Evans, and K. left at Heads
and back in Harbour Tug. Other tugs followed farther with Volunteer
Reserve Gunboat--all left about 4.30.  Christopher's unpleasant
experiences before learned committees and commissions had convinced him that unless he were
armed with some authoritative and documentary support for his theories they had little chance
of acceptance by the learned.  The, Idea was right; he knew that; but before he could convince
the academic mind, he felt that it must have the imprimatur of a mind whose learning could
not be impugned.  Therefore it is not an unfair guess--and it can be nothing more than a guess--that
Christopher and Bartholomew at this point laid their heads together, and decided that the next
time Christopher had to appear before a commission he would, so to speak, have something "up
his sleeve."  It was a risky thing to do, and must in any case be used only as a very last
resource; which would account for the fact that the Toscanelli correspondence was never used
at all, and is not mentioned in any document known to men written until long after Columbus's
death.

But these summers and winters of suspense are at last drawing to a close, and we must follow
Christopher rapidly through them until the hour of his triumph.  He was back in Spain in the
spring of 1489, his travelling expenses being defrayed out of the royal purse; and a little
later he was once more amid scenes of war at the siege of Baza, and, if report is true, taking
a hand himself, not without distinction.  It was there that he saw the two friars from the
convent of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem, who brought a message from the Grand Soldan of
Egypt, threatening the destruction of the Sepulchre if the Spanish sovereigns did not desist
from the war against Granada; and it was there that in his simple and pious mind he formed
the resolve that if ever his efforts should be crowned with success, and he himself become
rich and powerful, he would send a crusade for the rescue of the Holy Sepulchre.  And it was
there that, on the 22nd of December, he saw Boabdil, the elder of the two rival Kings of Granada,
surrender all his rights and claims to Spain. Surely now there will be a chance for him?  No;
there is another interruption, this time occasioned by the royal preparations for the marriage
of the Princess Isabella to the heir of Portugal.  Poor Columbus, sickened and disappointed
by these continual delays, irritated by a sense of the waste of his precious time, follows
the Court about from one place to another, raising a smile here and a scoff there, and pointed
at by children in the street.  There, is nothing so ludicrous as an Idea to those who do not
share it.

