The Master says "Resist not evil." How are we to understand this but by assuming that if we
try our strength against Evil, Evil is likely to overcome us? but on being confronted with
Evil we should instantly hold on to and join with the forces of Good and so have strength quietly
to continue side by side with Evil without being seduced by it. When Evil cannot seduce--that
is to say, make us consent to it,--then for us it is conquered. When we give in or conform
to this seduction we generate Sin. Let us say that we are in temptation, that Evil of some
sort confronts and invites us; if we battle with this presentment, this picture, this insinuating
invitation held out before us by Evil, the act of contending with the invitation will fix it
all the more firmly in our minds. We need to substitute another picture, another invitation,
another presentment, of that which pertains to the good and the beautiful. He who has learnt
so to substitute and present before his own heart and mind Jesus and the pure and beautiful
invitations of this Divine Jesus can solve the difficulty. This is not contending, this is
substituting; this is transferring allegiance from the glamour of Evil which is present with
us, to the glamour of God, which, because we are in temptation, is not present, but is yet
hoped and waited for.

To return again to the lying, dishonest, and negligent servant. If we argue, contend, and battle
morally with this evil servant we do not alter him, but by this contention generate antagonism.
Then what is our own position? Bad temper, a disturbed heart, an inharmonious angry mind; but
if without contending we bear with and act gently with this evil, making careful comparisons
with our own service to our own Lord, we learn patience, forgiveness, and humility also, for
have we never lied, have we never been dishonest, have we never been negligent to this sweet
Lord? Then immediately His patience, His forgiveness, His love are brought more intimately
to our consciousness, and our heart nearer to His and His to ours. Is this loss or gain? Is
Evil then an enemy? No, a handmaid. So is Satan made a servant to his Overlord, and his power
crossed.

Of all false things nothing is more false than the glamour of Evil, for when on being drawn
into it we sin, instead of the hoped-for delight we soon find satiety; instead of exhilaration,
fatigue; instead of contentment, disillusion; instead of satisfaction, dust; instead of romance,
the greedy claws of the harpy; and the further we go in response to this glamour the more pitiable
our outlook; for the sweets and possibilities of Evil are extraordinarily limited. Can any
man devise a new sin? No, but ever pursues the same old round, the same pitiful circle.

If we pursue the glamour of God, we find the exact opposite of all these things. Spiritual
delights know no satiety because of infinite variety: they know no disease, no disillusionment,
and who can set a boundary or limit to the beautiful, to love, and light, and God?

It is characteristic of temptation that while we are exposed to it Christ is absent from perception;
for to perceive Christ would instantly free us from all temptation (and often it is by temptation
faithfully borne that we mount).

When we are in a condition of contact with Christ which is His grace, we are raised above the
stem of faith into the flowers of knowledge; but for the true strengthening of the will it
is necessary that we live also on the harder and more difficult meat of faith. So we return
again and again to that insulation from things heavenly in which we lived before we had been
made Aware. When we emerge from these dark periods we find ourselves to have advanced. With
regard to Grace we can neither truly receive nor benefit by it without our heart, mind, and
soul are previously adjusted to Response to it.

The regenerated creature is not exempt from further temptations, but contrariwise the poignancy
of these temptations is greatly increased (though of a quite different order of temptation
to that known to us in an unregenerated state); it is increased in proportion to the degrees
of Grace vouchsafed to us. That is to say, temptation keeps level with our utmost capacity
of resistance yet never is allowed to exceed the bounds, for when it would exceed them a way
out is found by the return of Grace; and we are freed. The cause is the great root called Self,
a hydra-headed growth of selfishness, both material and spiritual, sprouting in all directions.
We would seem to be here for ever enclosed as in a glass bottle with this most horrid growth.
Through the glass we see all life, but always and ever in company with this voracious Self.
No sooner do we lop off one shoot of it than another grows--never was such strenuous gardening
as is required to keep this growth in check, and every time we lop a shoot we learn another
pain. This is the long road to perfection, for the Cross is "I" with a stroke through it.

Who can describe the marvels, the variations, the mystery of Grace? It is a dew and an elixir,
a balm and a fire, a destroyer of all fear and sorrow, a delight and an anguish, for we are
martyred, pierced with long arrows by the longing of the love that it calls forth. It is a
sweetness and a might, a glory and a power in which we are sensibly aware we could walk through
a furnace unscathed if He bade us to do it. And by it we are lifted in a crystal vase and enclosed
in the Presence of God.

* * *

As a man's desire is so is he. If our desire is entirely towards fleshly things and joys and
comforts, we are sensualists. If our desire is all towards sport and horses, we are not above
horses but rather below them, for the human animal is full of guile and the horse of obedience
and generosity. Nevertheless he is no goal for the human to aim at. If we desire the beautiful,
we become beautified and refined. If we desire God, we become godly.

* * *

It is characteristic of spiritual progress that each step is gained through suffering, through
penetrating faithful endeavours, through grievous incomprehensible turmoils and discords of
the spirit, worked frequently by means of the everyday commonplace happenings and responsibilities
of our daily life; and finally as each new step is gained we are by Grace carried to it in
a flood of divine happiness to crown our woes. Grace is God's magnetic power acting directly
and immediately upon us and is altogether independent of place, time, services, sacraments,
or ceremonies. We limit God's communication with us in this way--that He is communicable to
us only in so far as we ourselves respond and are able, apt, and willing to receive Him.

Is the condition of blessed nearness to God permanent? No, not as a condition but as a capacity
only. We have need to perpetually renew this condition by a positive active enthusiasm toward
God. We can in laziness no more retain and use this condition as a permanency than we can sleep
one night and eat one meal and have these suffice for our lifetime. But slowly, with work and
with pain, we learn perpetually to regain this condition by that form of prayer which is the
spiritual breathing-in of the Spirit of Christ.

