Jack raised his hands in protest, but Peter wouldn't listen.

"Then you'll come back, sir, on Saturday and stay until Monday, and then we'll all go down
together and you'll take Ruth across the ferry to her father's.

"Thank you, sir, but I am afraid I can't. You see, it all depends on the work--" this last
came with a certain tone of regret.

"But I'll send MacFarlane a note, and have you detailed as an escort of one to bring his only
daughter----"

"It would not do any good, Mr. Grayson."

"Stop your nonsense, Jack--" Peter called him so now--"You come back for Sunday." These days
with the boy were the pleasantest of his life.

"Well, I would love to--" Here his eyes sought, Ruth--"but we have an important blast to make,
and we are doing our best to get things into shape before the week is out."

"Well, but suppose it isn't ready?" demanded Peter.

"But it will be," answered Jack in a more positive tone; this part of the work was in his hands.

"Well, anyhow, send me a telegram."

"I will send it, sir, but I am afraid it won't help matters. Miss Ruth knows how delighted
I would be to return here and see her safe home."

"Whether she does or whether she doesn't," broke in Miss Felicia, "hasn't got a single thing
to do with it, Peter. You just go back to your work, Mr. Breen, and look after your gunpowder
plots, or whatever you call them, and if some one of these gentlemen of elegant leisure--not
one of whom so far has offered his services--cannot manage to escort you to your father's house,
Ruth, I will take you myself. Now come inside the drawing-room, every one of you, or you will
all blame me for undermining your precious healths--you, too, Major, and bring your cigars
with you. So you don't drop your ashes into my tea-caddy, I don't care where you throw them."

It was late in the afternoon of the second day when the telegram arrived, a delay which caused
no apparent suffering to any one except, perhaps, Peter, who wandered about with a "Nothing
from Jack yet, eh?" A question which no one answered, it being addressed to nobody in particular,
unless it was to Ruth, who had started at every ring of the door-bell. As to Miss Felicia--she
had already dismissed the young man from her mind.

When it did arrive there was a slight flutter of interest, but nothing more; Miss Felicia laying
down her book, Ruth asking in indifferent tones--even before the despatch was opened--"Is he
coming?" and Morris, who was playing chess with Peter, holding his pawn in mid-air until the
interruption was over. 

Some mischief has happened, and much good has, I am convinced, been prevented by our unnatural
alienation.

... With regard to Monsignor Erskine, I am certain that all his designs
are formed upon the most honourable and the most benevolent public
principles."

Peter made no answer; he was staring straight at the open slip, his face deathly pale, his
hand trembling.

"I'll tell you all about it in a minute, dear," he said at last with a forced smile. Then he
touched Morris's arm and the two left the room.

CHAPTER XIV

The Scribe would willingly omit this chapter. Dying men, hurrying doctors, improvised stretchers
made of wrenched fence rails; silent, slow-moving throngs following limp, bruised bodies,--are
not pleasant objects to write about and should be disposed of as quickly as possible.

Exactly whose fault it was nobody knew; if any one did, no one ever told. Every precaution
had been taken each charge had been properly placed and tamped; all the fulminates inspected
and the connections made with the greatest care. As to the battery--that was known to be half
a mile away in the pay shanty, lying on Jack Breen's table.

Nor was the weather unfavorable. True, there had been rain the day before, starting a general
thaw, but none of the downpour had soaked through the outer crust of the tunnel to the working
force inside and no extra labor had devolved on the pumps. This, of course, upset all theories
as to there having been a readjustment of surface rock, dangerous sometimes, to magnetic connections.

Then again, no man understood tunnel construction better than Henry MacFarlane, C.E., Member
of the American Society of Engineers, Fellow of the Institute of Sciences, etc., etc. Nor was
there ever an engineer more careful of his men. Indeed, it was his boast that he had never
lost a life by a premature discharge in the twenty years of his experience. Nor did the men,
those who worked under him--those who escaped alive--come to any definite conclusion as to
the cause of the catastrophe: the night and day gang, I mean,--those who breathed the foul
air, who had felt the chill of the clammy interior and who were therefore familiar with the
handling of explosives and the proper tamping of the charges--a slip of the steel meaning instantaneous
annihilation.

The Beast knew and could tell if he chose.

I say "The Beast," for that is what MacFarlane's tunnel was to me. To the passer-by and to
the expert, it was, of course, merely a short cut through the steep hills flanking one end
of the huge "earth fill" which MacFarlane was constructing across the Corklesville brook, and
which, when completed would form a road-bed for future trains; but to me it was always The Beast.

This illusion was helped by its low-browed, rocky head, crouching close to the end of the "fill,"
its length concealed in the clefts of the rocks--as if lying in wait for whatever crossed its
path--as well as its ragged, half-round, catfish gash of a mouth from out of which poured at
regular intervals a sickening breath--yellow, blue, greenish often--and from which, too, often
came dulled explosions, followed by belchings of debris which centipedes of cars dragged clear
of its slimy lips.

So I reiterate, The Beast knew.

Every day the gang had bored and pounded and wrenched, piercing his body with nervous, nagging
drills; propping up his backbone, cutting out tender bits of flesh, carving--bracing--only
to carve again. He had tried to wriggle and twist, but the mountain had held him fast. Once
he had straightened out, smashing the tiny cars and the tugging locomotive; breaking a leg
and an arm, and once a head, but the devils had begun again, boring and digging and the cruel
wound was opened afresh. Another time, after a big rain, with the help of some friendly rocks
who had rushed down to his help, he had snapped his jaws tight shut, penning the devils up
inside, but a hundred others had wrenched them open, breaking his teeth, shoring up his lips
with iron beams, tearing out what was left of his tongue. He could only sulk now, breathing
hard and grunting when the pain was unbearable. One thought comforted him, and one only: Far
back in his bulk he knew of a thin place in his hide,--so thin, owing to a dip in the contour
of the hill,--that but a few yards of overlying rock and earth lay between it and the free air.

Here his tormentors had stopped; why, he could not tell until he began to keep tally of what
had passed his mouth: The long trains of cars had ceased; so had the snorting locomotives;
so had the steam drills. Curious-looking boxes and kegs were being passed in, none of which
ever came back; men with rolls of paper on which were zigzag markings stumbled inside, stayed
an hour and stumbled out again; these men wore no lamps in their hats and were better dressed
than the others. Then a huge wooden drum wrapped with wire was left overnight outside his lips
and unrolled the next morning, every yard of it being stretched so far down his throat that
he lost all track of it.

