With regard to names, I have not thought it worth while to use the archaic, if more correct,
forms for those of well-known places. It seems unnecessary to write, for instance, "Glaestingabyrig"
for Glastonbury, or "Penbroch" for Pembroke. I have treated proper names in the same way, keeping,
for example, the more familiar latinised "Ina" rather than the Saxon "Ine," as being more nearly
the correct pronunciation than might otherwise be used without the hint given by a footnote.

The exact spot where Wessex and West Wales met in the battle between Ina and Gerent is not
certain, though it is known to have been on the line of the hills to the west of the Parrett,
and possibly, according to an identification deduced from the Welsh "Llywarch Hen," in the
neighbourhood of Langport. Local tradition and legend place a battle also at the ancient Roman
fortress of Norton Fitzwarren, which Ina certainly superseded by his own stronghold at Taunton
after the victory. As Nunna is named as leader of the Saxons, together with the king himself,
it seems most likely that there were two columns acting against the Welsh advance on the north
and south of the Tone River, and that therefore there were battles at each place. On the Blackdown
Hills beyond Langport a barrow was known until quite lately as "Noon's barrow," and it would
mark at least the line of flight of the Welsh; and if not the burial place of the Saxon leader,
who is supposed to have fallen, must have been raised by him over his comrades.

The line taken by the story will not be far wrong, therefore, as in any case the Blackdown
and Quantock strongholds must have been taken by the Saxons to guard against flank attacks,
from whichever side of the Tone the British advance was made.

The course of the story hangs to some extent on the influence of the old feud between the British
and Saxon Churches, which dated from the days of Augustine and his attempt to compel the adoption
of Western customs by the followers of the Church which had its rise from the East. There is
no doubt that the death of the wise and peacemaking Aldhelm of Sherborne let the smouldering
enmity loose afresh, with the result of setting Gerent in motion against his powerful neighbour.
Ina's victory was decisive, Gerent being the last king of the West Welsh named in the chronicles,
and we hear of little further trouble from the West until A.D. 835, when the Cornish joined
with a new-come fleet of Danes in an unsuccessful raid on Wessex.

Ina's new policy with the conquered Welsh is historic and well known. Even in the will of King
Alfred, two hundred years later, some of the best towns in west Somerset and Dorset are spoken
of as "Among the Welsh kin," and there is yet full evidence, in both dialect and physique,
of strongly marked British descent among the population west of the Parrett.

There is growing evidence that very early settlements of Northmen, either Norse or Danish,
or both, contemporary with the well-known occupation of towns, and even districts, on the opposite
shores of South Wales, existed on the northern coast of Somerset and Devon. Both races are
named by the Welsh and Irish chroniclers in their accounts of the expulsion of these settlers
from Wales in A.D. 795, and the name of the old west country port of Watchet being claimed
as of Norse origin, I have not hesitated to place the Norsemen there.

Owen and Oswald, Howel and Thorgils, and those others of their friends and foes beyond the
few whose names have already been mentioned as given in the chronicles, are of course only
historic in so far as they may find their counterparts in the men of the older records of our
forefathers. If I have too early or late introduced Govan the hermit, whose rock-hewn cell
yet remains near the old Danish landing place on the wild Pembrokeshire coast between Tenby
and the mouth of Milford Haven, perhaps I may be forgiven. I have not been able to verify his
date, but a saint is of all time, and if Govan himself had passed thence, one would surely
have taken his place to welcome a wanderer in the way and in the name of the man who made the
refuge.

CHAS. W. WHISTLER.

STOCKLAND, 1904.

CHAPTER I. HOW OWEN OF CORNWALL WANDERED TO SUSSEX, AND WHY HE BIDED THERE.

The title which stands at the head of this story is not my own. It belongs to one whose name
must come very often into that which I have to tell, for it is through him that I am what I
may be, and it is because of him that there is anything worth telling of my doings at all.
Hereafter it will be seen, as I think, that I could do no less than set his name in the first
place in some way, if indeed the story must be mostly concerning myself. Maybe it will seem
strange that I, a South Saxon of the line of Ella, had aught at all to do with a West Welshman--a
Cornishman, that is--of the race and line of Arthur, in the days when the yet unforgotten hatred
between our peoples was at its highest; and so it was in truth, at first. Not so much so was
it after the beginning, however. It would be stranger yet if I were not at the very outset
to own all that is due from me to him. Lonely was I when he first came to me, and lonely together,
in a way, have he and I been for long years that for me, at least, have had no unhappiness
in them, for we have been all to each other.

I have said that I was lonely when he first came to me, and I must tell how that was. I suppose
that the most lonesome place in the world is the wide sea, and after that a bare hilltop; but
next to these in loneliness I would set the glades of a beech forest in midwinter silence,
when the snow lies deep on the ground under boughs that are too stiff to rustle in the wind,
and the birds are dumb, and the ice has stilled the brooks. Set a lost child amid the bare
grey tree trunks of such a winter forest, in the dead silence of a great frost, with no track
near him but that which his own random feet have made across the snow, and I think that there
can be nought lonelier than he to be thought of: and in the depth of the forest there is peril
to the lonely.

I had no fear of the forest till that day when I was lost therein, for the nearer glades round
our village had been my playground ever since I could remember, and before I knew that fear
therein might be. That was not so long a time, however, save that the years of a child are
long years; for at this time, when I first learned the full wildness of the woods of the great
Andredsweald and knew what loneliness was, I was only ten years old. Since I could run alone
my old nurse had tried to fray me from wandering out of sight of those who tended me, with
tales of wolf and bear and pixy, lest I should stray and be lost, but I had not heeded her
much. Maybe I had proved so many of her tales to be but pretence that, as I began to think
for myself, I deemed them all to be so.

But now I was lost in the forest, and what had been a playground was become a vast and desolate
land for me, and all the things that I had ever heard of what dangers lurked within it, came
back to my mind. I remembered that the grey wolf's skin on which I slept had come hence, and
I minded the calf that the pack had slain close to the village a year ago, and I thought of
the girl who went mazed and useless about the place, having lost her wits through being pixy
led, as they said, long ago. The warnings seemed to me to be true enough, now that all the
old landmarks were lost to me, and all the tracks were buried under the crisp snow. I did not
know when I had left the road from the village to the hilltop, or in which direction it lay.

It was very silent in the aisles of the great beech trunks, for the herds were in shelter.
There was no sound of the swineherds' horn, though the evening was coming on, and but for the
frost it was time for their charges to be taken homeward, and the woodmen's axes were idle.
Even the scream of some hawk high overhead had been welcome to me, and the harsh cry of a jay
that I scared was like the voice of a friend.

It was the fault of none but myself that I was lost. I had planned to go hunting alone in the
woods while the old nurse, whose care I was far beyond, slept after her midday meal before
the fire. So, over my warm woollen clothing I had donned the deerskin short cloak that was
made like my father's own hunting gear, and I had taken my bow and arrows, and the little seax
{i} that a thane's son may always wear, and had crept away from the warm hall without a soul
seeing me. I had thought myself lucky in this, but by this time I began to change my mind in
all truth. Well it was for me that there was no wind, so that I was spared the worst of the cold.

I went up the hill to the north of the village by the track which the timber sleds make, climbing
until I was on the crest, and there I began to wander as the tracks of rabbit and squirrel
led me on. Sometimes I was set aside from the path by deep drifts that had gathered in its
hollows with the wind of yesterday, and so I left it altogether in time. Overhead the sky was
bright and clear as the low sun of the month after Yule, the wolf month, can make it. I wandered
on for an hour or two without meeting with anything at which to loose an arrow, and my ardour
began to cool somewhat, so that I thought of turning homewards. But then, what was to me a
wondrous quarry crossed my way as I stood for a moment on the edge of a wide aisle of beech
trees looking down it, and wondering if I would not go even to its end and so return. Then
at once the wild longing for the chase woke again in me, and I forgot cold and time and place
and aught else in it.

Across the glade came slowly and lightly over the snow a great red hare, looking against the
white background bigger than any I had ever set eyes on before. It paid no heed at all to me,
even when I raised my bow to set an arrow on the string with fingers which trembled with eagerness
and haste. Now and again it stopped and seemed to listen for somewhat, and then loped on again
and stopped, seeming hardly to know which way it wished to go. Now it came toward me, and then
across, and yet again went from me, and all as if I were not there.

It was thirty paces from me when I shot, and I was a fair marksman, for a boy, at fifty paces.
However, the arrow skimmed just over its back, and it crouched for a second as it heard the
whistle of the feathers, and then leapt aside and on again in the same way. But now it crossed
the glade and passed behind some trees before I was ready with a second arrow, and I ran forward
to recover the first, which was in the snow where it struck, hoping thence to see the hare again.

When I turned with the arrow in my hand I saw what made the hare pay no heed to me. There was
a more terrible enemy than even man on its track. Sniffing at my footprints where they had
just crossed those of the hare was a stoat, long and lithe and cruel. I knew it would not leave
its quarry until it had it fast by the throat, and the hare knew it also by some instinct that
is not to be fathomed, for I suppose that no hare, save by the merest chance, ever escaped
that pursuer. The creature seemed puzzled by my footprint, and sat up, turning its sharp eyes
right and left until it spied me; but when it did so it was not feared of me, but took up the
trail of the hare again. And by that time I was ready, and my hand was steady, and the shaft
sped and smote it fairly, and the hare's one chance had come to it. I sprang forward with the
whoop of the Saxon hunter, and took up and admired my prey, not heeding its scent at all. It
was in good condition, and I would get Stuf, the house-carle, who was a sworn ally of mine,
to make me a pouch of it, I thought.

I mind that this was the third wild thing that I had slain. One of the others was a squirrel
who stayed motionless on a bough to stare at me, in summer time, and the second was a rabbit
which Stuf had shown me in its seat. This was quite a different business, and I was proud of
my skill with some little reason. I should have some real wild hunting to talk of over the
fire tonight.

Then I must follow up the hare, of course, and I thrust the long body of the stoat through
my girdle, so that its head hung one way and its tail the other, and took up the trail of the
hare where my prey had left it. Now, I cannot tell how the mazed creature learned that its
worst foe was no longer after it, but so it must have been, else it had circled slowly in lessening
rings until the stoat had it, and presently it would have begun to scream dolefully. But I
only saw it once again, and then it seemed to be listening at longer spaces. Yet it took me
a long way before it suddenly fled altogether, as its footmarks told me. A forest-bred lad
learns those signs soon enough, if he is about with the woodmen in snow time.

Then I turned to make my way home, following my own track for a little way. That was crooked,
and I went to take a straighter path, and after that I was fairly lost.

Yet I held on, hoping every minute to come into some known glade or sight, some familiar landmark,
before the sun set. But I found nought but new trees, and new views over unknown white country
all round me as I turned my steps hither and thither as one mark after another drew me. Then
the sun set and the short day was over, and the grey twilight of snow weather came after the
passing of the warm red glow from the west, shadowless and still.

That was about the time when I was missed at home, for my father came back from Chichester
town, and straightway asked for me. And when I came not for calling, nor yet for the short
notes of the horn which my father had always used to bring me to him, one ran here and another
there, seeking me in wonted places about the village, until one minded that he had seen a boy,
who must have been myself, go up the hill track forestwards.

Then was fear enough for me, seeing that from our village more than one child has wandered
forth thus and been seen no more, and I was the only son of the long-widowed thane, and the
last of the ancient line that went back to Ella, and beyond him even to Woden. So in half an
hour there was not a man left in the village, and all the woods and hillsides rang with their
calls to me, while in the hall itself bided only the old nurse, who wept and wailed by the
hearth, and my father, whose tall form came and went across the doorway, restless; for he waited
here lest he should miss my coming homeward. Up the steep street of the village the wives stood
in the doorways silent, and forgetting their ailments for once in listening for the cries that
should tell that I was found. If they spoke at all, they said that I should not be seen again,
for the cold had driven the wolves close to the villages.

But I was by this time far beyond the reach of friendly voices, on the edge of the great hill
that falls sheer down through many a score feet of hanging woods and thicket to the Lavington
valley far below, and there at last I knew for certain that I was lost utterly, for this place
or its like I had never seen before. Then I stayed my feet, bewildered, for the sun was gone,
and I had nothing to tell me in which direction I was heading, for at that time the stars told
me nought, though there were enough out now to direct any man who was used to the night. When
I stood still I found that I was growing deadly cold, and the weariness that I had so far staved
off began to creep over me, so that I longed to sleep.

And I suppose that I should have done so, and thereby met my death shortly, but for a thing
that roused me in an instant, and set the warm blood coursing through me again.

There came a rustling in the undergrowth of the hillside below me, and that was the most homely
sound that I had heard since the wild geese flew over me seaward with swish and whistle of
broad wings and call that I knew well. The silence of the great brown owls that circled swiftly
over me now and then was uncanny.

The rustling drew nearer, and then out into the open place under the tall bare tree trunks
where I stood trotted a grey beast that was surely a shepherd's dog, for he stayed and looked
back and whined a little as if his master must be waited for. I thought that I could hear the
cracking of more branches once farther down the hill.

Then I called to the dog, knowing that he and the shepherd would not be far apart, and at the
call the dog turned quickly toward me and leaped back a yard, cowering a little with drooping
tail. So I called him again, and more loudly.

"Hither, lad! Hither, good dog!"

But the beast backed yet more from me, and I saw the dull gleam of yellow teeth and heard him
snarl as he did so, and then he growled fiercely, so that I thought him sorely ill-tempered.
But I had no fear of dogs, and I called him again cheerily, and at that he sank on his haunches
and set back his head and howled and yelled as I had never heard any dog give tongue before.
And presently from a long way off I heard the like howls, as if all the dogs of some village
answered him, and I thought their tongue was strange also.

Then came the shout of a man, even as I expected, and there was the noise of one who tears
his way through briers and brambles in haste; but at that shout the dog turned and fled like
a grey shadow into the farther thickets, and was gone.

"Who calls?" one said loudly, and from the hillside climbed hastily into the open a tall man,
bearded and strong, and with a pleasant-looking, anxious face. He was dressed in leather like
our shepherds, and like them carried but quarterstaff and seax for weapons. I suppose that
I was in some shadow, for at first he did not see me.

"Surely I heard a child's voice," he said out loud--"or was it some pixy playing with the grey
beast of the wood?"

"Here I am," I cried, running to him; "take me home, shepherd, for I think that I am lost."

He caught me up in haste, looking round him the while.

"Child," he said, "how came you here--and to what were you calling?"

"I was calling your dog," I answered, "but he is not friendly. Does he look for a beating?
for he ran away yonder when he heard you coming."

"Ay, sorely beaten will that dog be if he comes near me just now," the man said grimly. "Never
mind him, but tell me how you came here, and where you belong."

So I told him that I was Oswald, the son of Aldred, the thane of Eastdean, thinking, of course,
that all men would know of us, and so I bade him take me home quickly.

"I have been hunting," I said, showing him my unsavoury prey, which by this time was frozen
stiff in my belt. "Then I followed the hare this was after, and I cannot tell how far I have come."

All this while the man had me in his strong arms, and he had looked at the track of the dog
in the snow, and now was walking swiftly from it, through the beech trees, looking up at their
branches as if wondering at the way the great trunks shot up smooth and bare from the snow
at their roots before they reached the first forking, fathoms skyward.

"I am a stranger, Oswald, the thane's son," he said. "I do not rightly know in which direction
your home may lie."

