I thanked him for his good opinion, and civilly wished him--as it was a matter which seemed
to promise him so much  satisfaction--that the duration of the honeymoon should be as short
as possible. He thanked me affectionately--grasped my hand with the squeeze of a blacksmith,
and entreated that I should go back and take a drink of punch with him. As an earnest of what
he could give me, he pulled a handful of lemons from his pocket which he had bought from a
shop by the way. I need not say I expressed my gratitude, though I declined his invitation.
I then told him I was about to remove to Alabama, and he immediately proposed to go along with
me. I reminded him that he was just married, and it would be expected of him that he would
see the honeymoon out.

"Ah, faith!" he replied, "and there's sense in what you say; it must be done, I suppose; but
devil a bit, to my thinking, does any moon last a month in this climate; and the first cloudy
weather, d'ye see, and I'm after you."

It was difficult to escape from the generous embraces of my ardent father-in-law; and the whole
street witnessed them.

That afternoon I spent in part with the Edgertons. I went soon after my own dinner and found
the family at theirs.  William Edgerton was present. The old man insisted that I should take
a seat at the table and join them in a bottle of wine, which I did. It was a family, bearing
apparently all the elements within itself of a happiness the most perfect and  profound. Particularly
an amiable family. Yet there was no insipidity. The father has already been made known; the
son should be by this time; the mother was one of those strong-minded, simple women, whose
mind may be expressed by its most striking characteristic--independence. She had that most
obvious trait of aristocratic breeding, a quiet, indefinable, easy dignity--a seemingly natural
quality, easy itself, that puts everybody at ease, and yet neither in itself nor in others
suffered the slightest approach to be made to unbecoming familiarity.  A sensible, gentlewoman--literally
gentle--yet so calm, so firm, you would have supposed she had never known one emotion calculated
to stir the sweet, glass-like placidity of her  deportment.

And yet, amidst all this calm placidity, with an eye looking benevolence, and a considerateness
that took note of your smallest want, she sustained the pangs of one yearning for her  firstborn;
dissatisfied and disappointed in his career, and apprehensive for his fate. The family was
no longer happy. The worm was busy in all their hearts. They treated me kindly, but it was
obvious that they were suffering. A visible constraint chilled and baffled conversation; and
I could see the deepening anxieties which clouded the face of the mother, whenever her eye
wandered in the direction of her son. This it did, in spite, I am convinced, of her endeavors
to prevent it.

I, too, could now look in the same quarter. My feelings were less bitter than they were, and
William Edgerton shared in the change. I did not the less believe him to have done wrong, but,
in the renewed conviction of my wife's purity, I could forgive him, and almost think he was
sufficiently punished in entertaining  affections which were without hope. Punished he was,
whether by hopelessness or guilt, and punished terribly. I could see a difference for the worse
in his appearance since I had last conferred with him. He was haggard and spiritless to the
last degree. He had few words while we sat at table, and these were spoken only after great
effort; and, regarding him now with less temper than before, it seemed to me that his parents
had not exaggerated the estimate which they had  formed of his miserable appearance. He looked
very much like one, who had abandoned himself to nightly dissipation, and those excesses of
mind and body, which sap from both the saving and elevating substance. I did not wonder that
the old man ascribed his condition to the bottle and the gaming-table. But that I knew better,
such would most probably have been my own conclusion.

The conversation was not general--confined chiefly to Mr.  Edgerton the elder and myself. Mrs.
Edgerton remained awhile after the cloth had been withdrawn, joining occasionally in what was
said, and finally left us, though with still a lingering, and a last look toward her son, which
clearly told where her heart was. William Edgerton followed her, after a brief interval, and
I saw no more of him, though I remained for more than an hour. He had said but little. It was
with some evident effort, that he had succeeded in uttering some general observation on the
subject of the Alabama prairies--those beautiful "gardens of the desert,"

"For which the speech of England has no name."

My removal had been the leading topic of our discourse, and when I declared my intention to
start on the very next day, and that the present was a farewell visit, the emotion of the son
visibly increased. Soon after he left the room. When I was alone with the father, he took occasion
to renew his offer of service, and, in such a manner, as to take from the offer its tone of
service. He seemed rather to ask a favor than to suggest one.  Money he could spare--the repayment
should be at my own leisure--and my bond would be preferable, he was pleased to say, to that
of any one he knew. I thanked him with becoming  feelings, though, for the present, I declined
his assistance. I pledged myself, however, should circumstances make it necessary  for me to
seek a loan, to turn, in the first instance, to him.  He had been emphatically my friend--THE
friend, sole, singular--never fluctuating in his regards, and never stopping to calculate the
exact measure of my deserts. I felt that I could not too much forbear in reference to the son,
having in view the generous friendship of the father.

That day, and the night which followed it, was a long period with me. I had to see many acquaintances,
and attend to a thousand small matters. I was on my feet the whole day, and even when the night
came I had no rest. I was in the city till near eleven o'clock. When I got home I found that
my wife had done her share of the tasks. She had completed her preparations. Our luggage was
all ready for removal. To her I had assigned the labor of packing up her pictures, her materials
for painting, her clothes, and such other matters as she desired to carry with us, to our new
place of abode. The rest was to be sold by a friend after our departure, and the proceeds remitted.
I knew I should need them all. Most of our baggage was to be sent by water. We travelled in
a private carriage, and consequently, could take little. Julia, unlike most women, was willing
to believe with me that impediments are the true name for much luggage; and, with a most unfeminine
habit, she could limit herself without reluctance to the merest necessities. We had no bandboxes,
baskets, or extra bundles, to be stuffed here and there, filling holes and corners, and crowding
every space, which should be yielded entirely to the limbs of the traveller.  Though sensitive
and delicate in a great degree, she had yet that masculine sense which teaches that, in the
fewness of our wants lies our truest source of independence; and she could make herself ready
for taking stage or steamboat in quite as short a time as myself.

Her day's work had exhausted her. She retired, and when I went up to the chamber, she already
seemed to sleep. I could not. Fatigue, which had produced exhaustion, had baffled sleep.  Extreme
weariness becomes too much like a pain to yield readily to repose. The moment that exercise
benumbs the frame, makes the limbs ache, the difficulty increases of securing slumber. I felt
weary, but I was restless also. I felt that it would be vain for me to go to bed. Accordingly,
I placed myself beside the window, and looked out meditatingly upon the broad lake which lay
before our dwelling.

The night was very calm and beautiful. The waters from the lake were falling. Tide was going
out, and the murmuring clack of a distant sawmill added a strange sweetness to the hour, and
mingled harmoniously with the mysterious goings on of midnight. The starlight, not brilliant,
was yet very soft and touching. Isolated and small clouds, like dismembered ravens' wings,
flitted lightly along the edge of the western horizon, shooting out at intervals brief, brilliant
flashes of lightning.  There was a flickering breeze that played with the shrubbery beneath
my window, making a slight stir that did not break the quiet of the scene, and gave a graceful
movement to the slender stems as they waved to and fro beneath its pressure.  A noble pride
of India [Footnote: China tree: the melia azedaracha of botanists. A tree peculiar to the south,
of singular beauty, and held in high esteem as a shade-tree.] rose directly before my eyes
to the south--its branches stretching almost from within touch of the dwelling, over the fence
of a neighbor. The whole scene was fairy-like. I should find it indescribable. It soothed my
feelings.  I had been the victim of a long and painful moral conflict. At length I had a glimmering
of repose. Events, in the last few days--small events which, in themselves denoted nothing--had
yet spoken peace to my feelings. My heart was in that dreamy state of languor, such as the
body enjoys under the gradually growing power of the anodyne, in which the breath of the summer
wind brings a language of luxury, and the most emperiest sights and sounds in nature minister
to a capacity of enjoyment, which is not the less intoxicating and sweet because it is subdued. Grawville,
known as the 'New York Central College,' in which Allen, the colored Professor alluded to, is one
of the teachers.

"During that time, Allen became deeply interested in the lady, and proposed marriage to her.
This she at once rejected, declaring that the thought of such a connection was repulsive to
her.

"For some time after this, the Professor said no more upon
the subject; but in the course of a year or so, again proposed marriage,
and was again rejected. It did not offend me, however, for my heart was glowing in a present starlight.
It was the hour of hopes rather than of fears; and in the mere prospect of transition to the
new--such is the elastic nature of youth--I had agreed to forget every pang whether of idea
or fact, which had vexed and tortured me in the perished past.  My musings were all tender
yet joyful--they partook of that "joy of grief" of which the bard of Fingal tells us. I felt
a big tear gathering in my eye, I knew not wherefore. I felt my heart growing feeble, with
the same delight which one would feel at suddenly recovering a great treasure which had been
supposed for ever lost. I fancied that I had recovered my treasure, and I rose quietly, went
to the bed where Julia lay sleeping peacefully, and kissed her pale but lovely cheeks.  She
started, but did not waken--a gentle sigh escaped her lips, and they murmured with some indistinct
syllables which I failed to distinguish. At that moment the notes of a flute rose softly from
the grove without.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

RENEWED AGONIES.

In that same moment my pangs were all renewed; my repose of mind departed; once more my heart
was on fire, my spirit filled with vague doubts, grief, and commotion. The soft, sweet, preluding
note of the player had touched a chord in my soul as utterly different from that which it expressed,
as could by any possibility be conceived. Heart and hope were instantly paralyzed.  Fear and
its train, its haunting spectres of suspicion, took possession of the undefended citadel, and
established guard upon its deserted outposts. I tottered to the window which I had left--I
shrouded myself in the folds of the curtain, and as the strains rose, renewed and regular,
I struggled to keep in my breath, listening eagerly, as if the complaining instrument could
actually give utterance to the cruel mystery which I equally dreaded and desired to hear.

The air which was played was such as I had never heard before. Indeed, it could scarcely be
called an air. It was the most capricious burden of mournfulness that had ever had its utterance
from wo. Fancy a mute--one bereft of the divine faculty of speech, by human, not divine ministration.
Fancy such a being endowed with the loftiest desires, moved by the acutest sensibilities, having
already felt the pleasures of life, yet doomed to a denial of utterance, denied the language
of complaint, and striving, struggling through the imperfect organs of his voice to give a
name to the agony which works within him. That flute seemed to me to moan, and sob, and shiver,
with some such painful mode of expression as would be permitted to the "half made-up" mortal
of whom I have spoken. Its broken tones, striving and struggling, almost rising at times into
a shriek,  seemed of all things to complain of its own voicelessness.

And yet it had its melody--melody, to me, of the most vexing power. I should have called the
strain a soliloquizing one.  It certainly did not seem addressed to any ears. It wanted the
continuance of apostrophe. It was capricious. Sometimes the burden fell off suddenly--broken--wholly
interrupted--as if the vents had been all simultaneously and suddenly stopped.  Anon, it rose
again--soul-piercing if not loud--so abruptly, and with an utterance so utterly gone with wo,
that you felt sure the poor heart must break with the next breath that came from the laboring
and inefficient lungs. A "dying fall" succeeding, seemed to afford temporary relief. It seemed
as if tears must have fallen upon the instrument, Its language grew more methodical, more subdued,
but not less touching. I fancied, I felt, that, entering into the soul of the musician, I could
give the very words to the sentiment which his instrument vainly strove to speak. What else
but despair and utter self-abandonment was in that broken language? The full heart  over-burdened,
breaking, to find a vent for the feelings which it had no longer power to contain. And yet;
content to break, breaking with a melancholy sort of triumph which seemed to say--

"Such a death has its own sweetness; love sanctifies the pang to its victim. It is a sort of
martyrdom. He who loves truly, though he loves hopelessly, has not utterly loved in vain. 
The devoted heart finds a joy in the offering, though the Deity withholds his acceptance--though
a sudden gust from heaven scatters abroad the rich fruits which the devotee has placed upon
the despised and dishonored altar."

