It is unfortunate that the only satires or criticisms on married life which have come down
to us were written by men; one would like to hear what the women might have said, if a woman
had ever been a satirist. There is nearly always some basis of truth in a classic satire, but
the question is "How much?" Juvenal belongs to a later generation than that of Nero, but what
he says is doubtless equally applicable to that age. It is therefore interesting to note one
or two of his objections to contemporary woman, regarded as a wife. In the first place she
is too interfering and even dictatorial. "What madness is it," he asks of the man whom he supposes
himself to be addressing, "that drives you to marry? How can you bear with a tyrannous woman,
when there are so many good ropes in the world, when there are high windows to throw yourself
out of, or when there is the bridge quite handy?" "Why should you be made to wear the muzzle?"
"Why take into your house some one who will perhaps shut the door in the face of an old friend
whom you have known ever since he was a boy?" "When you displease her, she weeps, for she keeps
tears always ready to fall, but when you try to prevent her from displeasing you, she tells
you it was agreed that each should have liberty, and that she is a human being." He goes on
to attack her faithlessness, her extravagance, her superstition, her loquacity, and so forth.
Let us by all means discount his fierce invectives; nevertheless we must take them as but a
heightened way of putting circumstances which had a real and all too frequent existence, and
which encouraged the growing fancy for bachelordom. We shall, however, soon look at a very
different picture of domestic relations, and it is only fair to assume that these also were
by no means uncommon.

A Roman girl with a reasonable dowry might expect to be married at any age from about 13 to
18. The Italian of the south, like the Greek, ripens early. The legal age was 12; on the other
hand to be unmarried at 19 was to be distinctly an old maid. In the northern provinces of the
empire maturity was less early, whereas south of the Mediterranean it was even earlier. The
legal age for the bridegroom was that at which his father or guardian allowed him to put on
the "toga of the man" and enter the Forum. Thus theoretically a Roman youth might become a
benedict when about sixteen, and Nero was only at that age when he married his first wife Octavia.
Generally speaking, however, if Marcia was as old as 16, Silius would hardly be under 26 or 27.

The marriage, as has been said already, would commonly be a matter of arrangement between families,
sometimes effected by their own members, sometimes by an interested friend or some other go-between.
"You ask me," writes Pliny to Mauricus, "to look out for a husband for your niece. There is
no need to look far, for I know a man who might seem to have been provided on purpose. His
name is Minicius. He is well-connected, and comes from Brescia, which you know to be a good
old-fashioned place retaining the simple and modest manners of the country. He is a man of
active energy and has held high public office. In appearance he is a gentleman, well-built,
and with a wholesome ruddy complexion. His father has ample means, and though perhaps your
family is not much concerned on that point, we have to remember that a man's income is one
of the first considerations in the eyes, not only of our social system, but of the law."

A marriage of the full and regular type could only be contracted between free citizens. There
were varying degrees of the morganatic about all others, such as marriage with a foreigner
or emancipated slave. A non-Roman wife meant that the children were non-Roman. A man of the
senatorial order could not marry a freedwoman, if he wished to have the union recognised; also
no complete marriage could be contracted with a person labouring under degradation publicly
inflicted by the authorities or degraded ipso facto by certain occupations. For this reason
the actress on the "variety" stage could not aspire to become even an acknowledged Roman wife,
much less a member of the order which more or less corresponded to our peerage. Nor could a
Roman marry a relative within certain prohibited degrees. He might not, in fact, marry any
woman whom he already possessed what was called "the right to kiss."

We are, however, dealing with two persons entirely beyond exception, namely Quintus Silius
Bassus and Marcia Sabina. A match has been made between these parties, perhaps several years
before the actual marriage can take place, and while the intended bride is a mere child of
ten: even the future groom may be but a boy. When the go-between has done his or her work to
the satisfaction of both families, there takes place a betrothal ceremony, of which the original
purpose was, of course, to bind each party morally to carry out the contract, but which, by
the year 64, might mean very little.

In theory the Roman law required the consent of both participants; a father could not absolutely
force son or daughter to marry a particular person, nor, indeed, any person at all. But on
the other hand, according to the Roman law, neither sons nor daughters were free to act independently
of the father's will, nor to possess independent property, so long as the father lived, or
until he chose to "emancipate." It naturally follows that paternal pressure was the chief factor
in determining a marriage, and only those men or women whose fathers were dead, or who had
been formally freed from tutelage, were in a position absolutely to please themselves. We need
not suppose either that sons were always very amenable, or that parents were invariably self-willed
and autocratic, but it is obvious that marriages based on mutual attraction must have been
extremely few. We will suppose that Silius is his own master, while Marcia has a father or
a guardian still alive.

At the betrothal ceremony the friends of both houses are in attendance, a regular form of words
is interchanged between Silius and the father of Marcia, a ring is given by the man to his
fiancée, to be worn on the fourth finger of her left hand, and he adds some other present,
most probably some form of that jewellery of which the Roman women were and still are so extraordinarily
fond. A feast naturally follows.

You would think this performance sufficiently binding, and binding no doubt it was from a moral
point of view, so long as there was reasonably good behaviour on either side, or so long as
neither Silius nor Marcia's father was prepared wantonly to flout general opinion or to offend
a whole connection by simply changing his mind. On the other hand, there was no legal compulsion
whatever to carry out the contract. The Roman world knew nothing of actions for breach of promise.
If either party chose to repudiate the engagement, they were free so to do. In that case they
were said to "send back a refusal" or to "send a counter-notice." A family dispute, a breath
of suspicion, a change of circumstances, and even an improved prospect might be sufficient
excuse, or no excuse need be offered at all.

In the present instance, however, no such ugly missive passes between the house of Silius on
the Caelian Hill and that of Marcius on the Aventine, the wedding takes place in due course.
It will not be in May nor in early March or June, nor on certain other dates which, for reasons
mostly long forgotten, were regarded as inauspicious. It is a social ceremony, and neither
state nor priest will have anything to do with sanctioning or blessing it. The pillars at the
sides of the vestibules of both houses are wreathed with leaves and boughs, and the friends
and clients of both families proceed in festal array to the house of the bride. If Marcia is
very young she has taken her playthings--dolls and the like--and has dedicated them to the
household gods as a sign that she now puts away childish things and devotes herself to the
serious tasks of life. She has then been carefully dressed for the occasion. Her hair, however
she may have worn it before or may wear it afterwards, is for to-day made up into six plaits
or braids, which are wound into a coil on the top of her head. As an initial rite it is parted
by means of an instrument resembling a spear, a survival of the time when a bride was a prize
of war, and when her long locks were actually divided by a veritable spear in token of her
subjection. Round this coiffure is placed a bridal wreath, made of flowers which she must have
gathered with her own hands, and over her head is thrown a veil--more strictly a cloth--of
some orange-yellow or "flame-coloured" material, which does not, however, like the Grecian
or Oriental veil, conceal her face. On her feet are low yellow shoes. Meanwhile the bridegroom
arrives, escorted by his friends, and he also wears a festal garland. As with all other important
undertakings of Roman life, a professional seer will be in attendance to take care that the
auspices are favourable. Peculiar portents, very unpropitious behaviour of nature, a very strange
appearance in the entrails of a sacrificial victim, are omens which no properly constituted
Roman can afford to overlook. The auspices being favourable--and there is reason to believe
that no undue insistence was laid on their unpropitious aspects--the bride is led into the
reception-hall, and the contract of marriage is signed and sealed. That there should be a dowry,
and a considerable one, goes without saying. In some cases it is actually settled on the husband,
who is to all intents and purposes purchased by it; but in most it is available for his use
only so long as the marriage continues unbroken. For the rest, the wife's property is and remains
her own. Her guardian is still her father and not her husband: her legal connection is still
with her own family and not with his. She is a Marcia and not a Silia. If the marriage is dissolved,
at least without sufficient demonstrable provocation on her part, her father will see that
her dower is paid back. To such terms as these the parties affix their names and seals, and
a certain number of friends add their signatures as witnesses.

This done, one of the younger married women present takes the bride and leads her across to
Silius who holds her right hand in his. Both repeat a prescribed formula of words, and all
the company present exclaims "Good luck to you!" and offers such other congratulations as seem
fit. A wedding-dinner is held, generally, but not necessarily, in the house of the bride, and
a wedding-cake, served upon bay-leaves, is cut up and divided among the guests. It is now evening,
and a procession is formed to bring Marcia home to the house of Silius. In front will march
the torchbearers and what we should call "the band," consisting in these circumstances of a
number of persons playing upon the flageolet. Silius goes through a pretence of carrying off
Marcia by force--another practice reminiscent of the ancient time when men won their brides
by methods similar to those of the Australian aborigine with his waddy. Both groom and bride
are important people, and along the streets there is many a decoration; many a window and doorway
is filled with spectators; shouts, not always of the most discreet, are heard from all sides,
and loud above all rings the regular Io Talasse--whatever that may have meant, for no man now
knows, and almost certainly no one knew then. In the midst of the procession Marcia, followed
by bearers of her spindle and distaff, is being led by two pretty boys, while a third carries
a torch; Silius meanwhile is scattering nuts or walnuts, or confetti made like them, to the
crowd. Arrived on the Caelian, the bride is once more seized and lifted over the threshold;
when inside the hall, Silius presents her with fire and water in token of her common share
in the household and its belongings; and she offers prayers to various old-fashioned goddesses
who are supposed to preside over the introduction to married life.

If we have given with some particularity the orthodox proceedings of a fashionable wedding,
it must again be remembered that not all weddings were fashionable, and that one or other of
these details might be omitted as taste or circumstances required. Among the poorer folk there
must often have been practically no ceremony at all beyond the "bringing home." And if there
are certain items which appear to us trivial and meaningless, it is probably unfamiliarity
which breeds our contempt. Perhaps a far-off generation may wonder how civilised folk in the
twentieth century could perform absurd antics with rice and slippers.

Marcia is now what was known as a "matron." Her position is far more free than it could ever
have been in Greece or the Orient, more free indeed than it would be in any civilised country
at the present time. The Romans had at all times placed the matron in a position of dignity
and responsibility, and to this is now added the greatest liberty of action. Her husband salutes
her in public as "Madam." Since he is a senator, and it is beginning to be the vogue to call
such men "The Most Illustrious," she also shares that title in polite reference to herself.
She is not confined to any particular portion of the house, nor, within the limits of decorum,
is she excluded from masculine company. She is the mistress of the establishment, controlling,
not only the female slaves, but also the males, in so far as they are engaged in the work of
the household. She keeps the keys of the store-rooms. Theoretically at least she has been trained
in all the arts of the housekeeper, and thoroughly understands domestic management, together
with the weaving and spinning which her handmaids are to perform. The merits of the wife, as
summed up in the epitaphs of the middle classes, are those of "good counsellor good manager,
and good worker in wool." She walks or is carried abroad at her pleasure, attends the public
games in the Circus, and goes with her husband to dinner-parties, where she reclines at the
meal just as he does. When her tutelage is past she can take actions in the law-courts, or
appear as witness or surety. Her property is at her own disposal, and she instructs her own
agent or attorney. It is only necessary that she should guard the honour of her husband. So
long as he trusts her he will not interfere. It is only a very tyrannical spouse who will insist
that her litter or sedan-chair shall have the curtains drawn when in the streets. We will assume
that Marcia is a lady of the true Roman self-respect and dignity, and that Silius and she live
a life of reasonable harmony.

