And so Mr. Paget being there, Will Howe and I and he played over some things of Locke's that
we used to play at sea, that pleased us three well, it being the first music I have heard a
great while, so much has my business of late taken me off from all my former delights.  By
and by by water home, and there dined alone, and after dinner with my brother Tom's two men
I removed all my goods out of Sir W. Pen's house into one room that I have with much ado got
ready at my house, and so I am to be quit of any further obligation to him.  So to my office,
but missing my key, which I had in my hand just now, makes me very angry and out of order,
it being a thing that I hate in others, and more in myself, to be careless of keys, I thinking
another not fit to be trusted that leaves a key behind their hole.  One thing more vexes me:
my wife writes me from the country that her boy plays the rogue there, and she is weary of
him, and complains also of her maid Sarah, of which I am also very sorry.  Being thus out of
temper, I could do little at my office, but went home and eat a bit, and so to my lodging to bed.

2nd.  Up betimes and got myself ready alone, and so to my office, my mind much troubled for
my key that I lost yesterday, and so to my workmen and put them in order, and so to my office,
and we met all the morning, and then dined at Sir W. Batten's with Sir W. Pen, and so to my
office again all the afternoon, and in the evening wrote a letter to Mr. Cooke, in the country,
in behalf of my brother Tom, to his mistress, it being the first of my appearing in it, and
if she be as Tom sets her out, it may be very well for him.  So home and eat a bit, and so
to my lodging to bed.

3rd.  Up betimes, but now the days begin to shorten, and so whereas I used to rise by four
o'clock, it is not broad daylight now till after five o'clock, so that it is after five before
I do rise.  To my office, and about 8 o'clock I went over to Redriffe, and walked to Deptford,
where I found Mr. Coventry and Sir W. Pen beginning the pay, it being my desire to be there
to-day because it is the first pay that Mr. Coventry has been at, and I would be thought to
be as much with Mr. Coventry as I can.  Here we staid till noon, and by that time paid off
the Breda, and then to dinner at the tavern, where I have obtained that our commons is not
so large as they used to be, which I am glad to see.  After dinner by water to the office,
and there we met and sold the Weymouth, Successe, and Fellowship hulkes, where pleasant to
see how backward men are at first to bid; and yet when the candle is going out, how they bawl
and dispute afterwards who bid the most first.  And here I observed one man cunninger than
the rest that was sure to bid the last man, and to carry it; and inquiring the reason, he told
me that just as the flame goes out the smoke descends, which is a thing I never observed before,
and by that he do know the instant when to bid last, which is very pretty.

     [Cromwell had considered the 3rd of September as the most fortunate
     day of his life, on account of his victories at Dunbar and
     Worcester.  It was also remarkable for the great storm that occurred
     at the time of his death; and as being the day on which the Fire of
     London, in 1666, burnt with the greatest fury.--B.]

But, blessed be God! all is likely to be quiet, I hope.  After the sale I walked to my brother's,
in my way meeting with Dr. Fairbrother, of whom I enquired what news in Church matters.  I
took him in the tavern at Puddle dock, but neither he nor I drank any of the wine we called
for, but left it, and so after discourse parted, and Mr. Townsend not being at home I went
to my brother's, and there heard how his love matter proceeded, which do not displease me,
and so by water to White Hall to my Lord's lodgings, where he being to go to Hinchingbroke
to-morrow morning, I staid and fiddled with Will.  Howe some new tunes very pleasant, and then
my Lord came in and had much kind talk with him, and then to bed with Mr. Moore there alone.
So having taken my leave of my Lord before I went to bed, I resolved to rise early and be gone
without more speaking to him--

4th.  We had much and good music, which was my best entertainment.  After Sir W. Compton and
Mr. Coventry, and some of the best of the rest were gone, I grew weary of staying with Sir
Williams both, and the more for that my Lady Batten and her crew, at least half a score, come
into the room, and I believe we shall pay size for it; but 'tis very pleasant to see her in
her hair under her hood, and how by little and little she would fain be a gallant; but, Lord!
the company she keeps about her are like herself, that she may be known by them what she is.
Being quite weary I stole from them and to my office, where I did business till 9 at night,
and so to my lodgings to bed.

5th.  Here I staid and mustered the yard and looked into the storehouses; and so walked all
alone to Greenwich, and thence by water to Deptford, and there examined some stores, and did
some of my own business in hastening my work there, and so walked to Redriffe, being by this
time pretty weary and all in a sweat; took boat there for the Tower, which made me a little
fearful, it being a cold, windy morning.  After dinner I came home and found Sir John Minnes
come this day, and I went to him to Sir W. Batten's, where it pleased me to see how jealous
Sir Williams both are of my going down to Woolwich, &c., and doing my duty as I nowadays do,
and of my dining with the Commission of the Customs.  So to my office, and there till 9 at
night, and so to my lodgings to bed.

6th.  Lay long, that is, till 6 and past before I rose, in order to sweat a little away the
cold which I was afraid I might have got yesterday, but I bless God I am well.  So up and to
my office, and then we met and sat till noon, very full of business.  Then Sir John Minnes,
both Sir Williams and I to the Trinity House, where we had at dinner a couple of venison pasties,
of which I eat but little, being almost cloyed, having been at five pasties in three days,
namely, two at our own feast, and one yesterday, and two to-day.  So home and at the office
all the afternoon, busy till nine at night, and so to my lodging and to bed.  This afternoon
I had my new key and the lock of my office door altered, having lost my key the other day,
which vexed me.

7th (Lord's day).  Up betimes and round about by the streets to my office, and walked in the
garden and in my office till my man Will rose, and then sent to tell Sir J. Minnes that I would
go with him to Whitehall, which anon we did, in his coach, and to the Chapell, where I heard
a good sermon of the Dean of Ely's, upon returning to the old ways, and a most excellent anthem,
with symphonys between, sung by Captain Cooke.  Then home with Mr. Fox and his lady; and there
dined with them, where much company come to them.  Thence to my Lord's, where nobody at home
but a woman that let me in, and Sarah above, whither I went up to her and played and talked
with her .  .  .

     [James, the son of Charles II. by Lucy Walter, daughter of William
     Walter, of Roch Castle, co.  Pembroke.  He was born April 9th, 1649,
     and landed in England with the Queen-Mother, July 28th, 1662, when
     he bore the name of Crofts, after Lord Crofts, his governor.  He was
     created Duke of Monmouth, February 14th, 1663, and married Lady Anne
     Scott, daughter and heiress of Francis, second Earl of Buccleuch, on
     April 20th following.  The King and Queen
were very merry; and he would have made the Queen-Mother believe that his
Queen was with child, and said that she said so.  The company being gone I walked
home with great content as I can be in for seeing the greatest rarity, and
yet a little troubled that I should see them before my wife's coming home,
I having made a promise that I would not, nor did I do it industriously
and by design, but by chance only.  To my office, to fit myself for
waiting on the Duke to-morrow morning with the rest of our company, and so
to my lodgings and to bed.

8th.  Up betimes and to my office preparing an account to give the Duke this morning of what
we have of late done at the office.  The rest to Deptford, I to the Exchequer to meet Mr. Townsend,
where I hear he is gone to the Sun tavern, and there found him with some friends at breakfast,
which I eat with him, and so we crossed the water together, and in walking I told him my brother
Tom's intentions for a wife, which he would do me all favour in to Mr. Young, whose kinswoman
he do look after.  We took boat again at the Falcon, and there parted, and I to the old Swan,
and so to the Change, and there meeting Sir W. Warren did step to a tavern, and there sat and
talked about price of masts and other things, and so broke up and to my office to see what
business, and so we took water again, and at the Tower I over to Redriffe, and there left him
in the boat and walked to Deptford, and there up and down the yard speaking with people, and
so Sir W. Pen coming out of the payhouse did single me out to tell me Sir J. Minnes' dislike
of my blinding his lights over his stairs (which indeed is very bad) and blocking up the house
of office on the leads.  Which did trouble me.  So I went into the payhouse and took an occasion
of speaking with him alone, and did give him good satisfaction therein, so as that I am well
pleased and do hope now to have my closet on the leads without any more trouble, for he do
not object against my having a door upon the leads, but that all my family should not make
it a thoroughfare, which I am contented with. So to the pay, and in the evening home in the
barge, and so to my office, and after doing some business there to my lodgings, and so to bed.

9th.  At my office betimes, and by and by we sat, and at noon Mr. Coventry, Sir J. Minnes,
Mr. Pett, and myself by water to Deptford, where we met Sir G. C., Sir W. B., and Sir W. P.
At the pay of a ship, and we dined together on a haunch of good venison boiled, and after dinner
returned again to the office, and there met several tradesmen by our appointment to know of
them their lowest rates that they will take for their several provisions that they sell to
us, for I do resolve to know that, and to buy no dearer, that so when we know the lowest rate,
it shall be the Treasurer's fault, and not ours, that we pay dearer.  This afternoon Sir John
Minnes, Mr. Coventry, and I went into Sir John's lodgings, where he showed us how I have blinded
all his lights, and stopped up his garden door, and other things he takes notice of that he
resolves to abridge me of, which do vex me so much that for all this evening and all night
in my bed, so great a fool I am, and little master of my passion, that I could not sleep for
the thoughts of my losing the privilege of the leads, and other things which in themselves
are small and not worth half the trouble.  The more fool am I, and must labour against it for
shame, especially I that used to preach up Epictetus's rule:

     ["Some things are in our power, others are not" Pepys means,
     "I ought not to vex myself about what I cannot control."]

Late at my office, troubled in mind, and then to bed, but could hardly sleep at night.

10th.  Up and to my house, and there contrived a way how Sir John Minnes shall come into the
leads, and yet I save part of the closet I hoped for, which, if it will not please him, I am
a madman to be troubled at it. To my office, and then at my house among my lazy workmen all
day.  In the afternoon to the Wardrobe to speak with Mr. Townsend, who tells me that he has
spoke with Mr. Young about my brother Tom's business, and finds that he has made enquiry of
him, and do hear him so well spoken of that he doubts not that the business will take with
ordinary endeavours.  So to my brother's, and there finding both door and hatch open, I went
in and knocked 3 or 4 times, and nobody came to me, which troubled me mightily; at last came
Margaret, who complained of Peter, who by and by came in, and I did rattle him soundly for
it.  I did afterwards take occasion to talk seriously alone with Margaret, who I find a very
discreet, good woman, and tells me, upon my demand, that her master is a very good husband,
and minds his business well, but his fault is that he has not command over his two men, but
they do what they list, and care not for his commands, and especially on Sundays they go whither
they please, and not to church, which vexes me mightily, and I am resolved to school [him]
soundly for it, it being so much unlike my father, that I cannot endure it in myself or him.
So walked home and in my way at the Exchange found my uncle Wight, and he and I to an alehouse
to drink a cup of beer, and so away, and I home and at the office till 9 o'clock and past,
and so to my lodgings.  I forgot that last night Mr. Cooke came to me to make his peace for
inviting my brother lately out of town without my leave, but he do give me such a character
of the lady that he has found out for him that I do much rejoice at, and did this night write
a letter to her, which he enclosed in one of his, and by the report that I hear of her I confess
I am much pleased with the match.

11th.  Up, but not so soon as I have of late practised, my little trouble of mind and the shortness
of the days making me to lie a little longer than I used to do, but I must make it up by sitting
up longer of nights. To my office, whither my brother Tom, whom I chide sufficiently for yesterday's
work.  So we sat at the office all the morning, some of us at Deptford paying the ordinary
there; at noon Sir W. Pen took me to his lodgings to dinner, and after dinner I to my office
again, and now and then to see how my work goes on, and so to my office late, and so to my
lodgings, and after staying up till past 12 at night, at my musique upon my lute, to bed. 
This night Tom came to show me a civil letter sent him from his mistress.  I am pleased well
enough with the business.

12th.  Up betimes and to my office, and up to my workmen, which goes on slowly and troubles
me much.  Besides, my mind is troubled till I see how Sir John Minnes will carry himself to
me about my lodgings, for all my fear is that he will get my best chamber from me, for as for
the leads I care not a farthing for them.  At my office all the morning, Mr. Lewes teaching
me to understand the method of making up Purser's accounts, which is very needful for me and
very hard.  Dined at home all in dirt, and my mind weary of being thus out of order, but I
hope in God it will away, but for the present I am very melancholy, as I have been a great
while.  All the afternoon till 9 at night at my office, and then home and eat an egg or two,
and so to my lodgings and to bed.

13th.  Up betimes and to my office, and we sat all the morning, and then at noon dined alone
at home, and so among my work folks studying how to get my way sure to me to go upon the leads,
which I fear at last I must be contented to go without, but, however, my mind is troubled still
about it. We met again in the afternoon to set accounts even between the King and the masters
of ships hired to carry provisions to Lisbon, and in the evening Mr. Moore came to me and did
lie with me at my lodgings.  It is great pleasure to me his company and discourse, and did
talk also about my law business, which I must now fall upon minding again, the term coming
on apace.  So to bed.

14th (Lord's day).  Up very early, and Mr. Moore taking leave of me the barber came and trimmed
me (I having him now to come to me again after I have used a pumice-stone a good while, not
but what I like this where I cannot conveniently have a barber, but here I cannot keep my hair
dry without one), and so by water to White Hall, by the way hearing that the Bishop of London
had given a very strict order against boats going on Sundays, and as I come back again, we
were examined by the masters of the company in another boat; but I told them who I was.  But
the door not being open to Westminster stairs there, called in at the Legg and drank a cup
of ale and a toast, which I have not done many a month before, but it served me for my two
glasses of wine to-day.  Thence to St. James's to Mr. Coventry, and there staid talking privately
with him an hour in his chamber of the business of our office, and found him to admiration
good and industrious, and I think my most true friend in all things that are fair.  He tells
me freely his mind of every man and in every thing.

     [Charles II. determined to form his own chapel on the model of that
     at Versailles.  Twenty-four instrumentalists were engaged, and this
     was the first day upon which they were brought into requisition.
     Evelyn alludes to the change in his Diary, but he puts the date down
     as the 21st instead of the 14th.  "Instead of the antient, grave and
     solemn wind musiq accompanying the organ, was introduc'd a concert
     of 24 violins between every pause after the French fantastical light
     way, better suiting a tavern or playhouse than a church.  This was
     the first time of change, and now we no more heard the cornet which
     gave life to the organ, that instrument quite left off in which the
     English were so skilful."  A list of the twenty-four fiddlers in
     1674, taken from an Exchequer document, "The names of the Gents of
     his Majesties Private Musick paid out of the Exchequer," is printed
     in North's "Memoires of Musick," ed.  Rimbault, 1846, p. 98 (note).]

But yet I could discern Captain Cooke to overdo his part at singing, which I never did before.
Thence up into the Queen's presence, and there saw the Queen again as I did last Sunday, and
some fine ladies with her; but, my troth, not many.  Thence to Sir G. Carteret's, and find
him to have sprained his foot and is lame, but yet hath been at chappell, and my Lady much
troubled for one of her daughters that is sick.  I dined with them, and a very pretty lady,
their kinswoman, with them.  My joy is, that I do think I have good hold on Sir George and
Mr. Coventry.  Sir George told me of a chest of drawers that were given Sir W. B. by Hughes
the rope-maker, whom he has since put out of his employment, and now the fellow do cry out
upon Sir W. for his cabinet.  So home again by water and to church, and from church Sir Williams
both and Sir John Minnes into the garden, and anon Sir W. Pen and I did discourse about my
lodgings and Sir J. Minnes, and I did open all my mind to him, and he told me what he had heard,
and I do see that I shall hardly keep my best lodging chamber, which troubles me, but I did
send for Goodenough the plasterer, who tells me that it did ever belong to my lodgings, but
lent by Mr. Payles to Mr. Smith, and so I will strive hard for it before I lose it.  So to
supper with them at Sir W. Batten's, and do counterfeit myself well pleased, but my heart is
troubled and offended at the whole company.  So to my office to prepare notes to read to the
Duke to-morrow morning, and so to my lodgings and to bed, my mind a little eased because I
am resolved to know the worst concerning my lodgings tomorrow.  Among other things Sir W. Pen
did tell me of one of my servants looking into Sir J. Minnes' window when my Lady Batten lay
there, which do much trouble them, and me also, and I fear will wholly occasion my loosing
the leads.  One thing more he told me of my Jane's cutting off a carpenter's long mustacho,
and how the fellow cried, and his wife would not come near him a great while, believing that
he had been among some of his wenches.  At which I was merry, though I perceive they discourse
of it as a crime of hers, which I understand not.

15th.  Up betimes to meet with the plasterer and bricklayer that did first divide our lodgings,
and they do both tell me that my chamber now in dispute did ever belong to my lodgings, which
do put me into good quiet of mind.  So to Deptford, and took my Lady Batten and her daughter
and Mrs. Turner along with me, they being going through the garden thither, they to Mr. Unthwayte's
and I to the Pay, and then about 3 o'clock went to dinner (Sir W. Pen and I), and after dinner
to the Pay again, and at night by barge home all together, and so to my lodgings and to bed,
my mind full of trouble about my house.

16th.  Up and to my workmen, and then to the office, and there we sat till noon; then to the
Exchange, and in my way met with the housekeeper of this office, and he did give me so good
an account of my chamber in my house about which I am so much troubled that I am well at ease
in my mind.  At my office all the afternoon alone.  In the evening Sir J. M. and I walked together
a good while in the garden, very pleasant, and takes no notice that he do design any further
trouble to me about my house.  At night eat a bit of bread and cheese, and so to my lodgings
and to bed, my mind ill at ease for these particulars: my house in dirt, and like to lose my
best chamber.  My wife writes me from the country that she is not pleased there with my father
nor mother, nor any of her servants, and that my boy is turned a very rogue.  I have L30 to
pay to the cavaliers: then a doubt about my being forced to leave all my business here, when
I am called to the court at Brampton; and lastly, my law businesses, which vex me to my heart
what I shall be able to do next term, which is near at hand.

17th.  At my office all the morning, and at noon to the Exchange, where meeting Mr. Moore and
Mr. Stucky, of the Wardrobe, we to an ordinary to dinner, and after dinner Mr. Moore and I
about 3 o'clock to Paul's school, to wait upon Mr. Crumlum (Mr. Moore having a hopeful lad,
a kinsman of his, there at school), who we take very luckily, and went up to his chamber with
him, where there was also an old fellow student of Mr. Crumlum's, one Mr. Newell, come to see
him, of whom he made so much, and of me, that the truth is he with kindness did drink more
than I believe he used to do, and did begin to be a little impertinent, the more when after
all he would in the evening go forth with us and give us a bottle of wine abroad, and at the
tavern met with an acquaintance of his that did occasion impertinent discourse, that though
I honour the man, and he do declare abundance of learning and worth, yet I confess my opinion
is much lessened of him, and therefore let it be a caution to myself not to love drink, since
it has such an effect upon others of greater worth in my own esteem.  I could not avoid drinking
of 5 glasses this afternoon with him, and after I had parted with him Mr. Moore and I to my
house, and after we had eaten something to my lodgings, where the master of the house, a very
ordinary fellow, was ready to entertain me and took me into his dining-room where his wife
was, a pretty and notable lady, too fine surely for him, and too much wit too.  Here I was
forced to stay with them a good while and did drink again, there being friends of theirs with
them.  At last being weary of his idle company, I bid good-night and so to my chamber and Mr.
[Moore] and I to bed, neither of us well pleased with our afternoon's work, merely from our
being witnesses of Mr. Crumlum's weakness.  This day my boy is come from Brampton, and my wife
I think the next week.

18th.  Among other discourse, speaking concerning the great charity used in Catholic countrys,
Mr. Ashburnham did tell us, that this last year, there being great want of corn in Paris, and
so a collection made for the poor, there was two pearls brought in, nobody knew from whom (till
the Queen, seeing them, knew whose they were, but did not discover it), which were sold for
200,000 crownes.

19th.  Up betimes and to my office, and at 9 o'clock, none of the rest going, I went alone
to Deptford, and there went on where they left last night to pay Woolwich yard, and so at noon
dined well, being chief at the table, and do not see but every body begins to give me as much
respect and honour as any of the rest.  After dinner to Pay again, and so till 9 at night,
my great trouble being that I was forced to begin an ill practice of bringing down the wages
of servants, for which people did curse me, which I do not love.  At night, after I had eaten
a cold pullet, I walked by brave moonshine, with three or four armed men to guard me, to Redriffe,
it being a joy to my heart to think of the condition that I am now in, that people should of
themselves provide this for me, unspoke to.  I hear this walk is dangerous to walk alone by
night, and much robbery committed here.  So from thence by water home, and so to my lodgings
to bed.

20th.  Up betimes and to my office, where I found my brother Tom, who tells me that his mistress's
mother has wrote a letter to Mr. Lull of her full satisfaction about Tom, of which I was glad,
and do think the business will take.  All this morning we sat at the office, Sir J. Minnes
and I.  And so dined at home, and among my workmen all the afternoon, and in the evening Tom
brought Mr. Lull to me, a friend of his mistress, a serious man, with whom I spoke, and he
gives me a good account of her and of their satisfaction in Tom, all which pleases me well.
We walked a good while in the garden together, and did give him a glass of wine at my office,
and so parted.  So to write letters by the post and news of this to my father concerning Tom,
and so home to supper and to my lodgings and to bed.  To-night my barber sent me his man to
trim me, who did live in King Street in Westminster lately, and tells me that three or four
that I knew in that street, tradesmen, are lately fallen mad, and some of them dead, and the
others continue mad.  They live all within a door or two one of another.

21st (Lord's day).  Got up betimes and walked to St. James's, and there to Mr. Coventry, and
sat an hour with him, talking of business of the office with great pleasure, and I do perceive
he do speak his whole mind to me. Thence to the Park, where by appointment I met my brother
Tom and Mr. Cooke, and there spoke about Tom's business, and to good satisfaction.  After dinner
to Tom's, and so home, and after walking a good while in the garden I went to my uncle Wight's,
where I found my aunt in mourning and making sad stories for the loss of her dear sister Nicholls,
of which I should have been very weary but that pretty Mrs. Margaret Wight came in and I was
much pleased with her company, and so all supper did vex my aunt talking in commendation of
the mass which I had been at to-day, but excused it afterwards that it was only to make mirth.
And so after supper broke up and home, and after putting my notes in order against to-morrow
I went to bed.

22nd.  Up betimes among my workmen, hastening to get things ready against my wife's coming,
and so with Sir J. M., Sir W. B., and Sir W. P., by coach to St. James's, and there with the
Duke.  I did give him an account of all things past of late; but I stood in great pain, having
a great fit of the colic, having catched cold yesterday by putting off my stockings to wipe
my toes, but at last it lessened, and then I was pretty well again, but in pain all day more
or less.  Thence I parted from them and walked to Greatorex's, and there with him did overlook
many pretty things, new inventions, and have bespoke a weather glass of him.  Thence to my
Lord Crew's, and dined with the servants, he having dined; and so, after dinner, up to him,
and sat an hour talking with him of publique, and my Lord's private businesses, with much content.
So to my brother Tom's, where Mr. Cooke expected me, and did go with me to see Mr. Young and
Mr. Lull in Blackfryers, kindred of Tom's mistress, where I was very well used, and do find
things to go in the business to my good content. Thence to Mr. Townsend, and did there talk
with Mr. Young himself also, and then home and to my study, and so to my lodgings and to bed.

23rd.  Up betimes and with my workmen, taking some pleasure to see my work come towards an
end, though I am vexed every day enough with their delay. We met and sat all the morning, dined
at home alone, and with my workmen all the afternoon, and in the evening by water and land
to Deptford to give order for things about my house, and came back again by coach with Sir
G. Carteret and Sir W. Batten (who has been at a Pay to-day), and to my office and did some
business, and so to supper and to my lodgings, and so to bed.  Thence to Mr. Wotton, the shoemaker's,
and there bought a pair of boots, cost me 30s., and he told me how Bird hath lately broke his
leg, while he was fencing in "Aglaura," upon the stage, and that the new theatre of all will
be ready against term.  So to my brother's, and there discoursed with him and Mr. Cooke about
their journey to Tom's mistress again, and I did speak with Mr. Croxton about measuring of
silk flags.  So by water home and to my workmen, and so at night till late at my office, inditing
a letter from Tom to his mistress upon his sending her a watch for a token, and so home and
to supper, and to my lodgings and to bed.  It is my content that by several hands to-day I
hear that I have the name of good-natured man among the poor people that come to the office.

25th.  Up betimes and to my workmen, and then to the office, where we sat all the morning.
So home to dinner alone and then to my workmen till night, and so to my office till bedtime,
and so after supper to my lodgings and to bed.  This evening I sat awhile at Sir W. Batten's
with Sir J. Minnes, &c., where he told us among many other things how in Portugal they scorn
to make a seat for a house of office, but they do .  .  .  . all in pots and so empty them
in the river.  I did also hear how the woman, formerly nurse to Mrs. Lemon (Sir W. Batten's
daughter), her child was torn to pieces by two doggs at Walthamstow this week, and is dead,
which is very strange.

26th.  Up betimes and among my workmen.  By and by to Sir W. Batten, who with Sir J. M. are
going to Chatham this morning, and I was in great pain till they were gone that I might see
whether Sir John do speak any thing of my chamber that I am afraid of losing or no.  But he
did not, and so my mind is a little at more ease.  So all day long till night among my workmen,
and in the afternoon did cause the partition between the entry and the boy's room to be pulled
down to lay it all into one, which I hope will please me and make my coming in more pleasant.
Late at my office at night writing a letter of excuse to Sir G. Carteret that I cannot wait
upon him to-morrow morning to Chatham as I promised, which I am loth to do because of my workmen
and my wife's coming to town to-morrow.  So to my lodgings and to bed.

27th.  Up betimes and among my workmen, and with great pleasure see the posts in the entry
taken down beyond expectation, so that now the boy's room being laid into the entry do make
my coming in very handsome, which was the only fault remaining almost in my house.  We sat
all the morning, and in the afternoon I got many jobbs done to my mind, and my wife's chamber
put into a good readiness against her coming, which she did at night, for Will did, by my leave
to go, meet her upon the road, and at night did bring me word she was come to my brother's,
by my order.  So I made myself ready and put things at home in order, and so went thither to
her.  Being come, I found her and her maid and dogg very well, and herself grown a little fatter
than she was.  I was very well pleased to see her, and after supper to bed, and had her company
with great content and much mutual love, only I do perceive that there has been falling out
between my mother and she, and a little between my father and she; but I hope all is well again,
and I perceive she likes Brampton House and seat better than ever I did myself, and tells me
how my Lord hath drawn a plot of some alteracions to be made there, and hath brought it up,
which I saw and like well.  I perceive my Lord and Lady have been very kind to her, and Captn.
Ferrers so kind that I perceive I have some jealousy of him, but I know what is the Captain's
manner of carriage, and therefore it is nothing to me.  She tells me of a Court like to be
in a little time, which troubles me, for I would not willingly go out of town.

28th (Lord's day).  Waked early, and fell talking one with another with great pleasure of my
house at Brampton and that here, and other matters. She tells me what a rogue my boy is, and
strange things he has been found guilty of, not fit to name, which vexes [me], but most of
all the unquiett life that my mother makes my father and herself lead through her want of reason.
So to Tom's to dinner with my wife, and there came Mr. Cooke, and Joyce Norton do also dine
there, and after dinner Cooke and I did talk about his journey and Tom's within a day or two
about his mistress.  And I did tell him my mind and give him my opinion in it.  So I walked
home and found my house made a little clean, and pleases me better and better, and so to church
in the afternoon, and after sermon to my study, and there did some things against to-morrow
that I go to the Duke's, and so walked to Tom's again, and there supped and to bed with good
content of mind.

29th (Michaelmas day).  This day my oaths for drinking of wine and going to plays are out,
and so I do resolve to take a liberty to-day, and then to fall to them again.  It being Collarday,
we had no time to talk with him about any business.  They went out together.  So we parted,
and in the park Mr. Cooke by appointment met me, to whom I did give my thoughts concerning
Tom's match and their journey tomorrow, and did carry him by water to Tom's, and there taking
up my wife, maid, dog, and him, did carry them home, where my wife is much pleased with my
house, and so am I fully.  I saw, I confess, some good dancing and some handsome women, which
was all my pleasure.  Thence set my wife down at Madam Turner's, and so by coach home, and
having delivered Pegg Pen to her father safe, went home, where I find Mr. Deane, of Woolwich,
hath sent me the modell he had promised me; but it so far exceeds my expectations, that I am
sorry almost he should make such a present to no greater a person; but I am exceeding glad
of it, and shall study to do him a courtesy for it.  So to my office and wrote a letter to
Tom's mistress's mother to send by Cooke to-morrow. Then came Mr. Moore thinking to have looked
over the business of my Brampton papers against the Court, but my mind was so full of other
matters (as it is my nature when I have been a good while from a business, that I have almost
forgot it, I am loth to come to it again) that I could not set upon it, and so he and I past
the evening away in discourse, and to my lodgings and to bed.

30th.  We rose, and he about his business, and I to my house to look over my workmen; but good
God! how I do find myself by yesterday's liberty hard to be brought to follow business again,
but however, I must do it, considering the great sweet and pleasure and content of mind that
I have had since I did leave drink and plays, and other pleasures, and followed my business.
So to my office, where we sat till noon, and then I to dinner with Sir W. Pen, and while we
were at it coming my wife to the office, and so I sent for her up, and after dinner we took
coach and to the Duke's playhouse, where we saw "The Duchess of Malfy" well performed, but
Betterton and Ianthe to admiration.  That being done, home again, by coach, and my wife's chamber
got ready for her to lie in to-night, but my business did call me to my office, so that staying
late I did not lie with her at home, but at my lodgings.  Strange to see how easily my mind
do revert to its former practice of loving plays and wine, having given myself a liberty to
them but these two days; but this night I have again bound myself to Christmas next, in which
I desire God to bless me and preserve me, for under God I find it to be the best course that
ever I could take to bring myself to mind my business.  I have also made up this evening my
monthly ballance, and find that, notwithstanding the loss of L30 to be paid to the loyall and
necessitous cavaliers by act of Parliament,

     [Two acts were passed in 1662 for this purpose, viz., 13 and 14 Car.
     II. cap. 8: "An act for distribution of threescore thousand pounds
     amongst the truly loyal and indigent commission officers, and for
     assessing of offices and distributing the monies thereby raised for
     their further supply;" and cap.  9, "An act for the relief of poor
     and maimed officers and soldiers who have faithfully served his
     Majesty and his royal father in the late wars."]

yet I am worth about L680, for which the Lord God be praised.  My condition at present is this:--I
have long been building, and my house to my great content is now almost done.  But yet not
so but that I shall have dirt, which troubles me too, for my wife has been in the country at
Brampton these two months, and is now come home a week or two before the house is ready for
her.  My mind is somewhat troubled about my best chamber, which I question whether I shall
be able to keep or no.  I am also troubled for the journey which I must needs take suddenly
to the Court at Brampton, but most of all for that I am not provided to understand my business,
having not minded it a great while, and at the best shall be able but to make a bad matter
of it, but God, I hope, will guide all to the best, and I am resolved to-morrow to fall hard
to it.  I pray God help me therein, for my father and mother and all our well-doings do depend
upon my care therein. My brother Tom is gone out of town this day, to make a second journey
to his mistress at Banbury, of which I have good expectations, and pray God to bless him therein.
My mind, I hope, is settled to follow my business again, for I find that two days' neglect
of business do give more discontent in mind than ten times the pleasure thereof can repair
again, be it what it will.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 OCTOBER
                                   1662

October 1st.  Up with my mind pretty well at rest about my accounts and other business, and
so to my house and there put my work to business, and then down to Deptford to do the same
there, and so back and with my workmen all the afternoon, and my wife putting a chamber in
order for us to lie in.  At night to look over some Brampton papers against the Court which
I expect every day to hear of, and that done home and with my wife to bed, the first time I
have lain there these two months and more, which I am now glad to do again, and do so like
the chamber as it is now ordered that all my fear is my not keeping it.  But I hope the best,
for it would vex me to the heart to lose it.

2nd.  Up and to the office, where we sat till noon, and then to dinner, and Mr. Moore came
and dined with me, and after dinner to look over my Brampton papers, which was a most necessary
work, though it is not so much to my content as I could wish.  I fear that it must be as it
can, and not as I would. Thence to my Lord's, and saw him, and staid with him half an hour
in his chamber talking about some of mine and his own business, and so up to bed with Mr. Moore
in the chamber over my Lord's.

3rd.  Rose, and without taking leave or speaking to my Lord went out early and walked home,
calling at my brother's and Paul's Churchyard, but bought nothing because of my oath, though
I had a great mind to it.  At my office, and with my workmen till noon, and then dined with
my wife upon herrings, the first I have eat this year, and so to my workmen again.  By and
by comes a gentleman to speak with my wife, and I found him to be a gentleman that had used
her very civilly in her coming up out of the country, on which score I showed him great respect,
and found him a very ingenious gentleman, and sat and talked with him a great while. He gone,
to my workmen again, and in the evening comes Captain Ferrers, and sat and talked a great while,
and told me the story of his receiving his cut in the hand by falling out with one of my Lord's
footmen.  He told me also of the impertinence and mischief that Ned Pickering has made in the
country between my Lord and all his servants almost by his finding of faults, which I am vexed
to hear, it being a great disgrace to my Lord to have the fellow seen to be so great still
with him.  He brought me a letter from my father, that appoints the day for the Court at Brampton
to be the 13th of this month; but I perceive he has kept the letter in his pocket these three
days, so that if the day had been sooner, I might have been spilt. So that it is a great folly
to send letters of business by any friend that require haste.  He being gone I to my office
all the evening, doing business there till bedtime, it being now my manner since my wife is
come to spend too much of my daytime with her and the workmen and do my office business at
night, which must not be after the work of the house is done. This night late I had notice
that Dekins, the merchant, is dead this afternoon suddenly, for grief that his daughter, my
Morena, who has long been ill, is given over by the Doctors.  For both which I am very sorry.
So home and to bed.

4th.  To my office all the morning, after I was up (my wife beginning to make me lie long a
mornings), where we sat till noon, and then dined at home, and after a little with my workmen
to my office till 9 at night, among other things examining the particulars of the miscarriage
of the Satisfaction, sunk the other day on the Dutch coast through the negligence of the pilott.

5th (Lord's day).  Lay long in bed talking with my wife, and among other things fell out about
my maid Sarah, whom my wife would fain put away, when I think her as good a servant as ever
came into a house, but it seems my wife would have one that would dress a head well, but we
were friends at last.  Dined with my wife, and then to talk again above, chiefly about her
learning to dance against her going next year into the country, which I am willing she shall
do.  Then to church to a tedious sermon, and thence walked to Tom's to see how things are in
his absence in the country, and so home and in my wife's chamber till bedtime talking, and
then to my office to put things in order to wait on the Duke to-morrow morning, and so home
and to bed.

6th.  Sir W. Pen and I early to St. James's by water, where Mr. Coventry, finding the Duke
in bed, and not very well, we did not stay to speak with him, but to White Hall, and there
took boat and down to Woolwich we went. In our way Mr. Coventry telling us how of late upon
enquiry into the miscarriages of the Duke's family, Mr. Biggs, his steward, is found very faulty,
and is turned out of his employment.  Then we fell to reading of a book which I saw the other
day at my Lord Sandwich's, intended for the late King, finely bound up, a treatise concerning
the benefit the Hollanders make of our fishing, but whereas I expected great matters from it,
I find it a very impertinent [book], and though some things good, yet so full of tautologies,
that we were weary of it.  But here to my trouble I hear that Mr. Moore is gone very sick to
the Wardrobe this afternoon, which troubles me much both for his own sake and for mine, because
of my law business that he does for me and also for my Lord's matters.  So hence by water,
late as it was, to the Wardrobe, and there found him in a high fever, in bed, and much cast
down by his being ill.  So thought it not convenient to stay, but left him and walked home,
and there weary went to supper, and then the barber came to me, and after he had done, to my
office to set down my journall of this day, and so home and to bed.

7th.  At the office all the morning, dined at home with my wife.  After dinner with her by
coach to see Mr. Moore, who continues ill.  I took his books of accounts, and did discourse
with him about my Lord's and my own businesses, and there being Mr. Battersby by, did take
notice of my having paid him the L100 borrowed of him, which they both did confess and promise
to return me my bond.  Thence by water with Will.  Howe to Westminster, and there staying a
little while in the Hall (my wife's father and mother being abroad, and so she returning presently)
thence by coach to my Lord's, and there I left money for Captain Ferrers to buy me two bands.
So towards the New Exchange, and there while my wife was buying things I walked up and down
with Dr. Williams, talking about my law businesses, and thence took him to my brother's, and
there gave him a glass of wine, and so parted, and then by coach with my wife home, and Sir
J. M. and Sir W. B. being come from Chatham Pay I did go see them for complaisance, and so
home and to bed.

8th.  I was glad above measure of this.  Hither this night my scallop,

     [A lace band, the edges of which were indented with segments of
     circles, so as to resemble a scallop shell.  The word "scallop" was
     used till recently for a part of a lady's dress embroidered and cut
     to resemble a scallop shell.]

bought and got made by Captain Ferrers' lady, is sent, and I brought it home, a very neat one.
It cost me about L3, and L3 more I have given him to buy me another.  I do find myself much
bound to go handsome, which I shall do in linen, and so the other things may be all the plainer.
Here I staid playing some new tunes to parts with Wm. Howe, and, my Lord not coming home, I
came home late on foot, my boy carrying a link, and so eat a bit and to bed, my head full of
ordering of businesses against my journey to-morrow, that there may be nothing done to my wrong
in my absence.  This day Sir W. Pen did speak to me from Sir J. Minnes to desire my best chamber
of me, and my great joy is that I perceive he do not stand upon his right, which I was much
afraid of, and so I hope I shall do well enough with him for it, for I will not part with it
by fair means, though I contrive to let him have another room for it.

9th.  Up early about my business to get me ready for my journey. After supper we paid the reckoning
together, and so he to his chamber and I to bed, very well, but my feet being much cramped
by my new hard boots that I bought the other day of Wotton were in much pain.  Will lay in
another bed in the chamber with me.

10th.  Up, and between eight and nine mounted again; but my feet so swelled with yesterday's
pain, that I could not get on my boots, which vexed me to the blood, but was forced to pay
4s. for a pair of old shoes of my landlord's, and so rid in shoes to Cambridge; but the way
so good that but for a little rain I had got very well thither, and set up at the Beare: and
there being spied in the street passing through the town my cozen Angier came to me, and I
must needs to his house, which I did; and there found Dr. Fairbrother, with a good dinner,
a barrel of good oysters, a couple of lobsters, and wine.  This being done, and the Congregation
dissolved by the Vice-Chancellor, I did with much content return to my Cozen Angier's, being
much pleased of doing this jobb of work, which I had long wished for and could never have had
such a time as now to do it with so much ease.  Thence to Trinity Hall, and there staid a good
while with Dr. John Pepys, who tells me that [his] brother Roger has gone out of town to keep
a Court; and so I was forced to go to Impington, to take such advice as my old uncle and his
son Claxton could give me.  Which I did, and there supped and talked with them, but not of
my business till by and by after supper comes in, unlooked for, my cozen Roger, with whom by
and by I discoursed largely, and in short he gives me good counsel, but tells me plainly that
it is my best way to study a composition with my uncle Thomas, for that law will not help us,
and that it is but a folly to flatter ourselves, with which, though much to my trouble, yet
I was well satisfied, because it told me what I am to trust to, and so to bed.

11th.  Up betimes, and after a little breakfast, and a very poor one, like our supper, and
such as I cannot feed on, because of my she-cozen Claxton's gouty hands; and after Roger had
carried me up and down his house and orchards, to show me them, I mounted, and rode to Huntingdon,
and so to Brampton; where I found my father and two brothers, and Mr. Cooke, my mother and
sister.  So we are now all together, God knows when we shall be so again.  I walked up and
down the house and garden, and find my father's alteracions very handsome.  But not so but
that there will be cause enough of doing more if ever I should come to live there, but it is,
however, very well for a country being as any little thing in the country. So to dinner, where
there being nothing but a poor breast of mutton, and that ill-dressed, I was much displeased,
there being Mr. Cooke there, who I invited to come over with my brother thither, and for whom
I was concerned to make much of.  I told my father and mother of it, and so had it very well
mended for the time after, as long as I staid, though I am very glad to see them live so frugally.
But now to my business.  I found my uncle Thomas come into the country, and do give out great
words, and forwarns all our people of paying us rent, and gives out that he will invalidate
the Will, it being but conditional, we paying debts and legacies, which we have not done, but
I hope we shall yet go through well enough.  I settled to look over papers, and discourse of
business against the Court till the evening; and then rode to Hinchingbroke (Will with me),
and there to my Lady's chamber and saw her, but, it being night, and my head full of business,
staid not long, but drank a cup of ale below, and so home again, and to supper, and to bed,
being not quiet in mind till I speak with Piggott, to see how his business goes, whose land
lies mortgaged to my late uncle, but never taken up by him, and so I fear the heire at law
will do it and that we cannot, but my design is to supplant him by pretending bonds as well
as a mortgage for the same money, and so as executor have the benefit of the bonds.

12th (Lord's day).  Mr. Wells preached a pretty good sermon, and they say he is pretty well
in his witts again.  So home to dinner, and so to walk in the garden, and then to Church again,
and so home, there coming several people about business, and among others Mr. Piggott, who
gives me good assurance of his truth to me and our business, in which I am very much pleased,
and tells me what my uncle Thomas said to him and what he designs, which (in fine) is to be
admitted to the estate as well as we, which I must endeavour to oppose as well as I can.  So
to supper, but my mind is so full of our business that I am no company at all, and then their
drink do not please me, till I did send to Goody Stanks for some of her's which is very small
and fresh, with a little taste of wormewood, which ever after did please me very well.  So
after supper to bed, thinking of business, but every night getting my brother John to go up
with me for discourse sake, while I was making unready.

     [That is, "undressing."  So of the French lords leaping over the
     walls in their shirts

         "Alenc.  How now, my lords!  what all unready so?
          Bast.  Unready!  ay, and glad we 'scaped so well."
                         Henry VI., act ii., sc. i.--M. B.]

13th.  Up to Hinchingbroke, and there with Mr. Sheply did look all over the house, and I do,
I confess, like well of the alteracions, and do like the staircase, but there being nothing
to make the outside more regular and modern, I am not satisfied with it, but do think it to
be too much to be laid out upon it.  Thence with Sheply to Huntingdon to the Crown, and there
did sit and talk, and eat a breakfast of cold roast beef, and so he to St. Ives Market, and
I to Sir Robert Bernard's for council, having a letter from my Lord Sandwich to that end. 
He do give it me with much kindness in appearance, and upon my desire do promise to put off
my uncle's admittance, if he can fairly, and upon the whole do make my case appear better to
me than my cozen Roger did, but not so but that we are liable to much trouble, and that it
will be best to come to an agreement if possible.  With my mind here also pretty well to see
things proceed so well I returned to Brampton, and spent the morning in looking over papers
and getting my copies ready against to-morrow.  So to dinner, and then to walk with my father
and other business, when by and by comes in my uncle Thomas and his son Thomas to see us, and
very calm they were and we to them.  And after a short How do you, and drinking a cup of beer,
they went away again, and so by and by my father and I to Mr. Phillips, and there discoursed
with him in order to to-morrow's business of the Court and getting several papers ready, when
presently comes in my uncle Thomas and his son thither also, but finding us there I believe
they were disappointed and so went forth again, and went to the house that Prior has lately
bought of us (which was Barton's) and there did make entry and forbade paying rent to us, as
now I hear they have done everywhere else, and that that was their intent in coming to see
us this day.  I perceive most of the people that do deal with us begin to be afraid that their
title to what they buy will not be good.  Which troubled me also I confess a little, but I
endeavoured to remove all as well as I could. Among other things they make me afraid that Barton
was never admitted to that that my uncle bought of him, but I hope the contrary.  Thence home,
and with my father took a melancholy walk to Portholme, seeing the country-maids milking their
cows there, they being there now at grass, and to see with what mirth they come all home together
in pomp with their milk, and sometimes they have musique go before them.  So back home again,
and to supper, and in comes Piggott with a counterfeit bond which by agreement between us (though
it be very just in itself) he has made, by which I shall lay claim to the interest of the mortgage
money, and so waiting with much impatience and doubt the issue of to-morrow's Court, I to bed,
but hardly slept half an hour the whole night, my mind did so run with fears of to-morrow.

14th.  Up, and did digest into a method all I could say in our defence, in case there should
be occasion, for I hear he will have counsel to plead for him in the Court, and so about nine
o'clock to the court at the Lordshipp where the jury was called; and there being vacancies,
they would have had my father, in respect to him, [to] have been one of the Homage, but he
thought fit to refuse it, he not knowing enough the customs of the town.  They being sworn
and the charge given them, they fell to our business, finding the heir-at-law to be my uncle
Thomas; but Sir Robert [Bernard] did tell them that he had seen how the estate was devised
to my father by my uncle's will, according to the custom of the manour, which they would have
denied, first, that it was not according to the custom of the manour, proposing some difficulty
about the half-acre of land which is given the heir-at-law according to custom, which did put
me into great fear lest it might not be in my uncle's possession at his death, but mortgaged
with other to T. Trice (who was there, and was with my good will admitted to Taylor's house
mortgaged to him if not being worth the money for which it was mortgaged, which I perceive
he now, although he lately bragged the contrary, yet is now sensible of, and would have us
to redeem it with money, and he would now resurrender it to us rather than the heir-at-law)
or else that it was part of Goody Gorum's in which she has a life, and so might not be capable
of being according to the custom given to the heir-at-law, but Will Stanks tells me we are
sure enough against all that.  Then they fell to talk of Piggott's land mortgaged to my uncle,
but he never admitted to it, which they now as heir would have admitted to.  But the steward,
as he promised me, did find pretensions very kindly and readily to put off their admittance,
by which I find they are much defeated, and if ever, I hope, will now listen to a treaty and
agreement with us, at our meeting at London.  So they took their leaves of the steward and
Court, and went away, and by and by, after other business many brought in, they broke up to
dinner.  Will in another bed in my chamber.

15th.  My mind, though out of trouble, yet intent upon my journey home, being desirous to know
how all my matters go there, I could hardly sleep, but waked very early; and, when it was time,
did call up Will, and we rose, and musique (with a bandore

     [A musical instrument with wire strings, and sounded with a
     plectrum; used as a bass to the cittern.  The banjo is a
     modification of the bandore, as the name is a negro corruption of
     that word.]

for the base) did give me a levett;

     [A blast of trumpets, intended as a 'reveillee', from French lever.

                   "First he that led the Cavalcade
                    Wore a Sow-gelder's Flagellet,
                    On which he blew as strong a Levet
                    As well-feed Lawyer on his breviate."  Having eat well, only our oysters proving
bad, we mounted, having a pair of boots that I borrowed and carried with
me from Impington, my own to be sent from Cambridge to London, and took
leave of all, and begun our journey about nine o'clock. After we had rode
about 10 miles we got out of our way into Royston road, which did vex me
cruelly, and the worst for that my brother's horse, which was lame
yesterday, grows worse to-day, that he could not keep pace with us.  At
last with much ado we got into the road again, having misguided also a
gentleman's man who had lost his master and thought us to be going the
same way did follow us, but coming into the road again we met with his
master, by his coat a divine, but I perceiving Tom's horse not able to
keep with us, I desired Mr. Cooke and him to take their own time, and Will
and I we rode before them keeping a good pace, and came to Ware about
three o'clock in the afternoon, the ways being every where but bad.  Here
I fell into acquaintance and eat and drank with the divine, but know not
who he is, and after an hour's bait to myself and horses he, though
resolved to have lodged there, yet for company would out again, and so we
remounted at four o'clock, and he went with me as far almost as Tibbald's
and there parted with us, taking up there for all night, but finding our
horses in good case and the night being pretty light, though by reason of
clouds the moon did not shine out, we even made shift from one place to
another to reach London, though both of us very weary.  And having left
our horses at their masters, walked home, found all things well, and with
full joy, though very weary, came home and went to bed, there happening
nothing since our going to my discontent in the least degree; which do so
please me, that I cannot but bless God for my journey, observing a whole
course of success from the beginning to the end of it, and I do find it to
be the reward of my diligence, which all along in this has been
extraordinary, for I have not had the least kind of divertisement
imaginable since my going forth, but merely carrying on my business which
God has been pleased to bless.  So to bed very hot and feverish by being
weary, but early morning the fever was over.

16th.  And so I rose in good temper, finding a good chimneypiece made in my upper dining-room
chamber, and the diningroom wainscoat in a good forwardness, at which I am glad, and then to
the office, where by T. Hater I found all things to my mind, and so we sat at the office till
noon, and then at home to dinner with my wife.  Then coming Mr. Creede in order to some business
with Sir J. Minnes about his accounts, this afternoon I took him to the Treasury office, where
Sir John and I did stay late paying some money to the men that are saved out of the Satisfaction
that was lost the other day.  The King gives them half-pay, which is more than is used in such
cases, for they never used to have any thing, and yet the men were most outrageously discontented,
and did rail and curse us till I was troubled to hear it, and wished myself unconcerned therein.
Mr. Creede seeing us engaged took leave of us. Here late, and so home, and at the office set
down my journey-journall to this hour, and so shut up my book, giving God thanks for my good
success therein, and so home, and to supper, and to bed.  I hear Mr. Moore is in a way of recovery.
My brother Tom and Cooke are come to town I hear this morning, and he sends me word that his
mistress's mother is also come to treat with us about her daughter's portion and her jointure,
which I am willing should be out of Sturtlow lands.

17th.  This morning Tom comes to me, and I advise him how to deal with his mistress's mother
about his giving her a joynture, but I intend to speak with her shortly, and tell her my mind.
Then to my Lord Sandwich by water, and told him how well things do go in the country with me,
of which he was very glad, and seems to concern himself much for me.  Thence with Mr. Creed
to Westminster Hall, and by and by thither comes Captn.  Here I staid talking a good while,
and so by water to see Mr. Moore, who is out of bed and in a way to be well, and thence home,
and with Commr. Pett by water to view Wood's masts that he proffers to sell, which we found
bad, and so to Deptford to look over some businesses, and so home and I to my office, all our
talk being upon Sir J. M. and Sir W. B.'s base carriage against him at their late being at
Chatham, which I am sorry to hear, but I doubt not but we shall fling Sir W. B. upon his back
ere long.  At my office, I hearing Sir W. Pen was not well, I went to him to see, and sat with
him, and so home and to bed.

18th.  This morning, having resolved of my brother's entertaining his mistress's mother to-morrow,
I sent my wife thither to-day to lie there to-night and to direct him in the business, and
I all the morning at the office, and the afternoon intent upon my workmen, especially my joyners,
who will make my dining room very pretty.  At night to my office to dispatch business, and
then to see Sir W. Pen, who continues in great pain, and so home and alone to bed, but my head
being full of my own and my brother Tom's business I could hardly sleep, though not in much
trouble, but only multitude of thoughts.

19th (Lord's day).  Got me ready in the morning and put on my first new laceband; and so neat
it is, that I am resolved my great expense shall be lacebands, and it will set off any thing
else the more.  So walked to my brother's, where I met Mr. Cooke, and discoursing with him
do find that he and Tom have promised a joynture of L50 to his mistress, and say that I did
give my consent that she should be joyntured in L30 per ann. for Sturtlow, and the rest to
be made up out of her portion.  At which I was stark mad, and very angry the business should
be carried with so much folly and against my mind and all reason.  But I was willing to forbear
discovering of it, and did receive Mrs. Butler, her mother, Mr. Lull and his wife, very civil
people, very kindly, and without the least discontent, and Tom had a good and neat dinner for
us.  We had little discourse of any business, but leave it to one Mr. Smith on her part and
myself on ours.  So we staid till sermon was done, and I took leave, and to see Mr. Moore,
who recovers well; and his doctor coming to him, one Dr. Merrit, we had some of his very good
discourse of anatomy, and other things, very pleasant.  By and by, I with Mr. Townsend walked
in the garden, talking and advising with him about Tom's business, and he tells me he will
speak with Smith, and says I offer fair to give her L30 joynture and no more.  Thence Tom waiting
for me homewards towards my house, talking and scolding him for his folly, and telling him
my mind plainly what he has to trust to if he goes this way to work, for he shall never have
her upon the terms they demand of L50.  He left me, and I to my uncle Wight, and there supped,
and there was pretty Mistress Margt. Wight, whom I esteem very pretty, and love dearly to look
upon her.  We were very pleasant, I droning with my aunt and them, but I am sorry to hear that
the news of the selling of Dunkirk

     [A treaty was signed on the 27th October by which Dunkirk was sold
     to France for five million livres, two of which were to be paid
     immediately, and the remaining three by eight bills at dates varying
     from three months to two years; during which time the King of
     England was to contribute the aid of a naval force, if necessary,
     for defence against Spain.  Subsequently the remaining three
     millions were reduced to 2,500,000 to be paid at Paris, and 254,000
     in London.  It is not known that Clarendon suggested the sale of
     Dunkirk, but it is certain that he adopted the measure with zeal.
     There is also no doubt that he got as much as France could be
     induced to give.--Lister's Life of Clarendon, ii.  So home, and after preparing
things against to-morrow for the Duke, to bed.  But, however, as soon as I came home I did pay my
crown to the poor's box, according to my vow, and so no harm as to that is
done, but only business lost and money lost, and my old habit of pleasure
wakened, which I will keep down the more hereafter, for I thank God these
pleasures are not sweet to me now in the very enjoying of them.  So by
coach home, and after a little business at my office, and seeing Sir W.
Pen, who continues ill, I went to bed.  Dunkirk, I am confirmed, is
absolutely sold; for which I am very sorry.

21st.  Up, and while I was dressing myself, my brother Tom being there I did chide him for
his folly in abusing himself about the match, for I perceive he do endeavour all he can to
get her, and she and her friends to have more than her portion deserves, which now from 6 or
L700 is come to L450.  I did by several steps shew Tom how he would not be L100 the better
for her according to the ways he took to joynture her.  After having done with him to the office,
and there all the morning, and in the middle of our sitting my workmen setting about the putting
up of my rails upon my leads, Sir J. Minnes did spy them and fell a-swearing, which I took
no notice of, but was vexed, and am still to the very heart for it, for fear it should put
him upon taking the closett and my chamber from me, which I protest I am now afraid of.  But
it is my very great folly to be so much troubled at these trifles, more than at the loss of
L100, or things of greater concernment; but I forget the lesson I use to preach to others.
After dinner to my office with my head and heart full of troublesome business, and thence by
water with Mr. Smith, to Mr. Lechmore, the Counsellor at the Temple, about Field's business;
and he tells me plainly that, there being a verdict against me, there is no help for it, but
it must proceed to judgment.  Thence to Mr. Smith, the scrivener, upon Ludgate Hill, to whom
Mrs. Butler do committ her business concerning her daughter and my brother.  He tells me her
daughter's portion is but L400, at which I am more troubled than before; and they find fault
that his house is too little.  So after I had told him my full mind, I went away to meet again
to-morrow, but I believe the business will be broke off, which for Tom's sake I am much grieved
for, but it cannot be helped without his ruin. Thence to see Mr. Moore, who is pretty well
again, and we read over and discoursed about Mrs. Goldsborough's business, and her son coming
by my appointment thither, I did tell him our resolution as to her having her estate reconveyed
to her.  Hither also came my brother, and before Mr. Moore I did advise and counsel him about
his match, and how we had all been abused by Mr. Cooke's folly.  So home and to my office,
and there settled many businesses, and so home and to supper, and so to bed, Sir W. Pen being
still in great pain.

22nd.  Up, and carrying my wife and her brother to Covent Garden, near their father's new lodging,
by coach, I to my Lord Sandwich's, who receives me now more and more kindly, now he sees that
I am respected in the world; and is my most noble patron.  Here I staid and talked about many
things, with my Lord and Mr. Povy, being there about Tangier business, for which the Commission
is a taking out.  Hence (after talking with Mr. Cooke, whom I met here about Mrs. Butler's
portion, he do persist to say that it will be worth L600 certain, when he knows as well as
I do now that it is but L400, and so I told him, but he is a fool, and has made fools of us).
So I by water to my brother's, and thence to Mr. Smith's, where I was, last night, and there
by appointment met Mrs. Butler, with whom I plainly discoursed and she with me.  I find she
will give but L400, and no more, and is not willing to do that without a joynture, which she
expects and I will not grant for that portion, and upon the whole I find that Cooke has made
great brags on both sides, and so has abused us both, but know not how to help it, for I perceive
she had much greater expectations of Tom's house and being than she finds. But however we did
break off the business wholly, but with great love and kindness between her and me, and would
have been glad we had known one another's minds sooner, without being misguided by this fellow
to both our shames and trouble.  For I find her a very discreet, sober woman, and her daughter,
I understand and believe, is a good lady; and if portions did agree, though she finds fault
with Tom's house, and his bad imperfection in his speech, I believe we should well agree in
other matters.  After taking a kind farewell, I to Tom's, and there did give him a full account
of this sad news, with which I find he is much troubled, but do appear to me to be willing
to be guided herein, and apprehends that it is not for his good to do otherwise, and so I do
persuade [him] to follow his business again, and I hope he will, but for Cooke's part and Dr.
Pepys, I shall know them for two fools another time. Hence, it raining hard, by coach home,
being first trimmed here by Benier, who being acquainted with all the players, do tell me that
Betterton is not married to Ianthe, as they say; but also that he is a very sober, serious
man, and studious and humble, following of his studies, and is rich already with what he gets
and saves, and then to my office till late, doing great deal of business, and settling my mind
in pretty good order as to my business, though at present they are very many. So home and to
bed.  This night was buried, as I hear by the bells at Barking Church, my poor Morena,

     [The burial of Elizabeth, daughter of John Dekins or Dickens, is
     recorded in the parish register of All Hallows, Barking, as having
     taken place on October 22nd.  See ante, October 3rd]

whose sickness being desperate, did kill her poor father; and he being dead for sorrow, she
could not recover, nor desire to live, but from that time do languish more and more, and so
is now dead and buried.

23rd.  Up and among my workmen, and so to the office, and there sitting all the morning we
stept all out to visit Sir W. Batten, who it seems has not been well all yesterday, but being
let blood is now pretty well, and Sir W. Pen after office I went to see, but he continues in
great pain of the gout and in bed, cannot stir hand nor foot but with great pain.  So to my
office all the evening putting things public and private in order, and so at night home and
to supper and to bed, finding great content since I am come to follow my business again, which
God preserve in me.

24th.  After with great pleasure lying a great while talking and sporting in bed with my wife
(for we have been for some years now, and at present more and more, a very happy couple, blessed
be God), I got up and to my office, and having done there some business, I by water, and then
walked to Deptford to discourse with Mr. Lowly and Davis about my late conceptions about keeping
books of the distinct works done in the yards, against which I find no objection but their
ignorance and unwillingness to do anything of pains and what is out of their ordinary dull
road, but I like it well, and will proceed in it.  So home and dined there with my wife upon
a most excellent dish of tripes of my own directing, covered with, mustard, as I have heretofore
seen them done at my Lord Crew's, of which I made a very great meal, and sent for a glass of
wine for myself, and so to see Sir W. Pen, who continues bed-rid in great pain, and hence to
the Treasury to Sir J. Minnes paying off of tickets, and at night home, and in my study (after
seeing Sir W. Batten, who also continues ill) I fell to draw out my conceptions about books
for the clerk that cheques in the yard to keep according to the distinct works there, which
pleases me very well, and I am confident it will be of great use.  At 9 at night home, and
to supper, and to bed.

25th.  Up and to the office, and there with Mr. Coventry sat all the morning, only we two,
the rest being absent or sick.  Dined at home with my wife upon a good dish of neats' feet
and mustard, of which I made a good meal.  All the afternoon alone at my office and among my
workmen, who (I mean the joyners) have even ended my dining room, and will be very handsome
and to my full content.  In the evening at my office about one business or another, and so
home and to bed, with my mind every day more and more quiet since I come to follow my business,
and shall be very happy indeed when the trouble of my house is over.  Home and dined, and Mr.
Sympson, my joyner that do my diningroom, and my brother Tom with me to a delicate fat pig.
Tom takes his disappointment of his mistress to heart; but all will be well again in a little
time.  Then to church again, and heard a simple Scot preach most tediously.  So home, and to
see Sir W. Batten, who is pretty well again, and then to my uncle Wight's to show my fine band
and to see Mrs. Margaret Wight, but she was not there.  All this day soldiers going up and
down the town, there being an alarm and many Quakers and others clapped up; but I believe without
any reason: only they say in Dorsetshire there hath been some rising discovered.  So after
supper home, and then to my study, and making up my monthly account to myself. I find myself,
by my expense in bands and clothes this month, abated a little of my last, and that I am worth
L679 still; for which God be praised.  So home and to bed with quiett mind, blessed be God,
but afeard of my candle's going out, which makes me write thus slubberingly.

27th.  Up, and after giving order to the plasterer now to set upon the finishing of my house,
then by water to wait upon the Duke, and walking in the matted Gallery, by and by comes Mr.
Coventry and Sir John Minnes, and then to the Duke, and after he was ready, to his closet,
where I did give him my usual account of matters, and afterwards, upon Sir J. Minnes' desire
to have one to assist him in his employment, Sir W. Pen is appointed to be his, and Mr. Pett
to be the Surveyor's assistant.  Mr. Coventry did desire to be excused, and so I hope (at least
it is my present opinion) to have none joined with me, but only Mr. Coventry do desire that
I would find work for one of his clerks, which I did not deny, but however I will think of
it, whether without prejudice to mine I can do it.  After dinner he and I into another room
over a pot of ale and talked.

     [There has been much confusion as to the name and parentage of
     Charles's mistress. (privately printed, 1869), sets out her pedigree, which is
     a good one.  Roch Castle was taken and burnt by the Parliamentary
     forces in 1644, and Lucy was in London in 1648, where she made the
     acquaintance of Colonel Algernon Sidney.  She then fell into the
     possession of his brother, Colonel Robert Sidney.  In September of
     this same year she was taken up by Charles, Prince of Wales.
     Charles terminated his connection with her on October 30th, 1651,
     and she died in 1658, as appears by a document (administration entry
     in the Register of the Prerogative Court) met with by the late
     Colonel Chester.  William Erskine, who had served Charles as
     cupbearer in his wanderings, and was appointed Master of the
     Charterhouse in December, 1677, had the care of Lucy Walter, and
     buried her in Paris.  He declared that the king never had any
     intention of marrying her, and she did not deserve it.  Thomas Ross,
     the tutor of her son, put the idea of this claim into his head, and
     asked Dr. Cosin to certify to a marriage.  In consequence of this he
     was removed from his office, and Lord Crofts took his place
     (Steinman's "Althorp Memoirs").  Here we staid some time, thinking to stay out the play
before the King to-night, but it being "The Villaine," and my wife not
being there, I had no mind.  So walk to the Exchange, and there took many
turns with him; among other things, observing one very pretty Exchange
lass, with her face full of black patches, which was a strange sight.  So
bid him good-night and away by coach to Mr. Moore, with whom I staid an
hour, and found him pretty well and intends to go abroad tomorrow, and so
it raining hard by coach home, and having visited both Sir Williams, who
are both sick, but like to be well again, I to my office, and there did
some business, and so home and to bed.  At Sir W. Batten's I met with Mr.
Mills, who tells me that he could get nothing out of the maid hard by
(that did poyson herself) before she died, but that she did it because she
did not like herself, nor had not liked herself, nor anything she did a
great while.  It seems she was well-favoured enough, but crooked, and this
was all she could be got to say, which is very strange.

28th.  At the office sitting all the morning, and then home to dinner with my wife, and after
dinner she and I passing an hour or two in ridiculous talk, and then to my office, doing business
there till 9 at night, and so home and to supper and to bed.  My house is now in its last dirt,
I hope, the plasterer and painter now being upon winding up all my trouble, which I expect
will now in a fortnight's time, or a little more, be quite over.

29th (Lord Mayor's day).  Intended to have made me fine, and by invitation to have dined with
the Lord Mayor to-day, but going to see Sir W. Batten this morning, I found Sir G. Carteret
and Sir J. Minnes going with Sir W. Batten and myself to examine Sir G. Carteret's accounts
for the last year, whereupon I settled to it with them all the day long, only dinner time (which
Sir G. Carteret gave us), and by night did as good as finish them, and so parted, and thence
to my office, and there set papers in order and business against to-morrow.  I received a letter
this day from my father, speaking more trouble about my uncle Thomas his business, and of proceeding
to lay claim to Brampton and all my uncle left, because it is given conditional that we should
pay legacys, which to him we have not yet done, but I hope that will do us no hurt; God help
us if it should, but it disquiets my mind.  I have also a letter from my Lord Sandwich desiring
me upon matters of concernment to be with him early tomorrow morning, which I wonder what it
should be.  So my mind full of thoughts, and some trouble at night, home and to bed.  Could
sleep but little to-night for thoughts of my business.  At noon when we were up comes Mr. Wade
with my Lord's letter, and tells me the whole business.  Committed to the Tower (see March
17th, 1661-62).]

always had.  So to my office to put down my journal, and so home and to bed.  Lay pretty long
in bed, and then up and among my workmen, the carpenters being this day laying of my floor
of my dining room, with whom I staid a good while, and so to my office, and did a little business,
and so home to dinner, and after dinner all the afternoon with my carpenters, making them lay
all my boards but one in my dining room this day, which I am confident they would have made
two good days work of if I had not been there, and it will be very pleasant.  At night to my
office, and there late doing of my office business, and so home to supper and bed.  Thus ends
this month, I and my family in good health, but weary heartily of dirt, but now in hopes within
two or three weeks to be out of it.  My head troubled with much business, but especially my
fear of Sir J. Minnes claiming my bed-chamber of me, but I hope now that it is almost over,
for I perceive he is fitting his house to go into it the next week.  Then my law businesses
for Brampton makes me mad almost, for that I want time to follow them, but I must by no means
neglect them.  I thank God I do save money, though it be but a little, but I hope to find out
some job or other that I may get a sum by to set me up.  I am now also busy in a discovery
for my Lord Sandwich and Sir H. Bennett by Mr. Wade's means of some of Baxter's [Barkstead]
money hid in one of his cellars in the Tower.  If we get it it may be I may be 10 or L20 the
better for it.

