"Brutal cruelty?" echoed the Mistress. "What could be more brutal than the way he beats her?
Why, last week there was a bruise on her arm as big--"

"What can we prove? He has a legal right to punish her. If we got them up in court, he'd frighten
her into swearing she hurt her arm on a fence picket and that he never harms her. No, there's
no sort of cure for the rotten state of affairs."

But the Master was mistaken. There was a very good cure indeed for it. And that cure was being
applied at the moment he denied its existence.

Sonya had disappeared from view over the crest of the lawn: Down into the orchard she went,
Lad at her side; to where Ruloff was waiting for her to lug another full basket back to the house.

"Move!" he ordered, as she drew near. "Don't crawl! Move, or I'll make you move."

This threat he voiced very bravely indeed. He was well out of sight of the house. The superintendent
and the two other men were working on the far side of the hill. It seemed an eminently safe
time to exercise his parental authority. And, hand uplifted, he took a threatening step toward
the little girl.

Sonya cowered back in mortal dread. There was no mistaking the import of Ruloff's tone or gesture.
Lad read it as clearly as did the child. As Sonya shrank away from the menace, a furry shoulder
was pressed reassuringly against her side. Lad's cold muzzle was thrust for the merest instant
into her trembling hand.

Then, as Ruloff advanced, Lad took one majestic step forward; his great body shielding the
girl; his dark eyes sternly on the man's; his lips drawing back from his blunted yellow fangs.
Deep in his throat a growl was born.

Ruloff checked himself; looking doubtfully at the shaggy brute. And at the same moment the
superintendent appeared over the ridge of the hill, on his way to the orchard. The Slav picked
up a filled basket and shoved it at Sonya.

"Jump!" he ordered. "Keep moving. Be back here in one minute!"

With a sigh of enormous relief and a pat of furtive gratitude to Lad, the child set forth on
her errand. Yet, even at risk of a sharper rebuke, she accommodated her pace to Lad's stately
slow steps.

Hitherto she had loved the dog for no special reason except that her heart somehow went out
to him. But now she had a practical cause for her devotion. Lad had stood between her and a
fist blow. He had risked, she knew not what, to defy her all-terrible father and to protect
her from punishment.

As soon as she was out of Ruloff's sight, she set down her basket, and flung both puny arms
about the dog's neck in an agony of gratitude.

Her squeeze almost strangled the weak old collie. But there was love in it. And because of
that, he reveled in the hurt.

"You won't let him thump me!" she whispered in the dog's ear. "You won't let him. I'd never
be afraid of him, if you were there. Oh, Laddie, you're so darling!"

Lad, highly pleased, licked her wizened little face and, sitting down, insisted on shaking
hands with her. He realized he had done something quite wonderful and had made this little
chum of his proud of him. Wherefore, he was proud of himself; and felt young and gay again;--until
his next strenuous effort to walk fast.

All night, in her sleep, in the stiflingly hot loft of her father's hovel, which served her
and the five other Ruloff children as a dormitory, Sonya was faintly aware of that bright memory.
Her first waking thought was of the shaggy shoulder pressed so protectingly against her side;
and of the reassuring thrust of Lad's muzzle into her cupped palm. It all seemed as vividly
real as though she could still feel the friendly contact.

On the next morning, Ruloff alone of all the village's population went to work. For it was
Labor Day.

Ruloff did not believe in holidays,--either for himself or for his family. And while wages
were so high he was not minded to throw away a full day's earnings, just for the sake of honoring
a holiday ordained in a country for which he felt no fondness or other interest. So, with Sonya
tagging after him, he made his way to the Place, as usual.

Now, on Labor Day, of that year, was held the annual outdoor dog-show at Hawthorne. Lad, of
course, was far too old to be taken to a show. And this was one of the compensations of old
age. For Laddie detested dog shows. But, abnormally sensitive by nature, this sensitiveness
had grown upon him with failing strength and added years. Thus, when he saw Bruce and Bob and
Jean bathed and groomed and made ready for the show, he was sad at heart. For here was one
more thing in which he no longer had any share.

And so he lay down in his cave, under the piano, his head between his absurdly small white
forepaws; and hearkened sadly to the preparations for departure.

Bruce ("Sunnybank Goldsmith") was perhaps the most beautiful collie of his generation. Groomed
for a show, he made most other dogs look plebeian and shabby. That day, one may say in passing,
he was destined to go through the collie classes, to Winners, with a rush; and then to win
the award and cup for "Best Dog Of Any Breed In The Show."

Bruce's son and daughter--Bobby and Jean were to win in their respective collie classes as
Best Puppy and Best Novice. It was to be a day of triumph for the Sunnybank Kennels. Yet, somehow,
it was to be a day to which the Mistress and the Master never enjoyed looking back.

Into the car the three dogs were put. The Mistress and the Master and the Place's superintended
got aboard, and the trip to Hawthorne began.

Laddie had come out from his cave to see the show-goers off. The Mistress, looking back, had
a last glimpse of him, standing in the front doorway; staring wistfully after the car. She
waved her hand to him in farewell. Lad wagged his plumed tail, once, in reply, to the salute.
Then, heavily, he turned back again into the house.

"Dear old Laddie!" sighed the Mistress. "He used to hate to go to shows. And now he hates being
left behind. It seems so cruel to leave him. And yet--"

"Oh the maids will take good care of him!" consoled the Master. "They spoil him, whenever they
get a chance. And we'll be back before five o'clock. We can't be forever looking out for his
crotchety feelings."

"We won't be 'forever' doing that," prophesied the Mistress, unhappily.

Left alone the old dog paced slowly back to his cave. The day was hot. His massive coat was
a burden. Life was growing more of a problem than of old it had been. Also, from time to time,
lately, his heart did queer things that annoyed Lad. At some sudden motion or undue exertion
it had a new way of throbbing and of hammering against his ribs so violently as to make him pant.

Lad did not understand this. And, as with most things he did not understand, it vexed him.
This morning, for example,--the heat of the day and the fatigue of his ramble down through
the rose garden to the lake and back, had set it to thumping painfully. He was glad to lie
at peace in his beloved cave, in the cool music-room; and sleep away the hours until his deities
should return from that miserable dog-show. He slept.

And so an hour wore on; and then another and another.

At the show, the Mistress developed one of her sick headaches. She said nothing of it. But
the Master saw the black shadows grow, under her eyes; and the color go out of her face; and
he noted the little pain-lines around her mouth. So, as soon as the collie judging was over,
he made her get into the car; and he drove her home, meaning to return to Hawthorne in time
for the afternoon judging of specials and of variety classes.

Meanwhile, as the morning passed, Lad was roused from his fitful old-age slumber by the sound
of crying. Into his dreams seeped the distressing sound. He woke; listened; got up painfully
and started toward the front door.

Halfway to the door, his brain cleared sufficiently for him to recognize the voice that had
awakened him. And his leisurely walk merged into a run.

Ruloff and Sonya had been working all morning in the peach orchard. To the child's chagrin,
Lad was nowhere in sight. Every time she passed the house she loitered as long as she dared,
in hope of getting a glimpse of him.

"I wonder where Laddie is," she ventured, once, as her father was filling a basket for her
to carry.

"The dogs have gone to a silly show," grunted Ruloff, piling the basket. "The superintendent
told me, yesterday. To waste a whole day with dogs! Pouf! No wonder the world is poor! Here,
the basket is full. Jump!"

Sonya picked up the heavy load--twice as big as usual were the baskets given her to carry,
now that the interfering Master and the superintendent were not here to forbid--and started
laboriously for the house.

Her back ached with weariness. Yet, in the absence of her protectors, she dared not complain
or even to allow herself the luxury of walking slowly. So, up the hill, she toiled; at top
speed. Ruloff had finished filling another basket, and he prepared to follow her. This completed
the morning's work. His lunch-pail awaited him at the barn. With nobody to keep tabs on him,
he resolved to steal an extra hour of time, in honor of Labor Day--at his employer's expense.

Sonya pattered up the rise and around to the corner of the house. There, feeling her father's
eye on her, as he followed; she tried to hasten her staggering steps. As a result, she stumbled
against the concrete walk. Her bare feet went from under her.

Down she fell, asprawl; the peaches flying in fifty directions. She had cut her knee, painfully,
against the concrete edge. This, and the knowledge that Ruloff would most assuredly punish
her clumsiness, made her break out in shrill weeping.

Among the cascaded peaches she lay, crying her eyes out. Up the hill toward her scrambled Ruloff;
basket on shoulder; yelling abuse better fitted for the ears of a balky mule than for those
of a hurt child.

"Get up!" he bawled. "Get up, you worthless little cow! If you've spoiled any of those peaches
or broke my basket, I'll cut the flesh off your bones."

Sonya redoubled her wailing. For, she recognized a bumpy substance beneath her as the crushed
basket. And these baskets belonged to Ruloff; not to the Place.

For the accidental breaking of far less worthwhile things, at home, she and her brothers and
sisters had often been thrashed most unmercifully: Her lamentations soared to high heaven.
And her father's running feet sounded like the tramp of Doom.

There is perhaps no other terror so awful as that of an ill treated child at the approach of
punishment. A man or woman, menaced by danger from law or from private foe, can either fight
it out or run away from it. But there is no hiding place for a child from a brute parent. The
punishment is as inevitable and as fearsome as from the hand of God.

No; there is no other terror so awful. And, one likes to think, there is no other punishment
in the next world so severe as that meted out to the torturers of little children. For this
hope's basis there is the solemn warning voiced by the All-pitying Friend of children;--a threat
which, apparently, was unfamiliar to Ruloff.

Down upon the weepingly prostrate Sonya bore the man. As he came toward her, he ripped off
the leathern belt he wore. And he brandished it by the hole-punch end; the brass buckle singing
ominously about his head. Then, out from the house and across the wide veranda flashed a giant
tawny shape.

With the fierce speed of his youngest days, Lad cleared the porch and reached the crying child.
In the same instant he beheld the advancing Ruloff; and the wise old brain read the situation
at a glance.

Stopping only to lick the tear-streaked little face, Lad bounded in front of Sonya and faced
the father. The collie's feeble old body was tense; his eyes blazed with indignant fury. His
hackles bristled. The yellowed and useless teeth glinted from beneath back-writhed lips. For
all his age, Lad was a terrible and terrifying figure as he stood guard over the helpless waif.

Ruloff hesitated an instant, taken aback by the apparition. Sonya ceased shrieking. Lad was
here to protect her. Over her frightened soul came that former queer sense of safety. She got
up, tremblingly, and pressed close to the furry giant who had come to her rescue. She glared
defiantly up at Ruloff.

Perhaps it was this glare; perhaps it was the knowledge that Lad was very old and the sight
of his worn-down teeth; perhaps it was the need of maintaining his hold of fear over the rebellious
child. At all events, Ruloff swung aloft the belt once more and strode toward the two; balancing
himself for a kick at the thundrously growling dog.

The kick did not land. For, even as Sonya cried out in new terror, Lad launched himself at
the Slav.

All unprepared for the clash, and being an utter coward at heart--if he had a heart--the father
reeled back, under the impact. Losing his balance, he tumbled prone to earth.

By the time his back struck ground, Lad was upon him; ravening uselessly at the swarthy throat.

But, yelling with fright, Ruloff fended him off; and twisted and writhed out of reach; bunching
his feet under him and, in a second, staggering up and racing for the shelter of the nearest tree.

Up the low-stretching branches the man swarmed, until he was well out of reach. Then, pausing
in his climb, he shook his fist down at the collie, who was circling the tree in a vain attempt
to find some way of climbing it.

Chattering, mouthing, gibbering like a monkey, Ruloff shook an impotent fist at the dog that
had treed him; and squalled insults at him and at the hysterically delighted child.

Sonya rushed up to Lad, flinging her arms around him and trying to kiss him. At her embrace,
the collie's tension relaxed. He turned his back on the jabbering Ruloff, and looked pantingly
up into the child's excited face.

Then, whimpering a little under his breath, he licked her cheek; and made shift to wag his
plumed tail in reassurance. After which, having routed the enemy and done what he could to
comfort the rescued, Laddie moved heavily over to the veranda.

For some reason he was finding it hard to breathe. And his heart was doing amazing things against
his ribs. He was very tired--very drowsy. He wanted to finish his interrupted nap. But it was
a long way into the house. And a spot on the veranda, under the wide hammock, promised coolness.
Thither he went; walking more and more slowly.

At the hammock, he looked back: Ruloff was shinnying down from the tree; on the far side. All
the fight, all the angry zest for torturing, seemed to have gone out of the man. Without so
much as glancing toward Sonya or the dog, he made his way, in a wide detour, toward the barn
and lunch.

Sonya ran up on the veranda after Lad. As he laid himself heavily down, under the hammock,
she sat on the floor beside him; taking his head in her lap, stroking its silken fur and beginning
to sing to him in that high-pitched crooning little voice of hers.

Laddie loved this. And he loved the soft caress of her hand. It soothed him to sleep.

It was good to sleep. He had just undergone more vehement exertion and excitement than had
been his for many a long month. And he had earned his rest. It was sweet to doze like this--petted
and sung to.

It was not well to exercise body and emotions as he had just done. Lad realized that, now;--now
that it was all over and he could rest. Rest! Yes, it was good to rest,--to be smoothed and
crooned at. It was thus the Mistress had stroked and crooned to him, so many thousand times.
And always Lad had loved it.

It was well to be at home and to be sinking so pleasantly to sleep; here at the Place he had
guarded since before he could remember--the Place where he and the Mistress and the Master
had had such splendid times; where he and his long-dead mate, Lady, had romped; where he had
played with and trained his fiery little son, Wolf; and where every inch of the dear land was
alive with wonderful memories to him.

He had had a full, happy, rich life. And now, in its twilight, rest was as grateful as action
once had been.

The morning air was warm and it was heavy with flower and field, scents; and with the breath
of the forests where so often Lad had led the tearing run of the collie pack and in whose snowy
depths he once had fought for his life against Wolf and the huge crossbreed, Rex. That was
ever so long ago.

The Mistress and the Master were coming home. Lad knew that. He could not have told how he
knew it. In earlier years, he had known their car was bringing them home to him, while it was
still a mile or more distant from the Place;--had known and had cantered forth to meet it.

He was too tired, just now, to do that. At least, until he had slept for a moment or two. Always,
until now, the Mistress and the Master had been first, with Lad. Now, for some odd reason,
sleep was first.

And he slept;--deeply, wearily.

Presently, as he slept, he sighed and then quivered a little. After that, he lay still. The
great heart, very quietly, had stopped beating.

Into the driveway, from the main road, a furlong above, rolled the homecoming car. At sight
of it, Sonya started up. She was not certain how the car's occupants would take her preempting
of the veranda in their absence. Letting Lad's head gently down to the floor, she slipped away.

To the barn she went, ignorant that her father had not returned to the orchard. She wanted
to get herself into a more courageous frame of mind before meeting Ruloff. By experience she
judged he would make her pay, and pay dear, for the  fright the collie had given him.

Into the barn she ran, shutting fast its side door behind her. Then, midway across the dusky
hay-strewn space, she came to a gasping stop. Ruloff had risen from a box on the corner, had
set down his lunch pail, moved between her and the door and yanked off his brass-buckled belt.

The child was trapped. Here there was no earthly chance for escape. Here, too, thanks to the
closed door, Laddie could not come to her aid. In palsied dread, she stood shaking and sobbing;
as the man walked silently toward her.

Ruloff's flat face widened in a grin of anticipation. He had a big score to pay. And he was
there to pay it. The fear of the dog was still upon him; and the shame that this child, the
cause of all his humiliation, should have seen him run yelling up a tree. It would take a mighty
good flogging to square that.

Sonya cried out, in mortal terror, at his first step. Then--probably only in her hysterical
imagination, though afterward she vowed it had actually happened--came rescue.

Distinctly, against her quivering side, she felt the pressure of a warm furry bulk. Into her
paralyzed hand a reassuring cold muzzle was thrust. And, over her, came a sense of wonderful
safety from all harm. Facing her father with a high-pitched loud laugh of genuine courage,
she shrilled:

"You don't dare touch me! You don't dare lay one finger on me!"

And she meant it. Her look and every inflection of the defiant high voice proved she meant
it; proved it to the dumfounded Ruloff, in a way that sent funny little shivers down his spine.

The man came to a shambling halt; aghast at the transfigured little wisp of humanity who confronted
him in such gay fearlessness.

"Why don't I dare?" he blustered, lifting the brass-buckled weapon again.

