This is indeed India! the land of dreams and romance, of fabulous wealth and fabulous poverty,
of splendor and rags, of palaces and hovels, of famine and pestilence, of genii and giants
and Aladdin lamps, of tigers and elephants, the cobra and the jungle, the country of a hundred
nations and a hundred tongues, of a thousand religions and two million gods, cradle of the
human race, birthplace of human speech, mother of history, grandmother of legend, great-grandmother
of tradition, whose yesterdays bear date with the mouldering antiquities of the rest of the
nations--the one sole country under the sun that is endowed with an imperishable interest for
alien prince and alien peasant, for lettered and ignorant, wise and fool, rich and poor, bond
and free, the one land that all men desire to see, and having seen once, by even a glimpse,
would not give that glimpse for the shows of all the rest of the globe combined. Even now,
after the lapse of a year, the delirium of those days in Bombay has not left me, and I hope
never will.  It was all new, no detail of it hackneyed.  And India did not wait for morning,
it began at the hotel --straight away.  The lobbies and halls were full of turbaned, and fez'd
and embroidered, cap'd, and barefooted, and cotton-clad dark natives, some of them rushing
about, others at rest squatting, or sitting on the ground; some of them chattering with energy,
others still and dreamy; in the dining-room every man's own private native servant standing
behind his chair, and dressed for a part in the Arabian Nights.

Our rooms were high up, on the front.  A white man--he was a burly German --went up with us,
and brought three natives along to see to arranging things. Perhaps because he was so he became
the victim of one of the strangest of feminine whimsies and human freaks. There was a young
girl in Louisville, named Ellen Godwin. Meeting him at a public ball she fell violently in love
with him.
It was all done with earnestness and sincerity, there was not a smile in the procession from
the head of it to the tail of it.  Each man waited patiently, tranquilly, in no sort of hurry,
till one of us found time to give him a copper, then he bent his head reverently, touched his
forehead with his fingers, and went his way.  They seemed a soft and gentle race, and there
was something both winning and touching about their demeanor.

There was a vast glazed door which opened upon the balcony.  It needed closing, or cleaning,
or something, and a native got down on his knees and went to work at it.  He seemed to be doing
it well enough, but perhaps he wasn't, for the burly German put on a look that betrayed dissatisfaction,
then without explaining what was wrong, gave the native a brisk cuff on the jaw and then told
him where the defect was.  It seemed such a shame to do that before us all.  The native took
it with meekness, saying nothing, and not showing in his face or manner any resentment.  I
had not seen the like of this for fifty years.  It carried me back to my boyhood, and flashed
upon me the forgotten fact that this was the usual way of explaining one's desires to a slave.
I was able to remember that the method seemed right and natural to me in those days, I being
born to it and unaware that elsewhere there were other methods; but I was also able to remember
that those unresented cuffings made me sorry for the victim and ashamed for the punisher. 
My father was a refined and kindly gentleman, very grave, rather austere, of rigid probity,
a sternly just and upright man, albeit he attended no church and never spoke of religious matters,
and had no part nor lot in the pious joys of his Presbyterian family, nor ever seemed to suffer
from this deprivation.  He laid his hand upon me in punishment only twice in his life, and
then not heavily; once for telling him a lie--which surprised me, and showed me how unsuspicious
he was, for that was not my maiden effort.  He punished me those two times only, and never
any other member of the family at all; yet every now and then he cuffed our harmless slave
boy, Lewis, for trifling little blunders and awkwardnesses.  My father had passed his life
among the slaves from his cradle up, and his cuffings proceeded from the custom of the time,
not from his nature.  When I was ten years old I saw a man fling a lump of iron-ore at a slaveman
in anger, for merely doing something awkwardly--as if that were a crime.  It bounded from the
man's skull, and the man fell and never spoke again.  He was dead in an hour. I knew the man
had a right to kill his slave if he wanted to, and yet it seemed a pitiful thing and somehow
wrong, though why wrong I was not deep enough to explain if I had been asked to do it.  Nobody
in the village approved of that murder, but of course no one said much about it.

It is curious--the space-annihilating power of thought.  For just one second, all that goes
to make the me in me was in a Missourian village, on the other side of the globe, vividly seeing
again these forgotten pictures of fifty years ago, and wholly unconscious of all things but
just those; and in the next second I was back in Bombay, and that kneeling native's smitten
cheek was not done tingling yet!  Back to boyhood--fifty years; back to age again, another
fifty; and a flight equal to the circumference of the globe-all in two seconds by the watch!

Some natives--I don't remember how many--went into my bedroom, now, and put things to rights
and arranged the mosquito-bar, and I went to bed to nurse my cough.  It was about nine in the
evening.  What a state of things!  For three hours the yelling and shouting of natives in the
hall continued, along with the velvety patter of their swift bare feet--what a racket it was!
They were yelling orders and messages down three flights. Why, in the matter of noise it amounted
to a riot, an insurrection, a revolution.  And then there were other noises mixed up with these
and at intervals tremendously accenting them--roofs falling in, I judged, windows smashing,
persons being murdered, crows squawking, and deriding, and cursing, canaries screeching, monkeys
jabbering, macaws blaspheming, and every now and then fiendish bursts of laughter and explosions
of dynamite.  By midnight I had suffered all the different kinds of shocks there are, and knew
that I could never more be disturbed by them, either isolated or in combination.  Then came
peace--stillness deep and solemn and lasted till five.

