Here she met the turquoise god, who fell in love with her at sight, and wooed so warmly that
she accepted and married him. For a time they lived happily, but when the people learned that
the goddess had concealed herself among the mountains of New Mexico they followed her to that
land and troubled her again until she declared that she would leave their view forever. She
entered this mesa, breaking her way through a high wall of sandstone as she did so. The arched
portal through which she passed is plainly visible. As she went through, one of her plumes
was broken off, and falling into the valley it tipped upon its stem and became the monument
that is seen there. The god of turquoise followed his wife, and his footsteps may be traced
in outcrops of pale-blue stone.

THE COMING OF THE NAVAJOS

Many fantastic accounts of the origin of man are found among the red tribes. The Onondagas
say that the Indians are made from red earth and the white men from sea-foam. Flesh-making
clay is seen in the precipitous bank in the ravine west of Onondaga Valley, where at night
the fairies "little fellows" sport and slide. Among others, the Noah legend finds a parallel.
Several tribes claim to have emerged from the interior of the earth. The Oneidas point to a
hill near the falls of Oswego River, New York, as their birthplace; the Wichitas rose from
the rocks about Red River; the Creeks from a knoll in the valley of Big Black River in the
Natchez country, where dwelt the Master of Breath; the Aztecs were one of seven tribes that
came out from the seven caverns of Aztlan, or Place of the Heron; and the Navajos believe that
they emerged at a place known to them in the Navajo Mountains.

In the under world the Navajos were happy, for they had everything that they could wish: there
was no excess of heat or cold, trees and flowers grew everywhere, and the day was marked by
a bright cloud that arose in the east, while a black cloud that came out of the west made the
night. Here they lived for centuries, and might have been there to this day had not one of
the tribe found an opening in the earth that led to some place unknown. He told of it to the
whole tribe. They set off up the passage to see where it led, and after long and weary climbing
the surface was reached. Pleased with the novelty of their surroundings, they settled here,
but on the fourth day after their arrival their queen disappeared.

Their search for her was unavailing until some of the men came to the mouth of the tunnel by
which they had reached the upper land, when, looking down, they saw their queen combing her
long, black locks. She told them that she was dead and that her people could go to her only
after death, but that they would be happy in their old home. With that the earth shut together
and the place has never since been open to the eye of mortals. Soon came the cannibal giants
who ravaged the desert lands and destroyed all of the tribe but four families, these having
found a refuge in a deep canon of the Navajo Mountains. From their retreat they could see a
beam of light shining from one of the hills above them, and on ascending to the place they
found a beautiful girl babe.

This child grew to womanhood under their care, and her charms attracted the great manitou that
rides on a white horse and carries the sun for a shield. He wooed and married her, and their
children slew the giants that had destroyed the Navajos. After a time the manitou carried his
wife to his floating palace in the western water, which has since been her home. To her the
prayers of the people are addressed, and twelve immortals bear their petitions to her throne.

THE ARK ON SUPERSTITION MOUNTAINS

The Pima Indians of Arizona say that the father of all men and animals was the butterfly, Cherwit
Make (earth-maker), who fluttered down from the clouds to the Blue Cliffs at the junction of
the Verde and Salt Rivers, and from his own sweat made men. As the people multiplied they grew
selfish and quarrelsome, so that Cherwit Make was disgusted with his handiwork and resolved
to drown them all. But first he told them, in the voice of the north wind, to be honest and
to live at peace. The prophet Suha, who interpreted this voice, was called a fool for listening
to the wind, but next night came the east wind and repeated the command, with an added threat
that the ruler of heaven would destroy them all if they did not reform.

Again they scoffed, and on the next night the west wind cautioned them. But this third warning
was equally futile. On the fourth night came the south wind. It breathed into Suha's ear that
he alone had been good and should be saved, and bade him make a hollow ball of spruce gum in
which he might float while the deluge lasted. Suha and his wife immediately set out to gather
the gum, that they melted and shaped until they had made a large, rounded ark, which they ballasted
with jars of nuts, acorn-meal and water, and meat of bear and venison.

On the day assigned Suha and his wife were looking regretfully down into the green valleys
from the ledge where the ark rested, listening to the song of the harvesters, and sighing to
think that so much beauty would presently be laid waste, when a hand of fire was thrust from
a cloud and it smote the Blue Cliffs with a thunder-clang. It was the signal. Swift came the
clouds from all directions, and down poured the rain. Withdrawing into their waxen ball, Suha
and his wife closed the portal. Then for some days they were rolled and tossed on an ever-deepening
sea. Their stores had almost given out when the ark stopped, and breaking a hole in its side
its occupants stepped forth.

There was a tuna cactus growing at their feet, and they ate of its red fruit greedily, but
all around them was naught but water. When night came on they retired to the ark and slept--a
night, a month, a year, perhaps a century, for when they awoke the water was gone, the vales
were filled with verdure, and bird-songs rang through the woods. The delighted couple descended
the Superstition Mountains, on which the ark had rested, and went into its valleys, where they
lived for a thousand years, and became the parents of a great tribe.

But the evil was not all gone. There was one Hauk, a devil of the mountains, who stole their
daughters and slew their sons. One day, while the women were spinning flax and cactus fibre
and the men were gathering maize, Hauk descended into the settlement and stole another of Suha's
daughters. The patriarch, whose patience had been taxed to its limit, then made a vow to slay
the devil. He watched to see by what way he entered the valley. He silently followed him into
the Superstition Mountains; he drugged the cactus wine that his daughter was to serve to him;
then, when he had drunk it, Suha emerged from his place of hiding and beat out the brains of
the stupefied fiend.

Some of the devil's brains were scattered and became seed for other evil, but there was less
wickedness in the world after Hauk had been disposed of than there had been before. Suha taught
his people to build adobe houses, to dig with shovels, to irrigate their land, to weave cloth,
and avoid wars. But on his death-bed he foretold to them that they would grow arrogant with
wealth, covetous of the lands of others, and would wage wars for gain. When that time came
there would be another flood and not one should be saved--the bad should vanish and the good
would leave the earth and live in the sun. So firmly do the Pimas rely on this prophecy that
they will not cross Superstition Mountains, for there sits Cherwit Make--awaiting the culmination
of their wickedness to let loose on the earth a mighty sea that lies dammed behind the range.

THE PALE FACED LIGHTNING

Twenty miles from the capital of Arizona stands Mount Superstition--the scene of many traditions,
the object of many fears. Two centuries ago a tribe of Pueblo dwarfs arrived near it and tilled
the soil and tended their flocks about the settlements that grew along their line of march.
They were little people, four feet high, but they were a thousand strong and clever. They were
peaceful, like all intelligent people, and the mystery surrounding their incantations and sun-worship
was more potent than a show of arms to frighten away those natural assassins, the Apaches.

After they had lived near the mountain for five years the "little people" learned that the
Zunis were advancing from the south and made preparations for defence. Their sheep were concealed
in obscure valleys; provisions, tools, and arms were carried up the mountain; piles of stone
were placed along the edges of cliffs commanding the passes. This work was superintended by
a woman with a white face, fair hair, and commanding form, who was held in reverence by the
dwarfs; and she it was--the Helen of a New-World Troy--who was causing this trouble, for the
Zunis claimed her on the ground that they had brought her from the waters of the rising sun,
and that it was only to escape an honorable marriage with their chief that she had fled to
the dwarfs.

Be that as it might, the Zunis marched on, meeting with faint resistance until, on a bright
afternoon, they massed on a slope of the mountain, seven hundred in number. The Apaches, expecting
instant defeat of the "little men," watched, from neighboring hills, the advance of the invaders
as they climbed nimbly toward the stone fort on the top of the slope, brandishing clubs and
stone spears, and bragging, as the fashion of a red man is--and sometimes of a white one.

At a pool outside of the walls stood the pale woman, queenly and calm, and as her white robe
and brown hair fluttered in the wind both her people and the foe looked upon her with admiration.
When but a hundred yards away the Zunis rushed toward her with outstretched arms, whereupon
she stooped, picked up an earthen jar, emptied its contents into the pool, and ran back. In
a moment sparks and balls of fire leaped from crevices in the rocks, and as they touched the
Indians many fell dead. Others plunged blindly over the cliffs and were dashed to pieces.

In a few minutes the remainder of the force was in full retreat and not an arrow had been shot.
The Apaches, though stricken with terror at these pyrotechnics, overcame the memory of them
sufficiently in a couple of years to attempt the sack of the fort on their own account, but
the queen repelled them as she had forced back the Zunis, and with even greater slaughter.
From that time the dwarfs were never harmed again, but they went away, as suddenly as they
had come, to a secret recess in the mountains, where the Pale Faced Lightning still rules them.

Some of the Apaches maintain that her spirit haunts a cave on Superstition Mountain, where
her body vanished in a blaze of fire, and this cave of the Spirit Mother is also pointed out
on the south side of Salt River. A skeleton and cotton robes, ornamented and of silky texture,
were once found there. It is said that electrical phenomena are frequent on the mountain, and
that iron, copper, salt, and copperas lying near together may account for them.

THE WEIRD SENTINEL AT SQUAW PEAK

There is a cave under the highest butte of the Squaw Peak range, Arizona, where a party of
Tonto Indians was found by white men in 1868. The white men were on the war-path, and when
the Tontos fell into their hands they shot them unhesitatingly, firing into the dark recesses
of the cavern, the fitful but fast-recurring flashes of their rifles illuminating the interior
and exposing to view the objects of their hatred.

