Above all, the mother should form the habit of watching his eyes and of speaking as often as
possible when his gaze is fixed upon her face. The habit on his part of looking at the face
of a speaker, and the habit on his mother's part of observing his gaze and, when it wanders,
of pausing in her talk till he is looking at her again, are two very valuable aids in the language
development of the deaf child. In addition to always raising her voice a little in speaking
to her baby, the mother should several times a day take him in her lap and sing to him, and
talk to him with her lips not far from his ear. Talk to him just as all mothers do to their
babies (but not with the mangled and distorted words called "baby talk"), about the pussy,
the dog, the bird, his foot, his toes, his arms and hands and fingers; about his papa, brothers,
sisters; about the flowers, the grass, the trees, and a thousand other things. Say the good
old Mother Goose rhymes of "Patty Cake, Patty Cake, Baker's Man," "This little pig went to
market," etc., etc. But in all your frolics and stories and songs, take the greatest care that
he shall hear or see, or better still, both see and hear, what you are saying. Gradually he
can be taught to understand many simple commands and questions just as hearing babies learn
them, by constant repetition at times and under circumstances when the meaning is obvious.
Such as "come," "go," "go to papa," "come to mamma," "jump," "stop," "kiss mother," "pet pussy,"
"pick up," "put down," "milk," "water," "bread" (the later in life that he learns the meaning
and taste of "candy" the better), "do you want some bread?" "milk," "water," etc. "Bring my
slippers," "bring my shoes," "put on your hat," "take off your mittens," "wash your hands,"
etc., etc., throughout the whole day.

Very early the mother should learn to consider the direction from which the light comes, and
should be careful to take her position facing the main source of light which should come from
behind the child. The eye can be trained from the very beginning of attention to unconsciously
supplement an imperfect ear in comprehending spoken words. It is even possible for the eye
to perform the entire task of interpreting speech, and, if the hearing is entirely lacking,
the course outlined will result in training the brain to interpret the movements of speech
as seen by the eye, as it would have been trained by the same procedure to interpret the sounds
of speech had the organ of transmission not been injured. But the idea must be constantly in
the mind of the mother that her boy needs to see the spoken word at the very moment when the
idea that it represents is in his mind, AS OFTEN as he would hear it if his hearing were perfect.

This one suggestion, if faithfully lived up to from the age of one year to that of two years,
would be almost enough. But there are other things that the mother can do as the mental development
of the baby increases with each month of life. She should encourage him to babble and gurgle
and murmur, as much as possible, to laugh and crow and make all the various baby noises that
will train and develop his voice. Encourage noisy, romping, rollicking games as he gets older,
that make him shout and call, for they are the natural and best voice exercises.

IV

WHAT ABOUT THE BABY'S SPEECH?

The hearing baby babbles because he gets some pleasure from the sounds, and also because he
desires to imitate the sounds of speech he hears around him. He has his attention called constantly
to sound. The sense of vibration is not as strong nor as instructive as that of sound, but
if the attention of the child is early called to it, a watchfulness for vibration from within
himself as well as from without, can be aroused, and a sensitiveness developed that would not
have come as early, if at all, without special, directive effort on the part of the mother.
She can lead her little one to oo-oo, and ee-ee, and mamma, and bub-bub, etc., by doing these
babblings herself while the baby is in her arms and his tiny hands are wandering over her lips
and face and throat. These exercises will gradually bring a recognition on the part of the
child of the sensation of vibration that accompanies voice, and they will give facility, coupled
with the normal and natural intonations that have been acquired when he was not conscious of
any effort, that will prepare him for a better and more fluent speech when the time comes for
more exact articulation training.

But during the first two or three years of the child's life the principal stress should be
placed upon his learning to understand what is said to him, without bothering much about his
speaking himself. In the case of the hearing child, the understanding of language comes before
he can himself utter it. This must also be the case with the deaf child, and the period preceding
utterance must be longer, by reason of his handicap, than in the case of a child with normal
hearing.

V

DEVELOPING THE MENTAL FACULTIES

By the time he is two years old he has gained maturity and grasp enough to play many little
educational games with his mother and his little brothers and sisters, or playmates. These
games should be calculated to develop his various faculties, his powers of observation, memory,
and concentration. To develop a faculty is really to train the brain. As a matter of fact,
we see and hear and taste and smell and feel with our brains. The eye of a two-year-old child
is practically as perfect an optical instrument as the eye of a boy of ten, and yet how much
more the older boy seems to see. This is because his brain has been trained to interpret the
impressions that even the baby eyes received but did not understand. Of course, where the instrument
is found to be imperfect we can assist it by means of additional lenses, or perhaps by some
one of the skillful operations now performed by oculists, and, as the sight is of such increased
importance to a deaf child, the greatest care and watchfulness should be given to his eyes.
Do not let him sleep, or lie, facing the sun, or any other powerful light, but throughout his
life be careful that all his use of eyesight be under conditions of ample and well-directed
light. Supposing that the simple tests referred to heretofore have shown that the eyes, as
optical instruments, are sufficiently perfect, our efforts need to be to train the brain to
take cognizance of, and to interpret the impressions transmitted to it by the eyes. We shall
not be able to improve the working of the eye by our efforts, but we can educate the brain.

Color and form make the earliest appeal to the child's eyes, and we can use them for our educational
play. The duplicate set of worsted balls of the seven primal colors can be increased to include
easily distinguishable shades. The child can be sent on entertaining voyages of discovery around
the room with a ball of a certain color to find other objects similar in color in the rugs,
books, chairs, dresses, ties, etc.

A game to develop observation of form can be made by collecting a group of objects of varying
shapes in a pile on the floor or a low table; mother picks up some one of the objects, directs
the attention of the little one to it, and after he has observed it somewhat she puts it back
in the pile and moves all the objects about till they are well mixed up. Ask the little fellow
then to pick out the object mother held in her hand a moment before. When he can do this by
sight without difficulty, have him shut his eyes, place an object in his little hands, teach
him to feel it over carefully, take it from him, and, while his eyes are still closed, place
it once more in the pile. Let him then open his eyes and see if he can indicate the object
he had previously held. When he has mastered this, give the game another turn by asking him
to find by means of touch alone, while the eyes are still closed, the object that he has been
feeling, after it is restored to the pile of other objects. Still another turn can be given
by first letting him see the object, without touching it, then having him close his eyes, and
by touch alone select it from the pile. A set of wooden forms, such as spheres, cubes, pyramids,
cones, cylinders, and similar, but truncated, forms, can be obtained at any school supply store.
To these can be added common household objects such as small frames, vases, napkin rings, spoons,
forks, and other similar things, as well as some of the forms included in a complete set of
the Montessori material.

The Montessori weighted forms are excellent for training his muscular recognition of difference
of weight, and an excellent way is to put various quantities of birdshot into half a dozen
exactly similar little rubber balls that can be purchased at any toy store for two cents apiece.
Then hand the boy one of the weighted balls, and after he has felt its weight put it back with
the other similar-appearing balls and see if he can again discover it. An outfit for training
his tactile sense can be made in any home by collecting duplicate pieces of cloth having different
textures; such as velvet, rough woolen tweeds or homespun, silk, satin, cambric, muslin, etc.,
and pasting one set on cards. Also by stretching on a wooden frame, strings of varying sizes,
weaves, and twists, and having a bunch of duplicates from which he can select, by sight and
touch alone, the pieces that correspond, each to each, with those on the frame or on the cards.
If there is a guitar, or mandolin, or zither, or a piano, available, perhaps, by and by, the
mother can teach the child to recognize the difference in the vibratory sensation perceived
by his fingers touching the body of the instrument when a low note and a high note are struck
alternately. She can make a game of this, too, by later having him close his eyes and place
his fingers in contact with the instrument and then tell her approximately what string or key
she struck. The next step, if she can take it, is to place his little hands upon her chest
to feel the lowest notes of her voice, and upon both the chest and the top of her head to feel
the highest, and endeavoring to get him to recognize the similarity in vibratory sensation
between what he now feels and what he previously felt on the musical instruments. The last
step in this series of exercises to awaken a recognition of vibratory sensations is to lead
him to feel in his own chest and head the vibrations set up by his own voice in shouting and
laughing, crying or babbling.

These hints that are so quickly and easily given, require weeks and months of patient, happy
effort to carry out. Beware that no one of them is repeated or continued so long at a time
as to become a thing dreaded and disliked. Remember that the attention of a little child is
like a constantly flitting butterfly that rests for only a moment or two on anything before
dancing away to something else.

There are many little games with kindergarten materials that can be used to develop the powers
of attention, observation, imitation, and obedience. The laying in simple designs, by watchful
imitation of the mother, of colored sticks, colored squares, etc.; the building with colored
blocks; stringing of large beads; weaving with wide strips of colored paper simple designs
that a mother could invent with the material at hand or could learn from any kindergarten manual.
The point that must be firmly, but pleasantly, insisted upon in these exercises is careful
and obedient following by the child of the exact order of movement and manner of placing adopted
by the mother teacher. The entire value of these exercises for the purpose she wishes to accomplish
depends upon accurate observation by the child and implicit obedience.

The material outfit prepared and sold by the American exploiters of the Montessori method is
admirably adapted to the development of the budding faculties of the child, and the mother
who is trying to do all in her power to prepare her little one to benefit to the greatest possible
extent from the professional instruction that must come later, will make no mistake in supplying
herself with the set of materials, and making herself intelligent on their use by the child.

VI

DEVELOPING THE LUNGS

The tendency of the deaf child is to grow up with less development of lungs and of the imagination
than hearing children. In order to overcome this tendency the child must be encouraged and
taught to play games and use toys that will exercise the lungs and develop the power of imaginative
thought.

In order to expand and strengthen the lungs through the child's play, supply him with the brightly
colored paper wind-mills that he can set whirling by blowing lustily; also the rubber balloon
toys, even though the torturing squeak of the toys is only heard by those in the vicinity and
not by himself. An especially good exercise for the gentle and long-continued control of breath
results from the toy blow pipes with conical wire bowls by means of which light, celluloid
balls of bright colors are kept suspended in the air, dancing on the column of breath blown
softly through the tube. The more steadily the child blows, the more mysteriously the ball
remains at a fixed point, whirling rapidly but without any apparent support.

Blowing soap bubbles, especially trying to blow big ones, is very useful as well as interesting.

For physical development in which the lungs come in for their share and the sense of mechanical
rhythm is fostered, an excellent exercise is marching in step to the stroke of the drum, proud
in Boy Scout uniform. Dancing is a very desirable accomplishment for the deaf child.

Tops and tenpins cultivate dexterity, as do playing ball and rolling hoop.

VII

THE CULTIVATION OF CREATIVE IMAGINATION

This can be greatly helped by early use on the part of the child of colored modeling wax to
reproduce objects and animals, and to construct models of imaginary houses, yards, trees, etc.
A sand pile, or a large, shallow sand box, perhaps five feet square, with sides six inches
high, and completely lined with enamel cloth to make it watertight, is a wonderful implement
for constructive play on the part of the child. Whole villages of farms, fields, and forests,
ponds and brooks, roads and railroads, can be made here in miniature.

Building blocks of wood or stone; the metal construction toy called "Mechano"; dolls, doll
houses, furniture, and equipment, are valuable, but they should be simple, inexpensive and
not fragile.

Cut-up picture puzzles, painting books, tracing slates with large and simple designs cultivate
observation and ingenuity. Kaleidoscopes and stereoscopes are excellent, but moving pictures
are so trying upon the eyes, and the air of the theaters is so bad, that a deaf child whose
eyes are his only salvation, and whose health is doubly important, should not even know of
their existence till he is seven or eight years old.

VIII

FURTHER TESTS OF HEARING

But, as soon as the mother finds her little child sufficiently mature to benefit by the sense
training described above, whether it be at twenty or, as is more likely, at from twenty-four
to thirty months, she can begin to make a more complete and accurate determination of the degree
of his deafness, for now she can establish a system of responses on the part of the child that
will show her when he perceives the sounds she uses in her tests.

In order to be certain that the little one knows what she wishes of him, she must begin with
some sensation that she is sure he feels. We will assume that he has as yet no speech, and
cannot count, at least does not know the names of the numbers. Let the mother pat him once
on the shoulder and then cause him to hold up one of his little fingers. Then pat him twice,
and make him hold up two fingers, then three times and have him put up three fingers. Now return
to one pat and one finger, repeat two pats and the holding up of two of his fingers, and three
pats and three fingers. Go over and over this little game until he has grasped the idea and
will hold up as many fingers as he feels pats. Simple as the idea seems, it will often take
a bright child some time to realize what you want him to do. But you are sure that he feels
the pats, whereas, if you began at once with sounds, you could not know whether his failure
to respond was because he did not hear, or through not understanding what you expected of him.
He will weary of the exercise soon, and then mother may as well turn to something else till
he has rested.

Having established this system of response on his part to sensations perceived, it is not difficult
to shift from the number of pats to the number of times he hears a noise. This once accomplished,
tests can be made with sounds of different kinds, different pitch, and different volume, varying
the distance, the instruments, and the vowel when the articulate sounds are reached. He can
be shown a whistle, then, when it is blown behind his back, he will hold up as many fingers
as the times it was blown, if he perceives the sound. He can be asked to distinguish between
a whistle, a little bell, and the clapping of the hands. When he is successful in that, the
vowel sounds may be uttered not far from his ear, but behind him. Begin with "ah" (ä), as this
is the most open and strongest; then try "oh" (o with macron), which is not easily confused
with ä. Then ee (e with macron). If, after a time, a distance and a degree of loudness are
found that enable him to recognize these sounds with unfailing accuracy, or at least 90 per
cent. of the time, then other sounds can be added, such as aw (a with diaresis below), (a with
breve) (as in hat), (i with macron) (as in ice), oo (as in cool), ow (as in owl). Using these
sounds at different pitches, and with different intensities and distances, a sufficiently accurate
estimate can be formed of the degree of his hearing power so far as his present needs are concerned.

IX

THE DEVELOPMENT OF RESIDUAL HEARING

If any ability to perceive sounds is found, every effort should be made to lead the child to
use it, and as the most essential use of hearing is in the comprehension of spoken language,
the principal effort should be made along that line.

Take three objects, the names of which are short, with the principal vowels quite easily distinguished.
A little toy street car, a cap, and a toy sheep, would do nicely to begin with, as the three
words, "car," "cap," and "sheep," are not easily confused. Place two of the objects before
him, the car and the sheep, and speak the name of one of them, "car," we will say, loudly and
distinctly close to his ear, but in such a way that he cannot see your mouth. Then show him
the car. Repeat it with "sheep" and show him the sheep. Repeat "car," and take his little hand,
put it on the car. Then "sheep," and make him put his hand on the sheep. Continue this process
until he will indicate to you the object you name. When he makes only occasional mistakes with
two objects, add the cap. When he can get the right one about 90 per cent. of the time, then
take three new words, returning occasionally to the first three. The ladies looked pale but curious,
the men for the most part indifferent or disapproving. Intense quietness prevailed, broken only
by the soft opening and closing of the door through which the guests were admitted. Presently
the Duke and Duchess emerged from his Highness's closet. They were followed by Prince Ferrante,
supported by his governor and his dwarf, and robed in a silken dressing-gown which hung in voluminous
folds about his little shrunken body. Their Highnesses seated themselves in two armchairs in
front of the court, and the little prince reclined beside his mother.

No sooner had they taken their places than Heiligenstern stepped forth,
wearing a doctor's gown and a quaintly-shaped bonnet or mitre.

In his long robes and strange headdress he looked extraordinarily tall and pale, and his features
had the glassy-eyed fixity of an ancient mask. He was followed by his two attendants, the Oriental
carrying a frame-work of polished metal, not unlike a low narrow bed, which he set down in the
middle of the room; while the Georgian lad, who had exchanged his fustanella and embroidered
jacket for a flowing white robe, bore in his hands a crystal globe set in a gold stand. Having
reverently placed it on a small table, the boy, at a signal from his master, drew forth a phial
and dropped its contents into a bronze vat or brazier which stood at the far end of the room.
Instantly clouds of perfumed vapour filled the air, and as these dispersed it was seen that
the black hangings of the walls had vanished with them, and the spectators found themselves
seated in a kind of open temple through which the eye travelled down
colonnaded vistas set with statues and fountains.

 When it is possible to make the child perceive the sound
of the vowels with the unaided voice uttered very near the ear, I believe it to be better,
at first, not to interpose any artificial device. But I have found that sometimes, in cases
where the sound perception was not at first sufficient to enable the child to distinguish even
the most dissimilar vowel sounds, although uttered loudly close to the ear, I could awaken
the attention of the child to sound, and stimulate the dormant power by the use of an Acousticon.
After a few months I have been able to dispense with the instrument and use only the unaided
voice at close range. Later, when some vocabulary has been acquired through these auricular
exercises, it is often desirable to return to the Acousticon and teach the child to use it,
in order to extend the distance at which sounds can be heard. By the use of the Acousticon,
it then becomes possible to communicate by means of the ear without speaking at such short
range. It is not easy, however, to induce a child to use an Acousticon at all times, whereas
an adult will take the time and trouble necessary to become accustomed to the instrument, and
will put up with the slight inconveniences inseparable from its use.

X

DEVELOPING THE POWER OF LIP READING

In this effort to develop the hearing, however, the necessity must not be forgotten of also
training the brain to associate ideas with what the eye sees on the lips when words are spoken.
In the case of the very slightly deaf child, this visual training is not quite so important
as the auricular training, but when there is much deafness it is the more important of the
two. The comprehension of much language can be given to the little deaf child by constantly
talking just as any mother does to her hearing baby, only being always careful to take a position
facing the main source of light, which should come from behind the child.

The hearing child arrives at the association of meaning with the sounds of words only after
very many repetitions. How often must the child hear "Mamma," "Look at mamma," "See, here is
mamma," "Mamma is coming," "Mamma is here," "Where is mamma?" "Do you love mamma?" "Mamma loves
baby," etc., etc., from morning to night, day after day, week after week. The mother does it
for pleasure; to play with and pet the dear baby. She does not think of it as a teaching exercise,
but it is a very important one. The deaf baby will learn gradually to associate a meaning with
the various sequences of movement of the lips, if a little care is taken to watch his eyes
and to speak when they are directed toward the speaker, and to stand in such relation to the
light that it falls upon the speaker's face. The speech should be the same as to the hearing
child, but it takes a little more care and watchfulness to have the deaf child see the same
word or phrase as many times as the hearing child hears it. If it is spoken when the baby is
not looking, it does not help.

When the little one is learning to walk, the mother says, "Come to mamma," "Go to daddy," and
gradually he learns "come" and "go." She has him play hide and seek with another child, and
she says, "Where is Tom?" "Where is the baby's mouth?" "Where is the baby's nose?" etc., and
by and by he knows "where" and "mouth" and "nose," and the names of his playmates or brothers
and sisters. When he is sitting on the floor she picks him up, saying "up." When she puts him
from her lap to the floor she says "down." If he is naughty she says "naughty," and perhaps
spats his little hands, and so on through the day. A little care on her part, a little added
thought and watchfulness, perhaps a few more repetitions, and little by little she will find
her deaf baby learning to look at her always, and to understand much that is said to him. She
must all this time remember, also, that the shades of feeling, pleasure, disappointment, approval,
disapproval, doubt, certainty, love, anger, joy, which are largely conveyed to the hearing
child by intonation of voice, must be conveyed to the deaf baby by facial expression and manner.
They become very keen at interpreting moods by the look. Let the face be sunny and kind and
INTERESTED, if possible. The first indication of impatience, of being bored and weary, will
destroy much of one's influence with the deaf child.

Sometimes it is harder to disguise one's feelings in the face than in the voice. Do not be
caught unawares. Interest, cheerfulness, and patience are tremendous forces to help the little
deaf child.

Some one has said:

     "When you consent, consent cordially;
     When you refuse, refuse finally;
     When you punish, punish good-naturedly."

XI

FORMING CHARACTER

And now that the little one is two or three years old, it may be well to say a few words about
his general training in character and habits. There is a strong, and a not unnatural tendency
to maintain an attitude toward the deaf child that differs from that maintained by sensible
mothers toward their other children. They often set up a different standard of conduct and
of obligation for the afflicted child. His brothers and sisters are taught to always defer
to his wishes; even to the extent of yielding to improper and selfish demands on his part,
and conceding that they have no rights where he is concerned. He is not required to perform
the little duties demanded of the other children. He is given privileges which the others do
not, and which no one of them, including himself, should enjoy. He grows tyrannical, domineering,
and selfish. The mother says: "Poor little chap; he has trouble enough, we must do all in our
power to make up to him for what he misses by reason of his deafness." This is, however, a
shortsighted, and really a cruel policy. It lays up much misery for his future, and in the
end proves a serious handicap to one who needs to have as few additional difficulties as possible.
Though it may seem hard-hearted, it is really kinder to put him on the same basis as any other
child. Make him do everything possible for himself. Insist upon his being independent; dressing
himself as soon as he is able, buttoning his own shoes, and performing all the little self-help
acts that the wise mother demands of all her children. Make no distinction in the treatment
accorded him. Ask the same services, reward right actions and punish wrongdoing as impartially
as if he was not deaf, only being sure that he clearly connects the punishment with the wrong
act. This, in the case of a deaf child, requires a little more care than with a hearing child.
Train him to be thoughtful for the comfort of others, and respectful of their rights, just
as you insist that the others observe his rights. He cannot be argued with, object lessons
and example must be the means of teaching him manners and morals.

XII

CULTIVATING THE SOCIAL INSTINCT

Between the ages of two and four years all the games and exercises heretofore described can
continue to be used, together with others increasingly difficult and complicated, as the child's
mind develops and his powers of observation, attention, and memory increase. Take very special
care that he learns all the childhood games that other children know and enjoy. Devote yourself
more to him in this respect than you would in the case of another child. Encourage the neighbors'
children to come and play with him by making it especially pleasant for them. Teach them yourself
to play "Hide the Thimble," "Hide and Seek," "Drop the Handkerchief," "Going to Jerusalem,"
"Old Maid," "Bean Bag." Follow the Leader is an excellent game by which to teach watchfulness
and imitation. Cat and Mouse, Hot Potato, Ring on a String, are all games that can be played
by groups and cultivate quickness. Ping Pong Football is excellent as a lung developer. That
is the choosing of sides and trying to blow a ping pong ball between the goal posts formed
by a pair of salt shakers at opposite ends of a table. Or blowing a feather across a sheet
by opposing sides. Encourage good, romping, noisy games in which the children naturally laugh
and shout. They are the best of voice-developing exercises, and by such means, and his long-distance
shouting and calling to his playmates, the little hearing child gains much of his lung and
voice power. In all his games, as in all his other activities, take very special pains to talk
to him, using the regulation expressions and training him to watch for the "It's your turn,"
or "Now, Tom," "Ready," "Whose turn is it?" etc., etc.

If the foregoing suggestions have been carefully carried out since he was twelve months old,
he will long ago have arrived unconsciously at the knowledge that all things, and all actions,
and all feelings, have names, and that the mouth always makes the same sequence of movements
for the same thing. In the babbling exercises recommended, he will gradually come to utter
many of the vowel and consonant sounds of his native language; especially those that are made
by the lips, and by evident positions of the tongue. Those sounds that require hidden positions
of the organs, such as the sound of C and K in cat and ark, or G in go and dog, or ng in long,
he is unlikely to have stumbled upon. These can be taught when the proper time comes, but their
absence for the present need cause no anxiety. In fact, up to the time when he is three and
a half or four years old, the matter of speaking is not one to be much troubled about. If the
conception of language has been given him through lip-reading, and some ability to understand
the necessary language of his daily life, his future success is assured.

XIII

SOMETHING ABOUT SCHOOLS AND METHODS

Till the child is at least four years old, the proper place for him is at home, and if he must
be sent to one of the large public schools for the deaf it should not be till he is five or
even six years of age.

But during these years the mother can gain much knowledge that will help her by visiting as
many schools for the deaf as possible. There are about a hundred and fifty such schools in
the United States and eight in Canada. They vary in size, in character, and in methods of instruction
employed. There are public boarding schools, and public day schools, free to the resident of
the state, or city, in which they are located. There are private boarding and day schools,
maintained by charity, or by the tuition fees. Some of each class are oral schools; that is,
they employ only speech methods of instruction, without any signs or finger spelling. Others
are called "Combined" schools; that is, they permit, and in some exercises encourage, the use
of finger spelling and gestural signs, while they also give some instruction by the speech
method. There are sectarian and non-sectarian schools, both oral and combined.

A very considerable number of schools for the deaf in the United States and Canada still use
manual, or silent, methods of instruction, at least in part. But the speech, or oral, method
is steadily growing in popularity, and gradually supplanting manual spelling and gestural signs.
The time will certainly come when the public will be too intelligent to any longer tolerate
the use between teacher and pupil, or between any employee and the pupils, in a school for
the deaf, any system of manual communication.

Every deaf child, no matter if born totally deaf and of a low order of intelligence, can be
given as much education by the exclusive use of the speech method as it can by any manual,
or silent, method or by a combination of the speech and the silent method. This is not the
mere expression of an opinion, but the statement of a fact; a fact firmly established by actual
results in state institutions where, unfortunately, the law requires the admission of pupils
too poorly equipped intellectually to belong in a school with normally bright children. In
addition to acquiring all the education of which his mental endowment makes him capable, he
can be taught to speak and to understand when spoken to. The degree of perfection attainable
depends upon the ability of the child, the skill of the teaching, and especially upon the environment
in which the child passes its formative educational years. The probability of the child's acquiring
a maximum proficiency in speaking and in understanding others when they speak, is lessened
in direct proportion to the extent to which he is permitted to use the silent or manual means
of communication. In the so-called "combined" schools, the environment is largely manual. A
visit to the playgrounds, the baseball fields, the shops, dining rooms, and dormitories of
"combined" schools will disclose the pupils using silent means of communication, not only between
themselves, but with those in charge of them. They do not think in spoken forms, but in finger
spelling and signs. The powerful influence of environment in those schools is against the acquisition
of the speech and lip-reading habit.

The mother who has faithfully followed the suggestions offered in the foregoing pages will
be able to appreciate what she sees on visiting the schools, and will gain much more from such
visits than one who is entirely inexperienced in the problem. Every mother should make it her
business to visit at least one purely oral school, in order that she may make herself thoroughly
intelligent on what may be expected of a deaf child.

Unfortunately, pure oral schools are not as plentiful as "combined" schools, but it will well
repay any parent to make a journey, even across the continent, if necessary, in order to study
the workings of some good, purely oral, school. Do not be satisfied with a visit to the nearest
"combined" school.

You owe it to your child to make yourself thoroughly intelligent as to the possibilities open
to a deaf child. You will not be intelligent till you have personally visited some good purely
oral school.

The number, character, location, etc., of the schools are constantly changing. A descriptive
list of all schools corrected to date will be gladly supplied by the author to any one requesting
it. In cases where, through accident or illness, impairment of hearing has come after the child
has begun to talk, the mother should bend all her efforts upon keeping the speech of her child.
The younger the child, the more difficult is the task. Without the greatest vigilance and increasing
attention, the speech of a little child who has become deaf will fade rapidly away, until it
is lost entirely, and must be artificially recreated when he is old enough to grasp the complicated
ideas involved in speech teaching to the deaf. But by persistently encouraging him to talk,
and never, even for a day, allowing him to lapse into silence, and by not accepting careless
and faulty utterance, but pretending not to understand till the child speaks distinctly and
correctly, the natural speech, which was his before deafness occurred, can be preserved, and
the speech habit thoroughly fixed. If, by good luck, the little one has learned to read even
a simple primer before becoming deaf, it will be much easier to prevent a loss of speech. For
this reading can be made an excuse for frequently using his speech. But when the child cannot
read, the mother must depend entirely upon inducing him to talk to her, refusing to give him
anything, or grant his request, till he asks for it in good spoken form; showing him pictures,
playing games, frolicking with him; doing everything that a mother's love and ingenuity can
suggest, to keep him talking all day long.

The tendency of the child will be to drop, or slur, the final syllables of the words; to leave
off the sound of final ed; to lose the sharpness of the s; to blur the l; and sometimes to
lose the sound of k and c. But, if he has learned to read, by pointing to these letters in
the words he has spoken imperfectly, he will correct his own mistake. Prompt and increasing
attention to the little fellow's speech during the first year after deafness occurs will usually
serve to fix correct habits for life.

XV

TEACHING LIP READING

All that has been said about training the little deaf child to read the lip movements and associate
them with the names of things and of actions, will apply also to the little boy who has suddenly
been made deaf, after speech has been learned. Be careful that he is looking at you always
when you speak to him or reply to some question he has asked, but speak just as you would have
done before he became deaf. You may have to repeat things to him very often at first, but do
not permit any sign of impatience in your face. Do not let him get the idea that it is a hardship
to talk to him. Remember that you are changing his manner of understanding speech over to another
way, and that his present and future happiness depends very greatly on the thoroughness and
promptness with which it is done. In all dealings with a deaf child the mother should remember
that the child draws his impressions of the character and the feelings of those about him from
the expression of their faces, and many almost unconscious little acts and gestures. Avoid
very carefully any appearance of being impatient, or bored, or contemptuous at his failures.
Try to understand the difficulties under which he is working to maintain his place in the world.
Do not humor his whims, or spoil him by indulgence, yet treat him with the greatest consideration
and fairness. Above all, be cheerful and, at least apparently, interested in his doings and
sayings.

XVI

SCHOOL AGE

