MISS MERIVALE'S MISTAKE

By

MRS. HENRY CLARKE, M.A.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER I.    A STARTLING DISCOVERY II.   WOODCOTE III.  A VISIT TO KENTISH TOWN IV.   TOM
AND RHODA MEET V.    "A MERRY HEART GOES ALL THE WAY" VI.   PAULINE'S DIPLOMACY VII.  APPLES
OF SODOM VIII. AN INVITATION IX.   PAULINE HAS HER SUSPICIONS X.    A CONFESSION XI.   POLLY
SMITH XII.  CONCLUSION

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAULINE SAT DOWN IN THE LOW CHAIR BY THE WINDOW AND TOOK UP THE PHOTOGRAPH FRAME.

PAULINE LEANT AGAINST THE DRESSER AND WATCHED HER.

HE STARED AT HER, NOT COMPREHENDING.

CHAPTER I.

A STARTLING DISCOVERY.

Miss Merivale had not been paying much heed to the eager talk that was going on between Rose
and Pauline Smythe at the window.

The long drive from Woodcote had made her head ache, and she was drowsily wishing that Miss
Smythe would get her the cup of tea she had promised, when the sound of a name made her suddenly
sit bolt upright, her kind old face full of anxious curiosity.

"Rhoda Sampson, the creature calls herself," Pauline was saying in her clear, high-pitched
voice. "Her people live in Kentish Town, or somewhere in the dim wilds about there. You would
know it by just looking at her."

"Does she come from Kentish Town every day?" asked Rose.

"Three times a week. On the top of an omnibus, one may be sure. And she imbibes facts from
The Civil Service Geography all the way. I found the book in her bag yesterday. I believe she
wants to get into the Post Office eventually. It is a worthy ambition."

"Whom are you talking of, my dears?" asked Miss Merivale from her seat by the fire. Pauline
turned round with a little stare. Miss Merivale was so quiet and unassuming a personage that
she had got into the habit of ignoring her. "Of Clare's new amusement, Miss Merivale," she
said, with a laugh. Her laugh, like her voice, was a trifle hard. "It was scientific dressmaking
when I was at Woodcote last, you remember, Rose dear. Now it is a society. Clare is secretary."

"But you spoke of some girl who came here," persisted Miss Merivale.

Pauline lifted her delicately-pencilled eyebrows. "Oh, that is Clare's typewriter. She is part
of the joke. If you saw Clare and her together over their letters, you would think they were
reforming the universe. It hasn't dawned on poor Sampson yet that Clare will get tired of the
whole business in a month. It is lucky she has the Post Office to fall back on. Clare is exactly
what she used to be at school, Rose, 'everything by starts and nothing long.' It amuses me
to watch her."

"She doesn't tire of you, Pauline," said Rose fondly.

Pauline frowned a little. She did not care to be reminded, even by foolish, flattering little
Rose, that she was, in sober fact, nothing more nor less than Clare's paid companion.

"Oh, we get on," she said coolly. "We each leave the other to go her own way in peace. And
it suits Lady Desborough in Rome to say that Clare is living with her old governess. People
think of me as a spectacled lady of an uncertain age, and everybody is satisfied. But you would
like some tea. I wish Clare was in. She isn't afraid of that gas stove. I am ashamed to confess
that I am. Come out with me while I light it, Rosamunda mia. And you shall make the tea. I
never can remember how many spoonfuls to put in. How pretty you look in blue! I wish I was
eighteen, with hair the colour of ripe wheat, then I would wear blue too."

She went off, laughing, with Rose to the tiny kitchen on the other side of the passage. The
sitting-room was the largest room in the little Chelsea flat, and that was smaller than any
of the rooms at Woodcote; but the diminutive dimensions of the place only added to the fascinations
of it in Rose's eyes.

As she took the cups and saucers down from the toy-like dresser and put them on the lilliputian
table between the gas stove and the door, she felt a thrill of ineffable pleasure.

"Oh, Pauline, I wish I lived here with you. It's so dull at Woodcote. And it seems to get duller
every day."

"Poor little Rose, it must be dull for you. Clare and I often talk of you with pity. Clare
pities you the most. A fellow-feeling makes us wondrous kind, you know. She will have to go
back to Desborough Park when her mother returns, I suppose. The flat is only rented for six
months. I wish"--She stopped to take off the lid of the tea-kettle and peer earnestly in. "When
a kettle boils, little bubbles come to the top, don't they? I have got a notebook where I write
down interesting little details of that sort. They will come useful by and by, if I have to
live in a flat by myself. I shouldn't be able to keep a regular servant."

"But a regular servant would spoil it all, even if you could afford it," said Rose, with sparkling
eyes. "We couldn't come out here and get tea like this, if you had a servant, Pauline.".

"She would have to stand in the passage, wouldn't she?" said Pauline, looking round the tiny
kitchen, with a laugh. "But how would you like to get tea for yourself every day, little Rose?
Clare seems to like it, though. Her mother wanted Mrs. Richards to stay with us all day, but
Clare begged that she might go at three o'clock. And Clare is maid-of-all-work after that.
It seems to come natural to her to know what kitchen things are meant for. Now, if you will
make the tea, we will go back to your aunt. This kettle is certainly boiling at last."

Rose carefully measured the tea into the pretty Japanese teapot. Pauline leant against the
dresser and watched her with her hands clasped at the back of her head. Pauline was not pretty,--her
features were badly cut and her skin was sallow,--but she made a pretty picture standing there.
Her dress of ruddy brown was made in a graceful, artistic fashion, and was just the right colour
to set off her dark eyes and dark, wavy hair. Rose thought her friend beautiful. She had adored
her from the first day they met, when Pauline was junior English governess at Miss Jephson's
Collegiate School for Young Ladies at Brighton, and Rose was a frightened, lonely, homesick
child of fourteen, tasting her first experience of boarding-school.

Pauline had had many adorers among the younger girls, and a holiday rarely passed without her
receiving some delightful invitations. It was spitefully noticed by the senior English governess
that she was very rarely invited twice to the same house; but after Rose came to the school,
it became a matter of course that Pauline should spend her holidays at Woodcote. She had no
home of her own, as she often sadly told the girls. She very seldom said more than that, but
it was understood in the school that the seal ring she wore at her watch-chain belonged to
her father, one of the Norfolk Smythes; and the beautiful woman with powdered hair, whose miniature
hung in her bedroom, was her great-grandmother, the Marquise de Villeroy, who perished on the
scaffold during the Reign of Terror.

It was considered a high privilege by Pauline's band of worshippers to be allowed to hold this
miniature in their hands; but on Rose a still higher privilege had been once conferred. She
had worn the miniature tied round her neck by a blue ribbon when she acted a part in the French
play Miss Jephson's pupils produced every Christmas. That was in Rose's last year at school.
She left at the end of the next term, as her aunt was in failing health and wanted her at home.

Soon Pauline left too, and after a brief experience as a private governess, commenced to give
visiting lessons in London. She lived at first with a cousin of Miss Jephson's, a clergyman's
widow; but the arrangement did not somehow prove a satisfactory one, and it was a relief to
them both when Clare Desborough, whose old admiration for Pauline had revived on meeting her
in London, had begged her to share the little flat her mother had consented to rent for her,
while the family spent the winter in Italy.

Pauline found the freedom of a flat delightful, and looked forward with a sinking heart to
the day of Lady Desborough's return. Her only hope was that Rose might be induced to entreat
her aunt to let her live in London, so that she might study music at the Royal Academy. Pauline
was sure that Miss Merivale would consent, if only Rose's pleading was urgent enough. Rose
had had her own way all her life.

"There, it is quite ready now," Rose said, as she finished cutting the bread and butter. "If
you will move a little, Pauline, I will carry the tray in."

"I ought to do that," said Pauline lazily. "What will your aunt think, Rosie? I am not treating
you like a visitor, am I?"

"I wish I wasn't a visitor," said Rose, with a faint little sigh. "I envy Clare more than I
ever envied anybody. She must be having a lovely time." "It will soon be over, poor dear. I
wish"--Pauline stopped again, and began a fresh sentence. "You and I would get on better than
Clare and I do, Rose. We like the same things. She does not care a bit for music, but I can't
live without it. What delightful times we could have together, Rose! But I don't suppose your
aunt would hear of it. She is more old-fashioned in her ideas than Lady Desborough."

Rose had clasped her hands together. "Oh, Pauline, it would be too delightful! Would you really
like to have me? Aunt Lucy might let me come, though I'm afraid she could not get on without
me. And there's Tom!"

Pauline's dark eyes grew quizzical "I didn't know you were afraid of Tom, Rose. Doesn't he
think everything you do is right? Was there ever a little girl so spoiled by a big brother?"

"But he thinks I ought always to be at home to wait on him. You said the other day that he
was selfish, Pauline."

"All brothers are, my dear," returned Pauline oracularly, "and it is sisters who make them
so. Come, strike a blow for your liberty, Rose. You are not really wanted at home, and you
are wasting your days in that dull little country place. Wouldn't you like to live here with me?"

Rose's face was answer enough. She drew a deep breath before she spoke. "If only Aunt Lucy
wouldn't miss me too much, Pauline! But she's not strong. I don't think she could do without me."

"She would be better if she came up to London oftener and had a fuller life," returned Pauline,
with decision. "Her ill health has always been mainly imaginary, Rose. When people have nothing
else to do, they sink into invalidism. But you are making me lose my character as a hostess
altogether. Let us take in the tea. Your aunt will wonder what we have been doing."

But Miss Merivale had not noticed that the tea was a long time in making its appearance. She
was still absorbed in anxious thought when the girls came in, and after a little while she
managed to lead the conversation back to Clare and her typewriter.

"Mr. Powell suggested that we should have the programmes for the concert typewritten, Rose.
He said it would be cheaper. Could you give me the address of Miss Sampson, Miss Smythe?"

"I shouldn't advise you to employ her, Miss Merivale," returned Pauline in a voice that had
a sharp edge to it. For some reason or other, Clare's assistant was evidently not a favourite
of hers. "I don't believe she knows her business properly. Lady Desborough's sister picked
her up for Clare."

"I might try her. Could you give me her address, my dear?"

Pauline opened her eyes. It was utterly unlike Miss Merivale to be so persistent. "I am afraid
I can't, Miss Merivale. I know nothing whatever about her, except that she has just come from
Australia with some relations who kept a small shop out there. It was foolish of Mrs. Metcalfe
to send us such a person. There are so many ladies who would be glad to do the work."

Miss Merivale had caught her breath sharply as Pauline mentioned Australia, but neither of
the girls noticed her agitation. Rose had wandered to the window, and was looking with delight
at the vast expanse of chimney-tops, and the little glimpse of the river, grey under the cold
March sky. And Pauline was slowly stirring her tea, with her eyes cast down. She was thinking
whether it would be wise to drop a hint about Rose's unhappiness at Woodcote. She had just
made up her mind to say a guarded word or two, when she found, to her sharp annoyance, that
Miss Merivale's mind was still running on Rhoda Sampson.

"She comes here three times a week, I think you said, my dear?" asked Miss Merivale in her
gentle voice. "Does she come in the mornings? She has her meals here, perhaps?"

Pauline laughed. "We haven't invited her yet. I told Clare she must draw the line somewhere.
There is a Lockhart's Coffee House round the corner, and she goes there. What makes you interested
in her, Miss Merivale? If you want some typewriting done, I can easily get a proper person
for you. Mrs. Metcalfe got Sampson because she is so cheap. She comes to Clare, on Mondays,
Wednesdays, and Saturdays, for some ridiculous sum. If she knew her work, she would have wanted
more. In fact, she told Clare that she knew very little. Rose, what are you looking at? Do
you find the company of chimney-tops exhilarating? I wish our flat was in the front of the
building. Then we could have a good view of the river."

"You have a delightful glimpse of it here," Rose said, without turning her head.

Pauline smiled and looked at Miss Merivale. "Rose is in the mood to find even London smuts
fascinating," she said. "Could you spare her to us for a night or two next week, Miss Merivale?
Joachim is playing at St. James's Hall, and I want Rose to hear him."

Miss Merivale started from a deep reverie. "Tom talked of bringing her up for Joachim's concert,"
she said. "But if Rose would like to stay a day or two--But have you room for a visitor?"

Rose had come from the window, her eyes sparkling at Pauline's suggestion that she should stay
with her and Clare. She now broke merrily in. "Clare's two cousins stayed with them for a night
last week, Aunt Lucy. You don't know how elastic a flat is. Does she, Pauline? Oh, do let me!"

If Rose had been pleading to be let out of prison she could not have spoken more earnestly.
Another time Miss Merivale might have been hurt, but just then she was hardly able to attend
to what Rose was saying.

"We must ask Tom about the concert," she said. "You can write to Miss Smythe to-morrow. Would
any day next week be convenient, my dear?"

"Any day," said Pauline smilingly. "But the sooner the better. Be sure and bring your violin,
Rose. I want Mrs. Metcalfe to hear you play. She is a brilliant performer herself. We must
have a musical afternoon while you are here. Don't you think you could spare her for a week,
Miss Merivale? We shall have so much to do."

"We will see, my dear," said Miss Merivale, getting up. "A week sounds a long time. But we
will see. We must go now, Rosie. The carriage will be waiting. You and Miss Desborough must
come and see us, my dear. I am sure even a day in the country would be good for you. Don't
you pine for the country now the spring is coming?"

CHAPTER II.

WOODCOTE.

The drive home to Woodcote was a very silent one. Miss Merivale and Rose were both absorbed
in their own thoughts, and neither of them even dimly divined the thoughts of the other.

It had never entered Miss Merivale's head that Rose, her pet and darling, her little nurse
and helper, could be longing to live with Pauline in London; and how could Rose have guessed
that her aunt's thoughts were fixed on Rhoda Sampson, the girl Pauline had spoken of in such
contemptuous terms? She supposed her aunt was asleep, she sat so still in the corner of the
carriage with her eyes closed, and she took good care not to disturb her. She was glad to be
free to dwell on the delightful visions Pauline had called up for her.

Miss Merivale roused herself as the carriage turned in at the gates of the drive. The March
twilight had gathered thickly, and lights were shining from the windows of the low, irregular
house. They could see them twinkling through the trees.

"I wonder if Tom is back from Guilford yet, Rosie. He will scold us for being late. Oh, how
sweet and fresh the air is here! Don't you pity those girls cooped up in that stuffy little
flat? You must not promise to stay a week with them, Rosie. You would find two days quite long
enough."

Rose was saved from attempting to answer this by the carriage stopping before the wide porch.
A short, fair-haired young man, with a pleasant face and merry blue eyes, was waiting to open
the door.

"Auntie, you have no business to be out as late as this and an east wind blowing," he said,
in a playful scolding tone. "Rose, you should not have allowed it. But come in. There is a
jolly fire in the dining-room, and tea is quite ready. Next time you go to London, I mean to
go with you."

The dining-room looked a picture of comfort, with the curtains drawn, and the table laid for
tea. Miss Merivale never had late dinner except when she gave a dinner party. She liked the
simple, old-fashioned ways she had been accustomed to in her youth. But the table was laid
with dainty care; the swinging lamps shone upon shining silver that had been in the family
for two hundred years, on an old Worcester tea-set that had been bought by Miss Merivale's
grandmother, on bowls of early spring flowers gathered by Rose that morning from the beautiful
old garden at the back of the house. Everything in the room spoke of long years of quiet prosperity.
As Miss Merivale took her accustomed seat at the tea-table and looked about her, and then at
Tom sitting opposite her, all unwitting of the terrible blow that might be about to fall on
him, she could scarcely keep back the sob that rose to her lips.

Tom met her glance without seeing the trouble in it, and he smiled cheerfully back at her.

"Well, how did the shopping get on?" he asked, "Did you remember the seeds, Rose?"

Rose gave him a guilty look. "Oh, Tom, I quite forgot. Did you want them?"

He looked vexed for a moment, but only for a moment. "It does not matter. I can write. I promised
Jackson he should have them this week. Cousin Ann has a wonderful show of anemones this year,
Aunt Lucy. The square bed in the back garden is brilliant with them. We must try them here
again next year. I don't intend to be satisfied till we have beaten Cousin Ann."

"She says the soil here doesn't suit anemones; they are fanciful flowers," returned Miss Merivale.
"Then you went to Broadhurst, Tom?"

"Yes, I just managed it. Old Mrs. Harding was there. She is failing very fast, poor old soul.
Part of the time she thought I was Cousin James, Aunt Lucy. She wanted to know when I heard
last from my sister Lydia."

Miss Merivale put her cup down with a little clatter. Her hand had begun to tremble. "You are
very much like James, Tom," she said, glancing at the portrait that hung on the wainscoted
wall just above him, "and you get more like him every day."

It was the portrait of her only brother she was looking at. Tom and Rose were her cousin's
children, though they called her aunt. She had adopted them when Rose was a baby and Tom a
sturdy lad of five. Woodcote had been their home ever since. Tom had grown up knowing that
the estate was to be his at Miss Merivale's death. James Merivale had died young, ten years
before his father; and Lydia, Miss Merivale's only sister, had married against her father's
wishes, and had been disowned by him. After vainly trying to gain his forgiveness, she and
her husband emigrated to Australia, and for some years nothing was heard of them. Then Lydia
wrote to her father, telling him that she was a widow, and begging him to send her money that
she might come home. The stern old man burnt the letter without answering it and without showing
it to his daughter Lucy, and the next news came in a letter written by Lydia to her sister.

She had married again, her husband's partner, James Sampson, and had a little daughter, whom
she had named Rhoda, after her mother. The letter asked for money, and Miss Merivale sent what
she could, though she had little to send, for her father demanded a strict account of all she
spent.

She gave him the letter to read, and he returned it to her without a word; but his heart must
have relented towards his disobedient daughter at the last, for by a codicil to his will it
was provided that at Miss Merivale's death Woodcote was to pass to Lydia, or, in the event
of her not surviving her sister, to her daughter Rhoda.

But poor Lydia never knew that her father had forgiven her. She died three days before him;
and when her sister's letter reached Australia, James Sampson had broken up his home in Melbourne
and started with his little daughter for a distant settlement. He never reached the settlement,
and all Miss Merivale's efforts to trace him proved fruitless. She at last accepted the belief
of the lawyers that he had lost his way, and, like so many other hapless wanderers, had perished
in the bush.

When Tom had become dear as a son to her, fears would sometimes rise that his claim to Woodcote
might one day be disputed; but as the quiet years went on these fears ceased to present themselves,
and when Pauline mentioned Rhoda Sampson the name had gone through her like a knife. She tried--she
had been trying ever since--to tell herself that it was impossible it could be James Sampson's
child, but the terror had laid fast hold of her, and she could not shake it off. It was as
James Sampson's child she had always thought of her niece. Her heart had refused to give her
the place Lydia's little girl had a right to claim. She could not think of her as Lydia's.

Tom had not noticed his aunt's agitation at the mention of her sister's name. He went on speaking
of his visit to Broadhurst.

"They want you to spend a day or two there next week, Rosie. Mr. Powell has asked Laura to
sing at the concert, and she wants to practise with you."

Rose's pretty face clouded over. "But I am going to stay with Pauline next week. And I wish
people wouldn't ask Laura to sing in public. She can't sing."

"It's a pleasure to listen to her, though," returned Tom sturdily. "We aren't all as critical
as you, Rosie; and our Parish Room isn't the Albert Hall. You had much better go to Broadhurst
than to Chelsea. Miss Smythe and Miss Desborough live in two cupboards up among the clouds,
don't they?"

"It isn't quite as bad as that, my dear," broke in Miss Merivale, as she saw Rose's vexed expression.
"I promised that Rose should stay with them for a day or two. I thought that if you went up
to Joachim's concert you might leave Rose behind, and fetch her next day."

"But, Aunt Lucy, Pauline said a week!" exclaimed Rose in dismay. "We could do nothing in a
day. And we want to do so much. Time always flies so fast in London. One lives there."

"We only vegetate here, eh, Rosie?" said Tom in a tone of good-humoured banter. "Was Wordsworth
a vegetable too? He lived in the country, you know."

But Rose refused to answer this. "Aunt Lucy, I may stay longer than a day, may I not?"

"Yes, dear, of course. Don't mind Tom's teasing. I must go up to town again to-morrow, I find,
and I will call at Cadogan Mansions and see Miss Smythe for you. And I can get your seeds, Tom."

Both Rose and Tom stared in surprise at this. "Aunt Lucy, you will tire yourself out if you
go off shopping again to-morrow," exclaimed Tom. "Can't I go for you?"

"No; I must go, my dear. I shall go by train, I think. You shall drive me to the station, and
I can take a hansom at Victoria. No, you must not come with me, Tom. I want to see Mr. Thomson."

"You won't be able to find your way to Lincoln's Inn by yourself," said Tom teasingly. "We
can't let her go alone, can we, Rose?"

"Don't be such foolish children," returned Miss Merivale, getting up from the table. "I have
a matter of business to talk over with Mr. Thomson, Tom. And I would rather go alone, please."

She spoke with such unwonted decision Tom could say no more. But he was both hurt and surprised.
Miss Merivale was accustomed to ask his opinion on every business matter. He practically managed
the estate for her. It seemed very strange to him that she should be so bent on going to see
Mr. Thomson alone. He felt as if he must have proved himself in some way unworthy of her confidence.

Miss Merivale saw that he was hurt, though he tried his best to hide it. But it was impossible
for her to explain. She had determined to be silent till she had seen Rhoda Sampson and found
out who she was.

Rose was as much surprised as Tom at her aunt's determination to go alone to London next day.
She talked of it to Tom in the drawing-room when Miss Merivale had gone up to her room.

"You don't think it is about her will, do you?" she said, in a hushed tone.

Tom gave her a look of strong disgust. "I don't think anything about it. But she isn't fit
to go by herself. Get her to take Maitland, if she won't take one of us. She was looking quite
ill this evening, didn't you notice? I wouldn't stay away a week, Rosie, if I were you. She
misses you dreadfully if you are away only a day."

"But it is so dull here, doing nothing day after day but wait on Aunt Lucy, and pick the flowers,
and look after the old people in the village," said Rose, moved to a sudden burst of confidence.
"It's different for you, Tom. You have your shooting and fishing, and the estate to look after,
and all the rest of it. But I'm at home all day"--

"That's where a girl ought to be, my dear," returned Tom good-humouredly. "I'm not going to
pity you. If you are dull, it's your own fault. Laura isn't dull."

"I don't suppose an oyster is dull," was Rose's disdainful retort. "But it's no good to talk
to you, Tom."

"I don't say Laura is as clever as you, my dear," returned Tom, with undiminished good humour.
"But it is no good grumbling about your lot. Aunt Lucy couldn't do without you, and you wouldn't
leave her if you could. So what's the use of talking? And as to your being dull, I don't believe
it. You only imagine you are. That's where your cleverness comes in, you see. We stupid people
aren't ashamed to be contented."

Rose could not help laughing at this, though she felt very cross. But she felt Tom was right
in saying that her aunt could not do without her for very long. And she told herself sorrowfully
that she must give up all hope of sharing Pauline's flat when Clare went back to dull captivity
at Desborough Park. She could not be spared. It seemed doubtful if she would be able to persuade
her aunt and Tom to let her stay more than a day or two when she made her promised visit in
the following week.

She went up to her aunt's room to bid her good-night, feeling herself a martyr, but determined
to bear her hard lot with decent cheerfulness.

Miss Merivale was sitting at the old bureau where she kept her most private papers. She had
been reading over again the letter in which Lydia told her of the birth of her little dark-eyed
girl.

Many tears had fallen on the yellow pages before she put them away, and she turned such a white,
worn face to Rose as she entered, Rose felt horribly ashamed at having ever thought of sharing
Pauline's flat. And the good-night embrace she gave Miss Merivale before going into the little
white room that opened from her aunt's had compunction in it as well as warm affection.

"Aunt Lucy, do let Tom go with you to-morrow," she begged. "But must you go to-morrow?"

"Yes, I must, dear. And I want to go alone," Miss Merivale answered. Then she pinched Rose's
cheek, trying to speak playfully. "You silly children, am I not to be trusted to go anywhere
alone? I shall start early, and get back early. It is business I cannot put off, Rose. Perhaps
to-morrow I shall be able to tell you all about it."

CHAPTER III.

A VISIT TO KENTISH TOWN.

It was just before twelve o'clock next morning when Miss Merivale reached Cadogan Mansions.
She told the cabman to wait, and walked slowly up the long flights of stone steps.

About half-way up, she met a girl coming down, with light springing steps, buttoning a pair
of shabby dogskin gloves. Her dress was shabby too, and the little black straw hat had seen
long service; but Miss Merivale only noticed her bonnie face. It brightened the dreary staircase
like a gleam of sunshine.

It never struck her that this was the girl she had come to see. From Pauline's words the day
before, she had pictured Rhoda Sampson as a very different sort of girl.

The flat was at the top of the high buildings, and Miss Merivale was out of breath by the time
she reached the neat front door with the electric bell. She had not long to wait before her
ring was answered by Mrs. Richards, a thin, careworn woman, who ushered her into the sitting-room
where Miss Desborough sat at her writing-table.

She jumped up, with her pen in her hand. "Miss Merivale, what a delightful surprise! Is Rose
with you? I was so sorry to miss you yesterday, but I had to go to a committee meeting. I have
more work on my hands just now than I can do. Would you mind my just finishing this letter
for the post? It is very important. I shall not be five minutes."

Miss Merivale, who had seen Clare running about the garden at Woodcote three summers before
with her hair flying, was considerably taken aback by her extremely "grown-up" manner. She
sat meekly down on the sofa and waited for the letter to be finished.

"There, it's done!" Clare exclaimed, after a moment or two. "Now I will just give it to Mrs.
Richards, and we can have a little talk. Pauline will be back in half an hour," She glanced
as she spoke at a tiny clock on the writing-table. "Then after lunch I must rush off to Southwark.
I shall find a big mothers' meeting waiting for me. The women bring their needlework, and I
talk to them. Last week we considered Food Stuffs in reference to young children, and this
afternoon I am going to discuss Herbert Spencer's Theory of Education."

"Dear me! these sound very difficult subjects for you, my dear," said Miss Merivale, trying
to repress a laugh as she looked at Clare's serious young face. "They must need a great deal
of preparation."

"Yes, that is the worst of it. I haven't time for any study. We workers lead very busy lives,
Miss Merivale. I am rushing all day from one thing to another, feeling all the time that I
ought to be doing something else."

It suggested itself to Miss Merivale that work undertaken in that hurried fashion must do more
harm than good; but she was too eager to speak of Rhoda Sampson to think much of anything else.
"You have someone to help you, Miss Smythe told us yesterday," she said. "Someone who typewrites
your letters."

"Oh, Miss Sampson? Yes, she is an energetic little thing. But she has vexed me to-day. I particularly
wanted her this afternoon, and she has asked for a holiday. Her little cousin is ill, and she
wants to take him into the country somewhere. She has just gone. You must have met her on the
stairs."

Miss Merivale started. "Yes, I met someone coming down. Was that Miss Sampson? Then she is
not coming back to-day? I wanted some programmes typewritten. Could you give me her address?"

"Yes, I have it here somewhere. But she will be here on Monday. I will speak to her, if you
like I shall be glad to get her some work; for after next week I shall not want her, though
I have not told her so yet. Mother is coming home rather sooner than we expected, and I am
going back to Desborough with her."

"Indeed? You will be sorry to give up your work, won't you, my dear?" asked Miss Merivale mechanically,
as she watched Clare turning over her address-book.

"Mother has promised that I shall come back later on and stay with Aunt Metcalfe. I shall like
that better than this. One gets tired of a flat after a time. But here is Miss Sampson's address.
Will you write to her, or shall I tell her what you want?"

"I will go there now," Miss Merivale said, her hand closing eagerly on the slip of paper Clare
gave her. "She has just come from Australia, Miss Smythe said."

"Yes; they have been in England a few months only. I know nothing more of her. But she is a
good little thing. Pauline does not like her, but Pauline is too critical sometimes. I notice
that she is strangely lacking in sympathy towards girls of Miss Sampson's class."

It was a long drive from Chelsea to Acacia Road, Kentish Town. Miss Merivale knew London very
little, though she had lived near it all her life, and the dreary, respectable streets she
drove through after leaving Oxford Street behind her oppressed her even more than Whitechapel
had done in her one visit to it with Tom, the year before, to see a loan collection of pictures.
Street after street of blank, drab-faced houses--dull, unsmiling houses! She thought of children
growing up there, wan and joyless, like plants kept out of the sun. And then two happy-eyed
boys came running by with their satchels under their arms, while a door opened and a woman
with a smiling mother-face came out to welcome them. And Miss Merivale confessed to herself
the mistake she had been making. Where love is, even a dull London street has its sunshine.

Acacia Road was reached at last, and the cab drew up before a small bow-windowed house that
had a card, "Apartments to Let," over the hall door. A little servant with a dirty apron and
a merry face opened the door, and two boys with bright red pinafores came rushing from the
sitting-room behind her.

Miss Sampson wasn't in, but her aunt, Mrs. M'Alister, was, the smiling servant-maid told Miss
Merivale, and led the way into the front sitting-room. The boys ran upstairs. Miss Merivale
heard them shouting to their mother that a lady wanted her, and she sat down on a chair near
the door, trembling all over.

The room was the ordinary lodging-house sitting-room; but though there was a litter of toys
on the worn carpet, it had evidently been carefully swept and dusted that morning, and there
was a brown jug filled with fresh daffodils on the centre table. On the side table near Miss
Merivale there was a pile of books. She looked at the titles as she waited for a step on the
stairs--The Civil Service Geography, Hamblin Smith's Arithmetic, one or two French Readers,
a novel by George MacDonald, and a worn edition of Longfellow's Poems. Miss Merivale wondered
if they all belonged to Rhoda.

She was not kept waiting very long. Almost before she had finished looking at the books she
heard someone coming down the stairs, and the door opened to admit a tall, angular woman, whose
brown hair was thickly streaked with grey. Miss Merivale found herself unable to begin at once
to make the inquiries she had come to make, and fell back on the programmes she wanted typewritten.
Mrs. M'Alister eagerly promised that Rhoda would undertake the work. She had not a typewriter
of her own, but a friend would lend the use of hers, and Miss Merivale might rely on the work
being done punctually.

"It is very kind of Miss Desborough to recommend Rhoda," she said in her anxious voice. "It
is difficult to get work in London, we find."

"You have lately come from Australia, have you not?" asked Miss Merivale gently.

Mrs. M'Alister was too simple-minded to discern the profound agitation that lay beneath Miss
Merivale's quiet manner. And the kind voice and kind, gentle face of her visitor led her to
be more confidential than was her wont with strangers.

"Yes, we came back just before Christmas. When my husband died, I felt I must come home. My
brothers offered to help me with the boys. Rhoda has taken the youngest down to one of his
uncles to-day. But it's only in Essex; she will be back to-night."

She said the last words hurriedly, as if afraid of wearying her visitor. She little knew how
Miss Merivale was hanging on her words.

"Your niece must be a great comfort to you," Miss Merivale said, after a moment's pause. "Has
she always lived with you?"

"As good as always. She wasn't five when we had her first. Her father was our nearest neighbour;
we were living up in the hills then, fifty miles from a town. She used to stay with us for
days together while her father went off after cattle. And when he died we brought her home
for good. I haven't a girl of my own, but I've never known what it is to miss one. Rhoda's
no kith or kin to us, but she has been a daughter to me, all the same, and a sister to the
boys. We've had a hard fight since we came home, for my brothers have been unfortunate lately,
and are not able to help us as they wanted to; but Rhoda hasn't lost heart for a moment."

Mrs. M'Alister had been drawn into making this long speech by the eager look of interest she
saw in Miss Merivale's face; but now she stopped short, her pale face flushing a little. She
felt afraid lest Miss Merivale might think she was asking for help.

"Then I suppose she had no relatives of her own?" asked Miss Merivale, after a pause, in which
she had been struggling for her voice.

"She had some on her mother's side. I never heard their names. But her father seemed certain
that they would be unkind to the child, and he was thankful when we promised to keep her. He
was a queer, silent sort of man. We never knew much about him, except that he had lived in
Adelaide. But he was mother and father both to Rhoda. He was just wrapped up in her. It was
a pretty sight to see them together."

There were many questions Miss Merivale would have liked to ask, but she had not the courage
to. She was afraid of betraying herself. She no longer felt any doubt about Rhoda's parentage.
James Sampson had not perished in the bush, but had hidden himself in that lonely spot up among
the hills, where either no news of the will had reached him, or he had deliberately refrained
from communicating with England. Perhaps he thought that his girl would be happier with the
kind M'Alisters than with her rich English relatives.

But the most probable supposition was that he had never heard of the will. Mrs. M'Alister had
said that they were living fifty miles from a town. How easily it might have happened that
the advertisements they put in the Melbourne papers had never been seen by him.

As soon as she could she got away, after arranging that Rhoda should bring the programmes to
Woodcote one day in the following week, so that she might talk over with her the details of
some other work she wanted done. Miss Merivale marvelled at herself for the calmness with which
she settled all this.

But when once she was in the cab her strength left her. After telling the man to drive her
to Victoria, she sank back faint and trembling. The alternatives that lay before her seemed
equally impossible. If Rhoda was Lydia's child, her own niece, her successor to Woodcote, how
could she leave her unacknowledged? How could she be silent about the discovery she had made,
even for a day? And as Miss Merivale thought this she stretched her hand to the check-string,
determining to drive at once to Lincoln's Inn to see her lawyer.

But her hand dropped at her side. All his life Tom had thought of Woodcote as his inheritance;
every stone, every blade of grass, was dear to him. He would have to leave it, to go out into
the world to fight for his living. How could she let him go? If she was silent, no one would
be likely to guess that Rhoda was Lydia's child. She was not mentioned by name in the will.
And she should not suffer. Ways and means of providing for her could be found. But she could
not have Woodcote. That was Tom's. It would break Tom's heart to give it up.

As Miss Merivale thought of Tom her heart grew hard against Rhoda. She who had never hated
anyone felt herself in danger of hating Lydia's little girl. Tears burst from her eyes and
streamed down her cheeks. She did not think of wiping them away. She sat with her hands clasped
on her lap, staring miserably in front of her. What she was to do she did not know.

CHAPTER IV.

TOM AND RHODA MEET.

On the day of the Joachim concert Tom and Rose went up to London soon after breakfast. Tom
was not going to the concert. After taking Rose to Cadogan Mansions he meant to hurry back.

He was anxious about his aunt. She had been so unlike herself during the last few days, he
feared she must be ill. And he felt sure he must have offended her in some way, for she had
seemed anxious to avoid him, and he had hardly spoken to her since she came back from London.

Did she think he was taking too much on himself? He had got into the habit lately of settling
matters of minor importance without consulting her, so as to save her trouble. Perhaps he had
annoyed her by doing so. At any rate, he would ask her if this was so. Tom's nature was so
simple and straightforward that this was the natural course for him to take. He believed half
the difficulties of life arose from the want of a little plain speaking.

Miss Merivale had said little about her journey to town. She left Tom and Rose under the impression
that she had called at the lawyer's, and it was not till the next day that she casually mentioned
her visit to Mrs. M'Alister.

"I have asked Miss Sampson to come and see me," she added, after telling them that Rhoda was
to do some typewriting for her. "I am interested in her, Rose. Did you know that poor Lydia's
second husband was named Sampson? It is not at all certain that this girl is of the same family,
as she comes from quite a different part of Australia. But I should like to see her."

Miss Merivale had had this speech carefully prepared ever since she came home, and she uttered
it so carelessly that neither Rose nor Tom suspected how her heart beat as she said it. Their
cousin Lydia was a faint, shadowy figure to them, and the suggestion that Miss Sampson might
prove to be related to her husband aroused no interest in their minds. Tom never thought of
it again till Rose mentioned Miss Sampson as they were travelling up to Victoria.

"I wish Aunt Lucy hadn't taken her up like this," she said impatiently. "Pauline will be vexed,
for she advised Aunt Lucy to have nothing to do with her."

"But if she is our cousin," suggested Tom, with a twinkle in his blue eyes, "don't you think
we are bound to patronise our relations?"

"How could she be our cousin? Don't be so foolish, Tom," Rose answered sharply.

"A family connection, then," returned Tom. "But perhaps you had better not mention the possibility
to Miss Smythe. It would shock her too much. All her relations are in Debrett, aren't they?"

Rose looked doubtfully at him. "I never know whether you like Pauline or not, Tom," she said.
"But I am sure you never heard her boast of her relations."

"No, I never did, my dear; but I have somehow gathered the fact that they are very fine people
indeed. I always feel I ought to be ashamed that we did not come over at the Conquest when
I am talking to Miss Smythe."

"Now you are laughing at her," returned Rose, with some indignation in her voice. "I believe
you are always laughing at her, Tom. And it is just because she is clever. Men always like
stupid girls best, who think everything they say is wonderful."

At this Tom laughed outright. "There is one clever little girl I am very fond of," he said,
"and it is going to be dull at Woodcote without her. When will you come back, Rosie? Don't
stay very long. I am sure Aunt Lucy is not well."

"I must stay till Thursday. Pauline and Clare are going to have a musical At Home on Thursday.
But I will come back on Friday, Tom. I must, I suppose." And Rose tried to suppress a sigh.

"Do you really want to stay longer?" said Tom, with a wondering look at her. "I daresay Laura
would spend a day or two with Aunt Lucy. I don't think she ought to be alone, Rose."

"Laura fidgets Aunt Lucy to death," Rose answered quickly. "You know she does, Tom. Of course
I shall come back on Friday. I promised Aunt Lucy I would."

While Tom and Rose were talking thus, Miss Merivale was waiting anxiously for Rhoda. She had
arranged that she should come to Woodcote that morning while Tom and Rose were away. The station
was only half a mile from the house, and she did not send to meet her; but she sat by the drawing-room
window, looking with painful eagerness down the drive for the first glimpse of the slim figure
she remembered.

It was nearly eleven o'clock when Rhoda came up the quiet country road and turned in at the
iron gates. It was a delightful day, the first real day of spring. Though no leaves were yet
on the trees, ruddy brown buds just ready for bursting clothed every branch. And the grass
along the hedges was starred with celandines and daisies, while yellow catkins sprinkled the
bushes above them. A blackbird was singing loudly as Rhoda passed the big chestnut trees by
the gate, and a squirrel darted down from a fir and scurried across the drive to hide himself
in the little wood. She has told me that she finds nothing degrading in her position; it is not inconsistent
with personal dignity, self-respect, and the respect of others. She confers benefits and receives
them. She has good health; her presence itself is healthy and bracing; her character is unstain'd;
she has made herself understood, and preserves her independence, and has been able to help her
parents, and educate and get places for her sisters; and her course
of life is not without opportunities for mental improvement, and of
much quiet, uncosting happiness and love.

I have seen another woman who, from taste and necessity conjoin'd, has gone into practical affairs,
carries on a mechanical business, partly works at it herself, dashes out more and more into real
hardy life, is not abash'd by the coarseness of the contact, knows how to be firm and silent
at the same time, holds her own with unvarying coolness and decorum, and will compare, any
day, with superior carpenters, farmers, and even boatmen and drivers. For all that, she has
not lost the charm of the womanly nature, but preserves and bears
it fully, though through such rugged presentation.

Then there is the wife of a mechanic, mother of two children, a woman
of merely passable English education, but of fine wit, with all her
sex's grace and intuitions, who exhibits, indeed, such a noble female
personality, that I am fain to record it here.

Never abnegating her own proper independence, but always genially preserving it, and what
belongs to it--cooking, washing, child-nursing, house-tending--she beams sunshine out of all these
duties, and makes them illustrious. Physiologically sweet and sound, loving work, practical,
she yet knows that there are intervals, however few, devoted to recreation,
music, leisure, hospitality--and affords such intervals.

Whatever she does, and wherever she is, that charm, that indescribable perfume of genuine womanhood
attends her, goes with her, exhales from her, which belongs of right to all the sex, and is,
or ought to be, the invariable atmosphere and common aureola of old as well as young.

My dear mother once described to me a resplendent person, down on Long Island, whom she knew in
early days. She was known by the name of the Peacemaker.

She was well toward eighty years old, of happy and sunny temperament, had always lived on a
farm, and was very neighborly, sensible and discreet, an invariable
and welcom'd favorite, especially with young married women.

She had numerous children and grandchildren. She was uneducated, but possess'd a native dignity.
She had come to be a tacitly agreed upon domestic regulator, judge, settler of difficulties,
shepherdess, and reconciler in the land.

She was a sight to draw near and look upon, with her large figure, her profuse snow-white hair,
(uncoil'd by any head-dress or cap,) dark eyes, clear complexion,
sweet breath, and peculiar personal magnetism.

The foregoing portraits, I admit, are frightfully out of line from these imported models of
womanly personality--the stock feminine characters of the current novelists, or of the foreign
court poems, (Ophelias, Enids, princesses, or ladies of one thing or another,) which fill
the envying dreams of so many poor girls, and are accepted by our men, too, as supreme ideals
of feminine excellence to be sought after.

But I present mine just for a change.

Then there are mutterings, (we will not now stop to heed them here,
but they must be heeded,) of something more revolutionary.

The day is coming when the deep questions of woman's entrance amid the arenas of practical
life, politics, the suffrage, &c., will not only be argued all around
us, but may be put to decision, and real experiment.

Of course, in these States, for both man and woman, we must entirely recast the types of highest personality
from what the oriental, feudal, ecclesiastical worlds bequeath us,
and which yet possess the imaginative and esthetic fields of the United
States, pictorial and melodramatic, not without use as studies, but
making sad work, and forming a strange anachronism upon the scenes
and exigencies around us.

Of course, the old undying elements remain. The task is, to successfully adjust them to new
combinations, our own days. Nor is this so incredible.

I can conceive a community, to-day and here, in which, on a sufficient scale, the perfect personalities,
without noise meet; say in some pleasant western settlement or town, where a couple of hundred
best men and women, of ordinary worldly status, have by luck been drawn together, with nothing
extra of genius or wealth, but virtuous, chaste, industrious, cheerful,
resolute, friendly and devout.

I can conceive such a community organized in running order, powers judiciously delegated--farming,
building, trade, courts, mails, schools, elections, all attended
to; and then the rest of life, the main thing, freely branching and
blossoming in each individual, and bearing golden fruit.

I can see there, in every young and old man, after his kind, and in every woman after hers,
a true personality, develop'd, exercised proportionately in body, mind, and spirit. I can imagine
this case as one not necessarily rare or difficult, but in buoyant accordance with the municipal
and general requirements of our times. And I can realize in it the culmination of something better
than any stereotyped eclat of history or poems.

Perhaps, unsung, undramatized, unput in essays or biographies--perhaps even some such community
already exists, in Ohio, Illinois, Missouri, or somewhere, practically fulfilling itself, and
thus outvying, in cheapest vulgar life, all that has been hitherto shown in best ideal pictures.

In
short, and to sum up, America, betaking herself to formative action, (as it is about time for
more solid achievement, and less windy promise,) must, for her purposes, cease to recognize a theory
of character grown of feudal aristocracies, or form'd by merely literary standards, or from
any ultramarine, full-dress formulas of culture, polish, caste, &c.,
and must sternly promulgate her own new standard, yet old enough,
and accepting the old, the perennial elements, and combining them
into groups, unities, appropriate to the modern, the democratic, the
west, and to the practical occasions and needs of our own cities,
and of the agricultural regions.

Ever the most precious in the common. Ever the fresh breeze of field, or hill, or lake, is more
than any palpitation of fans, though of ivory, and redolent with perfume; and the air is more
than the costliest perfumes.

And now, for fear of mistake, we may not intermit to beg our absolution from all that genuinely
is, or goes along with, even Culture. Pardon us, venerable shade! if we have seem'd to speak
lightly of your office. The whole civilization of the earth, we know, is yours, with all the
glory and the light thereof. It is, indeed, in your own spirit, and seeking to tally the loftiest
teachings of it, that we aim these poor utterances. For you, too, mighty minister! know that
there is something greater than you, namely, the fresh, eternal qualities
of Being.

From them, and by them, as you, at your best, we too evoke the last, the needed help, to vitalize
our country and our days. Thus we pronounce not so much against the principle of culture; we only
supervise it, and promulge along with it, as deep, perhaps a deeper, principle. As we have shown
the New World including in itself the all-leveling aggregate of democracy, we show it also including
the all-varied, all-permitting, all-free theorem of individuality,
and erecting therefor a lofty and hitherto unoccupied framework or
platform, broad enough for all, eligible to every farmer and mechanic--to
the female equally with the male--a towering selfhood, not physically
perfect only--not satisfied with the mere mind's and learning's stores,
but religious, possessing the idea of the infinite, (rudder and compass
sure amid this troublous voyage, o'er darkest, wildest wave, through
stormiest wind, of man's or nation's progress)--realizing, above the
rest, that known humanity, in deepest sense, is fair adhesion to itself,
for purposes beyond--and that, finally, the personality of mortal
life is most important with reference to the immortal, the unknown,
the spiritual, the only permanently real, which as the ocean waits
for and receives the rivers, waits for us each and all.

Much is there, yet, demanding line and outline in our Vistas, not only on these topics, but others
quite unwritten. Indeed, we could talk the matter, and expand it, through lifetime. But it is necessary
to return to our original premises.

In view of them, we have again pointedly to confess that all the objective grandeurs of the world,
for highest purposes, yield themselves up, and depend on mentality
alone.

Here, and here only, all balances, all rests.

For the mind, which alone builds the permanent edifice, haughtily
builds it to itself.

By it, with what follows it, are convey'd to mortal sense the culminations of the materialistic,
the known, and a prophecy of the unknown. To take expression, to incarnate, to endow a literature
with grand and archetypal models--to fill with pride and love the utmost capacity, and to achieve
spiritual meanings, and suggest the future--these, and these only,
satisfy the soul.

We must not say one word against real materials; but the wise know that they do not become real till
touched by emotions, the mind. Did we call the latter imponderable?

Ah, let us rather proclaim that the slightest song-tune, the countless ephemera of passions
arous'd by orators and tale-tellers, are more dense, more weighty
than the engines there in the great factories, or the granite blocks
in their foundations.

Approaching thus the momentous spaces, and considering with reference to a new and greater
personalism, the needs and possibilities of American imaginative literature, through the medium-light
of what we have already broach'd, it will at once be appreciated that a vast gulf of difference
separates the present accepted condition of these spaces, inclusive
of what is floating in them, from any condition adjusted to, or fit
for, the world, the America, there sought to be indicated, and the
copious races of complete men and women, along these Vistas crudely
outlined.

It is, in some sort, no less a difference than lies between that long-continued nebular state
and vagueness of the astronomical worlds, compared with the subsequent
state, the definitely-form'd worlds themselves, duly compacted, clustering
in systems, hung up there, chandeliers of the universe, beholding
and mutually lit by each other's lights, serving for ground of all
substantial foothold, all vulgar uses--yet serving still more as an
undying chain and echelon of spiritual proofs and shows.

A boundless field to fill! A new creation, with needed orbic works launch'd forth, to revolve in
free and lawful circuits--to move, self-poised, through the ether,
and shine like heaven's own suns!

With such, and nothing less, we suggest that New World literature, fit to rise upon, cohere,
and signalize in time, these States.

What, however, do we more definitely mean by New World literature? Are we not doing well enough
here already? Are not the United States this day busily using, working, more printer's type,
more presses, than any other country? uttering and absorbing more
publications than any other?

Do not our publishers fatten quicker and deeper? (helping themselves, under shelter of a delusive
and sneaking law, or rather absence of law, to most of their forage, poetical, pictorial, historical,
romantic, even comic, without money and without price--and fiercely
resisting the timidest proposal to pay for it.) Many will come under
this delusion--but my purpose is to dispel it.

I say that a nation may hold and circulate rivers and oceans of very readable print, journals,
magazines, novels, library-books, "poetry," &c.--such as the States
to-day possess and circulate--of unquestionable aid and value--hundreds
of new volumes annually composed and brought out here, respectable
enough, indeed unsurpass'd in smartness and erudition--with further
hundreds, or rather millions, (as by free forage or theft aforemention'd,)
also thrown into the market--and yet, all the while, the said nation,
land, strictly speaking, may possess no literature at all.

Repeating our inquiry, what, then, do we mean by real literature? especially the democratic literature
of the future? Hard questions to meet. The clues are inferential,
and turn us to the past.

At best, we can only offer suggestions, comparisons, circuits.

It must still be reiterated, as, for the purpose of these memoranda,
the deep lesson of history and time, that all else in the contributions
of a nation or age, through its politics, materials, heroic personalities,
military eclat, &c., remains crude, and defers, in any close and thorough-going
estimate, until vitalized by national, original archetypes in literature.

They only put the nation in form, finally tell anything--prove, complete anything--perpetuate
anything. Without doubt, some of the richest and most powerful and populous communities of
the antique world, and some of the grandest personalities and events, have, to after and present
times, left themselves entirely unbequeath'd. Doubtless, greater
than any that have come down to us, were among those lands, heroisms,
persons, that have not come down to us at all, even by name, date,
or location.

Others have arrived safely, as from voyages over wide, century-stretching seas. The little ships,
the miracles that have buoy'd them, and by incredible chances safely
convey'd them, (or the best of them, their meaning and essence,) overlong
wastes, darkness, lethargy, ignorance, &c., have been a few inscriptions--a
few immortal compositions, small in size, yet compassing what measureless
values of reminiscence, contemporary portraitures, manners, idioms
and beliefs, with deepest inference, hint and thought, to tie and
touch forever the old, new body, and the old, new soul!

These! and still these! bearing the freight so dear--dearer than pride--dearer than love. All
the best experience of humanity, folded, saved, freighted to us here. Some of these tiny ships
we call Old and New Testament, Homer, Eschylus, Plato, Juvenal, &c. Precious minims! I think,
if we were forced to choose, rather than have you, and the likes of you, and what belongs to,
and has grown of you, blotted out and gone, we could better afford, appaling as that would be,
to lose all actual ships, this day fasten'd by wharf, or floating
on wave, and see them, with all their cargoes, scuttled and sent to
the bottom.

Gather'd by geniuses of city, race or age, and put by them in highest
of art's forms, namely, the literary form, the peculiar combinations
and the outshows of that city, age, or race, its particular modes
of the universal attributes and passions, its faiths, heroes, lovers
and gods, wars, traditions, struggles, crimes, emotions, joys, (or
the subtle spirit of these,) having been pass'd on to us to illumine
our own selfhood, and its experiences--what they supply, indispensable
and highest, if taken away, nothing else in all the world's boundless
store-houses could make up to us, or ever again return.

By points like these we, in reflection, token what we mean by any land's or people's genuine
literature. And thus compared and tested, judging amid the influence of loftiest products only,
what do our current copious fields of print, covering in manifold
forms, the United States, better, for an analogy, present, than, as
in certain regions of the sea, those spreading, undulating masses
of squid, through which the whale swimming, with head half out, feeds?



"I mean to write a cookery book one day," she exclaimed presently, in a tone of deep disgust.
"And I mean to use simple language, and explain everything. I can't understand this book a bit."

Rhoda was on the point of offering her help, when the door was hastily opened and Pauline came
in, with a bunch of daffodils in her hand. She raised her eyebrows at the sight of the pastry
board.

"My darling Rose! Suppose Lady Desborough were to come back with Clare, what would she think?"

"It was so hot in the kitchen, Pauline," Rose answered meekly. "And I do so want to learn how
to cook. Mrs. Richards' pastry is like leather. Just look here. This book says"--

But Pauline laughingly put it from her. "My dear child, it is worse than Greek to me. And I
really do object to see lumps of raw dough about. Please take them away. I never like to think
of my food till I see it on the table. Good-morning, Miss Sampson. When you have finished those
letters you will not be required any more. I will pay you before you go. Miss Desborough has
gone out with Lady Desborough."

Clare had left a kind message for Rhoda, and when Pauline went into the next room to take off
her hat, Rose hastened to give it.

"She was so sorry not to be here to say good-bye to you, Miss Sampson. She feels that you have
been such a help to her."

Rhoda had listened to Pauline with a smile faintly lurking at the corner of her firm lips,
but now the smile flashed brightly out at Rose.

"It has been very pleasant work," she said. "I am sorry it is over. But your aunt has promised
me some more work, Miss Merivale. I am to go down to Woodcote again on Thursday."

Rose was surprised, and she could not help showing it. "You went yesterday, didn't you?" she
said rather stiffly. "It is a long way for you to go."

"I am very glad to go," Rhoda answered. She did not tell Rose she had spent the day at Woodcote;
something in Rose's manner checked her. But she did not begin her writing at once. Rose had
taken up the cookery book again, and was bending puzzled brows over it. Rhoda watched her for
a moment, her eyes full of admiration. Miss Desborough was pretty, but there was not a soft
line in her face. Rose looked a child still for all her womanly height. Rhoda said to herself
that she must be much younger than her brother. It was easy to see that they were brother and
sister. Rose had just the same straight brow she had noticed in him yesterday, and her eyebrows,
like his, were a shade or two darker than her hair.

"Would you let me see if I could help you, Miss Merivale?" Rhoda said, after a moment. "I did
all the cooking at home before we came to England."

But Rose shut up her book. "Pauline will scold again if I don't carry all this away," she said,
with a laugh. "And I mean to have some cookery lessons, if I can get them. But Woodcote is
so far from everywhere. It is like being buried alive."

Rhoda, who had known what it was to live for years fifty miles from a town, did not know how
to answer this. And Rose, angry with herself for saying so much to Miss Sampson, caught up
the pastry board and rolling-pin and retreated to the kitchen. She came back in a few moments
with her apron off, and found Rhoda busy at work, and Pauline in a low chair by the fire with
her hands clasped round her knees. Pauline had changed her outdoor dress for an odd, picturesque
frock of sage green Liberty serge, touched with yellow. She had fastened some daffodils in
her belt, and looked like an aesthetic picture of Spring.

"Arrange my daffodils for me, there is a good little Rose," she said, smiling lazily at Rose
as she entered. "The brown pots, not the blue ones. Now Clare is going to her native fens,
I mean this room to be a thing of beauty and a joy for ever. How good it will be to get rid
of the click of that typewriter!"

"Don't say that to Clare," laughed Rose, as she brought the brown pots to the table. "She was
telling me this morning it was the thing she would miss most."

Pauline lifted her dark eyebrows. "Did she really say that? But it is exactly like Clare; she
is more a machine herself than a human being. I was very fond of her once, but I have found
her trying to live with. They say you never know a woman till you have lived six months with
her. Don't put too many daffodils in one pot, my Rose; they want plenty of room to show themselves."

Rhoda had finished the work Clare had left for her. She carefully put her papers together,
and rose from the table. Pauline looked carelessly round at her. "Ah, are you going, Miss Sampson?
Here is the money Miss Desborough left for you. Just write a receipt and leave it on the table,
please. You understand that you are not wanted any more, don't you?"

"I knew this was to be my last day, thank you," said Rhoda composedly. She smiled to herself
as she wrote her receipt. She half thought of mentioning her visit to Leyton, but she refrained.
There was not a touch of spitefulness in Rhoda's nature, and she had no wish to humiliate Pauline;
but the humorous side of the situation was thoroughly enjoyed by her.

Rose went on arranging her flowers in silence for a minute or two after Rhoda went away; then
she spoke rather constrainedly.

"Why do you dislike poor Miss Sampson so, Pauline? Do you know that you were quite unkind to her?"

"Was I? It is necessary to keep that sort of girl at arm's length; she would become intolerable
if you didn't. Thank goodness, we have seen the last of her. Now, come and sit down here and
have a talk. What shall we do this afternoon, Rose? Only two more days! What do you want to
do most?"

"Clare and Lady Desborough are coming back to tea," suggested Rose, with a laugh. "You are
not very hospitable, Pauline. And to-morrow we shall be busy all day. My time will soon be
over, won't it? Do you know, Aunt Lucy has asked Miss Sampson down to Woodcote again to-morrow,
Pauline? I wonder if she has found out that she is related to Cousin Lydia's husband. I don't
see what Aunt Lucy can want her for."

"Poor relations are a great nuisance," said Pauline sharply. "It is foolish of your aunt to
have anything to do with her. But don't let us talk of Sampson, Rosie; let us talk of ourselves.
Suppose for a moment that you were going to stay with me through the summer, just let us plan
what we would do."

Rose shook her head.

"It would be too tantalising, Pauline. I shall spend the summer at Woodcote. I know exactly
what I shall be doing every hour of the day, and every day of the week, and every week of the
month. But don't let us talk of it. Let us talk of the concert last night. Wasn't it wonderful?
I wish Tom had been there; he would have understood better why Laura's singing irritates me.
Pauline, I must get some good music lessons somehow. Do speak to Aunt Lucy about it on Friday.
You are quite right; I am wasting my time as it is."

CHAPTER VI.

PAULINE'S DIPLOMACY.

When Rhoda got home that morning, she found that Mrs. M'Alister had already begun to pack.
Ned was to go to Plymouth almost at once, and Mr. Price was anxious that his sister and the
younger boys should return with him on the following Saturday. Little Hugh was to stay at Leyton
for the present; Rhoda was to bring him down when she came for her holiday in August.

Mrs. M'Alister did not guess how hard Rhoda found it to be cheerful as she helped with the
packing. A great load was lifted off her heart by the ready way in which the girl had acquiesced
in the new arrangements. Much as it grieved her to part with Rhoda, she could not help looking
forward with delight to going back to the dear old farmhouse in which her childhood had been
spent. And Rhoda understood exactly how she felt. There was no bitterness in her heart; but,
brave and cheery as she was, she dreaded to think of the lonely days that lay before her.

She did not go down to Woodcote till Thursday afternoon. Miss Merivale had asked her to come
early and spend the day, but she had written to explain how it was that she could not spare
the time; her aunt wanted her help in packing.

The old house looked more beautiful and peaceful than ever, steeped in the golden afternoon
sunlight. Rhoda thought with a thrill of wonder of Rose's words about her home. How could she
have spoken so!

Miss Merivale was in the library, with all the windows open to the garden. Rhoda was tremulously
surprised at her greeting. She kissed her, and even when they sat down she did not leave her
hand go, but held it tight, looking anxiously at her.

"I want you to tell me more about your aunt," she said. "I did not quite understand your letter.
You are not going to Devonshire?"

"Oh no; I am going on with my work here," Rhoda said hastily. And after a pause she added,
impelled by the yearning kindness in Miss Merivale's eyes, "Mr. Price wishes me to stay here.
It is not as if I was his own niece, you see. And I am nearly twenty; I am quite able to earn
my own living."

Miss Merivale dropped her hand suddenly, and rose and went to the window. The quiver in Rhoda's
voice was more than she could bear. She spoke without turning round. "I see they are carrying
the tea into the garden. Let us go out. I thought it would be pleasanter to have it out of
doors. And afterwards you shall tell me what you mean to do. I should like"--

But she checked herself. She wanted to say that she would like Rhoda to come to Woodcote; but
she saw how strange such a wish would seem, both to Rhoda and to Tom and Rose. She must wait
a little. She must content herself with helping her in other ways.

Tom had been obliged to go to Guilford that day on farm business; but somehow he had managed
to get back early, and he strolled into the garden just as they sat down to tea, not looking
in the least as if he had just ridden twelve miles at headlong speed.

A faint smile crossed Miss Merivale's pale face as she saw him. It was what she had been hoping
for.

She left the talk during tea-time to him and Rhoda, who had plenty to say to each other. They
were both enthusiasts about a garden, and found it intensely interesting to compare notes.
After tea, Tom was eager to show Rhoda some white violets in the wood close by. He found she
had never seen any.

They went off together, and Miss Merivale could hear their eager, happy voices as they searched
about the wood looking for the violets, just like two children. She leant back in her chair,
closing her eyes. For the moment the ache at her heart was stilled. She was hoping that all
might yet come right.

Rhoda went home that evening feeling like a different creature. Mrs. M'Alister had a jealous
pang or two as she listened to her account of the happy time she had had.

"Don't you trust too much to her promises, child," she said anxiously. "She's taken a sudden
fancy to you, that's clear enough; but it mightn't last. She might take a fancy to somebody
else next week, and forget all about you. I have heard of people like that."

"I don't think Miss Merivale is a bit like that," returned Rhoda stoutly. "Hasn't she a sweet,
kind face, Aunt Mary? I wish she didn't look so ill."

"Don't rest your hopes on her too much," repeated Mrs. M'Alister, shaking her head gloomily.
"James will be in again to-night, and you will hear what he says. He has heard of a firm that
wants a lady-clerk. We think you'd better try for it, Rhoda. I'd like to see you settled before
we go away. I've been wishing and wishing this afternoon that you could go with us."

"You mustn't say that to Mr. Price, Aunt Mary," Rhoda said quickly. "You know how it vexes
him. And he is very kind. You heard him tell me that I was to ask him for any money I wanted.
But I don't think I shall want any. Miss Merivale said again this afternoon that she would
be able to get me as much work as I could do. She is going to write to me on Monday. I am quite
sure she meant it. And I don't want to try for work in an office if I can help it. I should
feel in prison."

Miss Merivale had spoken very vaguely of the work she was going to give Rhoda. She had, in
truth, made up her mind that Rhoda must come to Woodcote. She was only waiting till Rose came
home to arrange it. However much she surprised Rose and Tom, however difficult it would be
to explain why she wanted Rhoda, Rhoda must come to her. She could not leave Lydia's girl alone
in London. And Tom's surprise, at least, would have no element of annoyance in it. It was quite
plain already that Rhoda's company was delightful to him.

It had been arranged that Tom should go and fetch his sister on Friday, but by the first post
on Friday morning Miss Merivale got a letter from Rose, saying that Pauline would return with
her that afternoon, and that there was no need for Tom to come to London. It was at Pauline's
instigation Rose had written the letter. Those few charmed days in the little flat had made
Rose more passionately desirous than ever to get away from Woodcote, and Pauline had suggested
that she should go home with Rose and beg her aunt to allow her to pay a longer visit a little
later in the year.

"May is the best month of the year in London, Rose. You shall spend May with me. The flat will
have to be given up then, if I cannot get anyone to share it with me. Lady Desborough only
took it till the end of April. But we will have a lovely May together. I am sure your aunt
will not refuse to let you come."

"I couldn't possibly stay away for a month," Rose said firmly, but with the air of a martyr.
"Aunt Lucy looked heartbroken when I asked for a week this time. She has got to depend on me
for everything."

"Just so. But if you were away she would do things for herself, and it would be a thousand
times better for her. She won't have missed you this time as much as you fear, Rosie. And won't
you think of me a little bit? Just think how lonely I shall be!"

"Oh, I know. And I want to come again," Rose said piteously. "I might get away for a week in
May. If you spoke to Aunt Lucy"--

"Trust it to me entirely, dear. I know exactly what to say. And I feel sure your aunt will
let you be free when she understands how much you want it. For a week or so, I mean," she added
hastily, as she saw Rose's anxious look. "I mustn't ask for more, I suppose."

"It wouldn't be a bit of good to ask," sighed Rose. "If Aunt Lucy said I might stay longer,
she would look so miserable about it I should not like to take her at her word. But I might
be spared for a week, I should think. That will be something to look forward to."

They reached Woodcote early in the afternoon, and Pauline was soon furnished with an opportunity
to plead Rose's cause with Miss Merivale. Tom had bought a new pony which he wanted Rose to
see, and they went away to the stables, leaving their aunt and Pauline alone. Pauline had laughingly
refused to accompany them.

"I am going to tell Miss Merivale what Mrs. Metcalfe said about your music, Rose," she said.
"It would make you vain if you were to hear it."

"Who is Mrs. Metcalfe?" asked Tom, when they got outside. "Is she a great authority, Rose?"

"She is Lady Desborough's sister," returned Rose, with dignity. "Pauline and I went to tea
there yesterday. She lives in Grosvenor Square."

"Ah, I understand now why Miss Smythe spoke of her with bated breath," returned Tom in the
light, bantering tone which so often irritated Rose. "I might have known she lived in Grosvenor
Square."

Rose refused to take notice of his raillery. "It was Mrs. Metcalfe who got Miss Sampson for
Clare. She heard of her through some agency. What has made Aunt Lucy take such an interest
in her, Tom? She was down here again yesterday, wasn't she?"

"Yes. Have you seen her, Rosie?"

"For a moment or two. She looked nice, I thought. But I can't imagine what Aunt Lucy can find
for her to do."

"Aunt Lucy is sure that she must be related to Cousin Lydia's husband. It is natural that she
should take a great interest in her. She is coming down again next week to stay for a day or
two. Aunt Lucy told me this morning that she meant to ask her. I am sure you will like her, Rosie."

Tom spoke without looking at his sister, and hurried forward to open the gate of the stable
yard for her without waiting to get an answer. But Rose had no answer ready. The tone in which
Tom had spoken took her breath away. He seemed to think it was a matter of importance whether
she liked Miss Sampson or not.

When they got back to the house, Tom went off to his own den, and when Rose entered the drawing-room
she found Pauline alone.

The latter ran towards her and caught her by both hands. Her eyes were sparkling joyfully.
"My Rose, I have delightful news for you. Now, confess that I am the cleverest person in the
world! I have made your aunt as anxious as you are about your music. She wants you to spend
two months with me in London. Two whole long, lovely months! Think of it, Rosamunda mia! And
you can come next week. It is far, far more than I ever hoped for. And, who knows, you might
get an extension of leave after that. We may spend the whole summer together in the flat. Well,
why don't you say something? Aren't you pleased?"

"But, Pauline, I can't go. Aunt Lucy couldn't do without me. I"--

"My dear, she wants you to go," returned Pauline impatiently. "Go up and speak to her, and
you will find it is so. Miss Sampson is to come here as her companion. She isn't the person
I should choose for a companion, but chacun a son gout."

"Did you suggest that she should come here?" asked Rose. "Oh, Pauline, don't look at me like
that! It is so sudden. And Aunt Lucy can't bear strangers. I don't think it is a good plan at all"

Pauline dropped her hands with one look, and turned away. Her lips were quivering; her face
had the stricken look of one who has received a cruel blow. She did not speak, but Rose was
full of remorse instantly.

"Oh, Pauline, you know I want to come to you. It would be too lovely. But it is so sudden.
I can't believe Aunt Lucy would like to have Miss Sampson with her."

"You had better speak to your aunt," returned Pauline in an icy voice. "I wash my hands of
the matter altogether. I did my best for you; but I see I was mistaken in thinking that you
really cared about our being together. It does not matter I can give up the flat and go back
to Mrs. Jephson's."

"Pauline, don't speak like that," begged Rose, with tears in her eyes. "You know how I love
being with you. If I could be certain Aunt Lucy would not fret for me, I should be only too
delighted to get away. I never feel more than half-alive here. But Miss Sampson could not do
for her what I do."

"Don't you think you may exaggerate your usefulness to your aunt, dear?" Pauline returned,
with a sneer. But with an effort she controlled her temper, and spoke the next words in a different
tone. "Miss Merivale seems really anxious for you to have a change, Rose. I think she understands
that you are bored and unhappy here."

"Oh, Pauline, you did not say that to her?" cried Rose, the blood rushing, up into her face.

"Of course not, darling. It was your music I spoke most of. But she does want you to come to
me. Go up and speak to her; you will see that she really wants it. You won't make difficulties,
Rose? Can't you see it is best for both of you to be apart for a time? Your aunt will learn
to do without you. When you come back you will be able to lead a much freer life. And think
of the happy time we shall have!"

But Rose's face did not light up as Pauline had expected, and it was with a very sober step
that she went up to her aunt's room. She had made up her mind to tell her aunt that she did
not want to go and stay with Pauline--that she had never really thought of leaving her. She
expected to be clasped and fondly kissed for being so ready to give up her visit; but she found,
to her hurt surprise, that Pauline had been right, and that her aunt was bent on her going
away for a time.

"It is a chance that may not happen again, Rosie," she said, tenderly stroking her bright hair.
"I have wanted you to have some really good music lessons for a long time, and Pauline and
Mrs. Metcalfe will be able to see that you get the best. And you have been looking pale lately.
You want a change; I know it has been dull for you. And I should like to have Rhoda here for
a time. I have just been talking to Tom about it. He thinks it an excellent plan. You would
like to go next week, wouldn't you, darling? Pauline is very anxious to have you. Before she
goes away we must settle how long you are to stay. Two months, I thought of. I can't spare
you longer than that, Rosie."

But, affectionate as these words were, and loving the kiss that accompanied them, Rose went
downstairs again with a sore heart. She was like those who pluck Dead Sea apples, and find
the fruit that looked so fair when out of reach turning to ashes in their hands.

CHAPTER VII.

APPLES OF SODOM.

One warm, beautiful morning, early in April, Rose was toiling rather wearily up the long flight
of stone steps leading to the flat. She had her violin, and she found it heavy. She was wishing
she had Tom with her to carry it.

Though Rose had not yet confessed it to herself, she was beginning to be a little homesick.
She missed the delicious freshness of Woodcote, its wide rooms and sunny gardens, the thousand
and one little comforts she had been too accustomed to to notice; but more, far, far more,
she missed the protecting fondness that had surrounded her all her life. It was only a fortnight
since she joined Pauline, but it seemed much longer. And June seemed a very long way off.

But she was looking forward to a great treat that afternoon. Paderewski was playing at St.
James's Hall, and she and Pauline were going early to get seats. They would have to wait two
hours or so, and might have to stand after all, but to Rose that was part of the afternoon's
enjoyment. She had quite agreed with Pauline that it would be foolish to go to the expense
of taking their tickets beforehand. She opened the door with her latch-key--that latch-key
still gave her a thrill of proud delight when she used it--and went in.

Pauline called to her from her room.

"Rosie, is that you, dearest? I want to speak to you."

Rose put down her violin and crossed the tiny entry. Pauline was standing before her looking-glass
doing her hair. She wore a soiled pink dressing-jacket elaborately trimmed with lace, and Rose
observed with a little shock that there were holes in the heels of her stockings. It was not
quite such a shock as it would have been a fortnight ago. Rose had discovered that Pauline
was very careless about little matters of this sort. On the bed was spread out her last new
dress--a charming combination of brown and gold, to be worn with a brown hat lined with yellow.

"Why, Pauline, you won't wear that dress this afternoon, will you?" asked Rose, glancing at
it. "It will get so crushed."

"My Rose, shall you be very disappointed? Madame Verney has asked me to go with her. She had
two tickets sent her, and Monsieur Verney had to go to Paris this morning. I am going there
to lunch. How I wish you were going with me, darling! But I could not refuse when Madame Verney
asked me, could I? I might have offended her."

The tears had rushed into Rose's eyes, but she drove them back. "I daresay Paderewski will
play again before I go," she said. "And it was kind of Madame Verney to ask you."

"Oh, as to kindness, she would have found it dull enough to go by herself, and she knows nobody
in London yet. But what do you mean about Paderewski playing again, Rosie? You'll go and hear
him this afternoon, won't you? I never thought of your staying at home."

"I promised Aunt Lucy I would not go to a concert by myself," Rose answered hastily. "I couldn't
go, Pauline."

"But she meant in the evening, Rosie. She couldn't mind your going this afternoon. Don't be
a silly child. You'll spoil my pleasure if you stay at home. Of course you must go."

"Oh, I couldn't," returned Rose. "I promised Aunt Lucy. Besides"--

"You little country mouse!" laughed Pauline. "I believe you are afraid to go. Who do you think
would eat you? Never mind, there is 'The Golden Legend' at the Albert Hall on Thursday. We'll
go to that. But I must be quick; I promised to be there early. Rosie, be my good angel, and
clean my shoes for me. You'll find the stuff in that box. I can't trust Mrs. Richards with
my kid shoes. No, not that box, darling, the one below it."

Rose, who was delicately fastidious about all her own belongings, could never understand how
Pauline allowed her room to be so untidy, and as she opened the box and took out the pot of
polish she blushed to find herself thinking of Aunt Dinah and her kitchen drawers in Uncle
Tom's Cabin. She took the boots away and cleaned them, and brought them back.

"Mrs. Richards isn't in the kitchen, Pauline. She hasn't gone, has she?"

"Poor dear little Rosie! Was she afraid she was going to be left all alone?" laughed Pauline.
"She has only gone to get me a hansom, dear. I shall spoil my dress if I go by omnibus, and
it is too far to walk. Have you five shillings in your purse you can lend me? I am hard up
till the end of the term."

Rose produced the five shillings, which was not by any means the first loan Pauline had asked
for. She hated herself for feeling so hurt and angry with her friend, and she was glad to lend
her the money she wanted. Life would become quite intolerable in the flat if she was going
to lose her belief in Pauline.

"Won't you think better of it and go to the concert?" Pauline said, when she was ready to start.
"It is really silly of you to stay at home, dearest. I wouldn't have accepted Madame Verney's
invitation if I had thought you would not go. But you see how it is, don't you? Her cousin
is at the French Embassy, and she is sure to get to know a lot of people. She may introduce
me to a great many pupils."

This sounded reasonable, and Pauline's voice was most kind and caressing, yet somehow the hurt
feeling remained in Rose's heart. She saw that Pauline was delighted to go. She did not really
care in the least about her disappointment. "He will be sure to play again," she answered,
"I shall go for a walk in the Park. What time shall you be back, Pauline?"

Pauline hesitated. "Don't expect me till the evening, darling. Madame Verney spoke about my
going back with her to tea. Shall you be very lonely? I never used to trouble about Clare.
She went her way, and I went mine. And"--

"You need not trouble about me," Rose flashed out, her colour rising. "I should be sorry to
spoil your afternoon, Pauline."

Pauline looked at her with grieved eyes. "It will make me most miserable if I leave you angry
with me. Don't you know that I would far, far rather have gone with you? Rosie, you know that,
don't you?"

But Rose had a stubborn love of truth, which prevented her from responding to this appeal as
Pauline wished.

"It would have been a pity for you to refuse Madame Verney," she said. "And I shall have a
nice afternoon. I will make some cakes, I think. I want to astonish Aunt Lucy and Wilmot when
I go home. I shall make Wilmot let me make Tom's birthday cake."

Pauline patted her cheek. "What a child you are still, Rosie! When you have been a month or
two in London, you will find yourself growing up. But I must start. How does this dress suit
me? Do you think there is just a little too much yellow about it?"

Rose could frankly say that the dress was perfect. She had never seen Pauline look better.
But she could not help hoping that she had changed her stockings as she watched her run lightly
down the stairs to the hansom.

She felt very downhearted as she closed the door and went back to the sitting-room. The room
was sweet with the primroses and white violets they had sent her from Woodcote the day before.
Rose felt herself pitying the flowers for being taken from the woods and sent to wither in
that stifling air. For it was stifling this afternoon. Even when she threw open the window,
no breath of coolness came to fan her burning face. The sky was cloudless, but yellow with
smoke, and a dull haze hung over the river.

Rose thought of Woodcote, where the great chestnuts were already in full leaf, and the gorse
common beyond the wood was a sheet of gold. An intense longing took hold of her to go home,
if only for an hour or two. She looked at her watch and saw that it was not yet one o'clock.
There was plenty of time to go to Woodcote and get back before Pauline returned. And how joyfully
surprised her aunt would be! She wondered she had not thought of it before.

An hour later she was in the train, speeding countrywards. She sat close to the window, looking
eagerly at the green fields and the budding trees. She no longer felt disappointed about the
concert. She was glad Madame Verney had invited Pauline to go with her.

Just outside the station for Woodcote the train came to a standstill. Rose from the window
had a full view of the white road down the hillside, and as she looked along it she caught
sight of an approaching carriage. It was a moment before she recognised the brown horses and
the broad figure of old Harris, her aunt's coachman. But directly afterwards she saw her aunt
and Rhoda Sampson, and Tom seated opposite to them.

The road passed close to the high embankment on which the train was standing. If they had looked
up, they must have seen her at the window. But they were too intent on their conversation.
Rose heard Tom laugh at something Rhoda said, and saw him turn to Miss Merivale as if she too
was enjoying the joke.

Rose could not see her aunt's face, her parasol shaded it; but she was not leaning back against
the cushions, as she usually did. She was bending a little forward, with her face turned towards
Rhoda. It was quite plain to Rose that it was Miss Sampson who was absorbing the attention
both of Tom and her aunt.

She stared after the carriage with angry, mystified eyes. It was her place Rhoda was sitting
in! She forgot how the long drives her aunt loved used to bore her. She felt that Rhoda Sampson
had no right to be sitting there, and it seemed to her positively cruel of her aunt and Tom
to be so happy when she was away.

She was half inclined to go back by the next train when she heard from the stationmaster that
they were gone to Guilford and would not be back till late. But on second thoughts she determined
to go on to Woodcote. Wilmot would be there, at any rate. She would be able to find out how
her aunt was.

She had the warmest of greetings from the old cook and housekeeper, whom she found at the linen
press upstairs, carefully examining her store of lavender-scented linen.

"Your aunt will be dreadfully disappointed, Miss Rosie. What a pity you didn't come a little
earlier! You could ha' gone to Guilford with them. They've gone about the new greenhouse Mr.
Tom is going to build. But come down to the dining-room, my dearie, and I'll get you some tea."

"No, no; finish what you were about," returned Rose, settling herself in the window-seat. The
linen press stood on a wide landing that had a window looking on the garden. It had always
been a favourite spot with Rose; in the deep-cushioned window-seat she had spent many a happy
afternoon. The linen press was of old oak, almost as old as the house. And opposite it stood
a finely-carved dower-chest with the date 1511 carved upon it. The landing-floor, like the
stairs, was of polished oak, and the wainscoted walls had one or two old pictures on them.

Rose looked round her, feeling as she had never felt before the beauty of her home. How fresh
it was, and roomy! And what a delicious scent of lavender came from the old linen press! "What
are you doing, Wilmot? I wish you would let me help you."

"No, thank you, my dearie. I've got what I wanted. It's this tablecloth Miss Sampson is going
to darn for me. She's the cleverest young lady with her needle I ever came across, and that
anxious to be useful."

"Then you like her?" asked Rose. She could not help a certain stiffness getting into her voice
when she mentioned Rhoda, though she was ready to laugh at herself for being jealous of her
aunt's companion.

"Nobody could help liking her, Miss Rosie. It's just like having a bit o' sunshine in the house.
The mistress would ha' missed you bad enough if she hadn't had Miss Sampson to cheer her up.
But nobody could feel lonely with her about. And it's wonderful what she knows about a garden."

"Do they have gardens in Australia?" asked Rose. It was the sort of remark Pauline might have
made. But Rose was feeling very cross.

Wilmot did not notice the spitefulness in her voice. "They seem to have lovely gardens out
there, my dearie. Miss Sampson was telling me of the different flowering trees they've got
when she was in the kitchen on Tuesday. I'd promised to show her how to make those drop cakes
you're so fond of, Miss Rosie. But I'll go and see about your tea. I wish you'd come this morning.
The mistress was saying only yesterday that she was longing to see you."

Rose went up to her room while tea was being made ready for her. It was all in perfect order,
as if ready for her to take possession of it at any moment. There was even a vase of fresh
primroses on the little table by the window. The room that had been prepared for Rhoda was
next to it. The door stood partly open, and Rose could not forbear taking one look. It was
only one look. She hurried on, feeling ashamed of her curiosity. But she got an impression
of exquisite neatness and freshness, and by some odd working of the law of contrast it was
Pauline's room she thought of as she ran downstairs.

In the dining-room she noticed with jealous eyes how carefully the plants in the flower-stands
before the windows had been tended, and with what care and skill the flowers on the table had
been arranged. Wilmot hung round her at tea, pressing her to eat all sorts of dainties, and
she could have easily learnt a great deal about Rhoda. The old servant seemed anxious to speak
of her, anxious to impress Rose with her sweetness and goodness.

But Rose cut her short. She refused to interest herself in the stranger who in a few weeks'
time would pass out of their lives again. And she grew cross at last at Wilmot's continual
praises of her.

She went back by an earlier train than she had intended. She found that her aunt and the others
would not return till dark; it was no good to wait for them.

She walked from Victoria to Chelsea along the Embankment, trying to convince herself that it
was good to be in London. But her step flagged as she went up the stone stairs, and when she
got to the flat and found that Pauline had not returned, a great flood of loneliness rushed
over her. She put her flowers down on the table, and, covering her face with her hands, she
burst into tears.

CHAPTER VIII.

AN INVITATION.

It was nearly ten o'clock when Pauline returned. Madame Verney had begged her so hard to stay
and keep her company that she had not been able to refuse, she told Rose, with many caresses.

"I have been thinking of you all the time, you poor darling. But what could I do? Felicie--she
begged me this evening to call her Felicie--was so bent on my staying. I am going to take you
to see her tomorrow. I talked so much about my little English Rose. And what have you been
doing with yourself? What a pity you did not go to the concert! It was glorious. We had delightful
seats. I never enjoyed a concert so much before."

"I have been to Woodcote," Rose broke in. "It was such a lovely afternoon I could not stay
indoors."

Pauline looked dismayed. "To Woodcote?" she said sharply. "What a strange idea, Rose! I thought
you were going into the Park. Was not Miss Merivale surprised to see you alone? I fancy she
thinks we are like the Siamese Twins--always together."

"I did not see Aunt Lucy. They had all gone to Guilford. I only saw Wilmot."

"Wilmot? That's the cook, isn't it? I never can remember servants' names. Well, did she condole
with you about the concert, and think me a wretch for deserting you? I am afraid Miss Merivale
will think so."

"I didn't say anything about the concert," returned Rose. "She talked about Miss Sampson chiefly.
She seems to think her perfect."

"I daresay," returned Pauline, with a yawn. "Those sort of people always hang together. She's
more of Wilmot's class than ours, you know. I wonder what your aunt thinks of her."

"Oh, Aunt Lucy thinks her perfect too," returned Rose, no longer able to keep her jealousy
out of her voice. "And so does Tom. I don't believe they miss me one little bit, Pauline."

"Did Wilmot tell you that?"

"No, but I am sure they don't. Little things she said made me think so."

"You silly child!" laughed Pauline. "Did you want your aunt to fret herself to death because
you weren't there to run her errands? You ought to be glad she finds Miss Sampson so useful.
She may be willing to let you stay on with me all the summer. Wouldn't that be delightful?
Why, what a gloomy little face! Rose, I believe you are angry because I accepted Felicie's
invitation. But I am not going to leave you alone again. I must remember you are not like Clare.
You are vexed with me, now confess it."

"I see you could not help it," Rose answered wearily. "And I was glad to go home. I shall go
again on Saturday. You must come with me, Pauline."

"Don't tell your aunt that I wanted you to go to the concert alone, then," said Pauline, with
a laugh. "She is such a dear old-fashioned thing, she might be shocked at me. And I believe
you were shocked, just a little. How Clare would have laughed at you!"

There was an expression of alarm in Pauline's eyes as she watched Rose. She began to fear that
she had really offended her by her behaviour. She had been so sure of her influence that she
had not thought it necessary to consider her, but she told herself now that she had been distinctly
foolish. And she tried her best to make Rose forget that she had been deserted for a new friend.
But she could not chase away the shadow from Rose's face. It was not her disappointment about
the concert which had brought it there. It was the feeling that she was not being missed at home.

Next morning she was practising her scales in the sitting-room, after Pauline had gone to give
some lessons, when Tom was ushered in by Mrs. Richards. Rose ran to meet him with a glad cry.

"Oh, Tom, this is nice! Has Aunt Lucy come with you?"

"No; she sent me. She wants you and Miss Smythe to spend Saturday to Monday with us. Why didn't
you let us know you were coming yesterday, Rosie? Aunt Lucy was so disappointed when she found
you had come down."

"I didn't think of it till the middle of the day. You had gone to Guilford, they told me. Wasn't
that too far for Aunt Lucy?"

"Why should it be?" asked Tom in a surprised tone. "She has often driven as far as that. She
seemed to enjoy it. She is certainly stronger, Rosie. But you will see on Saturday. You look
rather pale. Come out with me. If you'll ask me to lunch, I can stay."

Rose hesitated. "I don't think you would like Mrs. Richards' cooking, Tom. I would rather you
wouldn't stay."

"You inhospitable sister! Well, I'll ask you to lunch with me. Run and put your hat on and
let us go out. It is a glorious morning."

He watched her rather impatiently as she got the case and began to put her violin away. He
was anxious to get her out into the open air. It distressed him to see how pale she was. And
he had an uneasy feeling that he had been neglecting his little sister lately. For days he
had hardly thought of her.

"You aren't practising too hard, I hope, Rosie?" he said kindly. "You mustn't overdo it, you know."

"Oh, I don't practise too much," Rose returned. She did not tell him that she found it impossible
to practise except when Pauline was out. Pauline's neuralgia came on directly she began to
play. "And how does Miss Sampson suit, Tom? I hope she looks after Aunt Lucy properly?"

Tom flushed up. "You will see for yourself on Saturday, Rosie. Aunt Lucy is very fond of her."

"Yes, Wilmot told me that."

Tom gave his sister a hasty glance, was on the point of saying something, but checked himself.
And there was a moment's silence before he spoke. "I wish you had not settled to stay here
till June, Rosie. We want you at home."

It was in a choked voice Rose answered him. "I don't believe you do want me. Aunt Lucy has
got Miss Sampson. She doesn't want me."

Tom again paused a moment before he spoke. Each time Rose mentioned Rhoda in that slighting
tone it roused his anger against her. But he told himself that Rose did not know Rhoda yet,
and he must wait till they had seen something of each other before he could expect Rose's sympathy.
He spoke very calmly and reasonably after the pause.

"Did you wish Aunt Lucy to be miserable while you were away, Rose? It was your own wish to
go. Surely you ought to be glad that she has found someone to fill your place."

He felt he had said the wrong thing before Rose turned on him, her eyes flashing. "How could
Miss Sampson, a stranger, fill my place? Tom, you are horrid!"

"Not at all," he said stoutly, bent on defending the position he had taken up. "I don't want
to hurt you, Rosie; but look at the thing reasonably. Remember that you told me you were bored
to death at home, that you would give anything to live in London all the year round. I didn't
believe you. But suppose you had really wanted it? You couldn't have expected to keep your
place at home and yet have the freedom of a life like this. If a girl gives up her home duties,
she must take the consequences."

"I have only been away a fortnight," said Rose, with a trembling lip, "and I shall feel nothing
but a visitor when I go back on Saturday. You--you only ask me because I went home yesterday
and found you gone. I don't believe you want me a bit." And, to Tom's distress and amazement,
Rose, poor little homesick Rose, burst into tears.

"I wish you would go back with me this minute and you'd find out whether we wanted you," he
exclaimed, drawing her hands down from her face. "You silly child, what would Aunt Lucy say
if she heard you talking such nonsense? Rosie, just listen to me a moment. I am going to tell
you something I haven't even told Aunt Lucy yet, though I believe she guesses. Don't cry any
more. Just listen to me."

The quiver in Tom's voice made Rose look wonderingly at him. It was very unlike him to show
any emotion. His cool, matter-of-fact way of looking at things had often irritated her. But
she saw now that he was deeply moved. And the reason of his agitation suddenly flashed upon her.

"Oh, Tom!" she faltered out.

"Rosie, you'll try to like her?" he said eagerly. "I'm not sure--I'm sure of nothing, except
that I shall never be happy again unless--Rosie, you will be nice to her? You don't know her.
There is nobody like her. You won't be able to help liking her, I'm sure of that."

Rose was still looking at him with wide-open, wondering eyes.

"But, Tom, is she--is she a lady?" she faltered.

He frowned. "She hasn't sixteen quarterings on her shield, if you mean that. But you won't
ask the question again when you have seen her, Rose."

Rose did not remind him that she had seen her. She was trying to recall her as she sat at the
side table busy over her typewriting. Her jealousy of Rhoda had somehow vanished in the light
of Tom's wonderful confession. She was eager to see the girl again who might one day be her sister.

"Do you really think Aunt Lucy knows, Tom?" she asked in a doubtful voice. Tom's future wife
had been often a subject for conversation between Miss Merivale and Rose. And of the two, Miss
Merivale had been the more ambitious in her wishes. She had seemed to think that hardly anyone
could be good enough for Tom.

"I'm sure she knows," returned Tom, with conviction. "But don't say anything to her, Rosie.
I shouldn't have told you unless"--

"I'm glad you told me, Tom," said Rose, drawing a deep breath. "And I'm sure I shall like her.
I'm sure she must be nice."

Tom beamed at her. "But you did see her for a moment, Rosie. She came here while you were staying
with Miss Smythe last month."

"Yes; she sat at that table, and wrote the letters," Rose said, nodding towards the little
side table in the corner. "She had a brown dress on, I remember. Tom, am I expected to say
that I thought her very pretty? I hardly looked at her."

"Well, you will see her on Saturday," Tom said.

Rose noticed that his voice sounded quite different when he spoke of Rhoda. And there came
a look into his face she had never seen there before. It was impossible for her to cherish
any jealous feelings in face of the great fact that Tom was in love. It thrilled her to think
of it.

That evening, when Tom was gone, and she and Pauline were sitting together in their little
sitting-room, she let her book lie unheeded on her lap, while she looked forward dreamily into
the future. She took it for granted that Tom and Rhoda would marry. It seemed quite out of
the question that Tom could be refused. How strange it would be to have a sister! She had so
often wished for a sister. She hoped Rhoda would soon learn to love her. She thought of her
quite naturally as Rhoda now, and was tremulously eager to see her again. She was sure that
the girl Tom loved must be worthy of his love. And the fact that he had made her his confidante
had taken all bitterness out of her heart. She was proud that he had trusted her.

"Rosie, whatever is your little head full of?" asked Pauline suddenly. She had been watching
her for some moments, unable to interpret the shining, far-off look in her blue eyes.

Rose pave a start and looked hastily round. "I was thinking of Tom," she said, feeling her
colour rise.

"Tom ought to be flattered," laughed Pauline. "I believe you had forgotten my existence. How
you started when I spoke! Where were you? At Woodcote?"

"I fancy so," said Rose, getting up and stretching her hands above her head. "Shall we have
supper now, Pauline? I wonder why that lamp smells so. Ours never do at home. I must ask Wilmot
how to clean it. I am sure Mrs. Richards can't do it properly."

"I don't suppose she does, my dear. I believe Sampson tried to teach her. She's a domestic
genius, isn't she? I am beginning to feel grateful to Sampson. If your aunt had not heard of
her you wouldn't have come to me."

"Pauline, I wish you would not speak of her like that," said Rose, with a note of irritation
in her voice. "Why do you?"

"Why shouldn't I? It isn't as if she was a lady. One of her uncles is a butcher; she told Clare
so."

"I don't see why she should be ashamed of it," returned Rose, answering Pauline's tone rather
than her words. "It's what people are in themselves that matters, not what trade their relations
belong to. But Miss Sampson has no relations of her very own. The M'Alisters adopted her. And
Aunt Lucy thinks that her uncle might have been Cousin Lydia's husband. It is that which made
Aunt Lucy so interested in her at first. For, you know, if Cousin Lydia's little girl had lived,
she would have had Woodcote, and not Tom. And she and her father would have come to England
when Uncle James died."

Pauline was watching Rose's face curiously. She did not feel any interest in Cousin Lydia and
her husband, but she could not understand Rose's change of attitude towards Rhoda Sampson.
One explanation occurred to her--a delightful one. Had Rose made up her mind to spend the summer
in London with her? Was this the reason she felt glad that her aunt had someone she liked to
take her place?

"Well, as I said before, Rosie, I am grateful to Miss Rhoda Sampson," she said laughingly.
"If she was not at Woodcote, you would not be here. And I shall get more and more grateful
to her as the weeks go on. I may get to love her in time, if she enables us to spend the summer
together. You are quite happy about your aunt now, aren't you, my Rose?"

Rose looked aghast at the prospect of spending the whole summer in the flat. She hardly knew
how she was to endure it till June.

"I must go home in June, Pauline," she said hastily. "I couldn't stay longer than that."

"Well, we shall see," said Pauline gaily. "You won't talk so lightly about going back when
you have had a few more weeks of freedom, Rose. And if your aunt is so well provided for, there
will be no need for you to go back. You won't be wanted."

"Oh yes, I shall be," Rose answered, with a swelling heart. Tom had made her feel sure of that.
"Pauline, please don't think about my staying here after June. I can't stay. I want to go home."

"You haven't forgiven me for that wretched concert!" Pauline exclaimed.

"I haven't thought of it again. It isn't that, Pauline. How could it be? But I want to go home."

"You will be miserable, just as you were before. Remember how you talked to me. You were bored
to death."

Rose flushed scarlet. "I wasn't. Or if I was, I don't mean to be so silly again."

Pauline looked at her with an angry glance. "You are a homesick baby, Rose, that is the long
and short of it. I gave you credit for being grown-up. It was a mistake you coming here at
all. Clare didn't get homesick."

"Clare had her work," answered Rose, knitting her pretty brows and looking miserably at Pauline's
angry face. "I am doing nothing I couldn't do as well at home. I could come up once a week
for lessons. Pauline, don't be angry. You didn't really think I should stay on after June,
did you?"

"I gave you credit for meaning what you said," returned Pauline harshly. "And what you said
was true. You were not happy at home. In the preface prefixed to Roper's Life of Sir Thomas More, p. xix.

(edit. 1716), he describes himself "as leading the life of an ascetic." In the preface to the Annals
of Dunstable Priory, his bibliographical diligence is evinced by his saying he had "turned over
every volume in the Bodleian Library." In one of his prefaces (to which I am not able just now
to refer) he declares that he was born--like our British tars--"for
action:" and indeed his activity was sufficiently demonstrated; for
sometimes he would set about transcribing for the press papers which
had just been put into his hands.

Thus, in the Antiquities of Glastonbury, p. 326, he writes, "the two following old evidences
were lent me to-day by my friend the Hon. Benedict Leonard Calvert, Esq." His excessive regard
to fidelity of transcription is, among many other evidences that may be brought forward, attested
in the following passage: "Have taken particular care (saith Mr.
Harcourt, in his letter to me from Aukenvyke, Sep. 25, 1734) in the
copying; well knowing your exactness."

Benedict Abbas, vol ii., 870. But this servility of transcription was frequently the cause of
multiplying, by propagating, errors.

If Hearne had seen the word "faith" thus disjointed--"fay the"--he
would have adhered to this error, for "faythe."

As indeed he has committed a similar one, in the Battle of Agincourt,
in the appendix to Thomas de Elmham: for he writes "breth reneverichone"--instead
of "brethren everichone"--as Mr. Evans has properly printed it, in
his recent edition of his father's Collection of Old Ballads, vol.
ii., 334.

But this may be thought trifling.

It is certainly not here meant to justify capriciousness of copying; but surely an obvious corruption
of reading may be restored to its genuine state: unless, indeed, we are resolved to consider
antiquity and perfection as synonymous terms.

But there are some traits in Hearne's character which must make us forgive and forget this blind
adherence to the errors of antiquity. He was so warm a lover of every thing in the shape of
a BOOK that, in the preface to Alured of Beverley, pp. v. vi., he says that he jumped almost
out of his skin for joy, on reading a certain MS. which Thomas Rawlinson
sent to him ("vix credi potest qua voluptate, qua animi alacritate,
perlegerim," &c.).

Similar feelings possessed him on a like occasion: "When the pious author (of the Antiquities
of Glastonbury) first put it (the MS.) into my hands, I read it over with as much delight as
I have done anything whatsoever upon the subject of antiquity, and
I was earnest with him to print it," p. lxxviii.

Hearne's horror of book-devastations is expressed upon a variety of occasions: and what will
reconcile him to a great portion of modern readers--and especially
of those who condescend to read this account of him--his attachment
to the black-letter was marvelously enthusiastic!

Witness his pathetic appeal to the English nation, in the 26th section of his preface to Robert
of Gloucester's Chronicle, where he almost predicts the extinction
of "right good" literature, on the disappearance of the black-letter!

And here let us draw towards the close of these HEARNEANA, by contemplating a wood-cut portrait
of this illustrious Bibliomaniac; concerning whose life and works
the reader should peruse the well-known volumes published at Oxford
in 1772, 8vo.: containing the biographical memoirs of Leland, Bale,
Hearne, and Wood.

The library of Hearne was sold in February, 1736, by Osborne the book-seller; "the lowest price
being marked in each book."

The title-page informs us of what all bibliomaniacs will be disposed
to admit the truth, that the collection contained "a very great variety
of uncommon books, and scarce ever to be met withal," &c. There is,
at bottom, a small wretched portrait of Hearne, with this well known
couplet subjoined:

Pox on't quoth Time to Thomas Hearne, Whatever
I forget you learn.

Let the modern collector of Chronicles turn his eye towards the 15th
page of this catalogue--nos.

384, 390--and see what "compleat and very fair" copies of these treasures were incorporated
in Hearne's extensive library!]

A little volume of book chit-chat might be written upon the marvellous
discovesies and voluminous compilations of Bagford and Hearne: and
to these, we may add another unique bibliomaniac, who will go down
to posterity under the distinguished, and truly enviable, title of
"The Musical Small-Coal Man;"

I mean, master THOMAS BRITTON. Yes, Lisardo; while we give to the foregoing characters their full
share of merit and praise; we admit that Bagford's personal activity
and manual labour have hardly been equalled--while we allow John Murray
to have looked with sharper eyes after black-letter volumes than almost
any of his predecessors or successors--while we grant Thomas Hearne
a considerable portion of scholarship, an inflexible integrity, as
well as indefatigable industry, and that his works are generally interesting,
both from the artless style in which they are composed, and the intrinstic
utility of the greater part of them, yet let our admiration be "be
screwed to its sticking place," when we think upon the wonderous genius
of the aforesaid Thomas Britton; who, in the midst of his coal cellars,
could practise upon "fiddle and flute," or collate his curious volumes;
and throwing away, with the agility of a harlequin, his sombre suit
of business-cloths, could put on his velvet coat and bag-wig, and
receive his concert visitors, at the stair-head, with the politeness
of a Lord of the Bedchamber!

LOREN. In truth, a marvellous hero was this Small-Coal Man! Have you many such characters to
notice?

LYSAND. Not many of exactly the same stamp. Indeed, I suspect that Hearne, from his love of magnifying
the simple into the marvellous, has a little caricatured the picture. But Murray seems to have
been a quiet unaffected character; passionately addicted to old books of whatever kind they chanced
to be; and, in particular, most enthusiastically devoted to a certain
old English Chronicle, entitled Rastell's Pastime of (the) People.

PHIL.

I observed a notification of the re-appearance of this Chronicle in some of the Magazines or
Reviews: but I hope, for the benefit of general readers, the orthography will be modernized.

LOREN.
I hope, for the sake of consistency with former similar publications,[369] the ancient garb
will not be thrown aside. It would be like--what Dr. Johnson accuses Pope of having committed--"clothing
Homer with Ovidian graces."

[Footnote 369: The ANCIENT CHONICLES of the history of our country
are in a progressive state of being creditably reprinted, with a strict
adherence to the old phraseology.

Of these Chronicles, the following have already made their appearance: HOLINSHED, 1807, 4to.,
6 vols.; HALL, 1809, 4to.; GRAFTON, 1809, 4to., 2 vols.; FABIAN, 1811, 4to. This latter is not
a mere reprint of the first edition of Fabian, but has, at the bottom,
the various readings of the subsequent impressions.

The index is copious and valuable. Indeed, all these re-impressions have good indexes. The
public will hear, with pleasure, that ARNOLD, HARDING, and LORD BERNERS'
translation of FROISSARD, and RASTELL, are about to bring up the rear
of these popular Chroniclers.]

LYSAND.

Much may be said on both sides of the question. But why are we about to make learned dissertations
upon the old English Chronicles?

LIS. Proceed, and leave the old chroniclers to settle the matter themselves.

Who is the next bibliomaniac deserving of particular commendation?

LYSAND. As we have sometimes classed our bibliomaniacs in tribes, let me now make you acquainted
with another Trio, of like renown in the book-way: I mean Anstis,
Lewis, and Ames.

Of these in their turn.

ANSTIS[370] stands deservedly the first in the list; for he was, in
every respect, a man of thorough benevolent character, as well as
a writer of taste and research.

I do not know of any particulars connected with his library that merit a distinct recital; but
he is introduced here from his connection with the two latter bibliographers.

LEWIS[371] is known to us, both as a topographer and bibliographical antiquary. His Life of
Caxton has been reprinted with additions and corrections; and, in
particular, his edition of Wicliffe's New Testament has been recently
put forth by the Rev. Mr. Baber, in a handsome quarto volume, with
valuable emendations.

Lewis was a sharp censurer of Hearne, and was somewhat jealous of the typographical reputation
of Ames. But his integrity and moral character, as well as his love of rare and curious books,
has secured for him a durable reputation. Of AMES, and here--though a little out of order--I
may add HERBERT--the public has already heard probably "more than
enough."

They were both, undoubtedly, men of extraordinary mental vigour and bodily activity in the
darling pursuit which they cultivated.[372] Indeed, Herbert deserves
high commendation; for while he was rearing, with his own hands, a
lofty pyramid of typographical fame, he seems to have been unconscious
of his merits; and, possessing the most natural and diffident character
imaginable, he was always conjuring up supposed cases of vanity and
arrogance, which had no foundation whatever but in the reveries of
a timid imagination.

His Typographical Antiquities are a mass of useful, but occasionally
uninteresting, information.

They are as a vast plain, wherein the traveller sees nothing, immediately, which is beautiful
or inviting; few roses, or cowslips, or daisies; but let him persevere,
and walk only a little way onward, and he will find, in many a shelter'd
recess, "flowers of all hue," and herbs of all qualities: so that
fragrance and salubrity are not wanting in this said plain, which
has been thus depicted in a style so marvellously metaphorical!

[Footnote 370: The reader will be pleased to consult the account of Earl Pembroke, p. 325, ante,
where he will find a few traits of the bibliomaniacal character of ANSTIS. He is here informed,
from the same authority, that when Anstis "acquainted BAGFORD that
he would find in Rymer a commission granted to Caxton, appointing
him ambassador to the Duchess of Burgundy, he (Bagford) was transported
with joy."

Of HEARNE he thus speaks: "I am ashamed that Mr. Hearne hath made so many mistakes about the
translation of Boetius, printed at Tavistock; which book I had, and
gave it to the Duke of Bedford."

But in another letter (to Lewis) Anstis says, "I lent this book to one Mr. Ryder, who used me scurvily,
by presenting it, without my knowledge, to the Duke of Bedford." There are some curious particulars
in this letter about the abbey of Tavistock.

Anstis's Order of the Garter is a valuable book; and will one day, I prognosticate, retrieve
the indifferent credit it now receives in the book-market.

The author loved rare and curious volumes dearly; and was, moreover, both liberal and prompt
in his communications. The reader will draw his own conclusions on Anstis's comparative merit
with Lewis and Ames, when he reaches the end of the second note after
the present one.]

[Footnote 371: Concerning the Rev. JOHN LEWIS,
I am enabled to lay before the reader some particulars now published
for the first time, and of a nature by no means uninteresting to the
lovers of literary anecdote.

His printed works, and his bibliographical character, together with his conduct towards Ames,
have been already sufficiently described to the public: Typographical Antiquities, vol. i., 30-3. And
first, the aforesaid reader and lovers may peruse the following extract
from an original letter by Lewis to Ames: "I have no other design,
in being so free with you, than to serve you, by doing all I can to
promote your credit and reputation.

I take it, that good sense and judgment, attended with care and accuracy in making and sorting a
collection, suits every one's palate: and that they must have none at all who are delighted
with trifles and play things fit only for fools and children: such,
for the most part, as THOMAS HEARNE dished out for his chaps, among
whom I was so silly as to rank myself."

Again, to the same person, he thus makes mention of LORD OXFORD and Hearne: "I can truly say
I never took ill any thing which you have written to me: but heartily wish you well to succeed in
the execution of your projects. I han't sense to see, by the death of Lord Oxford, how much
more you are likely to make your account better. But time will shew.

I don't understand what you mean by his having a love to surprize people with his vast communications.
Dr. R(awlinson, qu.?) tells me he knew nobody who had so free a use of his Lordship's rarities
as T. Hearne, a sure proof of the exactness and solidity of his Lordship's judgment. But Hearne
answered, perhaps, his Lordship's design of making the world have a very great opinion of his collections,
and setting an inestimable value on them. And this Hearne attempted; but his daubing is, I think,
too coarse, and the smoke of his incense troublesome and suffocating." But it is to the loan
of a copy of Lewis's folio edition of the History of the Translations of the Bible, belonging
to my friend Mr. G.V. Neunburg, that I am indebted for the following further, and more interesting,
particulars.

This valuable copy, illustrated with some rare prints, and charged
with numerous MS. memoranda, contains some original letters to Lewis
by the famous Dr. White Kennet, Bishop of Peterborough: from which
these extracts are taken.

"Jan. 23, 1720-1. Dear Sir; I thank you for your kind acceptance of the advice to my clergy:
well meant, I pray God well applied. I have wisht long to see your Life of Wiclif, and shall
now impatiently expect it. I am not surprised that a man of dignity, near you, should be jealous
of publishing an impartial account of that good old evangelical author, &c. I have a mighty veneration
for Wicliff, and am the more angry with Mr. Russell for deceiving
the world in his promise of the Bible, after proposals given and money
taken.

But he has in other respects behaved so very basely that, forgiving him, I have done with him
for ever. I would not have you discouraged, by an ungrateful world, or by a sharp bookseller.
Go on, and serve truth and peace what you can, and God prosper your
labours."

Signed "Wh. Peterbor." "Feb. 20, 1720-1. You perceive your own unhappiness in not being able to
attend the press.

I cannot but importune you to revise the whole, to throw the additions and corrections into
their proper places, to desire all your friends and correspondents to suggest any amendments, or
any new matter; in order to publish a new correct edition that will
be a classic in our history, &c.--If the booksellers object against
a second edition till the full disposal of the first, I hope we may
buy them off with subscription for a new impression; wherein my name
should stand for six copies, and better example I hope would be given
by more able friends.

I pray God bless your labours and reward them." Several letters follow, in which this amiable prelate
and learned antiquary sends Lewis a good deal of valuable information for his proposed second
edition of the Life of Wicliffe; but which was never put to press.

 How fortunate it was that Miss Merivale
heard me mention you, Miss Sampson! She noticed the name at once. It is quite certain, isn't
it, that you are related to her through her sister's marriage?"

"Miss Merivale insists on thinking so," said Rhoda quietly. "But I cannot be sure of it."

"Don't you remember your own people at all? I can feel for you, if that is so. My father and
mother died while I was a baby. Can you remember your mother? I wish I could."

"No, I cannot remember her."

"And your father?"

"Just a little."

Rhoda's cold, brief replies checked Pauline. She did not find it so easy to pump Rhoda as she
had expected. She put the photograph down, and got up with a yawn. "I am keeping you up," she
said. "May I have the matches? Thank you. Good-night." She gave Rhoda one of her most charming
smiles as she spoke; but Rhoda's good-night was studiously cold. She had no desire to accept
the olive branch Pauline was holding out to her.

CHAPTER X.

A CONFESSION.

The more Pauline thought of it the more she felt convinced that she had solved the mystery
of Miss Merivale's sudden interest in Rhoda. And she spent a long time in considering what
was the best use she could make of her discovery.

Her first idea had been to disclose the truth to Rhoda herself, and thus establish a claim
to her gratitude. But something in Rhoda's manner the night before made her hesitate. And she
felt half inclined to believe that her best plan would be to speak to Miss Merivale and assure
her that she could be trusted to keep silent.

She was still undecided when she went into the garden next morning to help Rose pick the flowers
for the table.

Rhoda was already in the garden. Old Jackson, the gardener, had come to the house to seek her
directly after breakfast.

"Jackson expects Rhoda to spend half the day in his company," Miss Merivale said, with a laugh.
"He won't sow a seed without asking her opinion first. My opinions he has always laughed to scorn."

"And mine too," said Rose, with a merry glance at Rhoda. "He has always been a regular despot
about the garden. How have you managed to subdue him, Miss Sampson?"

"I expect he has found out that Miss Sampson knows more than he does," said Pauline smilingly.
"I want you to teach me something about flowers while I am here, Miss Sampson. I have schemes
for a flower-box outside our windows at the flat. Don't you think that would be a delightful
plan, Rosie?"

Rhoda made some fitting response, but Pauline discerned the coldness in her voice. She said
angrily to herself that Rhoda did not deserve to know what she could tell her. And ten minutes
later she had fully made up her mind to speak to Miss Merivale. It was another discovery which
had led her to a decision. She had wandered on before Rose towards the end of the garden, where
an archway through a clipped yew hedge led to the stables and farm buildings. Her steps made
no sound on the turf path, and she suddenly came in sight of Tom and Rhoda standing close to
the archway. Rhoda had her gardening gloves and apron on, and a trowel in her hand. She had
just been sowing seeds in the bed that ran along the yew hedge. Tom had come through the archway
to bid her good-bye before starting on his long ride.

"I wish I was going to Bingley woods with you," he said. "You will have a lovely day."

"Yes, it will be beautiful," Rhoda answered, finding it just as difficult as Tom did to speak
these ordinary words in an ordinary tone. A blush came over her face, and she dropped her eyes.
She could not meet his eager glance. For one moment Tom was silent--a moment that was eloquent
to them both. Then, "Rhoda!" he said, almost below his breath.

It was at that moment Pauline turned the corner by the great lilac bushes and caught sight
of them. Rhoda came towards her instantly, showing no sign of discomposure except a controlled
quivering at the corners of her firm lips; but Pauline was not deceived by her calmness. Her
only doubt was as to whether Tom shared Miss Merivale's knowledge as to Rhoda's parentage.
And after a moment or two's consideration she decided that he did not. It was impossible to
look at Tom and doubt his perfect honesty.

After a short talk, he went through the archway to start on his ride, and Pauline returned
to Rose, leaving Rhoda to her gardening.

"Rose, why didn't you warn me?" she said in a tone of laughing reproach when she joined her.
"I am afraid your brother will never forgive me. I have just interrupted a tete-a-tete."

"What do you mean, Pauline?" asked Rose, jarred through and through by her friend's tone.

"Is it possible you don't guess, you blind girl? But perhaps you would rather I did not speak
of it? I thought I could say anything to you, Rosie."

"You spoke of Tom," Rose answered. "Of course I know what you mean, Pauline."

"Ah, you are jealous, Rosie."

Rose flashed a glance at her. "I am not jealous. I am not so horrid as that. But don't make
a joke of it, Pauline, please don't."

Pauline burst into a loud laugh. "Oh, Rosie, what a solemn little face! But, seriously, do
you think the course of true love is likely to run smooth? Surely your aunt will object. We
are not all so unworldly and sentimental as you."

"Aunt Lucy is glad, I am sure of it. And so am I," said Rose stoutly, "I am beginning to see
what Rhoda is."

"You think Miss Merivale will be glad? Well, you are odd people. I shall begin to think Miss
Sampson must have a fairy godmother. It's a new version of Cinderella, isn't it?"

This made Rose too angry to answer, and she walked away to the next flower-bed to put an end
to the conversation. Pauline did not attempt to follow her. After standing in deep thought
for a moment, she returned to the house.

Miss Merivale was sitting in the drawing-room busy with her embroidery. She looked up with
a smile as Pauline entered. "I was just wishing you or Rose would come in, Miss Smythe," she
said. "I am not sure whether blue or green would be best for the centre of this flower."

Pauline gravely examined the embroidery, and gave her opinion. Then she took up the basket
of silks. "May I sort these for you, Miss Merivale?"

"Oh, do, my dear. The kittens got hold of the basket just now and made sad work with it."

Pauline seated herself at a little distance and began quickly and skilfully to arrange the
basket, glancing once or twice at her companion. Miss Merivale looked very composed and cheerful.
She was intent on her embroidery, and seemed in no hurry to talk.

It was Pauline who began the conversation.

"I have just been talking to Miss Sampson in the garden, Miss Merivale. How very happy she
seems here!"

"Yes, I think she is happy, my dear."

"And if you and Rosie had not come to the flat that afternoon, you might never have heard of
her. How strangely things come about, don't they, dear Miss Merivale?"

"I am very glad we came," Miss Merivale answered. "What colour shall I use for this leaf, my
dear? My eyes are not what they used to be, and I like to take advice."

Pauline bent forward to look, and patiently discussed the question; but she spoke of Rhoda
again directly it was decided. "But something still more strange might have happened, Miss
Merivale," she went on lightly. "Suppose Miss Sampson had been your own niece? She might have
been. People who are supposed to be lost in the bush aren't always lost, and--Oh, Miss Merivale,
what have I said?"

Miss Merivale had dropped her work, and was staring at Pauline with wide-open, terrified eyes.
She made no effort to answer her. She was incapable of speech.

"What have I said?" repeated Pauline. She got up and came close to Miss Merivale, kneeling
down beside her. "You are angry with me. I have hurt you. Is it possible that Rhoda is your
niece, and that you do not want her to know it? But you must trust me. Please trust me, Miss
Merivale."

Miss Merivale put her hand up to her eyes. She spoke in a stunned voice. Pauline's words had
suddenly torn away the veil which had hidden the meaning of her own conduct from her.

"Yes, Rhoda is my niece," she said. "She is my sister Lydia's little girl. What made you guess it?"

Pauline was slightly taken aback at this speech of Miss Merivale's. She had not expected her
to admit the truth so readily. "Miss Merivale, you must trust me," she said in a low, eager
voice. "I understand exactly why you want it to be a secret. No one shall ever know from me."

Miss Merivale pushed her chair back, freeing herself from the touch of Pauline's hands. A shock
of repulsion had gone through her.

"It will be no secret after to-day," she said in the same stunned, heavy voice. "I shall tell
Tom this afternoon. I ought to have told him before."

Tom came home late in the afternoon. He expected to find that his aunt and the girls had all
gone to Bingley woods, and he only went to the house to change his riding boots before going
to meet them. He passed through the archway in the yew hedge, marking with tender, happy eyes
the exact spot where Rhoda had stood that morning while they talked together. His feet lingered
a little as he went down the turf path to the house. Everything in the garden spoke to him
of Rhoda, and it was in the garden he had seen her first.

He went through the open window of the library and across the hall. As he reached the foot
of the stairs he was surprised to hear his aunt's voice.

She was standing at the drawing-room door, with her hand resting heavily on the jamb. It was
with difficulty she had crossed the room to call him on hearing his step. Her limbs were trembling
under her.

"I thought you had all gone to Bingley woods," Tom exclaimed. "Have the others gone?"

"Yes; I would not let them stay at home. I was feeling too tired to go."

"You caught cold yesterday in the porch," Tom said in a playful scolding voice. "You do want
a lot of looking after, Aunt Lucy. Have you a fire? The wind is keen, though the sun is so
bright. Here, let me make a better fire than this."

He knelt down on the rug, stirring the logs into a cheerful blaze. Miss Merivale sank down
on the sofa and watched him in silence. If Tom had looked attentively at her, he would have
seen that her face was grey with pain. She had spent some bitter hours since Pauline had spoken
to her that morning. Though she had done it for Tom's sake, she feared that he would find it
very hard to forgive her. And looking back over the last few weeks, she found it almost impossible
to understand how she could have been happy for a moment while keeping such a secret from him.

The knowledge that Pauline shared the secret had been like a light brought into a dark room.
Her shock of repulsion at Pauline's eagerness to convince her that she would be silent had
been followed by the sad reflection that she had no right to blame Pauline for being willing
to do what she herself had done for a month past.

"There, that is better," Tom said, getting up. "Let me draw your sofa close up to the fire.
Where is your knitting, Aunt Lucy? I know you can't have your afternoon nap without it."

But Miss Merivale did not laugh at the old joke that she pretended to be knitting when she
was really fast asleep. "Tom, sit down," she said. "I want to speak to you."

Tom hesitated. She had spoken in so low a tone he had not noticed how her voice trembled. "I
thought I would go to meet them, Aunt Lucy. They will be coming back by this time."

"Sit down," she repeated more urgently. "I want to speak to you. I must tell you before they
come home."

He was thoroughly startled now. "Has anything happened?" he said. "What is it?" He drew a chair
close to her and sat down, his square, honest face full of concern. "What is it, Aunt Lucy?"

She turned away from him. It was more difficult to speak than she had expected, though she
had known it would be very difficult. "Tom, it is about Rhoda," she said in a choked voice.

He straightened himself in his chair. "About Rhoda?" he echoed. She heard the challenge in
his grave voice.

"Yes, about Rhoda. I want to tell you why I asked her here. You know that I love her, Tom.
You know how happy it has made me to see that you"--

"Dear Aunt Lucy, I was sure you had guessed," Tom said in an eager voice. "And"--

"Tom, wait," she said breathlessly. "You don't understand me yet. Has it never struck you as
strange that I should have asked Rhoda to live here, that I should have treated her as a child
of my own?"

No, Tom was not able to say that he had thought it strange. Rhoda being Rhoda, it had seemed
to him most natural that his aunt should have loved her at first sight, just as he had done.
But his voice was anxious as he answered, "Aunt Lucy, I don't understand in the least what
you are driving at. What is it you want to tell me?"

She turned towards him, clasping her hands together. "Tom, Rhoda is Lydia's little girl. She
is my own niece. I have known it ever since the first day she came to see me."

He stared at her, not comprehending. "How can she be Cousin Lydia's child?" he asked. "She
would have known you were her aunt."

"She does not. She knows nothing. But, Tom, she is Lydia's daughter. I know it. I have known
it all these weeks."

"But why"--he began, and then stopped, a dark flush rising in his face. He knew why his aunt
had been silent.

"Tom, at first I tried to persuade myself I was mistaken," she faltered. "And then, when I saw"--

He made a quick gesture that was full of pain. The flush in his face had faded, leaving it
very white. "Aunt Lucy, do not speak of that," he said, turning his face aside.

She drew closer to him, putting her hand on his arm. "Tom, what do you mean?"

"Don't you see?" he returned, just glancing at her and then looking away again. "You have made
it impossible, Aunt Lucy. I could never ask her to marry me now."

The bitterness in his voice overwhelmed her. "Tom, you don't suppose she would believe that
you--Oh, what have I done? Tom, you will never forgive me!"

At the sound of the quick sob that choked her voice he turned quickly to her. "Aunt Lucy, do
not talk like that. What is done can't be undone. But let me understand. What proofs have you
that Rhoda is your niece? You must write to Mr. Thomson and tell him all you know. But he will
want proofs."

He spoke so quietly, she took courage. And she was able to speak fully to him. He listened
with grave intentness, asking a question now and then.

"We must write to this Mr. Harding," he said, when she had finished. "Mrs. M'Alister will be
sure to know his address. Shall I go up and see Mr. Thomson for you to-morrow, Aunt Lucy? I
think the first step is to tell him."

"And Rhoda, Tom?"

"Wait till I have seen Thomson. Though there seems no room for doubt. Aunt Lucy, I wish you
had told me at first."

How she wished it she tried to tell him, but her tears prevented her. She sobbed hysterically,
while he did his best to soothe her, forgetting his own pain at the sight of hers. When she
could speak, her first words were of Rhoda.

"Tom, you won't let this come between you? Tom dear, I know she loves you."

His face quivered all over. "I have no right to speak to her yet," he said. "Perhaps--but I
must wait. Can't you see it must be so? I shall have my own way to make in the world." He squared
his shoulders as he said it, as if eager to begin the struggle.

"Tom, I don't see it," his aunt burst out. But he would not let her go on. He could not bear
it. He felt that it was utterly impossible for him to ask Rhoda to marry him if she was heiress
of Woodcote and he without a penny he could call his own. If they had met knowing their relative
positions, it might have been different. But now he could make no claim on her. His aunt's
conduct had raised a barrier between them that could not be broken down till he had won an
independent position for himself.

Miss Merivale's heart ached as she looked at him, but she was far from understanding the full
bitterness of the blow she had inflicted on him.

Tom felt as if he had suddenly grown old. He left his aunt presently and went out into the
open air. He no longer felt inclined to go and meet the pony carriage, but he went through
the wood to the furzy common beyond. From there he could see the high road stretching like
a white ribbon across the downs.

No pony carriage was in sight, but a traction engine was lumbering heavily upwards, with a
man walking before it carrying a red flag. Tom was glad to see it disappear over the dip of
the hill. The lane from Bingley woods entered the high road lower down the hill. There was
no danger of Bob's nerves being shaken by the sight of the fiery-throated monster.

The road lay white and silent in the sunshine now. Tom sat down on a turf hillock, fixing his
eyes drearily upon it. He felt intensely miserable.

CHAPTER XI.

POLLY SMITH.

The expedition to Bingley woods was not a success. Pauline was in one of her worst tempers,
and treated Rose so rudely that the poor girl was more ashamed of her chosen friend than angry
with her.

To Rhoda, Pauline was all that was sweet and flattering. She had promised Miss Merivale to
say nothing to her; but she was eager to ingratiate herself with the girl whom she now knew
to be an heiress, and to make her forget how she had treated her while she was Clare's assistant.

Rhoda was strongly irritated by her advances. Pauline's snubs had never wounded her very deeply.
Rhoda only valued the good opinion of those whom she respected. But Pauline's eagerness to
make friends turned her indifference to something like violent dislike. She found it hardly
possible to speak civilly to her.

She went off at last into the depths of the wood, leaving Rose and Pauline together. Her irritation
soon passed away when she was alone. The basket she had brought to fill with primroses remained
empty in her hands. She wandered on, her eyes drinking in the beauty round her. Only the lower
boughs of the trees were in leaf as yet, and the wood was full of golden light. Primroses were
everywhere, and in the more open spaces celandines starred the ground with deeper yellow. In
a month the glades between the trees would be carpeted by bluebells. But there were no bluebells
yet. Spring was still in its infancy. The great oaks that skirted the wood stretched bare wintry
boughs over the flowers beneath them.

It was a time of hope, of delicate, exquisite promise; and Rhoda's lips curved with a happy,
dreamy smile, as she listened to the story the woods whispered to her that April day.

The deep voice of the clock in Bingley church tower recalled her to the necessity of going
back to her companions. It was four o'clock, the time they had fixed for starting homewards.
It was not with any pleasure that she thought of the long drive. She suspected that Pauline
and Rose had had a serious quarrel, and that Pauline's politeness to her arose from a wish
to vex Rose.

All the way to the woods Pauline had criticised Rose's driving, speaking with authority, as
if she had driven a pony carriage all her life. Rhoda could have laughed outright if she had
not been so angry.

She found the two girls ready to start for the village when she got back to the spot where
she had left them.

"Pauline wants to go round by the high road," Rose said, looking appealingly at Rhoda. "It
will make us much later at home. You can see the Abbey another day, Pauline. There isn't much
to see; is there, Miss Sampson?"

"It will not take us half an hour longer. How obstinate you are, Rosie!" exclaimed Pauline
irritably. "I will drive, and make Bob understand that he must hurry a little. Why should we
walk up that long tiresome lane to save his legs? There is no hill to speak of the other way,
you say. I am too tired to walk a step. I am not so strong as you are. Miss Sampson, don't
you agree with me that the high road will be much the better way for us?"

"We promised Miss Merivale that we would be back early," Rhoda said coldly. "I think it is
a pity to go out of our way."

"But we should be at home just as soon. Rose insists that we must all walk up the lane. I am
sure you are too tired to do it, Miss Sampson, if I was not. But Bob is to be considered before
either of us, eh, Rose?"

Rose walked down the turf slope towards the village without answering; she was too cross to
discuss the question any further.

A new complication arose when they reached the rustic inn where Bob and the carriage had been
left. One of Bob's shoes was found to be loose, and it was necessary to get it fixed before
starting for home.

Rose drew Rhoda aside, and spoke eagerly to her. "Miss Sampson, would you drive home with Pauline?
I could walk across the downs and be home in half an hour. I don't like to leave Aunt Lucy
so long alone."

"Will you let me go?" Rhoda answered, as eagerly as Rose had spoken. "I know the way quite
well. I would so much rather go, if you don't mind."

Rose could quite well understand that Rhoda must find Pauline's society unpleasant, even though
Pauline now appeared bent on being agreeable to her. "Are you sure you know the way?" she said
doubtfully. "But it is easy. You will see Woodcote when once you are on the top of the downs."

"I know the way quite well," Rhoda said, with a bright face. It was delightful to her to escape
the drive home with Pauline.

She started at once, and was soon on the top of the downs, enjoying the breezy expanse of beautiful
rolling country round her. Half an hour's rapid walking brought her to the furzy common close
to Woodcote woods. She had come down to it from the downs; and Tom, seated on his hillock,
with his eyes turned to the road, did not become aware of her presence till she was quite close
to him. He had been hidden by the gorse bushes from Rhoda till the moment before he started
up. And she would have shyly hurried on without speaking to him if the sound of her step had
not made him look round.

She hurriedly explained how she came to be there alone. "I don't think they will be back for
an hour or more," she said, looking at the white ribbon of road Tom had been watching for so
long. "The high road is much longer than the lane, isn't it?"

"Yes," said Tom briefly. He had forgotten all about the traction engine. In fact, he had hardly
understood what Rhoda was saying. His heart was heavy within him.

They turned and walked down the sunny bit of slope, where the bees were busy among the golden
gorse blossoms. Tom was not silent. He could not trust himself to be silent. He began to speak
of the meeting he had just been attending at Croydon. He gave Rhoda a vivid account of it,
which lasted till they got close to the house; then, with a hasty excuse of having forgotten
to tell Jackson something, he left her.

Rhoda walked on to the house with a calm, even step. Wilmot, who met her in the hall, and told
her that Miss Merivale was lying down and did not wish to be disturbed, noticed nothing unusual
about her. She stood and talked some minutes with the old servant before going upstairs to
her room. And she gave her a sunny smile as she left her. Even when she was alone, and had
shut the door between her and the world, she did not fling herself down by the bed and burst
into tears, as unhappy heroines so often do. She changed her dress, and carefully mended a
rent the briers had made in the one she took off. Then she got Hamblin Smith's Arithmetic and
her notebook, and began the hour's work she set herself every day. A tear or two did come--she
could not keep them back; but she worked steadily on. She would not even allow herself to think
how she could have offended Tom, or what the explanation of his changed manner could be. She
picked out the hardest examples in Complex Fractions she could find, and concentrated her mind
on them.

She was still working when Wilmot came to her door.

"Miss Rose and Miss Smythe have not come home, miss. Shall I send in tea? It is past six o'clock."

Rhoda opened the door. "I will go and ask Miss Merivale, Wilmot."

Wilmot looked doubtful. Her mistress had given strict orders that she was not to be disturbed.

"I will not go in," Rhoda said, as she saw her doubtful glance. "I will just knock softly.
If she is awake, she might be glad of a cup of tea."

Rhoda's first knock was not answered; but when she tapped softly again, she heard Miss Merivale's
voice telling her to come in. Miss Merivale was lying on the bed, with her face turned to the
wall. She reached out her hand for Rhoda's, and clasped it tenderly, but did not turn round.

"My head is very bad, darling. Tell Rose I won't have any tea. I want to keep quite quiet."

Rhoda did not tell her that Rose and Pauline had not returned. She was afraid she might be
alarmed. The deadly pallor of her face quite frightened her. She spoke to Tom when she went
downstairs.

"Miss Merivale looks very ill," she said, "and she won't let me do anything for her."

Tom was sitting at the table before the hall window, busy making flies for his trout fishing.
He was so intent on his work that he did not look up.

"She gets bad headaches. I should not be anxious. She always likes to be left alone."

Rhoda did not answer this. She went into the dining-room, where tea was laid ready, and sat
down in the broad window-seat with some needlework.

If Tom had come in then, she would have been very cold to him. Her pride was up in arms. But
he did not come near her; and for a miserable half hour Rhoda sat there alone, feeling as if
all life's music had suddenly stopped, and winter had taken the place of spring.

Wilmot came in at last to urge her to have some tea. "Miss Rosie may be stopping to tea at
the Rectory. It isn't any good for you and Mr. Tom to wait any longer."

Rhoda looked at the clock in some alarm. She had not been conscious of the lapse of time. "I
don't think Miss Rosie meant to stop anywhere, Wilmot. But they ought to be home. I hope nothing
has happened."

At that moment Tom entered the room. "It is getting very late," he said to Rhoda. "How long
did Jones mean to take to put that shoe right? Not very long, surely."

"Miss Merivale thought they would be at home by six o'clock," Rhoda answered.

"And it is seven now," Tom said, glancing at the clock. "It will be dark in half an hour. They
were coming by the high road all the way, didn't you say?"

"Yes; Miss Smythe did not want to go up the lane. But the high road is not very much longer,
is it, Mr. Merivale?"

"About two miles longer. But it is a better road. They ought to be home by this time."

Rhoda was standing by the window, and he came to her side and looked out. He carefully avoided
glancing at her, yet he knew that her face was very proud and cold.

"I think I will go down the road to meet them," he said. His voice shook a little. It was very
hard--it was almost harder than he could bear--to let her go on misunderstanding him. Yet how
could he explain?

"I wish they would come home," Rhoda answered. "Do go and meet them, Mr. Merivale. Miss Smythe
wanted to drive, and I do not trust her driving."

"Bob doesn't want much driving," Tom answered. But as he spoke he suddenly remembered the traction
engine crawling up the hill. For the first time he felt really alarmed. "I will go down the
road," he said, moving quickly from the window. "Though I daresay I shall meet them almost
at once."

Wilmot followed him into the hall. "Mr. Tom, where can they be?"

"Somewhere on the road between Bingley and our gates," he said lightly. "Don't alarm Miss Sampson
or my aunt, Wilmot. But send Ann round to the stables to tell Jack to get my horse ready. If
I do not see any sign of them on the road, I will ride towards Bingley."

He went off; and Rhoda, after watching him down the drive, crept upstairs to listen at Miss
Merivale's door. But as she crossed the landing the door opened, and Miss Merivale stepped
out, a black lace shawl framing the whiteness of her face.

"Rhoda, where has Tom gone?" she asked. "How still the house is! Haven't Rose and Miss Smythe
come back?"

"Not yet," answered Rhoda lightly. "Bob's shoe got loose, you know. They were delayed at the
village."

"But it is nearly dark. Something must have happened. Let us go down to the gate, Rhoda. I
am frightened."

Rhoda could not persuade her to let her go alone, and they went together down the drive. Tom
had just ridden off; they could hear the sound of his horse's feet on the hilly road. But when
that died away, a long period of silence ensued. They went out of the gates and down the hill
towards the station, Miss Merivale clinging to Rhoda.

It was after what seemed hours to them both that they heard a horse trotting rapidly towards
them. Miss Merivale leant against the low stone wall that divided the road on one side from
the common.

"Rhoda, that is Tom. I could tell Black Beauty's trot anywhere. Go on to meet him, dear. I
cannot go any farther."

Rhoda went quickly on. It was Tom; he sprang off his horse on catching sight of her.

"Miss Smythe has been badly hurt," he said. "She is at the Rectory. Rose is with her."

"Your sister is not hurt?"

"A bruise or two. They met that traction engine; Miss Smythe was driving, and tried to make
Bob pass it. The result was that Bob bolted down the hill."

They were walking quickly up the hill as he spoke. Rhoda told him that Miss Merivale was waiting
for them, and a couple of moments brought them to her side. She refused to accept at first
Tom's emphatic assurances that Rose had escaped with only a bruise or two, and begged him to
take her to the Rectory. Tom would not hear of her going. "Rose did not want to leave Miss
Smythe, or I would have brought her home, Aunt Lucy. She is perfectly well. Rose is a plucky
little girl She wasn't half as frightened as you are."

It was not till they got back to the house and he had made Miss Merivale drink the cup of tea
Wilmot brought her, that he allowed her to know how serious Pauline's injuries were.

"They fear concussion of the brain," he said. "I have promised Hartley to telegraph for her
friends. Can you give me their address?"

Miss Merivale hesitated. "I am afraid she has no near relatives, poor girl. I never heard her
speak of any."

"But she is continually calling for 'Granny,' Mrs. Hartley says. Her grandmother ought to be
here, if she has one. Excellent as has been all the work turned out by the Department I
have the honour to represent, I think I may fairly claim this as our
greatest achievement.

No less than nine firms have been employed in its construction, and I am proud to say that in
one of the principal portions of its intricate mechanism, fully seven-and-thirty different
parts, united by microscopic screws, are employed in the adjustment.

But allow me to explain.

[Does so, giving an elaborate and confusing account of the construction, showing that, without
the greatest care, and strictest attention to a series of minute precautions on the part of
the soldier, the weapon is likely to get suddenly out of order, and
prove worse than useless in action.

This, however, he artfully glides over in his description, minimising all its possible defects,
and finally insisting that no power in Europe has turned out such
a handy, powerful, and serviceable rifle.

Mrs. Britannia. Ah, well, I don't profess to understand the practical
working of the weapon.

But I have trusted you implicitly to provide me with a good one, and this being, as you tell me,
what I want, I herewith place it the hands of my Army.

(Presents the rifle to TOMMY ATKINS.) Here, ATKINS, take your rifle,
and I hope you'll know how to use it.

Tommy Atkins (with a broad grin). Thank'ee, Ma'am. I hope I shall, for I shall be in a precious
'ole if I don't.

[Flourish of newspaper articles, general congratulatory chorus on all sides, as Act-drop descends.

ACT
II.

A Battle-field in time of War. Enter TOMMY ATKINS with his rifle. In the interval, since the close
of the last Act, he is supposed to have been thoroughly instructed in its proper use, and,
though on one or two occasions, owing to disregard of some trifling precaution, he has found
it "jam," still, in the leisure of the practice-field, he has been generally able to get it right
again, and put it in workable order. He is now hurrying along in all the excitement of battle,
and in face of the enemy, of whom a batch appear on the horizon in
front of him, when the word is given to "fire."

Tommy Atkins (endeavours to execute the order, but he finds something "stuck," and his rifle
refuses to go off.) Dang it! What's the matter with the beastly thing!

It's that there bolt that's caught agin' (thumps it furiously in his excitement and makes matters
worse.) Dang the blooming thing; I can't make it go. (Vainly endeavours to recall some directions,
committed in calmer moments, to memory.) Drop the bolt? No! that ain't it. Loose this 'ere pin
(tugs frantically at a portion of the mechanism.) 'Ang me if I can make it go! (Removes a pin
which suddenly releases the magazine), well, I've done it now and
no mistake.

Might as well send one to fight with a broomstick. (A shell explodes just behind him.) Well,
I am in a 'ole and no mistake. [Battle proceeds with results as Act-drop falls.

* * * * *

OLD FRENCH SAW RE-SET.--FROM THE STANDARD, NOVEMBER 14:--

"The
duel between M. DÉROULÈDE and M. LAGUERRE occurred yesterday morning
in the neighbourhood of Charleroi, in Belgium. Four shots were exchanged
without any result. He was determined to find out at once how much
Mr. Harding knew about Rhoda's father and mother. "My aunt and I were talking about you yesterday,
Mr. Harding, but we had no idea that you were in England."

Mr. Harding turned his keen black eyes upon him. "No, I only landed last week."

"My aunt has some reason to believe that Miss Sampson is related to her," Tom hurried on. "You
knew her father well, I believe?"

Mr. Harding's answer was emphatic. "I should say I did, sir. Poor old Jack and I were boys
together. Why, he married a cousin of mine, as good as a sister. And we should have been partners
now if he hadn't died. Some people never understood Jack, and after Jenny died he got queerer
than ever; but he and I never had a cloud between us."

Tom had stopped still in the road. The ground seemed to be swaying under his feet, and something
caught him in the throat so that he could scarcely speak. "Was your cousin Rhoda's mother?"
he asked.

"Yes; she was their only child. I knew she was safe and happy with the M'Alisters, or I would
have looked after her more. I've no chick nor child of my own, and I mean Rhoda to have a big
slice of what I've got to leave."

Tom did not catch the last words clearly. "My aunt's sister married a Mr. James Sampson," he
hurried to say. "Was he related to Miss Sampson's father?"

"Ah, that was Jim. He got lost in the bush, poor fellow. He had his girl with him. Yes, he
was Jack's brother. They lived close together in Melbourne. I fancy Rhoda was named after Jim's
little girl. They were about the same age; but Jenny died when Rhoda was a year old, and Jack
left Melbourne for Adelaide."

When Tom and Mr. Harding reached the house, he went hastily in search of his aunt. He found
her in her own room, her eyes dim with weeping. She started up at the sight of his face.

"Oh, Tom, what have you come to tell me?"

In a few rapid words he made her understand. "You see how your mistake arose, Aunt Lucy. They
both had the same name, Rhoda and Cousin Lydia's little girl. And Cousin Lydia must have given
that locket to Rhoda's mother or to Rhoda's father for her when they left Melbourne. But come
down and speak to Mr. Harding. There is no need for him to know the mistake you fell into.
Let us forget it, Aunt Lucy."

At this, Miss Merivale's tears began to flow afresh. "Oh, Tom, I have told Rhoda."

"You told her? Why did you? I thought we had decided to wait till I had seen Thomson."

"Tom, I could not help it. She was so miserable, poor child. She tried to hide it, but she
could not hide it from me. She thought she had offended you. I do not know what she thought.
How could you treat her so differently? Do you think you will get her to forgive you?"

A glimmer of a smile showed itself in Miss Merivale's eyes as she spoke. But Tom could not
smile yet.

"Well, you told her," he said. "Did she believe you?"

"I don't know. But she declared that nothing would induce her to claim her rights if she had
any. She said there were no proofs, and if she had them she would not produce them. She spoke
very strongly, Tom."

Tom made no answer for a moment. "She has gone to the Rectory?" he said then.

"Yes, she was anxious to go. But she is going to walk home across the downs. I think she was
anxious to avoid you, Tom. No wonder! How could you make her so unhappy?"

Tom did not point out that he had been far more unhappy, and that it was all Miss Merivale's
fault. He looked at his aunt, giving her now back smile for smile. "Aunt Lucy, will you go
and fetch Rose?" he said.

Rose was delighted to see her aunt in the carriage when she ran out to meet it. 

"Amusement"? there is no such word among all the many spoken by God to men. "Recreation"?--nor
that either; and "game" is not in all the book, and "rest" is something so wide of the mark
(in the Bible sense, I mean) that you must leave it out altogether. And "pastime"? ah, the
very thought is an alien.

"This I say, brethren, that the time is short." [1]

Redeem it, buy
it up, use it while you may,--such is the Bible stand-point. It flies
all too quickly without your help. Oh,
my darling, I am so thankful!"

She held Rose close to her, and kissed her once or twice before she let her go. Till that moment
she had hardly been able to realise her happiness in having Rose safe.

Rose began to talk again of Pauline as they were driving home. "How strange she could be so
silent about her grandmother and yet be so fond of her, Aunt Lucy! Or do you think that she
is only fond of her when she wants her? She was calling for her over and over again all last
night."

"I expect she is really fond of her, dear. As fond as she can be of anybody. I don't wish to
speak harshly of her, Rose, and we will do all we can for her. But you must not live with her
again. Not because her grandmother is Mrs. Smith," added Miss Merivale quickly, afraid that
Rose might misunderstand her. "It isn't that. Rhoda's people are in the same rank of life as
the Smiths, yet Rhoda is a true gentlewoman."

"Aunt Lucy, I could not live with Pauline again," Rose said earnestly. "Besides, I want to
live at home. I believe I shall loathe the thought of a flat as long as I live. Pauline has
effectually cured me of my desire to live in one."

"She and Mrs. Smith must come to stay with us as soon as she can be moved," Miss Merivale said.
"Perhaps this illness will make her see things differently, Rosie. Let us hope so."

"Rhoda knew all the time," Rose said, after a moment's pause. "Poor Pauline, how angry she
would have been if she had guessed it! If I had been Rhoda, I should have told her."

"We should not have known where to telegraph if it had not been for Rhoda. (BRIEF IMPERIAL TRAGI-COMEDY,
IN TWO ACTS, IN ACTIVE REHEARSAL.)

["Well, if it comes to fighting, we should be just in a hole."--A
Linesman's Opinion of the New Rifle, from Conversation in Daily Paper.]

ACT
I.

SCENE--A Public Place in Time of Peace.

Mrs. Britannia (receiving a highly finished and improved newly constructed
scientific weapon from cautious and circumspect Head of Department).
And so this is the new Magazine Rifle?

Head of Department (in a tone
of quiet and self-satisfied triumph).

She gave him one shining look, and went quickly in.

Rhoda had heard the carriage enter, and was standing in the middle of the room when Miss Merivale
softly knocked and entered. There was a tremulous, eager, anxious look in the girl's face.
Happy as she was, she could not be quite happy till she was sure Miss Merivale was content.

But it was only a tiny shadow of doubt that clouded the brightness, and when Miss Merivale
clasped her close, and kissed her as fondly and tenderly as she had kissed Rose a little while
before, it nearly all fled away.

"My dear, I am delighted," Miss Merivale said, with happy tears in her voice. "Tom has always
been like a son to me, and now you will be my daughter."

"And you are not sorry you asked me here?" Rhoda whispered. She felt she must ask the question
once.

"Ask Tom if he thinks I am sorry," returned Miss Merivale, kissing her again. And this was
answer enough. Rhoda doubted no more.

