Among the most faithful was her 'Aunt Mai', her father's sister, who from the earliest days
had stood beside her, who had helped her to escape from the thraldom of family life, who had
been with her at Scutari, and who now acted almost the part of a mother to her, watching over
her with infinite care in all the movements and uncertainties which her state of health involved.
Another constant attendant was her brother-in-law, Sir Harry Verney, whom she found particularly
valuable in parliamentary affairs. Arthur Clough, the poet, also a connection by marriage,
she used in other ways. Ever since he had lost his faith at the time of the Oxford Movement,
Clough had passed his life in a condition of considerable uneasiness, which was increased rather
than diminished by the practice of poetry. Unable to decide upon the purpose of an existence
whose savour had fled together with his belief in the Resurrection, his spirits lowered still
further by ill-health, and his income not all that it should be, he had determined to seek
the solution of his difficulties in the United States of America. But, even there, the solution
was not forthcoming; and, when, a little later, he was offered a post in a government department
at home, he accepted it, came to live in London, and immediately fell under the influence of
Miss Nightingale. Though the purpose of existence might be still uncertain and its nature still
unsavoury, here, at any rate, under the eye of this inspired woman, was something real, something
earnest: his only doubt was-- could he be of any use? Certainly he could. There were a great
number of miscellaneous little jobs which there was nobody handy to do. For instance, when
Miss Nightingale was travelling, there were the railway- tickets to be taken; and there were
proof-sheets to be corrected; and then there were parcels to be done up in brown paper, and
carried to the post. Certainly he could be useful. And so, upon such occupations as these,
Arthur Clough was set to work. 'This that I see, is not all,' he comforted himself by reflecting,
'and this that I do is but little; nevertheless it is good, though there is better than it.'As
time went on, her 'Cabinet', as she called it, grew larger. Officials with whom her work brought
her into touch and who sympathised with her objects, were pressed into her service; and old
friends of the Crimean days gathered around her when they returned to England. Among these
the most indefatigable was Dr. Sutherland, a sanitary expert, who for more than thirty years
acted as her confidential private secretary, and surrendered to her purposes literally the
whole of his life. Thus sustained and assisted, thus slaved for and adored, she prepared to
beard the Bison.

Two facts soon emerged, and all that followed turned upon them. It became clear, in the first
place, that that imposing mass was not immovable, and, in the second, that its movement, when
it did move, would be exceeding slow. The Bison was no match for the Lady. It was in vain that
he put down his head and planted his feet in the earth; he could not withstand her; the white
hand forced him back. But the process was an extraordinarily gradual one. Dr. Andrew Smith
and all his War Office phalanx stood behind, blocking the way; the poor Bison groaned inwardly,
and cast a wistful eye towards the happy pastures of the Free Church of Scotland; then slowly,
with infinite reluctance, step by step, he retreated, disputing every inch of the ground.

The first great measure, which, supported as it was by the Queen, the Cabinet, and the united
opinion of the country, it was impossible to resist, was the appointment of a Royal Commission
to report upon the health of the Army. The question of the composition of the Commission then
immediately arose; and it was over this matter that the first hand-to-hand encounter between
Lord Panmure and Miss Nightingale took place. They met, and Miss Nightingale was victorious;
Sidney Herbert was appointed Chairman; and, in the end, the only member of the Commission opposed
to her views was Dr. Andrew Smith. During the interview, Miss Nightingale made an important
discovery: she found that 'the Bison was bullyable'--the hide was the hide of a Mexican buffalo,
but the spirit was the spirit of an Alderney calf. And there was one thing above all others
which the huge creature dreaded--an appeal to public opinion. The faintest hint of such a terrible
eventuality made his heart dissolve within him; he would agree to anything he would cut short
his grouse-shooting--he would make a speech in the House of Lords, he would even overrule Dr.
Andrew Smith--rather than that. Miss Nightingale held the fearful threat in reserve--she would
speak out what she knew; she would publish the truth to the whole world, and let the whole
world judge between them. With supreme skill, she kept this sword of Damocles

poised above the Bison's head, and more than once she was actually on the point of really dropping
it-- for his recalcitrancy grew and grew.

The personnel of the Commission once determined upon, there was a struggle, which lasted for
six months, over the nature of its powersWas it to be an efficient body, armed with the right
of full inquiry and wide examination, or was it to be a polite official contrivance for exonerating
Dr. Andrew Smith? The War Office phalanx closed its ranks, and fought tooth and nail; but it
was defeated: the Bison was bullyable. 'Three months from this day,' Miss Nightingale had written
at last, 'I publish my experience of the Crimean Campaign, and my suggestions for improvement,
unless there has been a fair and tangible pledge by that time for reform.' Who could face that?

And, if the need came, she meant to be as good as her word. For she had now determined, whatever
might be the fate of the Commission, to draw up her own report upon the questions at issue.
The labour involved was enormous; her health was almost desperate; but she did not flinch,
and after six months of incredible industry she had put together and written with her own hand
her Notes affecting the Health, Efficiency, and Hospital Administration of the British Army.
This extraordinary composition, filling more than 800 closely printed pages, laying down vast
principles of far-reaching reform, discussing the minutest details of a multitude of controversial
subjects, containing an enormous mass of information of the most varied kinds--military, statistical,
sanitary, architectural--was never given to the public, for the need never came; but it formed
the basis of the Report of the Royal Commission; and it remains to this day the leading authority
on the medical administration of armies.

Before it had been completed, the struggle over the powers of the Commission had been brought
to a victorious close. Lord Panmure had given way once more; he had immediately hurried to
the Queen to obtain her consent; and only then, when Her Majesty's initials had been irrevocably
affixed to the fatal document, did he dare to tell Dr. Andrew Smith what he had done. The Commission
met, and another immense load fell upon Miss Nightingale's shoulders. Today she would, of course,
have been one of the Commission herself; but at that time the idea of a woman appearing in
such a capacity was unheard of; and no one even suggested the possibility of Miss Nightingale's
doing so. The result was that she was obliged to remain behind the scenes throughout, to coach
Sidney Herbert in private at every important juncture, and to convey to him and to her other
friends upon the Commission the vast funds of her expert knowledge--so essential in the examination
of witnesses--by means of innumerable consultations, letters, and memoranda. It was even doubtful
whether the proprieties would admit of her giving evidence; and at last, as a compromise, her
modesty only allowed her to do so in the form of written answers to written questions. At length,
the grand affair was finished. The Commission's Report, embodying almost word for word the
suggestions of Miss Nightingale, was drawn up by Sidney Herbert. Only one question remained
to be answered--would anything, after all, be done? Or would the Royal Commission, like so
many other Royal Commissions before and since, turn out to have achieved nothing but the concoction
of a very fat bluebook on a very high shelf?

And so the last and the deadliest struggle with the Bison began. Six months had been spent
in coercing him into granting the Commission effective powers; six more months were occupied
by the work of the Commission; and now yet another six were to pass in extorting from him the
means whereby the recommendations of the Commission might be actually carried out. But, in
the end, the thing was done. Miss Nightingale seemed, indeed, during these months, to be upon
the very brink of death. Accompanied by the faithful Aunt Mai, she moved from place to place--to
Hampstead, to Highgate, to Derbyshire, to Malvern--in what appeared to be a last desperate
effort to find health somewhere; but she carried that with her which made health impossible.
Her desire for work could now scarcely be distinguished from mania. At one moment she was writing
a 'last letter' to Sidney Herbert; at the next she was offering to go out to India to nurse
the sufferers in the Mutiny. When Dr. Sutherland wrote, imploring her to take a holiday, she
raved. Rest!--'I am lying without my head, without my claws, and you all peck at me. It is
de rigueur, d'obligation, like the saying something to one's hat, when one goes into church,
to say to me all that has been said to me 110 times a day during the last three months. It
is the obbligato on the violin, and the twelve violins all practise it together, like the clocks
striking twelve o'clock at night all over London, till I say like Xavier de Maistre, Assez,
je sais, je ne le sais que trop. I am not a penitent; but you are like the R.C. confessor,
who says what is de rigueur. ...'

Her wits began to turn, and there was no holding her. She worked like a slave in a mine. She
began to believe, as she had begun to believe at Scutari, that none of her fellow-workers had
their hearts in the business; if they had, why did they not work as she did? She could only
see slackness and stupidity around her. Dr. Sutherland, of course, was grotesquely muddle-headed;
and Arthur Clough incurably lazy. Even Sidney Herbert ... oh yes, he had simplicity and candour
and quickness of perception, no doubt; but he was an eclectic; and what could one hope for
from a man who went away to fish in Ireland just when the Bison most needed bullying? As for
the Bison himself, he had fled to Scotland where he remained buried for many months. The fate
of the vital recommendation in the Commission's Report--the appointment of four Sub-Commissions
charged with the duty of determining upon the details of the proposed reforms and of putting
them into execution--still hung in the balance. The Bison consented to everything; and then,
on a flying visit to London, withdrew his consent and hastily returned to Scotland. Then for
many weeks all business was suspended; he had gout--gout in the hands-- so that he could not
write. 'His gout was always handy,' remarked Miss Nightingale. But eventually it was clear
even to the Bison that the game was up, and the inevitable surrender came.

There was, however, one point in which he triumphed over Miss Nightingale: the building of
Netley Hospital had been begun under his orders, before her return to England. Soon after her
arrival she examined the plans, and found that they reproduced all the worst faults of an out-of-date
and mischievous system of hospital construction. She therefore urged that the matter should
be reconsidered, and in the meantime the building stopped. But the Bison was obdurate; it would
be very expensive, and in any case it was too late. Unable to make any impression on him, and
convinced of the extreme importance of the question, she determined to appeal to a higher authority.
Lord Palmerston was Prime Minister; she had known him from her childhood; he was a near neighbour
of her father's in the New Forest. She went down to the New Forest, armed with the plan of
the proposed hospital and all the relevant information, stayed the night at Lord Palmerston's
house, and convinced him of the necessity of rebuilding Netley. 'It seems to me,' Lord Palmerston
wrote to Lord Panmure, 'that at Netley all consideration of what would best tend to the comfort
and recovery of the patients has been sacrificed to the vanity of the architect, whose sole
object has been to make a building which should cut a dash when looked at from the Southampton
river...  Pray, therefore, stop all further progress in the work until the matter can be duly
considered.' But the Bison was not to be moved by one peremptory letter, even if it was from
the Prime Minister. He put forth all his powers of procrastination, Lord Palmerston lost interest
in the subject, and so the chief military hospital in England was triumphantly completed on
insanitary principles, with unventilated rooms, and with all the patients' windows facing northeast.

But now the time had come when the Bison was to trouble and to be troubled no more. A vote
in the House of Commons brought about the fall of Lord Palmerston's Government, and, Lord Panmure
found himself at liberty to devote the rest of his life to the Free Church of Scotland. After
a brief interval, Sidney Herbert became Secretary of State for War. Great was the jubilation
in the Nightingale Cabinet: the day of achievement had dawned at last. The next two and a half
years (1859-61) saw the introduction of the whole system of reforms for which Miss Nightingale
had been struggling so fiercely--reforms which make Sidney Herbert's tenure of power at the
War Office an important epoch in the history of the British Army. The four Sub-Commissions,
firmly established under the immediate control of the Minister, and urged forward by the relentless
perseverance of Miss Nightingale, set to work with a will. The barracks and the hospitals were
remodelled; they were properly ventilated and warmed and lighted for the first time; they were
given a water supply which actually supplied water, and kitchens where, strange to say, it
was possible to cook. Then the great question of the Purveyor--that portentous functionary
whose powers and whose lack of powers had weighed like a nightmare upon Scutari--was taken
in hand, and new regulations were laid down, accurately defining his responsibilities and his
duties. One Sub-Commission reorganised the medical statistics of the Army; another established
in spite of the last convulsive efforts of the Department an Army Medical School. Finally,
the Army Medical Department itself was completely reorganised; an administrative code was drawn
up; and the great and novel principle was established that it was as much a part of the duty
of the authorities to look after the soldier's health as to look after his sickness. Besides
this, it was at last officially admitted that he had a moral and intellectual side. Coffee-rooms
and reading-rooms, gymnasiums and workshops were instituted. A new era did in truth appear
to have begun. Already by 1861 the mortality in the Army had decreased by one- half since the
days of the Crimea. It was no wonder that even vaster possibilities began now to open out before
Miss Nightingale. One thing was still needed to complete and to assure her triumphs. The Army
Medical Department was indeed reorganised; but the great central machine was still untouched.
The War Office itself--! If she could remould that nearer to her heart's desire- -there indeed
would be a victory! And until that final act was accomplished, how could she be certain that
all the rest of her achievements might not, by some capricious turn of Fortune's wheel--a change
of Ministry, perhaps, replacing Sidney Herbert by some puppet of the permanent official gang--
be swept to limbo in a moment?

Meanwhile, still ravenous for yet more and more work, her activities had branched out into
new directions. The Army in India claimed her attention. A Sanitary Commission, appointed at
her suggestion, and working under her auspices, did for our troops there what the four Sub-Commissions
were doing for those at home. At the same time, these very years which saw her laying the foundations
of the whole modern system of medical work in the Army, saw her also beginning to bring her
knowledge, her influence, and her activity into the service of the country at large. Her "Notes
on Hospitals" (1859) revolutionised the theory of hospital construction and hospital management.
She was immediately recognised as the leading expert upon all the questions involved; her advice
flowed unceasingly and in all directions, so that there is no great hospital today which does
not bear upon it the impress of her mind. Nor was this all. With the opening of the Nightingale
Training School for Nurses at St. Thomas's Hospital (1860), she became the founder of modern
nursing.

But a terrible crisis was now fast approaching. Sidney Herbert had consented to undertake the
root and branch reform of the War Office. He had sallied forth into that tropical jungle of
festooned obstructiveness, of intertwisted irresponsibilities, of crouching prejudices, of
abuses grown stiff and rigid with antiquity, which for so many years to come was destined to
lure reforming Ministers to their doom. 'The War Office,' said Miss Nightingale, 'is a very
slow office, an enormously expensive office, and one in which the Minister's intentions can
be entirely negated by all his sub-departments, and those of each of the sub-departments by
every other.' It was true; and of course, at the, first rumour of a change, the old phalanx
of reaction was bristling with its accustomed spears. At its head stood no longer Dr. Andrew
Smith, who, some time since, had followed the Bison into outer darkness, but a yet more formidable
figure, the Permanent Under-Secretary himself, Sir Benjamin Hawes-- Ben Hawes the Nightingale
Cabinet irreverently dubbed him "a man remarkable even among civil servants for adroitness
in baffling inconvenient inquiries, resource in raising false issues, and, in, short, a consummate
command of all the arts of officially sticking in the mud'.

'Our scheme will probably result in Ben Hawes's resignation,' Miss Nightingale said; 'and that
is another of its advantages.' Ben Hawes himself, however, did not quite see it in that light.
He set himself to resist the wishes of the Minister by every means in his power. The struggle
was long, and desperate; and, as it proceeded, it gradually became evident to Miss Nightingale
that something was the matter with Sidney Herbert. What was it? His health, never very strong,
was, he said, in danger of collapsing under the strain of his work. But, after all, what is
illness, when there is a War Office to be reorganised? Then he began to talk of retiring altogether
from public life. The doctors were consulted, and declared that, above all things, what was
necessary was rest. Rest! She grew seriously alarmed. Was it possible that, at the last moment,
the crowning wreath of victory was to be snatched from her grasp? She was not to be put aside
by doctors; they were talking nonsense; the necessary thing was not rest, but the reform of
the War Office; and, besides, she knew very well from her own case what one could do even when
one was on the point of death.

She expostulated vehemently, passionately; the goal was so near, so very near; he could not
turn back now! At any rate, he could not resist Miss Nightingale. A compromise was arranged.
Very reluctantly, he exchanged the turmoil of the House of Commons for the dignity of the House
of Lords, and he remained at the War Office. She was delighted. 'One fight more, the best and
the last,' she said.

For several more months the fight did indeed go on. But the strain upon him was greater even
than she perhaps could realise. Besides the intestine war in his office, he had to face a constant
battle in the Cabinet with Mr. Gladstone--a more redoubtable antagonist even than Ben Hawes--over
the estimates. His health grew worse and worse. He was attacked by faintingfits; and there
were some days when he could only just keep himself going by gulps of brandy. Miss Nightingale
spurred him forward with her encouragements and her admonitions, her zeal and her example.
But at last his spirit began to sink as well as his body. He could no longer hope; he could
no longer desire; it was useless, all useless; it was utterly impossible. He had failed. The
dreadful moment came when the truth was forced upon him: he would never be able to reform the
War Office. But a yet more dreadful moment lay behind; he must go to Miss Nightingale and tell
her that he was a failure, a beaten man.

'Blessed are the merciful!' What strange ironic prescience had led Prince Albert, in the simplicity
of his heart, to choose that motto for the Crimean brooch? The words hold a double lesson;
and, alas! when she brought herself to realise at length what was indeed the fact and what
there was no helping, it was not in mercy that she turned upon her old friend.

'Beaten!' she exclaimed. 'Can't you see that you've simply thrown away the game? And with all
the winning cards in your hands! And so noble a game! Sidney Herbert beaten! And beaten by
Ben Hawes! It is a worse disgrace...' her full rage burst out at last, '...a worse disgrace
than the hospitals at Scutari.'

He dragged himself away from her, dragged himself to Spa, hoping vainly for a return to health,
and then, despairing, back again to England, to Wilton, to the majestic house standing there
resplendent in the summer sunshine, among the great cedars which had lent their shade to Sir
Philip Sidney, and all those familiar, darling haunts of beauty which he loved, each one of
them, 'as if they were persons'; and at, Wilton he died. After having received the Eucharist,
he had become perfectly calm; then, almost unconscious, his lips were seen to be moving. Those
about him bent down. 'Poor Florence! Poor Florence!' they just caught. '...Our joint work ...
unfinished ... tried to do ...' and they could hear no more.

When the onward rush of a powerful spirit sweeps a weaker one to its destruction, the commonplaces
of the moral judgment are better left unmade. If Miss Nightingale had been less ruthless, Sidney
Herbert would not have perished; but then, she would not have been Miss Nightingale. The force
that created was the force that destroyed. It was her Demon that was responsible. When the
fatal news reached her, she was overcome by agony. In the revulsion of her feelings, she made
a worship of the dead man's memory; and the facile instrument which had broken in her hand
she spoke of forever after as her 'Master'. Then, almost at the same moment, another blow fell
on her. Arthur Clough, worn out by labours very different from those of Sidney Herbert, died
too: never more would he tie up her parcels. And yet a thirddisaster followed. The faithful
Aunt Mai did not, to be sure, die; no, she did something almost worse: she left Miss Nightingale.
She was growing old, and she felt that she had closer and more imperative duties with her own
family. Her niece could hardly forgive her. She poured out, in one of her enormous letters,
a passionate diatribe upon the faithlessness, the lack of sympathy, the stupidity, the ineptitude
of women. Her doctrines had taken no hold among them; she had never known one who had appris
a apprendre; she could not even get a woman secretary; 'they don't know the names of the Cabinet
Ministers--they don't know which of the Churches has Bishops and which not'. As for the spirit
of self-sacrifice, well--Sidney Herbert and Arthur Clough were men, and they indeed had shown
their devotion; but women--! She would mount three widow's caps 'for a sign'. The first two
would be for Clough and for her Master; but the third--'the biggest widow's cap of all'--would
be for Aunt Mai. She did well to be angry; she was deserted in her hour of need; and after
all, could she be sure that even the male sex was so impeccable? There was Dr. Sutherland,
bungling as usual. Perhaps even he intended to go off one of these days, too? She gave him
a look, and he shivered in his shoes. No!--she grinned sardonically; she would always have
Dr. Sutherland. And then she reflected that there was one thing more that she would always
have-- her work.

IV

SIDNEY HERBERT'S death finally put an end to Miss Nightingale's dream of a reformed War Office.
For a moment, indeed, in the first agony of her disappointment, she had wildly clutched at
a straw; she had written to M. Gladstone to beg him to take up the burden of Sidney Herbert's
work. And Mr. Gladstone had replied with a sympathetic account of the funeral.

Succeeding Secretaries of State managed between them to undo a good deal of what had been accomplished,
but they could not undo it all; and for ten years more (1862-72) Miss Nightingale remained
a potent influence at the War Office. After that, her direct connection with the Army came
to an end, and her energies began to turn more and more completely towards more general objects.
Her work upon hospital reform assumed enormous proportions; she was able to improve the conditions
in infirmaries and workhouses; and one of her most remarkable papers forestalls the recommendations
of the Poor Law Commission of 1909. Her training, school for nurses, with all that it involved
in initiative, control, responsibillity, and combat, would have been enough in itself to have
absorbed the whole efforts of at least two lives of ordinary vigour. And at the same time her
work in connection with India, which had begun with the Sanitary Commission on the Indian Army,
spread and ramified in a multitude of directions. Her tentacles reached the India Office and
succeeded in establishing a hold even upon those slippery high places. For many years it was
de rigueur for the newly appointed Viceroy, before he left England, to pay a visit to Miss
Nightingale.

After much hesitation, she had settled down in a small house in South Street, where she remained
for the rest of her life. That life was a very long one; the dying woman reached her ninety-
first year. Her ill health gradually diminished; the crises of extreme danger became less frequent,
and at last altogether ceased; she remained an invalid, but an invalid of a curious character--an
invalid who was too weak to walk downstairs and who worked far harder than most Cabinet Ministers.
Her illness, whatever it may have been, was certainly not inconvenient. It involved seclusion;
and an extraordinary, an unparalleled seclusion was, it might almost have been said, the mainspring
of Miss Nightingale's life. Lying on her sofa in the little upper room in South Street, she
combined the intense vitality of a dominating woman of the world with the mysterious and romantic
quality of a myth. She was a legend in her lifetime, and she knew it. She tasted the joys of
power, like those Eastern Emperors whose autocratic rule was based upon invisibility, with
the mingled satisfactions of obscurity and fame.

And she found the machinery of illness hardly less effective as a barrier against the eyes
of men than the ceremonial of a palace. Great statesmen and renowned generals were obliged
to beg for audiences; admiring princesses from foreign countries found that they must see her
at her own time, or not at all; and the ordinary mortal had no hope of ever getting beyond
the downstairs sitting-room and Dr. Sutherland. For that indefatigable disciple did, indeed,
never desert her. He might be impatient, he might be restless, but he remained. His 'incurable
looseness of thought', for so she termed it, continued at her service to the end. Once, it
is true, he had actually ventured to take a holiday; but he was recalled, and he did not repeat
the experiment. He was wanted downstairs. There he sat, transacting business answering correspondence,
interviewing callers, and exchanging innumerable notes with the unseen power above. Sometimes
word came down that Miss Nightingale was just well enough to see one of her visitors. The fortunate
man was led up, was ushered, trembling, into the shaded chamber, and, of course, could never
afterwards forget the interview. Very rarely, indeed, once or twice a year, perhaps, but nobody
could be quite certain, in deadly secrecy, Miss Nightingale went out for a drive in the Park.
Unrecognised, the living legend flitted for a moment before the common gaze. And the precaution
was necessary; for there were times when, at some public function, the rumour of her presence
was spread abroad; and ladies, mistaken by the crowd for Miss Nightingale, were followed, pressed
upon, vehemently supplicated 'Let me touch your shawl'; 'Let me stroke your arm'; such was
the strange adoration in the hearts of the people. That vast reserve of force lay there behind
her; she could use it, if she could. But she preferred never to use it. On occasions, she might
hint or threaten, she might balance the sword of Damocles over the head of the Bison; she might,
by a word, by a glance, remind some refractory Minister, some unpersuadable Viceroy, sitting
in audience with her in the little upper room, that she was something more than a mere sick
woman, that she had only, so to speak, to go to the window and wave her handkerchief, for ...
dreadful things to follow. But that was enough; they understood; the myth was there- -obvious,
portentous, impalpable; and so it remained to the last.

With statesmen and governors at her beck and call, with her hands on a hundred strings, with
mighty provinces at her feet, with foreign governments agog for her counsel, building hospitals,
training nurses-- she still felt that she had not enough to do. She sighed for more worlds
to conquer--more, and yet more.

She looked about her--what was left? Of course! Philosophy! After the world of action, the
world of thought. Having set right the health of the British Army, she would now do the same
good service for the religious convictions of mankind. She had long noticed--with regret--the
growing tendency towards free-thinking among artisans. With regret, but not altogether with
surprise, the current teaching of Christianity was sadly to seek; nay, Christianity itself
was not without its defects. She would rectify these errors. She would correct the mistakes
of the Churches; she would point out just where Christianity was wrong; and she would explain
to the artisans what the facts of the case really were. Before her departure for the Crimea,
she had begun this work; and now, in the intervals of her other labours, she completed it.
Her 'Suggestions for Thought to the Searchers After

Truth Among the Artisans of England' (1860), unravels, in the course of three portly volumes,
the difficulties hitherto, curiously enough, unsolved--connected with such matters as Belief
in God, the Plan of Creation, the Origin of Evil, the Future  Life, Necessity and Free Will,
Law, and the Nature of Morality.

The Origin of Evil, in particular, held no perplexities for Miss Nightingale. 'We cannot conceive,'
she remarks, 'that Omnipotent Righteousness would find satisfaction in solitary existence.'
This being, so, the only question remaining to be asked is: 'What beings should we then conceive
that God would create?' Now, He cannot create perfect beings, 'since, essentially, perfection
is one'; if He did so, He would only be adding to Himself. Thus the conclusion is obvious:
He must create imperfect ones. Omnipotent Righteousness, faced by the intolerable impasse of
a solitary existence, finds itself bound by the very nature of the cause, to create the hospitals
at Scutari. Whether this argument would have satisfied the artisans was never discovered, for
only a very few copies of the book were printed for private circulation. One copy was sent
to Mr. Mill, who acknowledged it in an extremely polite letter. He felt himself obliged, however,
to confess that he had not been altogether convinced by Miss Nightingale's proof of the existence
of God. Miss Nightingale was surprised and mortified; she had thought better of Mr. Mill; for
surely her proof of the existence of God could hardly be improved upon. 'A law,' she had pointed
out, 'implies a lawgiver.' Now the Universe is full of laws--the law of gravitation, the law
of the excluded middle, and many others; hence it follows that the Universe has a law-giver--
and what would Mr. Mill be satisfied with, if he was not satisfied with that?

Perhaps Mr. Mill might have asked why the argument had not been pushed to its logical conclusion.
Clearly, if we are to trust the analogy of human institutions, we must remember that laws are,
as a matter of fact, not dispensed by lawgivers, but passed by Act of Parliament. Miss Nightingale,
however, with all her experience of public life, never stopped to consider the question whether
God might not be a Limited Monarchy.Yet her conception of God was certainly not orthodox. She
felt towards Him as she might have felt towards a glorified sanitary engineer; and in some
of her speculations she seems hardly to distinguish between the Deity and the Drains. As one
turns over these singular pages, one has the impression that Miss Nightingale has got the Almighty
too into her clutches, and that, if He is not careful, she will kill Him with overwork.

Then, suddenly, in the very midst of the ramifying generalities of her metaphysical disquisitions,
there is an unexpected turn and the reader is plunged all at once into something particular,
something personal, something impregnated with intense experience-- a virulent invective upon
the position of women in the upper ranks of society. Forgetful alike of her high argument and
of the artisans, the bitter creature rails through a hundred pages of close print at the falsities
of family life, the ineptitudes of marriage, the emptinesses of convention, in the spirit of
an Ibsen or a Samuel Butler. Her fierce pen, shaking with intimate anger, depicts in biting
sentences the fearful fate of an unmarried girl in a wealthy household. It is a cri du coeur;
and then, as suddenly, she returns once more to instruct the artisans upon the nature ofOmnipotent
Righteousness.

Her mind was, indeed, better qualified to dissect the concrete and distasteful fruits of actual
life than to construct a coherent system of abstract philosophy. In spite of her respect for
Law, she was never at home with a generalisation. Thus, though the great achievement of her
life lay in the immense impetus which she gave to the scientific treatment of sickness, a true
comprehension of the scientific method itself was alien to her spirit. Like most great men
of action--perhaps like all--she was simply an empiricist. She believed in what she saw, and
she acted accordingly; beyond that she would not go. She had found in Scutari that fresh air
and light played an effective part in the prevention of the maladies with which she had to
deal; and that was enough for her; she would not inquire further; what were the general principles
underlying that fact--or even whether there were any--she refused to consider. Years after
the discoveries of Pasteur and Lister, she laughed at what she called the 'germ- fetish'. There
was no such thing as 'infection'; she had never seen it, therefore it did not exist. But she
had seen the good effects of fresh air; therefore, there could be no doubt about them; and
therefore, it was essential that the bedrooms of patients should be well ventilated. Such was
her doctrine; and in those days of hermetically scaled windows it was a very valuable one.
But it was a purely empirical doctrine, and thus it led to some unfortunate results. When,
for instance, her influence in India was at its height, she issued orders that all hospital
windows should be invariably kept open. The authorities, who knew what an open window in the
hot weather meant, protested, but in vain; Miss Nightingale was incredulous. She knew nothing
of the hot weather, but she did know the value of fresh air--from personal experience; the
authorities were talking nonsense; and the windows must be kept open all the year round. There
was a great outcry from all the doctors in India, but she was firm; and for a moment it seemed
possible that her terrible commands would have to be put into execution. Lord Lawrence, however,
was Viceroy, and he was able to intimate to Miss Nightingale, with sufficient authority, that
himself had decided upon the question, and that his decision must stand, even against her own.
Upon that she gave way, but reluctantly and quite unconvinced; she was only puzzled by the
unexpected weakness of Lord Lawrence. No doubt, if she had lived today, and if her experience
had lain, not among cholera cases at Scutari, but among yellow-fever cases in Panama, she would
have declared fresh air a fetish, and would have maintained to her dying day that the only
really effective way of dealing with disease was by the destruction of mosquitoes.

Yet her mind, so positive, so realistic, so ultra-practical, had its singular revulsions, its
mysterious moods of mysticism and of doubt. At times, lying sleepless in the early hours, she
fell into long, strange, agonised meditations, and then, seizing a pencil, she would commit
to paper the confessions of her soul. The morbid longings of her pre-Crimean days came over
her once more; she filled page after page with self-examination, self- criticism, self-surrender.
'Oh Father,' she wrote, 'I submit, I resign myself, I accept with all my heart, thisstretching
out of Thy hand to save me. ... 0h how vain it is, the vanity of vanities, to live in men's
thoughts instead of God's!'

She was lonely, she was miserable. 'Thou knowest that through all these horrible twenty years,
I have been supported by the belief that I was working with Thee who would bring everyone,
even our poor nurses, to perfection'--and yet, after all, what was the result? Had not even
she been an unprofitable servant? One night, waking suddenly, she saw, in the dim light of
the night-lamp, tenebrous shapes upon the wall. The past rushed back upon her. 'Am I she who
once stood on that Crimean height?' she wildly asked-- "The Lady with a lamp shall stand .
. .The lamp shows me only my utter shipwreck.'

She sought consolation in the writings of the Mystics and in a correspondence with Mr. Jowett.
For many years the Master of Balliol acted as her spiritual adviser. He discussed with her
in a series of enormous letters the problems of religion and philosophy; he criticised her
writings on those subjects with the tactful sympathy of a cleric who was also a man of the
world; and he even ventured to attempt at times to instil into her rebellious nature some of
his own peculiar suavity. 'I sometimes think,' he told her, 'that you ought seriously to consider
how your work may be carried on, not with less energy, but in a calmer spirit. I am not blaming
the past...  But I want the peace of God to settle on the future.' He recommended her to spend
her time no longer in 'conflicts with Government offices', and to take up some literary work.
He urged her to 'work out her notion of Divine Perfection', in a series of essays for Frazer's
Magazine. She did so; and the result was submitted to Mr. Froude, who pronounced the second
essay to be 'even more pregnant than the first. I cannot tell,' he said, 'how sanitary, with
disordered intellects, the effects of such papers will be.'

Mr. Carlyle, indeed, used different language, and some remarks of his about a lost lamb bleating
on the mountains, having been unfortunately repeated to Miss Nightingale, required all Mr.
Jowett's suavity to keep the peace. In a letter of fourteen sheets, he turned her attention
from this painful topic towards a discussion of Quietism. 'I don't see why,' said the Master
of Balliol, 'active life might not become a sort of passive life too.' And then, he added,
'I sometimes fancy there are possibilities of human character much greater than have been realised.'
She found such sentiments helpful, underlining them in blue pencil; and, in return, she assisted
her friend with a long series of elaborate comments upon the Dialogues of Plato, most of which
he embodied in the second edition of his translation. Gradually her interest became more personal;
she told him never to work again after midnight, and he obeyed her. Then she helped him to
draw up a special form of daily service for the College Chapel, with selections from the Psalms
under the heads of 'God the Lord, God the judge, God the Father, and God the Friend'-- though,
indeed, this project was never realised; for the Bishop of Oxford disallowed the alterations,
exercising his legal powers, on the advice of Sir Travers Twiss.

Their relations became intimate. 'The spirit of the Twenty-third  Psalm and the spirit of the
Nineteenth Psalm should be united in our lives,' Mr. Jowett said. Eventually, she asked him
to do her a singular favour. Would he, knowing what he did of her religious views, come to
London and administer to her the Holy Sacrament? He did not hesitate, and afterwards declared
that he would always regard the occasion as a solemn event in his life. He was devoted to her--
though the precise nature of his feelings towards her never quite transpired. Her feelings
towards him were more mixed. At first, he was 'that great and good man'--'that true saint,
Mr. Jowett'; but, as time went on, some gall was mingled with the balm; the acrimony of her
nature asserted itself. She felt that she gave more sympathy than she received; she was exhausted,
and she was annoyed by his conversation. Her tongue, one day, could not refrain from shooting
out at him: 'He comes to me, and he talks to me,' she said, 'as if I were someone else.'

V

AT one time she had almost decided to end her life in retirement as a patient at St. Thomas's
Hospital. But partly owing to the persuasions of Mr. Jowett, she changed her mind; for forty-five
years she remained in South Street; and in South Street she died. As old age approached, though
her influence with the official world gradually diminished, her activities seemed to remain
as intense and widespread as before. When hospitals were to be built, when schemes of sanitary
reform were in agitation, when wars broke out, she was still the adviser of all Europe. Still,
with a characteristic self-assurance, she watched from her Mayfair bedroom over the welfare
of India. Still, with an indefatigable enthusiasm, she pushed forward the work, which, perhaps,
was nearer to her heart, more completely her own, than all the rest-- the training of nurses.
In her moments of deepest depression, when her greatest achievements seemed to lose their lustre,
she thought of her nurses, and was comforted. The ways of God, she found, were strange indeed.
'How inefficient I was in the Crimea,' she noted. 'Yet He has raised up from it trained nursing.'

At other times, she was better satisfied. Looking back, she was amazed by the enormous change
which, since her early days, had come over the whole treatment of illness, the whole conception
of public and domestic health--a change in which, she knew, she had played her part. One of
her Indian admirers, the Aga Khan, came to visit her. She expatiated on the marvellous advances
she had lived to see in the management of hospitals-- in drainage, in ventilation, in sanitary
work of every kind. There was a pause; and then, 'Do you think you are improving?' asked the
Aga Khan. She was a little taken aback, and said, 'What do you mean by "improving"?' He replied,
'Believing more in God.' She saw that he had a view of God which was different from hers. 'A
most interesting man,' she noted after the interview; 'but you could never teach him sanitation.'

When old age actually came, something curious happened. Destiny, having waited very patiently,
played a queer trick on Miss Nightingale. The benevolence and public spirit of that long life
had only been equalled by its acerbity. Her virtue had dwelt in hardness, and she had poured
forth her unstinted usefulness with a bitter smile upon her lips. And now the sarcastic years
brought the proud woman her punishment. She was not to die as she had lived. The sting was
to be taken out of her; she was to be made soft; she was to be reduced to compliance and complacency.
The change came gradually, but at last it was unmistakable. The terrible commander who had
driven Sidney Herbert to his death, to whom Mr. Jowett had applied the words of Homer, amoton
memaniia-- raging insatiably-- now accepted small compliments with gratitude, and indulged
in sentimental friendships with young girls. The author of "Notes on Nursing"--that classical
compendium of the besetting sins of the sisterhood, drawn up with the detailed acrimony, the
vindictive relish, of a Swift--now spent long hours in composing sympathetic Addresses to Probationers,
whom she petted and wept over in turn. And, at the same time, there appeared a corresponding
alteration in her physical mood. The thin, angular woman, with her haughty eye and her acrid
mouth, had vanished; and in her place was the rounded, bulky form of a fat old lady, smiling
all day long. Then something else became visible. The brain which had been steeled at Scutari
was indeed, literally, growing soft. Senility--an ever more and more amiable senility--descended.
Towards the end, consciousness itself grew lost in a roseate haze, and melted into nothingness.

It was just then, three years before her death, when she was eighty-seven years old (1907),
that those in authority bethought them that the opportune moment had come for bestowing a public
honour on Florence Nightingale. She was offered the Order of Merit. That Order, whose roll
contains, among other distinguished names, those of Sir Lawrence Alma Tadema and Sir Edward
Elgar, is remarkable chiefly for the fact that, as its title indicates, it is bestowed because
its recipient deserves it, and for no other reason. Miss Nightingale's representatives accepted
the honour, and her name, after a lapse of many years, once more appeared in the Press. Congratulations
from all sides came pouring in. There was a universal burst of enthusiasm--a final revivification
of the ancient myth. Among her other admirers, the German Emperor took this opportunity of
expressing his feelings towards her. 'His Majesty,' wrote the German Ambassador, 'having just
brought to a close a most enjoyable stay in the beautiful neighbourhood of your old home near
Romsey, has commanded me to present you with some flowers as a token of his esteem.' Then,
by Royal command, the Order of Merit was brought to South Street, and there was a little ceremony
of presentation. Sir Douglas Dawson, after a short speech, stepped forward, and handed the
insignia of the Order to Miss Nightingale. Propped up by pillows, she dimly recognised that
some compliment was being paid her. 'Too kind-- too kind,' she murmured; and she was not ironical.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Sir E. Cook. Life of Florence Nightingale.  A. W. Kinglake. The Invasion of the Crimea.  Lord
Sidney Godolphin Osborne. Scutari and its Hospitals.  S. M. Mitra. Life of Sir John Hall. 
Lord Stanmore. Sidney Herbert.  Sir G. Douglas. The Panmure Papers.  Sir H. Maxwell. Life and
Letters of the Fourth Earl of Clarendon.

E.Abbott and L. Campbell. Life and Letters of Benjamin Jowett.  A.H. Clough. Poems and Memoir.

Dr. Arnold

IN 1827 the headmastership of Rugby School fell vacant, and it became necessary for the twelve
trustees, noblemen and gentlemen of Warwickshire, to appoint a successor to the post. Reform
was in the air--political, social, religious; there was even a feeling abroad that our great
public schools were not quite all that they should be, and that some change or other--no one
precisely knew what--but some change in the system of their management, was highly desirable.
Thus it was natural that when the twelve noblemen and gentlemen, who had determined to be guided
entirely by the merits of the candidates, found among the testimonials pouring in upon them
a letter from Dr. Hawkins, the Provost of Oriel, predicting that if they elected Mr. Thomas
Arnold he would 'change the face of education all through the public schools of England', they
hesitated no longer; obviously, Mr. Thomas Arnold was their man. He was elected therefore;
received, as was fitting, priest's orders; became, as was no less fitting, a Doctor of Divinity;
and in August, 1828, took up the duties of his office.

All that was known of the previous life of Dr. Arnold seemed to justify the prediction of the
Provost of Oriel, and the choice of the Trustees. The son of a respectable Collector of Customs,
he had been educated at Winchester and at Oxford, where his industry and piety had given him
a conspicuous place among his fellow students. It is true that, as a schoolboy, a certain pompousness
in the style of his letters home suggested to the more clear- sighted among his relatives the
possibility that young Thomas might grow up into a prig; but, after all, what else could be
expected from a child who, at the age of three, had been presented by his father, as a reward
for proficiency in his studies, with the twenty-four volumes of Smollett's History of England?

His career at Oxford had been a distinguished one, winding up with an Oriel fellowship. It
was at about this time that the smooth and satisfactory progress of his life was for a moment
interrupted: he began to be troubled by religious doubts. These doubts, as we learn from one
of his contemporaries, who afterwards became Mr. Justice Coleridge, 'were not low nor rationalistic
in their tendency, according to the bad sense of that term; there was no indisposition in him
to believe merely because the article transcended his reason, he doubted the proof and the
interpretation of the textual authority'. In his perturbation, Arnold consulted Keble, who
was at that time one of his closest friends, and a Fellow of the same College. 'The subject
of these distressing thoughts,' Keble wrote to Coleridge, 'is that most awful one, on which
all very inquisitive reasoning minds are, I believe, most liable to such temptations--I mean,
the doctrine of the blessed Trinity. Do not start, my dear Coleridge; I do not believe that
Arnold has any serious scruples of the UNDERSTANDING about it, but it is a defect of his mind
that he cannot get rid of a certain feeling of objections.' What was to be done? Keble's advice
was peremptory. Arnold was 'bid to pause in his inquiries, to pray earnestly for help and light
from above, and turn himself more strongly than ever to the practical duties of a holy life'.
He did so, and the result was all that could be wished. He soon found himself blessed with
perfect peace of mind, and a settled conviction.

One other difficulty, and one only, we hear of at this point in his life. His dislike of early
rising amounted, we are told, 'almost to a constitutional infirmity'. This weakness too he
overcame, yet not quite so successfully as his doubts upon the doctrine of the Trinity. For
in afterlife, the Doctor would often declare 'that early rising continued to be a daily effort
to him and that in this instance he never found the truth of the usual rule that all things
are made easy by custom.

He married young and settled down in the country as a private tutor for youths preparing for
the Universities. There he remained for ten years--happy, busy, and sufficiently prosperous.
Occupied chiefly with his pupils, he nevertheless devoted much of his energy to wider interests.
He delivered a series of sermons in the parish church; and he began to write a History of Rome,
in the hope, as he said, that its tone might be such 'that the strictest of what is called
the Evangelical party would not object to putting it into the hands of their children'. His
views on the religious and political condition of the country began to crystallise. He was
alarmed by the 'want of Christian principle in the literature of the day', looking forward
anxiously to 'the approach of a greater struggle between good and evil than the world has yet
seen'; and, after a serious conversation with Dr. Whately, began to conceive the necessity
of considerable alterations in the Church Establishment.

All who knew him during these years were profoundly impressed by the earnestness of his religious
convictions and feelings, which, as one observer said, 'were ever bursting forth'. It was impossible
to disregard his 'deep consciousness of the invisible world' and 'the peculiar feeling of love
and adoration which he entertained towards our Lord Jesus Christ'. 'His manner of awful reverence
when speaking of God or of the Scriptures' was particularly striking. 'No one could know him
even a little,' said another friend, 'and not be struck by his absolute wrestling

with evil, so that like St. Paul, he seemed to be battling with the wicked one, and yet with
a feeling of God's help on his side.'

Such was the man who, at the age of thirty-three, became headmaster of Rugby. His outward appearance
was the index of his inward character; everything about him denoted energy, earnestness, and
the best intentions. His legs, perhaps, were shorter than they should have been; but the sturdy
athletic frame, especially when it was swathed (as it usually was) in the flowing robes of
a Doctor of Divinity, was full of an imposing vigour; and his head, set decisively upon the
collar, stock, and bands of ecclesiastical tradition, clearly belonged to a person of eminence.
The thick, dark clusters of his hair, his bushy eyebrows and curling whiskers, his straight
nose and bulky chin, his firm and upward-curving lower lip--all these revealed a temperament
of ardour and determination. His eyes were bright and large; they were also obviously honest.
And yet--why was it? Was it in the lines of the mouth or the frown on the forehead?--it was
hard to say, but it was unmistakable--there was a slightly puzzled look upon the face of Dr.
Arnold.

And certainly, if he was to fulfil the prophecy of the Provost of Oriel, the task before him
was sufficiently perplexing. The public schools of those days were still virgin forests, untouched
by the hand of reform. Keate was still reigning at Eton; and we possess, in the records of
his pupils, a picture of the public school education of the early nineteenth century, in its
most characteristic state. It was a system of anarchy tempered by despotism. Hundreds of boys,
herded together in miscellaneous boarding-houses, or in that grim 'Long Chamber' at whose name
in after years aged statesmen and warriors would turn pale, lived, badgered and overawed by
the furious incursions of an irascible little old man carrying a bundle of birch-twigs, a life
in which licensed barbarism was mingled with the daily and hourly study of the niceties of
Ovidian verse. It was a life of freedom and terror, of prosody and rebellion, of interminable
floggings and appalling practical jokes. Keate ruled, unaided--for the undermasters were few
and of no account--by sheer force of character. But there were times when even that indomitable
will was overwhelmed by the flood of lawlessness. Every Sunday afternoon he attempted to read
sermons to the whole school assembled; and every Sunday afternoon the whole school assembled
shouted him down. The scenes in Chapel were far from edifying; while some antique Fellow doddered
in the pulpit, rats would be let loose to scurry among the legs of the exploding boys. But
next morning the hand of discipline would reassert itself; and the savage ritual of the whipping-block
would remind a batch of whimpering children that, though sins against man and God might be
forgiven them, a false quantity could only be expiated in tears and blood.

From two sides this system of education was beginning to be assailed by the awakening public
opinion of the upper middle classes. On the one hand, there was a desire for a more liberal
curriculum; on the other, there was a demand for a higher moral tone. The growing utilitarianism
of the age viewed with impatience a course of instruction which excluded every branch of knowledge
except classical philology; while its growing respectability was shocked by such a spectacle
of disorder and brutality as was afforded by the Eton of Keate. 'The public schools,' said
the Rev. Mr. Bowdler, 'are the very seats and nurseries of vice.'

Dr. Arnold agreed. He was convinced of the necessity for reform. But it was only natural that
to one of his temperament and education it should have been the moral rather than the intellectual
side of the question which impressed itself upon his mind. Doubtless it was important to teach
boys something more than the bleak rigidities of the ancient tongues; but how much more important
to instil into them the elements of character and the principles of conduct! His great object,
throughout his career at Rugby, was, as he repeatedly said, to 'make the school a place of
really Christian education'. To introduce 'a religious principle into education', was his 'most
earnest wish', he wrote to a friend when he first became headmaster; 'but to do this would
be to succeed beyond all my hopes; it would be a happiness so great, that, I think, the world
would yield me nothing comparable to it'. And he was constantly impressing these sentiments
upon his pupils. 'What I have often said before,' he told them, 'I repeat now: what we must
look for here is, first, religious and moral principle; secondly, gentlemanly conduct; andthirdly,
intellectual ability.'

There can be no doubt that Dr. Arnold's point of view was shared by the great mass of English
parents. They cared very little for classical scholarship; no doubt they would be pleased to
find that their sons were being instructed in history or in French; but their real hopes, their
real wishes, were of a very different kind. 'Shall I tell him to mind his work, and say he's
sent to school to make himself a good scholar?' meditated old Squire Brown when he was sending
off Tom for the first time to Rugby. ... If he'll only turn out a brave, helpful, truth-telling
Englishman, and a Christian, that's all I want.'

That was all; and it was that that Dr. Arnold set himself to accomplish. But how was he to
achieve his end? Was he to improve the character of his pupils by gradually spreading around
them an atmosphere of cultivation and intelligence? By bringing them into close and friendly
contact with civilised men, and even, perhaps, with civilised women? By introducing into the
life of his school all that he could of the humane, enlightened, and progressive elements in
the life of the community? On the whole, he thought not. Such considerations left him cold,
and he preferred to be guided by the general laws of Providence. It only remained to discover
what those general laws were. He consulted the Old Testament, and could doubt no longer. He
would apply to his scholars, as he himself explained to them in one of his sermons, 'the principle
which seemed to him to have been adopted in the training of the childhood of the human race
itself'. He would treat the boys at Rugby as Jehovah had treated the Chosen People: he would
found a theocracy; and there should be judges in Israel.

For this purpose, the system, prevalent in most of the public schools of the day, by which
the elder boys were deputed to keep order in the class-rooms, lay ready to Dr. Arnold's hand.
He found the Praepostor a mere disciplinary convenience, and he converted him into an organ
of government. Every boy in the Sixth Form became ipso facto a Praepostor, with powers extending
over every department of school life; and the Sixth Form as a body was erected into an authority
responsible to the headmaster, and to the headmaster alone, for the internal management of
the school.

This was the means by which Dr. Arnold hoped to turn Rugby into 'a place of really Christian
education'. The boys were to work out their own salvation, like the human race. He himself,
involved in awful grandeur, ruled remotely, through his chosen instruments, from an inaccessible
heaven. Remotely-- and yet with an omnipresent force. As the Israelite of old knew that his
almighty Lawgiver might at any moment thunder to him from the whirlwind, or appear before his
very eyes, the visible embodiment of power or wrath, so the Rugby schoolboy walked in a holy
dread of some sudden manifestation of the sweeping gown, the majestic tone, the piercing glance,
of Dr. Arnold. Among the lower forms of the school his appearances were rare and transitory,
and upon these young children 'the chief impression', we are told, 'was of extreme fear'. The
older boys saw more of him, but they did not see much. Outside the Sixth Form, no part of the
school came into close intercourse with him; and it would often happen that a boy would leave
Rugby without having had any personal communication with him at all.

Yet the effect which he produced upon the great mass of his pupils was remarkable. The prestige
of his presence and the elevation of his sentiments were things which it was impossible to
forget. In class, every line of his countenance, every shade of his manner imprinted themselves
indelibly on the minds of the boys who sat under him. One of these, writing long afterwards,
has described, in phrases still impregnated with awestruck reverence, the familiar details
of the scene: 'the glance with which he looked round in the few moments of silence before the
lesson began, and which seemed to speak his sense of his own position'--'the attitude in which
he stood, turning over the pages of Facciolati's Lexicon, or Pole's synopsis, with his eye
fixed upon the boy who was pausing to give an answer'--'the pleased look and the cheerful "thank
you", which followed upon a successful translation'--'the fall of his countenance with its
deepening severity, the stern elevation of the eyebrows, the sudden "sit down" which followed
upon the reverse'--and 'the startling earnestness with which he would cheek in a moment the
slightest approach to levity'.

To be rebuked, however mildly, by Dr. Arnold was a Potable experience. One boy could never
forget how he drew a distinction between 'mere amusement' and 'such as encroached on the next
day's duties', nor the tone of voice with which the Doctor added 'and then it immediately becomes
what St. Paul calls REVELLING'. Another remembered to his dying day his reproof of some boys
who had behaved badly during prayers. 'Nowhere,' said Dr. Arnold, 'nowhere is Satan's work
more evidently manifest than in turning holy things to ridicule.' On such occasions, as another
of his pupils described it, it was impossible to avoid 'a consciousness almost amounting to
solemnity' that, 'when his eye was upon you,  he looked into your inmost heart'.

With the boys in the Sixth Form, and with them alone, the severe formality of his demeanour
was to some degree relaxed. It was his wish, in his relations with the Praepostors, to allow
the Master to be occasionally merged in the Friend. From time to time, he chatted with them
in a familiar manner; once a term he asked them to dinner; and during the summer holidays he
invited them, in rotation, to stay with him in Westmorland.

It was obvious that the primitive methods of discipline which had reached their apogee under
the dominion of Keate were altogether incompatible with Dr. Arnold's view of the functions
of a headmaster and the proper governance of a public school. Clearly, it was not for such
as he to demean himself by bellowing and cuffing, by losing his temper once an hour, and by
wreaking his vengeance with indiscriminate flagellations. Order must be kept in other ways.
The worst boys were publicly expelled; many were silently removed; and, when Dr. Arnold considered
that a flogging was necessary, he administered it with gravity. For he had no theoretical objection
to corporal punishment. On the contrary, he supported it, as was his wont, by an appeal to
general principles. 'There is,' he said, 'an essential inferiority in a boy as compared with
a man'; and hence 'where there is no equality the exercise of superiority implied in personal
chastisement' inevitably followed.

He was particularly disgusted by the view that 'personal correction',as he phrased it, was
an insult or a degradation to the boy upon whom it was inflicted; and to accustom young boys
to think so appeared to him to be 'positively mischievous'. 'At an age,' he wrote, 'when it
is almost impossible to find a true, manly sense of the degradation of guilt or faults, where
is the wisdom of encouraging a fantastic sense of the degradation of personal correction? What
can be more false, or more adverse to the simplicity, sobriety, and humbleness of mind which
are the best ornaments of youth, and offer the best promise of a noble manhood?' One had not
to look far, he added, for 'the fruits of such a system'. In Paris, during the Revolution of
1830, an officer observed a boy of twelve insulting the soldiers, and 'though the action was
then raging, merely struck him with the flat part of his sword, as the fit chastisement for
boyish impertinence. But the boy had been taught to consider his person sacred, and that a
blow was a deadly insult; he therefore followed the officer, and having watched his opportunity,
took deliberate aim at him with a pistol and murdered him.' Such were the alarming results
of insufficient whipping.

Dr. Arnold did not apply this doctrine to the Praepostors, but the boys in the lower parts
of the school felt its benefits, with a double force. The Sixth Form was not only excused from
chastisement; it was given the right to chastise. The younger children, scourged both by Dr
Arnold and by the elder children, were given every opportunity of acquiring the simplicity,
sobriety, and humbleness of mind, which are the best ornaments of youth.

In the actual sphere of teaching, Dr. Arnold's reforms were tentative and few. He introduced
modern history, modern languages, and mathematics into the school curriculum; but the results
were not encouraging. He devoted to the teaching of history one hour a week; yet, though he
took care to inculcate in these lessons a wholesome hatred of moral evil, and to point out
from time to time the indications of the providential government of the world, his pupils never
seemed to make much progress in the subject. Could it have been that the time allotted to it
was insufficient? Dr. Arnold had some suspicions that this might be the case. With modern languages
there was the same difficulty. Here his hopes were certainly not excessive. 'I assume it,'
he wrote, 'as the foundation of all my view of the case, that boys at a public school never
will learn to speak or pronounce French well, under any circumstances.' It would be enough
if they could 'learn it grammatically as a dead language. But even this they very seldom managed
to do. I know too well,' he was obliged to confess, 'that most of the boys would pass a very
poor examination even in French grammar. But so it is with their mathematics; and so it will
be with any branch of knowledge that is taught but seldom, and is felt to be quite subordinate
to the boys' main study'.

The boys' main study remained the dead languages of Greece and Rome. That the classics should
form the basis of all teaching was an axiom with Dr. Arnold. 'The study of language,' he said,
'seems to me as if it was given for the very purpose of forming the human mind in youth; and
the Greek and Latin languages seem the very instruments by which this is to be effected.' Certainly,
there was something providential about it-- from the point of view of the teacher as well as
of the taught. If Greek and Latin had not been 'given' in that convenient manner, Dr. Arnold,
who had spent his life in acquiring those languages, might have discovered that he had acquired
them in vain. As it was, he could set the noses of his pupils to the grindstone of syntax and
prosody with a clear conscience. Latin verses and Greek prepositions divided between them the
labours of the week.

As time went on he became, he declared, 'increasingly convinced that it is not knowledge, but
the means of gaining knowledge which I have to teach'. The reading of the school was devoted
almost entirely to selected passages from the prose writers of antiquity. 'Boys,' he remarked,
'do not like poetry.' Perhaps his own poetical taste was a little dubious; at any rate, it
is certain that he considered the Greek Tragedians greatly overrated, and that he ranked Propertius
as 'an indifferent poet'. As for Aristophanes, owing to his strong moral disapprobation, he
could not bring himself to read him until he was forty, when, it is true, he was much struck
by the 'Clouds'. But Juvenal, the Doctor could never bring himself to read at all.

Physical science was not taught at Rugby. Since, in Dr. Arnold's opinion, it was too great
a subject to be studied en parergo, obviously only two alternatives were possible: it must
either take the chief place in the school curriculum, or it must be left out altogether. Before
such a choice, Dr. Arnold did not hesitate for a moment. 'Rather than have physical science
the principal thing in my son's mind,' he exclaimed in a letter to a friend, I would gladly
have him think that the sun went around the earth, and that the stars were so many spangles
set in the bright blue firmament. Surely the one thing needful for a Christian and an English
man to study is Christian, moral, and political philosophy.'

A Christian and an Englishman! After all, it was not in the classroom, nor in the boarding-house,
that the essential elements of instruction could be imparted which should qualify the youthful
neophyte to deserve those names. The final, the fundamental lesson could only be taught in
the school chapel; in the school chapel the centre of Dr. Arnold's system of education was
inevitably fixed. There, too, the Doctor himself appeared in the plenitude of his dignity and
his enthusiasm. There, with the morning sun shining on the freshly scrubbed faces of his 300
pupils, or, in the dusk of evening, through a glimmer of candles, his stately form, rapt in
devotion or vibrant with exhortation, would dominate the scene. Every phase of the Church service
seemed to receive its supreme expression in his voice, his attitude, his look. During the Te
Deum, his whole countenance would light up; and he read the Psalms with such conviction that
boys would often declare, after hearing him, that they understood them now for the first time.

It was his opinion that the creeds in public worship ought to be used as triumphant hymns of
thanksgiving, and, in accordance with this view, although unfortunately he possessed no natural
gift for music, he regularly joined in the chanting of the Nicene Creed with a visible animation
and a peculiar fervour, which it was impossible to forget. The Communion service he regarded
as a direct and special counterpoise to that false communion and false companionship, which,
as he often observed, was a great source of mischief in the school; and he bent himself down
with glistening eyes, and trembling voice, and looks of paternal solicitude, in the administration
of the elements. Nor was it only the different sections of the liturgy, but the very divisions
of the ecclesiastical year that reflected themselves in his demeanour; the most careless observer,
we are told, 'could not fail to be struck by the triumphant exultation of his whole manner
on Easter Sunday'; though it needed a more familiar eye to discern the subtleties in his bearing
which were produced by the approach or Advent, and the solemn thoughts which it awakened of
the advance of human life, the progress of the human race, and the condition of the Church
of England.

At the end of the evening service, the culminating moment of the week had come: the Doctor
delivered his sermon. It was not until then, as all who had known him agreed, it was not until
one had heard and seen him in the pulpit, that one could fully realise what it was to be face
to face with Dr. Arnold. The whole character of the man--so we are assured--stood at last revealed.
His congregation sat in fixed attention (with the exception of the younger boys, whose thoughts
occasionally wandered), while he propounded the general principles both of his own conduct
and that of the Almighty, or indicated the bearing of the incidents of Jewish history in the
sixth century B.C. upon the conduct of English schoolboys in 1830. Then, more than ever, his
deep consciousness of the invisible world became evident; then, more than ever, he seemed to
be battling with the wicked one. For his sermons ran on the eternal themes of the darkness
of evil, the craft of the tempter, the punishment of obliquity, and he justified the persistence
with which he dwelt upon these painful subjects by an appeal to a general principle: 'The spirit
of Elijah,' he said, 'must ever precede the spirit of Christ.'

The impression produced upon the boys was remarkable. It was noticed that even the most careless
would sometimes, during the course of the week, refer almost involuntarily to the sermon of
the past Sunday, as a condemnation of what they were doing. Others were heard to wonder how
it was that the Doctor's preaching, to which they had attended at the time so assiduously,
seemed, after all, to have such a small effect upon what they did. An old gentleman, recalling
those vanished hours, tried to recapture in words his state of mind as he sat in the darkened
chapel, while Dr. Arnold's sermons, with their high-toned exhortations, their grave and sombre
messages of incalculable import, clothed, like Dr. Arnold's body in its gown and bands, in
the traditional stiffness of a formal phraseology, reverberated through his adolescent ears.
'I used,' he said, 'to listen to those sermons from first to last with a kind of awe.'

His success was not limited to his pupils and immediate auditors. The sermons were collected
into five large volumes; they were the first of their kind; and they were received with admiration
by a wide circle of pious readers. Queen Victoria herself possessed a copy in which several
passages were marked in pencil, by the Royal hand.

Dr. Arnold's energies were by no means exhausted by his duties at Rugby. He became known not
merely as a headmaster, but as a public man. He held decided opinions upon a large number of
topics; and he enunciated them--based as they were almost invariably upon general principles--in
pamphlets, in prefaces, and in magazine articles, with an impressive self-confidence. He was,
as he constantly declared, a Liberal. In his opinion, by the very constitution of human nature,
the principles of progress and reform had been those of wisdom and justice in every age of
the world--except one: that which had preceded the fall of man from Paradise. Had he lived
then, Dr. Arnold would have been a Conservative. As it was, his Liberalism was tempered by
an 'abhorrence of the spirit of 1789, of the American War, of the French Economistes, and of
the English Whigs of the latter part of the seventeenth century'; and he always entertained
a profound respect for the hereditary peerage. It might almost be said, in fact, that he was
an orthodox Liberal. He believed in toleration too, within limits; that is to say, in the toleration
of those with whom he agreed. 'I would give James Mill as much opportunity for advocating his
opinion,' he said, 'as is consistent with a voyage to Botany Bay.'

He had become convinced of the duty of sympathising with the lower orders ever since he had
made a serious study of the Epistle of St. James; but he perceived clearly that the lower orders
fell into two classes, and that it was necessary to distinguish between them. There were the
'good poor'--and there were the others. 'I am glad that you have made acquaintance with some
of the good poor,' he wrote to a Cambridge undergraduate. 'I quite agree with you that it is
most instructive to visit them.' Dr. Arnold himself occasionally visited them, in Rugby; and
the condescension with which he shook hands with old men and women of the working classes was
long remembered in the neighbourhood. As for the others, he regarded them with horror and alarm.
'The disorders in our social state,' he wrote to the Chevalier Bunsen in 1834, 'appear to me
to continue unabated. You have heard, I doubt not, of the Trades Unions; a fearful engine of
mischief, ready to riot or to assassinate; and I see no counteracting power.'

On the whole, his view of the condition of England was a gloomy one. He recommended a correspondent
to read 'Isaiah iii, v, xxii; Jeremiah v, xxii, xxx; Amos iv; and Habakkuk ii', adding, 'you
will be struck, I think, with the close resemblance of our own state with that of the Jews
before the second destruction of Jerusalem'. When he was told that the gift of tongues had
descended on the Irvingites at Glasgow, he was not surprised. 'I should take it,' he said,
'merely as a sign of the coming of the day of the Lord.' And he was convinced that the day
of the Lord was coming--'the termination of one of the great aiones of the human race'. Of
that he had no doubt whatever; wherever he looked he saw 'calamities, wars, tumults, pestilences,
earthquakes, etc., all marking the time of one of God's peculiar seasons of visitation'. His
only uncertainty was whether this termination of an aion would turn out to be the absolutely
final one; but that he believed 'no created being knows or can know'. In any case, he had 'not
the slightest expectation of what is commonly meant by the Millennium'. And his only consolation
was that he preferred the present Ministry, inefficient as it was, to the Tories.

He had planned a great work on Church and State, in which he intended to lay bare the causes
and to point out the remedies of the evils which afflicted society. Its theme was to be, not
the alliance or union, but the absolute identity of the Church and the State; and he felt sure
that if only this fundamental truth were fully realised by the public, a general reformation
would follow. Unfortunately, however, as time went on, the public seemed to realise it less
and less. In spite of his protests, not only were Jews admitted to Parliament, but a Jew was
actually appointed a governor of Christ's Hospital; and Scripture was not made an obligatory
subject at the London University.

There was one point in his theory which was not quite plain to Dr. Arnold. If Church and State
were absolutely identical, it became important to decide precisely which classes of persons
were to be excluded, owing to their beliefs, from the community. Jews, for instance, were decidedly
outside the pale; while Dissenters--so Dr. Arnold argued--were as decidedly within it. But
what was the position of the Unitarians? Were they, or were they not, members of the Church
of Christ? This was one of those puzzling questions which deepened the frown upon the Doctor's
forehead and intensified the pursing of his lips. He thought long and earnestly upon the subject;
he wrote elaborate letters on it to various correspondents; but his conclusions remained indefinite.
'My great objection to Unitarianism,' he wrote, 'in its present form in England, is that it
makes Christ virtually dead.' Yet he expressed 'a fervent hope that if we could get rid of
the Athanasian Creed many good Unitarians would join their fellow Christians in bowing the
knee to Him who is Lord both of the dead and the living'. Amid these perplexities, it was disquieting
to learn that 'Unitarianism is becoming very prevalent in Boston'. He inquired anxiously as
to its 'complexion' there; but received no very illuminating answer. The whole matter continued
to be wrapped in a painful obscurity, There were, he believed, Unitarians and Unitarians; and
he could say no more.

In the meantime, pending the completion of his great work, he occupied himself with putting
forward various suggestions of a practical kind. He advocated the restoration of the Order
of Deacons, which, he observed, had long been 'quoad the reality, dead; for he believed that
'some plan of this sort might be the small end of the wedge, by which Antichrist might hereafter
be burst asunder like the Dragon of Bel's temple'. But the Order of Deacons was never restored,
and Dr. Arnold turned his attention elsewhere, urging in a weighty pamphlet the desirabitity
of authorising military officers, in congregations where it was impossible to procure the presence
of clergy, to administer the Eucharist, as well as Baptism. It was with the object of laying
such views as these before the public--'to tell them plainly', as he said, 'the evils that
exist, and lead them, if I can, to their causes and remedies'--that he started, in 1831, a
weekly newspaper, "The Englishman's Register". The paper was not a success, in spite of the
fact that it set out to improve its readers morally and, that it preserved, in every article,
an avowedly Christian tone. After a few weeks, and after he had spent upon it more than £200,
it came to an end.

Altogether, the prospect was decidedly discouraging. After all his efforts, the absolute identity
of Church and State remained as unrecognised as ever. 'So deep', he was at last obliged to
confess, 'is the distinction between the Church and the State seated in our laws, our language,
and our very notions, that nothing less than a miraculous interposition of God's Providence
seems capable of eradicating it.' Dr. Arnold waited in vain.

But, he did not wait in idleness. He attacked the same question from another side: he explored
the writings of the Christian Fathers, and began to compose a commentary on the New Testament.
In his view, the Scriptures were as fit a subject as any other book for free inquiry and the
exercise of the individual judgment, and it was in this spirit that he set about the interpretation
of them. He was not afraid of facing apparent difficulties, of admitting inconsistencies, or
even errors, in the sacred text. Thus he observed that 'in Chronicles xi, 20 and xiii, 2, there
is a decided difference in the parentage of Abijah's mother;'-- 'which', he added, 'is curious
on any supposition'. And at one time he had serious doubts as to the authorship of the Epistle
to the Hebrews. But he was able, on various problematical points, to suggest interesting solutions.

At first, for instance, he could not but be startled by the cessation of miracles in the early
Church; but upon consideration, he came to the conclusion that this phenomenon might be 'truly
accounted for by the supposition that none but the Apostles ever conferred miraculous powers,
and that therefore they ceased of course, after one generation'. Nor did he fail to base his
exegesis, whenever possible, upon an appeal to general principles. One of his admirers points
out how Dr. Arnold 'vindicated God's command to Abraham to sacrifice his son and to the Jews
to exterminate the nations of Canaan', by explaining the principles on which these commands
were given, and their reference to the moral state of those to whom they were addressed-- thereby
educing light out of darkness, unravelling the thread of God's religious education of the human
race, and holding up God's marvellous counsels to the devout wonder and meditation of the thoughtful
believer'.

There was one of his friends, however, who did not share this admiration for the Doctor's methods
of Scriptural interpretation. W. G. Ward, while still a young man at Oxford, had come under
his influence, and had been for some time one of his most enthusiastic disciples. But the star
of Newman was rising at the University; Ward soon felt the attraction of that magnetic power;
and his belief in his old teacher began to waver. It was, in particular, Dr. Arnold's treatment
of the Scriptures which filled Ward's argumentative mind, at first with distrust, and at last
with positive antagonism. To subject the Bible to free inquiry, to exercise upon it the criticism
of the individual judgment-- where might not such methods lead? Who could say that they would
not end in Socinianism?--nay, in Atheism itself? If the text of Scripture was to be submitted
to the searchings of human reason, how could the question of its inspiration escape the same
tribunal? And the proofs of revelation, and even of the existence of God? What human faculty
was capable of deciding upon such enormous questions? And would not the logical result be a
condition of universal doubt?

'On a very moderate computation, Ward argued, 'five times the amount of a man's natural life
might qualify a person endowed with extraordinary genius to have some faint notion (though
even this we doubt) on which side truth lies.' It was not that he had the slightest doubt of
Dr. Arnold's orthodoxy-- Dr. Arnold, whose piety was universally recognised--Dr. Arnold, who
had held up to scorn and execration Strauss's Leben Jesu without reading it. What Ward complained
of was the Doctor's lack of logic, not his lack of faith. Could he not see that if he really
carried out his own principles to a logical conclusion he would eventually find himself, precisely,
in the arms of Strauss? The young man, whose personal friendship remained unshaken, determined
upon an interview, and went down to Rugby primed with first principles, syllogisms, and dilemmas.
Finding that the headmaster was busy in school, he spent the afternoon reading novels on the
sofa in the drawing-room. When at last, late in the evening, the Doctor returned, tired out
with his day's work, Ward fell upon him with all his vigour. The contest was long and furious;
it was also entirely inconclusive. When it was over, Ward, with none of his brilliant arguments
disposed of, and none of his probing questions satisfactorily answered, returned to the University
to plunge headlong into the vortex of the Oxford Movement; and Dr. Arnold, worried, perplexed,
and exhausted, went to bed, where he remained for the next thirty-six hours.

The Commentary on the New Testament was never finished, and the great work on Church and State
itself remained a fragment. Dr. Arnold's active mind was diverted from political and theological
speculations to the study of philology, and to historical composition. His Roman History, which
he regarded as 'the chief monument of his historical fame', was based partly upon the researches
of Niebuhr, and partly upon an aversion to Gibbon. 'My highest ambition,' he wrote, 'is to
make my history the very reverse of Gibbon in this respect, that whereas the whole spirit of
his work, from its low morality, is hostile to religion, without speaking directly against
it, so my greatest desire would be, in my History, by its high morals and its general tone,
to be of use to the cause without actually bringing it forward.' These efforts were rewarded,
in 1841, by the Professorship of Modern History at Oxford. Meanwhile, he was engaged in the
study of the Sanskrit and Slavonic languages, bringing out an elaborate edition of Thucydides,
and carrying on a voluminous correspondence upon a multitude of topics with a large circle
of men of learning. At his death, his published works, composed during such intervals as he
could spare from the management of a great public school, filled, besides a large number of
pamphlets and articles, no less than seventeen volumes. It was no wonder that Carlyle, after
a visit to Rugby, should have characterised Dr. Arnold as a man of 'unhasting, unresting diligence'.

Mrs. Arnold, too, no doubt agreed with Carlyle. During the first eight years of their married
life, she bore him six children; and four more were to follow. In this large and growing domestic
circle his hours of relaxation were spent. There those who had only known him in his professional
capacity were surprised to find him displaying the tenderness and jocosity of a parent. The
dignified and stern headmaster was actually seen to dandle infants and to caracole upon the
hearthrug on all fours. Yet, we are told, 'the sense of his authority as a father was never
lost in his playfulness as a companion'. On more serious occasions, the voice of the spiritual
teacher sometimes made itself heard. An intimate friend described how 'on a comparison having
been made in his family circle, which seemed to place St. Paul above St. John,' the tears rushed
to the Doctor's eyes and how, repeating one of the verses from St. John, he begged that the
comparison might never again be made. The longer holidays were spent in Westmorland, where,
rambling with his offspring among the mountains, gathering wild flowers, and pointing out the
beauties of Nature, Dr. Arnold enjoyed, as he himself would often say, 'an almost awful happiness'.
Music he did not appreciate, though he occasionally desired his eldest boy, Matthew, to sing
him the Confirmation Hymn of Dr. Hinds, to which he had become endeared, owing to its use in
Rugby Chapel. But his lack of ear was, he considered, amply recompensed by his love of flowers:
'they are my music,' he declared. 'Life,' he said, 'is not long enough to take such intense
interest in objects in themselves so little.' As for the animal world, his feelings towards
it were of a very different cast. 'The whole subject,' he said, 'of the brute creation is to
me one of such painful mystery, that I dare not approach it.' The Unitarians themselves were
a less distressing thought.

Once or twice he found time to visit the Continent, and the letters and journals recording
in minute detail his reflections and impressions in France or Italy show us that Dr. Arnold
preserved, in spite of the distractions of foreign scenes and foreign manners, his accustomed
habits of mind. Taking very little interest in works of art, he was occasionally moved by the
beauty of natural objects; but his principal preoccupation remained with the moral aspects
of things. From this point of view, he found much to reprehend in the conduct of his own countrymen.
'I fear,' he wrote, 'that our countrymen who live abroad are not in the best possible moral
state, however much they may do in science or literature.' And this was unfortunate, because
'a thorough English gentleman--Christian, manly, and enlightened--is more, I believe, than
Guizot or Sismondi could comprehend; it is a finer specimen of human nature than any other
country, I believe, could furnish'. Nevertheless, our travellers would imitate foreign customs
without discrimination, 'as in the absurd habit of not eating fish with a knife, borrowed from
the French, who do it because they have no knives fit for use'. Places, no less than people,
aroused similar reflections. By Pompeii, Dr. Arnold was not particularly impressed. 'There
is only,' he observed, 'the same sort of interest with which one would see the ruins of Sodom
and Gomorrah, but indeed there is less. One is not authorised to ascribe so solemn a character
to the destruction of Pompeii.' The lake of Como moved him more profoundly. As he gazed upon
the overwhelming beauty around him, he thought of 'moral evil', and was appalled by the contrast.
'May the sense of moral evil', he prayed, 'be as strong in me as my delight in external beauty,
for in a deep sense of moral evil, more perhaps than in anything else, abides a saving knowledge
of God!'

His prayer was answered: Dr. Arnold was never in any danger of losing his sense of moral evil.
If the landscapes of Italy only served to remind him of it, how could he forget it among the
boys at Rugby School? The daily sight of so many young creatures in the hands of the Evil One
filled him with agitated grief. 'When the spring and activity of youth,' he wrote, 'is altogether
unsanctified by anything pure and elevated in its desires, it becomes a spectacle that is as
dizzying and almost more morally distressing than the shouts and gambols of a set of lunatics.'
One thing struck him as particularly strange: 'It is very startling,' he said, 'to see so much
of sin combined with so little of sorrow.' The naughtiest boys positively seemed to enjoy themselves
most. There were moments when he almost lost faith in his whole system of education, when he
began to doubt whether some far more radical reforms than any he had attempted might not be
necessary, before the multitude of children under his charge-- shouting and gambolling, and
yet plunged all the while deep in moral evil-- could ever be transformed into a set of Christian
gentlemen. But then he remembered his general principles, the conduct of Jehovah with the Chosen
People, and the childhood of the human race. No, it was for him to make himself, as one of
his pupils afterwards described him, in the words of Bacon, 'kin to God in spirit'; he would
rule the school majestically from on high. He would deliver a series of sermons analysing 'the
six vices' by which 'great schools were corrupted, and changed from the likeness of God's temple
to that of a den of thieves'. He would exhort, he would denounce, he would sweep through the
corridors, he would turn the pages of Facciolati's Lexicon more imposingly than ever; and the
rest he would leave to the Praepostors in the Sixth Form.

Upon the boys in the Sixth Form, indeed, a strange burden would seem to have fallen. Dr. Arnold
himself was very well aware of this. 'I cannot deny,' he told them in a sermon, 'that you have
an anxious duty-- a duty which some might suppose was too heavy for your years'; and every
term he pointed out to them, in a short address, the responsibilities of their position, and
impressed upon them 'the enormous influence' they possessed 'for good or for evil'. Nevertheless
most youths of seventeen, in spite of the warnings of their elders, have a singular trick of
carrying moral burdens lightly. The Doctor might preach and look grave; but young Brooke was
ready enough to preside at a fight behind the Chapel, though he was in the Sixth, and knew
that fighting was against the rules. At their best, it may be supposed that the Praepostors
administered a kind of barbaric justice; but they were not always at their best, and the pages
of "Tom Brown's Schooldays" show us what was no doubt the normal condition of affairs under
Dr. Arnold, when the boys in the Sixth Form were weak or brutal, and the blackguard Flashman,
in the intervals of swigging brandy-punch with his boon companions, amused himself by toasting
fags before the fire.

But there was an exceptional kind of boy, upon whom the high- pitched exhortations of Dr. Arnold
produced a very different effect. A minority of susceptible and serious youths fell completely
under his sway, responded like wax to the pressure of his influence, and moulded their whole
lives with passionate reverence upon the teaching of their adored master. Conspicuous among
these was Arthur Clough. Having been sent to Rugby at the age of ten, he quickly entered into
every phase of school life, though, we are told, 'a weakness in his ankles prevented him from
taking a prominent part in the games of the place'. At the age of sixteen, he was in the Sixth
Form, and not merely a Praepostor, but head of the School House. Never did Dr. Arnold have
an apter pupil. This earnest adolescent, with the weak ankles and the solemn face, lived entirely
with the highest ends in view. He thought of nothing but moral good, moral evil, moral influence,
and moral responsibility. Some of his early letters have been preserved, and they reveal both
the intensity with which he felt the importance of his own position, and the strange stress
of spirit under which he laboured. 'I have been in one continued state of excitement for at
least the last three years,' he wrote when he was not yet seventeen, 'and now comes the time
of exhaustion.' But he did not allow himself to rest, and a few months later he was writing
to a schoolfellow as follows: 'I verily believe my whole being is soaked through with the wishing
and hoping and striving to do the school good, or rather to keep it up and hinder it from falling
in this, I do think, very critical time, so that my cares and affections and conversations,
thoughts, words, and deeds look to that in voluntarily. I am afraid you will be inclined to
think this "cant" and I am conscious that even one's truest feelings, if very frequently put
out in the light, do make a bad and disagreeable appearance; but this, however, is true, and
even if I am carrying it too far, I do not think it has made me really forgetful of my personal
friends, such as, in particular, Gell and Burbidge and Walrond, and yourself, my dear Simpkinson .'

Perhaps it was not surprising that a young man brought up in such an atmosphere, should have
fallen a prey at Oxford, to the frenzies of religious controversy; that he should have been
driven almost out of his wits by the ratiocinations of W. G. Ward; that he should have lost
his faith; that he should have spent the rest of his existence lamenting that loss, both in
prose and verse; and that he should have eventually succumbed, conscientiously doing up brown
paper parcels for Florence Nightingale.

In the earlier years of his headmastership Dr. Arnold had to face a good deal of opposition.
His advanced religious views were disliked, and there were many parents to whom his system
of school government did not commend itself. But in time this hostility melted away. Succeeding
generations of favourite pupils began to spread his fame through the Universities. At Oxford
especially, men were profoundly impressed by the pious aims of the boys from Rugby. It was
a new thing to see undergraduates going to Chapel more often than they were obliged, and visiting
the good poor. Their reverent admiration for Dr. Arnold was no less remarkable. Whenever two
of his old pupils met, they joined in his praises; and the sight of his picture had been known
to call forth, from one who had not even reached the Sixth, exclamations of rapture lasting
for ten minutes and filling with astonishment the young men from other schools who happened
to be present.

He became a celebrity; he became at last a great man. Rugby prospered; its numbers rose higher
than ever before; and, after thirteen years as headmaster, Dr. Arnold began to feel that his
work there was accomplished, and that he might look forward either to other labours or, perhaps,
to a dignified retirement. But it was not to be.

His father had died suddenly at the age of fifty-three from angina pectoris; and he himself
was haunted by forebodings of an early death. To be snatched away without a warning, to come
in a moment from the seductions of this World to the presence of Eternity-- his most ordinary
actions, the most casual remarks, served to keep him in remembrance of that dreadful possibility.
When one of his little boys clapped his hands at the thought of the approaching holidays, the
Doctor gently checked him, and repeated the story of his own early childhood; how his own father
had made him read aloud a sermon on the text 'Boast not thyself of tomorrow"; and how, within
the week, his father was dead. On the title page of his MS. volume of sermons, he was always
careful to write the date of its commencement, leaving a blank for that of its completion.
One of his children asked him the meaning of this. 'It is one of the most solemn things I do,'
he replied, 'to write the beginning of that sentence, and think that I may perhaps not live
to finish it.'

It was noticed that in the spring of 1842 such thoughts seemed to be even more frequently in
his mind than usual. He was only in his forty-seventh year, but he dwelt darkly on the fragility
of human existence. Towards the end of May, he began to keep a diary--a private memorandum
of his intimate communings with the Almighty. Here, evening after evening, in the traditional
language of religious devotion, he humbled himself before God, prayed for strength and purity,
and threw himself upon the mercy of the Most High. 'Another day and another month succeed',
he wrote on May 31st. 'May God keep my mind and heart fixed on Him, and cleanse me from all
sin. I would wish to keep a watch over my tongue, as to vehement speaking and censuring of
others...I would desire to remember my latter end to which I am approaching... May God keep
me in the hour of death, through Jesus Christ; and preserve me from every fear, as well as
from presumption.' On June 2nd he wrote, 'Again the day is over and I am going to rest. Oh
Lord, preserve me this night, and strengthen me to bear whatever Thou shalt see fit to lay
on me, whether pain, sickness, danger, or distress.' On Sunday, June 5th, the reading of the
newspaper aroused 'painful and solemn' reflections... 'So much of sin and so much of suffering
in the world, as are there displayed, and no one seems able to remedy either. And then the
thought of my own private life, so full of comforts, is very startling.' He was puzzled; but
he concluded with a prayer: 'May I be kept humble and zealous, and may God give me grace to
labour in my generation for the good of my brethren and for His Glory!'

The end of the term was approaching, and to all appearance the Doctor was in excellent spirits.
On June 11th, after a hard day's work, he spent the evening with a friend in the discussion
of various topics upon which he often touched in his conversation the comparison of the art
of medicine in barbarous and civilised ages, the philological importance of provincial vocabularies,
and the threatening prospect of the moral condition of the United States. Left alone, he turned
to his diary. 'The day after tomorrow,' he wrote, 'is my birthday, if I am permitted to live
to see it-- my forty-seventh birthday since my birth. How large a portion of my life on earth
is already passed! And then-- what is to follow this life? How visibly my outward work seems
contracting and softening away into the gentler employments of old age. In one sense how nearly
can I now say, "Vivi". And I thank God that, as far as ambition is concerned, it is, I trust,
fully mortified; I have no desire other than to step back from my present place in the world,
and not to rise to a higher. Still there are works which, with God's permission, I would do
before the night cometh.' Dr. Arnold was thinking of his great work on Church and State.

Early next morning he awoke with a sharp pain in his chest. The pain increasing, a physician
was sent for; and in the meantime Mrs. Arnold read aloud to her husband the Fifty-first Psalm.
Upon one of their boys coming into the room, 'My son, thank God for me,' said Dr. Arnold; and
as the boy did not at once catch his meaning, he added, 'Thank God, Tom, for giving me this
pain; I have suffered so little pain in my life that I feel it is very good for me. Now God
has given it to me, and I do so thank Him for it.' Then Mrs. Arnold read from the Prayer-book
the 'Visitation of the Sick', her husband listening with deep attention, and assenting with
an emphatic 'Yes' at the end of many of the sentences. When the physician arrived, he perceived
at once the gravity of the case: it was an attack of angina pectoris. He began to prepare some
laudanum, while Mrs. Arnold went out to fetch the children. All at once, as the medical man
was bending over his glasses, there was a rattle from the bed; a convulsive struggle followed;
and, when the unhappy woman, with the children, and all the servants, rushed into the room,
Dr. Arnold had passed from his perplexities forever.

There can be little doubt that what he had achieved justified the prediction of the Provost
of Oriel that he would 'change the face of education all through the public schools of England'.
It is true that, so far as the actual machinery of education was concerned, Dr. Arnold not
only failed to effect a change, but deliberately adhered to the old system. The monastic and
literary conceptions of education, which had their roots in the Middle Ages, and had been accepted
and strengthened at the revival of Learning, he adopted almost without hesitation. Under him,
the public school remained, in essentials, a conventional establishment, devoted to the teaching
of Greek and Latin grammar. Had he set on foot reforms in these directions, it seems probable
that he might have succeeded in carrying the parents of England with him. The moment was ripe;
there was a general desire for educational changes; and Dr. Arnold's great reputation could
hardly have been resisted. As it was, he threw the whole weight of his influence into the opposite
scale, and the ancient system became more firmly established than ever.

The changes which he did effect were of a very different nature. By introducing morals and
religion into his scheme of education, he altered the whole atmosphere of public-school life.
Henceforward the old rough-and-tumble, which was typified by the regime of Keate at Eton, became
impossible. After Dr. Arnold, no public school could venture to ignore the virtues of respectability.
Again, by his introduction of the prefectorial system, Dr. Arnold produced far-reaching effects--effects
which he himself, perhaps, would have found perplexing. In his day, when the school hours were
over, the boys were free to enjoy themselves as they liked; to bathe, to fish, to ramble for
long afternoons in the country, collecting eggs or gathering flowers. 'The taste of the boys
at this period,' writes an old Rugbaean who had been under Arnold, 'leaned strongly towards
flowers'. The words have an odd look today. 'The modern reader of "Tom Brown's Schooldays"
searches in vain for any reference to compulsory games, house colours, or cricket averages.
In those days, when boys played games they played them for pleasure; but in those days the
prefectorial system-- the system which hands over the life of a school to an oligarchy of a
dozen youths of seventeen-- was still in its infancy, and had not yet borne its fruit.

Teachers and prophets have strange after-histories; and that of Dr. Arnold has been no exception.
The earnest enthusiast who strove to make his pupils Christian gentlemen and who governed his
school according to the principles of the Old Testament, has proved to be the founder of the
worship of athletics and the worship of good form. Upon those two poles our public schools
have turned for so long that we have almost come to believe that such is their essential nature,
and that an English public schoolboy who wears the wrong clothes and takes no interest in football,
is a contradiction in terms. Yet it was not so before Dr. Arnold; will it always be so after
him? We shall see.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Dean Stanley. Life and Correspondence of Dr Arnold.  Thomas Hughes. Tom Brown's Schooldays.
Sir H. Maxwell-Lyte. History of Eton College.  Wilfrid Ward. W. G. Ward and the Oxford Movement.
H. Clough. Letters. An Old Rugbaean. Recollections of Rugby. Thomas Arnold. Passages in a Wandering
Life.

The End of General Gordon

DURING the year 1883 a solitary English gentleman was to be seen,

wandering, with a thick book under his arm, in the neighbourhood  of Jerusalem. His unassuming
figure, short and slight, with its  half-gliding, half-tripping motion, gave him a boyish aspect,
which contrasted, oddly, but not unpleasantly, with the touch of  grey on his hair and whiskers.
There was the same contrast-- enigmatic and attractive--between the sunburnt brick-red  complexion--the
hue of the seasoned traveller--and the large blue

eyes, with their look of almost childish sincerity. To the  friendly inquirer, he would explain,
in a row, soft, and very  distinct voice, that he was engaged in elucidating four  questions--the
site of the Crucifixion, the line of division  between the tribes of Benjamin and Judah, the
identification of  Gideon, and the position of the Garden of Eden. He was also, he  would add,
most anxious to discover the spot where the Ark first  touched ground, after the subsidence
of the Flood: he believed,  indeed, that he had solved that problem, as a reference to some
passages in the book which he was carrying would show.

This singular person was General Gordon, and his book was the  Holy Bible.

In such complete retirement from the world and the ways of men,  it might have seemed that
a life of inordinate activity had found

at last a longed-for, final peacefulness. For month after  month, for an entire year, the General
lingered by the banks of  the Jordan. But then the enchantment was suddenly broken. Once  more
adventure claimed him; he plunged into the whirl of high  affairs; his fate was mingled with
the frenzies of Empire and the

doom of peoples. And it was not in peace and rest, but in ruin  and horror, that he reached
his end.

The circumstances of that tragic history, so famous, so bitterly  debated, so often and so
controversially described, remain full  of suggestion for the curious examiner of the past.
There emerges

from those obscure, unhappy records an interest, not merely  political and historical, but
human and dramatic. One catches a  vision of strange characters, moved by mysterious impulses,
interacting in queer complication, and hurrying at last--so it  almost seems--like creatures
in a puppet show to a predestined  catastrophe. The characters, too, have a charm of their
own: they

are curiously English. What other nation on the face of the earth

could have produced Mr. Gladstone and Sir Evelyn Baring and Lord  Hartington and General Gordon?
Alike in their emphasis and their  lack of emphasis, in their eccentricity and their conventionality,
in their matter-of-factness and their romance, these four figures

seem to embody the mingling contradictions of the English spirit.

As for the mise-en-scene, it is perfectly appropriate. But first,

let us glance at the earlier adventures of the hero of the piece.

Charles George Gordon was born in 1833. His father, of Highland  and military descent, was
himself a Lieutenant-General; his  mother came of a family of merchants, distinguished for
their sea

voyages into remote regions of the Globe. As a boy, Charlie was  remarkable for his high spirits,
pluck, and love of mischief.  Destined for the Artillery, he was sent to the Academy at  Woolwich,
where some other characteristics made their appearance.

On one occasion, when the cadets had been forbidden to leave the  dining-room and the senior
corporal stood with outstretched arms  in the doorway to prevent their exit, Charlie Gordon
put his head

down, and, butting the officer in the pit of the stomach,  projected him down a flight of stairs
and through a glass door at

the bottom. For this act of insubordination he was nearly  dismissed-- while the captain of
his company predicted that he  would never make an officer. A little later, when he was  eighteen,
it came to the knowledge of the authorities that  bullying was rife at the Academy. The new-comers
were questioned,

and one of them said that Charlie Gordon had hit him over the  head with a clothes-brush. He
had worked well, and his record was

on the whole a good one; but the authorities took a serious view  of the case, and held back
his commission for six months. It was  owing to this delay that he went into the Royal Engineers,
instead of the Royal Artillery.

He was sent to Pembroke, to work at the erection of  fortifications; and at Pembroke those
religious convictions,  which never afterwards left him, first gained a hold upon his  mind.
Under the influence of his sister Augusta and of a 'very  religious captain of the name of
Drew', he began to reflect upon  his sins, look up texts, and hope for salvation. Though he
had  never been confirmed-- he never was confirmed-- he took the  sacrament every Sunday; and
he eagerly perused the Priceless  Diamond, Scott's Commentaries, and The Remains of the Rev.
R.  McCheyne.

During the siege of Sebastopol he behaved with conspicuous  gallantry. Upon the declaration
of peace, he was sent to  Bessarabia to assist in determining the frontier between Russia 
and Turkey, in accordance with the Treaty of Paris; and upon this

duty he was occupied for nearly two years. Not long after his  return home, in 1860, war was
declared upon China. Captain Gordon

was dispatched to the scene of operations, but the fighting was  over before he arrived. Nevertheless,
he was to remain for the  next four years in China, where he was to lay the foundations of
extraordinary renown.

Though he was too late to take part in the capture of the Taku  Forts, he was in time to witness
the destruction of the Summer  Palace at Peking--the act by which Lord Elgin, in the name of
European civilisation, took vengeance upon the barbarism of the  East.

The war was over; but the British Army remained in the country,  until the payment of an indemnity
by the Chinese Government was  completed. A camp was formed at Tientsin, and Gordon was occupied

in setting up huts for the troops. While he was thus engaged, he  had a slight attack of smallpox.
In 1837, a village schoolmaster near  Canton had been attacked by illness; and, as in the case
of  Gordon, illness had been followed by a religious revulsion. Hong- Siu-Tsuen-- for such
was his name-- saw visions, went into  ecstasies, and entered into relations with the Deity.
Shortly  afterwards, he fell in with a Methodist missionary from America,  who instructed him
in the Christian religion. The new doctrine,  working upon the mystical ferment already in
Hong's mind,  produced a remarkable result. He was, he declared, the prophet of

God; he was more-- he was the Son of God; he was Tien Wang, the  Celestial King; he was the
younger brother of Jesus. 

The times were propitious, and proselytes soon gathered around him.  Having conceived a grudge
against the Government, owing to his failure  in an examination, Hong gave a political turn
to his teaching,  which soon developed into a propaganda of rebellion against the  rule of
the Manchus and the Mandarins. The authorities took  fright, attempted to suppress Hong by
force, and failed. The  movement spread. By 1850 the rebels were overrunning the populous

and flourishing delta of the Yangtse Kiang, and had become a  formidable force. In 1853 they
captured Nankin, which was  henceforth their capital. The Tien Wang, established himself in a

splendid palace, and proclaimed his new evangel. His theogony  included the wife of God, or
the celestial Mother, the wife of  Jesus, or the celestial daughter-in-law, and a sister of
Jesus,  whom he married to one of his lieutenants, who thus became the  celestial son-in-law;
the Holy Ghost, however, was eliminated. 

His mission was to root out Demons and Manchus from the face of  the earth, and to establish
Taiping, the reign of eternal peace.  In the meantime, retiring into the depths of his palace,
he left  the further conduct of earthly operations to his lieutenants,  upon whom he bestowed
the title of 'Wangs' (kings), while he  himself, surrounded by thirty wives and one hundred
concubines,  devoted his energies to the spiritual side of his mission. The  Taiping Rebellion,
as it came to be called, had now reached its  furthest extent. The rebels were even able to
occupy, for more  than a year, the semi-European city of Shanghai. 

But then the tide turned. The latent forces of theEmpire gradually  asserted themselves. The
rebels lost ground, their armies were defeated,  and in 1859 Nankin itself was besieged, and
the Celestial King trembled  in his palace. The end seemed to be at hand, when there was a
sudden  twist of Fortune's wheel. The war of 860, the invasion of China by  European armies,
their march into the interior, and their occupation of  Peking, not only saved the rebels from
destruction, but allowed them to  recover the greater part of what they had lost. Once more
they  seized upon the provinces of the delta, once more they menaced  Shanghai. It was clear
that the Imperial army was incompetent,  and the Shanghai merchants determined to provide for
their own  safety as best they could. They accordingly got together a body  of troops, partly
Chinese and partly European, and under European

officers, to which they entrusted the defence of the town. This  small force, which, after
a few preliminary successes, received  from the Chinese Government the title of the 'Ever Victorious
Army', was able to hold the rebels at bay, but it could do no  more. 

For two years Shanghai was in constant danger. The Taipings, steadily  growing in power, were
spreading destruction far and wide. The Ever  Victorious Army was the only force capable of
opposing them, and the  Ever Victorious Army was defeated more often than not. Its first European
leader had been killed; his successor quarrelled with the Chinese

Governor, Li Hung Chang, and was dismissed. At last it was determined to  ask the General at
the head of the British Army of Occupation for the loan  of an officer to command the force.
The English, who had been at first  inclined to favour the Taipings, on religious grounds,
were now  convinced, on practical grounds, of the necessity of suppressing  them. It was in
these circumstances that, early in 1863, the  command of the Ever Victorious Army was offered
to Gordon. He  accepted it, received the title of General from the Chinese  authorities, and
entered forthwith upon his new task. He was just

thirty.

In eighteen months, he told Li Hung Chang, the business would be  finished; and he was as good
as his word. The difficulties before

him were very great. A vast tract of country was in the  possession of the rebels-- an area,
at the lowest estimate, of  14,000 square miles with a population of 20,000,000. For  centuries
this low-lying plain of the Yangtse delta, rich in silk

and tea, fertilised by elaborate irrigation, and covered with  great walled cities, had been
one of the most flourishing  districts in China. Though it was now being rapidly ruined by the

depredations of the Taipings, its strategic strength was  obviously enormous. Gordon, however,
with the eye of a born  general, perceived that he could convert the very feature of the  country
which, on the face of it, most favoured an army on the  defence-- its complicated geographical
system of interlacing roads  and waterways, canals, lakes and rivers-- into a means of  offensive
warfare. The force at his disposal was small, but it  was mobile. He had a passion for map-making,
and had already, in  his leisure hours, made a careful survey of the country round  Shanghai;
he was thus able to execute a series of manoeuvres  which proved fatal to the enemy. By swift
marches and counter- marches, by sudden attacks and surprises, above all by the  dispatch of
armed steamboats up the circuitous waterways into  positions from which they could fall upon
the enemy in reverse,  he was able gradually to force back the rebels, to cut them off  piecemeal
in the field, and to seize upon their cities. 

But, brilliant as these operations were, Gordon's military genius

showed itself no less unmistakably in other directions. The Ever  Victorious Army, recruited
from the riff-raff of Shanghai, was an

ill-disciplined, ill-organised body of about three thousand men,  constantly on the verge of
mutiny, supporting itself on plunder,  and, at the slightest provocation, melting into thin
air. Gordon,

by sheer force of character, established over this incoherent  mass of ruffians an extraordinary
ascendancy. He drilled them  with rigid severity; he put them into a uniform, armed them  systematically,
substituted pay for loot, and was even able, at  last, to introduce regulations of a sanitary
kind. There were  some terrible scenes, in which the General, alone, faced the  whole furious
army, and quelled scenes of rage, desperation,  towering courage, and summary execution. Eventually
he attained  an almost magical prestige. Walking at the head of his troops  with nothing but
a light cane in his hand, he seemed to pass  through every danger with the scatheless equanimity
of a demi- god. The Taipings themselves were awed into a strange reverence.  More than once
their leaders, in a frenzy of fear and admiration,

ordered the sharp-shooters not to take aim at the advancing  figure of the faintly smiling
Englishman.

It is significant that Gordon found it easier to win battles and  to crush mutineers than to
keep on good terms with the Chinese  authorities. He had to act in cooperation with a large
native  force; and it was only natural that the general at the head of it

should grow more and more jealous and angry as the Englishman's  successes revealed more and
more clearly his own incompetence. At

first, indeed, Gordon could rely upon the support of the  Governor. Li Flung Chang's experience
of Europeans had been  hitherto limited to low-class adventurers, and Gordon came as a  revelation.
'It is a direct blessing from Heaven,' he noted in  his diary, 'the coming of this British
Gordon. ... He is superior

in manner and bearing to any of the foreigners whom I have come  into contact with, and does
not show outwardly that conceit which

makes most of them repugnant in my sight.' A few months later,  after he had accompanied Gordon
on a victorious expedition, the  Mandarin's enthusiasm burst forth. 'What a sight for tired eyes,'

he wrote, 'what an elixir for a heavy heart-- to see this  splendid Englishman fight! ... If
there is anything that I admire

nearly as much as the superb scholarship of Tseng Kuofan, it is  the military qualities of
this fine officer. He is a glorious  fellow!' In his emotion, Li Hung Chang addressed Gordon
as his  brother, declaring that he 'considered him worthy to fill the  place of the brother
who is departed. Could I have said more in  all the words of the world?' 

Then something happened which impressed and mystified the sensitive  Chinaman. 'The Englishman's
face was first filled with a deep pleasure,  and then he seemed to be thinking), of something
depressing and sad; for  the smile went from his mouth and there were tears in his eyes when
he  thanked me for what I had said. Can it be that he has, or has had, some  great trouble
in his life, and that he fights recklessly to  forget it, or that Death has no terrors for
him?' But, as time  went on, Li Hung Chang's attitude began to change. 'General  Gordon,' he
notes in July, 'must control his tongue, even if he  lets his mind run loose.' The Englishman
had accused him of  intriguing with the Chinese general, and of withholding money due

to the Ever Victorious Army. 'Why does he not accord me the  honours that are due to me, as
head of the military and civil  authority in these parts?' By September, the Governor's earlier
transports have been replaced by a more judicial frame of mind.  'With his many faults, his
pride, his temper, and his never- ending demand for money, (for one is a noble man, and in
spite of all  I have said to him or about him) I will ever think most highly of

him. ... He is an honest man, but difficult to get on with.'

Disagreements of this kind might perhaps have been tided over  until the end of the campaign;
but an unfortunate incident  suddenly led to a more serious quarrel. Gordon's advance had been

fiercely contested, but it had been constant; he had captured  several important towns; and
in October lice laid siege to the  city of Soo-chow, once one of the most famous and splendid
in  China. In December, its fall being obviously imminent, the  Taiping leaders agreed to surrender
it on condition that their  lives were spared. Gordon was a party to the agreement, and laid
special stress upon his presence with the Imperial forces as a  pledge of its fulfilment. No
sooner, however, was the city  surrendered than the rebel 'Wangs' were assassinated. In his
fury, it is said that Gordon searched everywhere for Li Hung  Chang with a loaded pistol in
his hand. He was convinced of the  complicity of the Governor, who, on his side, denied that
he was  responsible for what had happened. 'I asked him why I should  plot, and go around a
mountain, when a mere order, written with  five strokes of the quill, would have accomplished
the same  thing. He did not answer, but he insulted me, and said he would  report my treachery,
as he called it, to Shanghai and England.  Let him do so; he cannot bring the crazy Wangs back.'
The  agitated Mandarin hoped to placate Gordon by a large gratuity and

an Imperial medal; but the plan was not successful. 'General  Gordon,' he writes, 'called upon
me in his angriest mood. He  repeated his former speeches about the Wangs. I did not attempt
to argue with him... He refused the 10,000 taels, which I had  ready for him, and, with an
oath, said that he did not want the  Throne's medal. This is showing the greatest disrespect.'

Gordon resigned his command; and it was only with the utmost  reluctance that he agreed at
last to resume it. An arduous and  terrible series of operations followed; but they were successful,

and by June, 1864, the Ever Victorious Army, having accomplished  its task, was disbanded.
The Imperial forces now closed round  Nankin; the last hopes of the Tien Wang had vanished.
In the  recesses of his seraglio, the Celestial King, judging that the  time had come for the
conclusion of his mission, swallowed gold  leaf until he ascended to Heaven. In July, Nankin
was taken, the  remaining chiefs were executed, and the rebellion was at an end.  The Chinese
Government gave Gordon the highest rank in its  military hierarchy, and invested him with the
yellow jacket and  the peacock's feather. He rejected an enormous offer of money;  but he could
not refuse a great gold medal, specially struck in  his honour by order of the Emperor. At
the end of the year he  returned to England, where the conqueror of the Taipings was made

a Companion of the Bath.

That the English authorities should have seen fit to recognise  Gordon's services by the reward
usually reserved for industrious  clerks was typical of their attitude towards him until the
very  end of his career. Perhaps if he had been ready to make the most  of the wave of popularity
which greeted him on his return--if he  had advertised his fame and, amid high circles, played
the part  of Chinese Gordon in a becoming manner-- the results would have  been different.
But he was by nature farouche; his soul revolted  against dinner parties and stiff shirts;
and the presence of  ladies-- especially of fashionable ladies-- filled him with  uneasiness.
He had, besides, a deeper dread of the world's  contaminations. And so, when he was appointed
to Gravesend to  supervise the erection of a system of forts at the mouth of the  Thames, he
remained there quietly for six years, and at last was  almost forgotten. The forts, which were
extremely expensive and  quite useless, occupied his working hours; his leisure he devoted

to acts of charity and to religious contemplation. The neighbourhood  was a poverty-stricken
one, and the kind Colonel, with his tripping  step and simple manner, was soon a familiar figure
in it, chatting  with the seamen, taking provisions to starving families, or visiting  some
bedridden old woman to light her fire. He was particularly fond  of boys. Ragged street arabs
and rough sailor-lads crowded about him.  They were made free of his house and garden; they
visited him in the  evenings for lessons and advice; he helped them, found them employment,
corresponded with them when they went out into the world. They  were, he said, his Wangs. It
was only by a singular austerity of  living that he was able to afford such a variety of charitable
expenses. The easy luxuries of his class and station were unknown

to him: his clothes verged upon the shabby; and his frugal meals  were eaten at a table with
a drawer, into which the loaf and  plate were quickly swept at the approach of his poor visitors.
Special occasions demanded special sacrifices. When, during the  Lancashire famine, a public
subscription was opened, finding  that he had no ready money, he remembered his Chinese medal,
and, after effacing the inscription, dispatched it as an  anonymous gift.

Except for his boys and his paupers, he lived alone. In his  solitude, he ruminated upon the
mysteries of the universe; and  those religious tendencies, which had already shown themselves,
now became a fixed and dominating factor in his life. His reading

was confined almost entirely to the Bible; but the Bible he read  and re-read with an untiring,
unending assiduity. There, he  was convinced, all truth was to be found; and he was equally
convinced that he could find it. The doubts of philosophers, the  investigations of commentators,
the smiles of men of the world,  the dogmas of Churches-- such things meant nothing to the
Colonel.  Two facts alone were evident: there was the Bible, and there was  himself; and all
that remained to be done was for him to discover

what were the Bible's instructions, and to act accordingly. In  order to make this discovery
it was only necessary for him to  read the Bible over and over again; and therefore, for the
rest  of his life, he did so.

The faith that he evolved was mystical and fatalistic; it was  also highly unconventional.
His creed, based upon the narrow  foundations of Jewish Scripture, eked out occasionally by
some  English evangelical manual, was yet wide enough to ignore every  doctrinal difference,
and even, at moments, to transcend the  bounds of Christianity itself. The just man was he
who submitted  to the Will of God, and the Will of God, inscrutable and  absolute, could be
served aright only by those who turned away  from earthly desires and temporal temptations,
to rest themselves

whole-heartedly upon the in-dwelling Spirit. Human beings were  the transitory embodiments
of souls who had existed through an  infinite past, and would continue to exist through an
infinite  future. 

The world was vanity; the flesh was dust and ashes. 'A man,' Gordon  wrote to his sister, 'who
knows not the secret, who has not the in-dwelling  of God revealed to him, is like this--[picture
of a circle with Body and  Soul written within it].  He takes the promises and curses as addressed
to him as one man, and will not hear of there being any birth before his  natural birth, in
any existence except with the body he is in. The man to  whom the secret (the indwelling of
God) is revealed is like this: [picture  of a circle with soul and body enclosed in two separate
circles].

He applies the promises to one and the curses to the other, if  disobedient, which he must
be, except the soul is enabled by God  to rule. He then sees he is not of this world; for when
he speaks

of himself he quite disregards the body his soul lives in, which  is earthly.' Such conceptions
are familiar enough in the history  of religious thought: they are those of the hermit and
the fakir;

and it might have been expected that, when once they had taken  hold upon his mind, Gordon
would have been content to lay aside  the activities of his profession, and would have relapsed
at last

into the complete retirement of holy meditation. But there were  other elements in his nature
which urged him towards a very  different course. He was no simple quietist. He was an English
gentleman, an officer, a man of energy and action, a lover of  danger and the audacities that
defeat danger; a passionate  creature, flowing over with the self-assertiveness of independent

judgment and the arbitrary temper of command. 

Whatever he might find in his pocket-Bible, it was not for such as  he to dream out his days
in devout obscurity. But, conveniently enough,  he found nothing in his pocket-Bible indicating
that he should. What  he did find was that the Will of God was inscrutable and absolute;  that
it was man's duty to follow where God's hand led; and, if  God's hand led towards violent excitements
and extraordinary  vicissitudes, that it was not only futile, it was impious to  turn another
way. Fatalism is always apt to be a double-edged  philosophy; for while, on the one hand, it
reveals the minutest  occurrences as the immutable result of a rigid chain of  infinitely predestined
causes, on the other, it invests the  wildest incoherences of conduct or of circumstance with
the  sanctity of eternal law. And Gordon's fatalism was no exception.  The same doctrine that
led him to dally with omens, to search for

prophetic texts, and to append, in brackets, the apotropaic  initials D.V. after every statement
in his letters implying  futurity, led him also to envisage his moods and his desires, his

passing reckless whims and his deep unconscious instincts, as the

mysterious manifestations of the indwelling God. That there was  danger lurking in such a creed
he was very well aware. The  grosser temptations of the world-- money and the vulgar attributes
of power-- had, indeed, no charms for him; but there were subtler

and more insinuating allurements which it was not so easy to  resist. More than one observer
declared that ambition was, in  reality, the essential motive in his life: ambition, neither
for  wealth nor titles, but for fame and influence, for the swaying of

multitudes, and for that kind of enlarged and intensified  existence 'where breath breathes
most even in the mouths of men'.

Was it so? In the depths of Gordon's soul there were intertwining

contradictions-- intricate recesses where egoism and renunciation

melted into one another, where the flesh lost itself in the  spirit, and the spirit in the
flesh. What was the Will of God?  The question, which first became insistent during his retirement
at Gravesend, never afterwards left him; it might almost be said  that he spent the remainder
of his life in searching for the  answer to it. In all his Odysseys, in all his strange and
agitated adventures, a day never passed on which he neglected the

voice of eternal wisdom as it spoke through the words of Paul or  Solomon, of Jonah or Habakkuk.
He opened his Bible, he read, and  then he noted down his reflections upon scraps of paper,
which,  periodically pinned together, he dispatched to one or other of  his religious friends,
and particularly his sister Augusta. The  published extracts from these voluminous outpourings
lay bare the

inner history of Gordon's spirit, and reveal the pious visionary  of Gravesend in the restless
hero of three continents.

His seclusion came to an end in a distinctly providential manner.

In accordance with a stipulation in the Treaty of Paris, an  international commission had been
appointed to improve the  navigation of the Danube; and Gordon, who had acted on a similar
body fifteen years earlier, was sent out to represent Great  Britain. At Constantinople, he
chanced to meet the Egyptian  minister, Nubar Pasha. The Governorship of the Equatorial  Provinces
of the Sudan was about to fall vacant; and Nubar  offered the post to Gordon, who accepted
it. The unexplored and pestilential

region of Equatoria, stretching southwards to the Great Lakes and

the sources of the Nile, had been annexed to Egypt by the Khedive

Ismail, who, while he squandered his millions on Parisian ballet- dancers, dreamt strange dreams
of glory and empire. Those dim  tracts of swamp and forest in Central Africa were-- so he 
declared-- to be 'opened up'; they were to receive the blessings  of civilisation, they were
to become a source of eternal honour  to himself and Egypt. The slave-trade, which flourished
there,  was to be put down; the savage inhabitants were to become  acquainted with freedom,
justice, and prosperity. Incidentally, a

government monopoly in ivory was to be established, and the place

was to be made a paying concern. Ismail, hopelessly in debt to a  horde of European creditors,
looked to Europe to support him in  his schemes. Europe, and, in particular, England, with
her  passion for extraneous philanthropy, was not averse. 

Sir Samuel Baker became the first Governor of Equatoria, and now  Gordon was to carry on the
good work. In such circumstances it was  only natural that Gordon should consider himself a
special instrument  in God's band. To put his disinterestedness beyond doubt, he  reduced his
salary, which had been fixed at £10,000, to £2,000. He  took over his new duties early in 1874,
and it was not long  before he had a first hint of disillusionment. On his way up the  Nile,
he was received in state at Khartoum by the Egyptian  Governor-- General of the Sudan, his
immediate official superior.

The function ended in a prolonged banquet, followed by a mixed  ballet of soldiers and completely
naked young women, who danced  in a circle, beat time with their feet, and accompanied their
gestures with a curious sound of clucking. At last the Austrian  Consul, overcome by the exhilaration
of the scene, flung himself  in a frenzy among the dancers; the Governor-General, shouting
with delight, seemed about to follow suit, when Gordon abruptly  left the room, and the party
broke up in confusion. 

When, 1,500 miles to the southward, Gordon reached the seat of  his government, and the desolation
of the Tropics closed over  him, the agonising nature of his task stood fully revealed. For
the next three years he struggled with enormous difficulties--  with the confused and horrible
country, the appalling climate,  the maddening insects and the loathsome diseases, the  indifference
of subordinates and superiors, the savagery of the  slave-traders, and the hatred of the inhabitants.
One by one the  small company of his European staff succumbed. With a few hundred

Egyptian soldiers he had to suppress insurrections, make roads,  establish fortified posts,
and enforce the government monopoly of

ivory. All this he accomplished; he even succeeded in sending  enough money to Cairo to pay
for the expenses of the expedition. 

But a deep gloom had fallen upon his spirit. When, after a series

of incredible obstacles had been overcome, a steamer was launched

upon the unexplored Albert Nyanza, he turned his back upon the  lake, leaving the glory of
its navigation to his Italian  lieutenant, Gessi. 'I wish,' he wrote, 'to give a practical proof

of what I think regarding the inordinate praise which is given to

an explorer.' Among his distresses and self-mortifications, he  loathed the thought of all
such honours, and remembered the  attentions of English society with a snarl. 'When, D.V.,
I get  home, I do not dine out. My reminiscences of these lands will  not be more pleasant
to me than the China ones. What I shall have

done, will be what I have done. Men think giving dinners is  conferring a favour on you...
Why not give dinners to those who  need them?' No! His heart was set upon a very different
object.  'To each is allotted a distinct work, to each a destined goal; to

some the seat at the right hand or left hand of the Saviour. (It  was not His to give; it was
already given-- Matthew xx, 23. Again,  Judas went to "HIS OWN PLACE"--Acts i, 25.) It is difficult
for  the flesh to accept: "Ye are dead, ye have naught to do with the  world". How difficult
for anyone to be circumcised from the  world, to be as indifferent to its pleasures, its sorrows,
and  its comforts as a corpse is! That is to know the resurrection.'

But the Holy Bible was not his only solace. For now, under the  parching African sun, we catch
glimpses, for the first time, of  Gordon's hand stretching out towards stimulants of a more
material quality. For months together, we are told, he would  drink nothing but pure water;
and then ... water that was not so  pure. In his fits of melancholy, he would shut himself
up in his  tent for days at a time, with a hatchet and a flag placed at the  door to indicate
that he was not to be disturbed for any reason  whatever; until at last the cloud would lift,
the signals would  be removed, and the Governor would reappear, brisk and cheerful. 

During, one of these retirements, there was grave danger of a  native attack upon the camp.
Colonel Long, the Chief of Staff,  ventured, after some hesitation, to ignore the flag and
hatchet,  and to enter the forbidden tent. He found Gordon seated at a  table, upon which were
an open Bible and an open bottle of  brandy. Long explained the circumstances, but could obtain
no  answer beyond the abrupt words--'You are commander of the camp'-- and was obliged to retire,
nonplussed, to deal with the situation

as best he could. On the following morning, Gordon, cleanly  shaven, and in the full-dress
uniform of the Royal Engineers,  entered Long's hut with his usual tripping step, exclaiming
'Old  fellow, now don't be angry with me. I was very low last night.  Let's have a good breakfast--a
little b. and s. Do you feel up to

it?' And, with these veering moods and dangerous restoratives,  there came an intensification
of the queer and violent elements  in the temper of the man. 

His eccentricities grew upon him. He found it more and more uncomfortable  to follow the ordinary
course. Official routine was an agony to him. His  caustic and satirical humour expressed itself
in a style that astounded  government departments. While he jibed at his superiors, his subordinates
learned to dread the explosions of his wrath. There were moments when his  passion became utterly
ungovernable; and the gentle soldier of God, who  had spent the day in quoting texts for the
edification of his sister, would  slap the face of his Arab aide-de-camp in a sudden access
of fury, or set  upon his Alsatian servant and kick him until he screamed.

At the end of three years, Gordon resigned his post in Equatoria,

and prepared to return home. But again Providence intervened: the

Khedive offered him, as an inducement to remain in the Egyptian  service, a position of still
higher consequence-- the Governor- Generalship of the whole Sudan; and Gordon once more took
up his  task. Another three years were passed in grappling with vast  revolting provinces,
with the ineradicable iniquities of the  slave-trade, and with all the complications of weakness
and  corruption incident to an oriental administration extending over  almost boundless tracts
of savage territory which had never been  effectively subdued. His headquarters were fixed
in the palace at

Khartoum; but there were various interludes in his government. Once,  when the Khedive's finances
had become peculiarly embroiled, he  summoned Gordon to Cairo to preside over a commission
which  should set matters to rights. 

Gordon accepted the post, but soon found that his situation was  untenable. He was between
the devil and the deep sea-- between the  unscrupulous cunning of the Egyptian Pashas, and
the immeasurable

immensity of the Khedive's debts to his European creditors. The Pashas  were anxious to use
him as a respectable mask for their own nefarious  dealings; and the representatives of the
European creditors, who looked  upon him as an irresponsible intruder, were anxious simply
to get rid  of him as soon as they could. One of these representatives was  Sir Evelyn Baring,
whom Gordon now met for the first time. An  immediate antagonism flashed out between the two
men. But their  hostility had no time to mature; for Gordon, baffled on all  sides, and deserted
even by the Khedive, precipitately returned  to his Governor-Generalship. Whatever else Providence
might have  decreed, it had certainly not decided that he should be a  financier.

His tastes and his talents were indeed of a very different kind.  In his absence, a rebellion
had broken out in Darfur-- one of the

vast outlying provinces of his government-- where a native  chieftain, Zobeir, had erected,
on a basis of slave-traffic, a  dangerous military power. Zobeir himself had been lured to Cairo,

where he was detained in a state of semi-captivity; but his son,  Suleiman, ruled in his stead,
and was now defying the Governor- General. Gordon determined upon a hazardous stroke. He mounted
a  camel, and rode, alone, in the blazing heat, across eighty-five  miles of desert, to Suleiman's
camp. His sudden apparition  dumbfounded the rebels; his imperious bearing overawed them; he
signified to them that in two days they must disarm and disperse;

and the whole host obeyed. Gordon returned to Khartoum in triumph.  But he had not heard the
last of Suleiman. Flying southwards from

Darfur to the neighbouring province of Bahr-el-Ghazal, the young  man was soon once more at
the head of a formidable force. A  prolonged campaign of extreme difficulty and danger followed.
Eventually, Gordon, summoned again to Cairo, was obliged to leave

to Gessi the task of finally crushing the revolt. After a  brilliant campaign, Gessi forced
Suleiman to surrender, and then  shot him as a rebel. The deed was to exercise a curious influence

upon Gordon's fate.

Though Suleiman had been killed and his power broken, the slave- trade still flourished in
the Sudan. Gordon's efforts to suppress

it resembled the palliatives of an empiric treating the  superficial symptoms of some profound
constitutional disease. The

root of the malady lay in the slave-markets of Cairo and  Constantinople: the supply followed
the demand. Gordon, after  years of labour, might here and there stop up a spring or divert
a tributary, but, somehow or other the waters would reach the  river-bed. In the end, he himself
came to recognise this. 'When  you have got the ink that has soaked into blotting-paper out
of  it,' he said, 'then slavery will cease in these lands.' And yet  he struggled desperately
on; it was not for him to murmur. 'I  feel my own weakness, and look to Him who is Almighty,
and I  leave the issue without inordinate care to Him.'

Relief came at last. The Khedive Ismail was deposed; and Gordon  felt at liberty to send in
his resignation. Before he left  Egypt, however, he was to experience yet one more remarkable
adventure. At his own request, he set out on a diplomatic  mission to the Negus of Abyssinia.
The mission was a complete  failure. The Negus was intractable, and, when his bribes were 
refused, furious. Gordon was ignominiously dismissed; every  insult was heaped on him; he was
arrested, and obliged to  traverse the Abyssinian Mountains in the depth of winter under  the
escort of a savage troop of horse. When, after great  hardships and dangers, he reached Cairo,
he found the whole  official world up in arms against him. The Pashas had determined  at last
that they had no further use for this honest and peculiar

Englishman. It was arranged that one of his confidential  dispatches should be published in
the newspapers; naturally, it  contained indiscretions; there was a universal outcry-- the
man  was insubordinate, and mad. He departed under a storm of obloquy.

It seemed impossible that he should ever return to Egypt.

On his way home he stopped in Paris, saw the English Ambassador,  Lord Lyons, and speedily
came into conflict with him over Egyptian  affairs. There ensued a heated correspondence, which
was finally  closed by a letter from Gordon, ending as follows: 'I have some  comfort in thinking
that in ten or fifteen years' time it will matter  little to either of us. A black box, six
feet six by three feet wide,  will then contain all that is left of Ambassador, or Cabinet
Minister,  or of your humble and obedient servant.'

He arrived in England early in 1880 ill and exhausted; and it  might have been supposed that
after the terrible activities of  his African exile he would have been ready to rest. But the
very  opposite was the case; the next three years were the most  momentous of his life. He
hurried from post to post, from  enterprise to enterprise, from continent to continent, with
a  vertiginous rapidity. He accepted the Private Secretaryship to  Lord Ripon, the new Viceroy
of India, and, three days after his  arrival at Bombay, he resigned. He had suddenly realised
that he  was not cut out for a Private Secretary, when, on an address  being sent in from some
deputation, he was asked to say that the  Viceroy had read it with interest. 'You know perfectly,'
he said  to Lord William Beresford, 'that Lord Ripon has never read it,  and I can't say that
sort of thing; so I will resign, and you  take in my resignation.' He confessed to Lord William
that the  world was not big enough for him, that there was 'no king or  country big enough';
and then he added, hitting him on the  shoulder, 'Yes, that is flesh, that is what I hate,
and what  makes me wish to die.'

Two days later, he was off for Pekin. 'Every one will say I am  mad,' were his last words to
Lord William Beresford; 'but you say

I am not.' The position in China was critical; war with Russia  appeared to be imminent; and
Gordon had been appealed to in  order to use his influence on the side of peace. He was welcomed
by many old friends of former days, among them Li Hung Chang,  whose diplomatic views coincided
with his own. Li's diplomatic  language, however, was less unconventional. In an interview
with  the Ministers, Gordon's expressions were such that the interpreter  shook with terror,
upset a cup of tea, and finally refused to translate  the dreadful words; upon which Gordon
snatched up a dictionary, and,  with his finger on the word 'idiocy', showed it to the startled
Mandarins.  A few weeks later, Li Hung Chang was in power, and peace was assured.  Gordon had
spent two and a half days in Pekin, and was whirling through  China, when a telegram arrived
from the home authorities, who  viewed his movements with uneasiness, ordering him to return
at  once to England. 'It did not produce a twitter in me,' he wrote  to his sister; 'I died
long ago, and it will not make any  difference to me; I am prepared to follow the unrolling
of the  scroll.' The world, perhaps, was not big enough for him; and yet  how clearly he recognised
that he was 'a poor insect!' 'My heart  tells me that, and I am glad of it.'

On his return to England, he telegraphed to the Government of the

Cape of Good Hope, which had become involved in a war with the  Basutos, offering his services;
but his telegram received no  reply. Just then, Sir Howard Elphinstone was appointed to the
command of the Royal Engineers in Mauritius. it was a thankless  and insignificant post; and,
rather than accept it, Elphinstone  was prepared to retire from the Army-- unless some other
officer  could be induced, in return for £800, to act as his substitute.  Gordon, who was an
old friend, agreed to undertake the work upon  one condition: that he should receive nothing
from Elphinstone;  and accordingly, he spent the next year in that remote and  unhealthy island,
looking after the barrack repairs and testing  the drains. 

While he was thus engaged, the Cape Government, whose difficulties  had been increasing, changed
its mind, and early in 1882, begged for  Gordon's help. Once more he was involved in great
affairs: a new field  of action opened before him; and then, in a moment, there was another
shift of the kaleidoscope, and again he was thrown upon the world. Within  a few weeks, after
a violent quarrel with the Cape authorities, his mission  had come to an end. What should he
do next? To what remote corner or what  enormous stage, to what self-sacrificing drudgeries
or what resounding  exploits, would the hand of God lead him now? He waited, in an odd hesitation.
He opened the Bible, but neither the prophecies of Hosea nor the epistles  to Timothy gave
him any advice. The King of the Belgians asked if he would  be willing to go to the Congo.
He was perfectly willing; he would go whenever  the King of the Belgians sent for him; his
services, however, were not required  yet. It was at this juncture that he betook himself to
Palestine. His studies  there were embodied in a correspondence with the Rev. Mr. Barnes, filling
over  2,000 pages of manuscript-- a correspondence which was only put an end to  when, at last,
the summons from the King of the Belgians came. He

hurried back to England; but it was not to the Congo that he was  being led by the hand of God.

Gordon's last great adventure, like his first, was occasioned by  a religious revolt. At the
very moment when, apparently forever,  he was shaking the dust of Egypt from his feet, Mahommed
Ahmed  was starting upon his extraordinary career in the Sudan. The time

was propitious for revolutions. The effete Egyptian Empire was  hovering upon the verge of
collapse. The enormous territories of  the Sudan were seething with discontent. Gordon's administration
had, by its very vigour, only helped to precipitate the  inevitable disaster. His attacks upon
the slave-trade, his  establishment of a government monopoly in ivory, his hostility to

the Egyptian officials, had been so many shocks, shaking to its  foundations the whole rickety
machine. The result of all his  efforts had been, on the one hand, to fill the most powerful
classes in the community-- the dealers in slaves and, ivory-- with  a hatred of the government,
and on the other to awaken among the  mass of the inhabitants a new perception of the dishonesty
and  incompetence of their Egyptian masters. 

When, after Gordon's removal, the rule of the Pashas once more asserted  itself over the Sudan,
a general combustion became inevitable: the first  spark would set off the blaze. Just then
it happened that Mahommed Ahmed,  the son of an insignificant priest in Dongola, having quarrelled
with the  Sheikh from whom he was receiving religious instruction, set up as an  independent
preacher, with his headquarters at Abba Island, on the Nile,  150 miles above Khartoum. Like
Hong-siu-tsuen, he began as a religious  reformer, and ended as a rebel king. It was his mission,
he declared, to  purge the true Faith of its worldliness and corruptions, to lead  the followers
of the prophet into the paths of chastity,  simplicity, and holiness; with the puritanical
zeal of a Calvin,  be denounced junketings and merrymakings, songs and dances, lewd  living
and all the delights of the flesh. He fell into trances,  he saw visions, he saw the prophet
and Jesus, and the Angel  Izrail accompanying him and watching over him forever. He  prophesied
and performed miracles, and his fame spread through  the land.

There is an ancient tradition in the Mohammedan world, telling of

a mysterious being, the last in succession of the twelve holy  Imams, who, untouched by death
and withdrawn into the recesses of

a mountain, was destined, at the appointted hour, to come forth  again among men. His title
was the Mahdi, the guide; some  believed that he would be the forerunner of the Messiah; others
believed that he would be Christ himself. Already  various Mahdis

had made their appearance; several had been highly successful, and  two, in medieval times,
had founded dynasties in Egypt. But who could  tell whether ail these were not impostors? Might
not the twelfth  Imam be still waiting, in mystical concealment, ready to emerge,  at any moment,
at the bidding of God? There were signs by which  the true Mahdi might be recognised-- unmistakable
signs, if one  could but read them aright. He must be of the family of the  prophet; he must
possess miraculous powers of no common kind; and

his person must be overflowing with a peculiar sanctity. The  pious dwellers beside those distant
waters, where holy men by  dint of a constant repetition of one of the ninety-nine names of
God, secured the protection of guardian angels, and where groups  of devotees, shaking their
heads with a violence which would  unseat the reason of less athletic worshippers, attained
to an  extraordinary beatitude, heard with awe of the young preacher  whose saintliness was
almost more than mortal and whose miracles  brought amazement to the mind. Was he not also
of the family of  the prophet? He himself had said so, and who would disbelieve the

holy man? When he appeared in person, every doubt was swept away.

There was a strange splendour in his presence, an overpowering  passion in the torrent of his
speech. Great was the wickedness of

the people, and great was their punishment! Surely their miseries

were a visible sign of the wrath of the Lord. They had sinned,  and the cruel tax gatherers
had come among them, and the corrupt  governors, and all the oppressions of the Egyptians.
Yet these  things, 'Too, should have an end. The Lord would raise up his  chosen deliverer;
the hearts of the people would be purified, and

their enemies would be laid low. The accursed Egyptian would be  driven from the land. Let
the faithful take heart and make ready.

How soon might not the long-predestined hour strike, when the  twelfth Imam, the guide, the
Mahdi, would reveal himself to the  world?' In that hour, the righteous 'Would triumph and
the guilty

be laid low forever.' Such was the teaching of Mohammed Ahmed. A  band of enthusiastic disciples
gathered round him, eagerly  waiting for the revelation which would crown their hopes. At 
last, the moment came. One evening, at Abba Island, taking aside  the foremost of his followers,
the Master whispered the  portentous news. He was the Mahdi.                

The Egyptian Governor-General at Khartoum, hearing that a  religious movement was afoot, grew
disquieted, and dispatched  an emissary to Abba Island to summon the impostor to his  presence.
The emissary was courteously received. Mohammed Ahmed,  he said, must come at once to Khartoum.
'Must!' exclaimed the  Mahdi, starting to his feet, with a strange look in his eyes. The

look was so strange that the emissary thought it advisable to cut

short the interview and to return to Khartoum empty-handed.  Thereupon, the Governor-General
sent 200 soldiers to seize the  audacious rebel by force. With his handful of friends, the
Mahdi fell upon the soldiers and cut them to pieces. The news spread  like wild-fire through
the country: the Mahdi had arisen, the  Egyptians were destroyed. But it was clear to the little
band of  enthusiasts at Abba Island that their position on the river was  no longer tenable.
The Mahdi, deciding upon a second Hegira,  retreated south-westward, into the depths of Kordofan.

The retreat was a triumphal progress. The country, groaning under

alien misgovernment and vibrating with religious excitement,  suddenly found in this rebellious
prophet a rallying-point, a  hero, a deliverer. And now another element was added to the  forces
of insurrection. The Baggara tribes of Kordofan, cattle- owners and slave-traders, the most
warlike and vigorous of the  inhabitants of the Sudan, threw in their lot with the Mahdi. 
Their powerful Emirs, still smarting from the blows of Gordon,  saw that the opportunity for
revenge had come. A holy war was  proclaimed against the Egyptian misbelievers. The followers
of  the Mahdi, dressed, in token of a new austerity of living, in the

'jibbeh', or white smock of coarse cloth, patched with variously  shaped and coloured patches,
were rapidly organised into a  formidable army. Several attacks from Khartoum were repulsed; and

at last, the Mahdi felt strong enough to advance against the  enemy. While his lieutenants
led detachments into the vast  provinces lying to the west and the south--Darfur and Bahr-el-
Ghazal--he himself marched upon El Obeid, the capital of  Kordofan. It was in vain that reinforcements
were hurried from  Khartoum to the assistance of the garrison: there was some severe

fighting; the town was completely cut off; and, after a six  months' siege, it surrendered.
A great quantity of guns and  ammunition and £100,000 in spices fell into the hands of the
Mahdi. He was master of Kordofan: he was at the head of a great  army; he was rich; he was
worshipped. A dazzling future opened  before him. No possibility seemed too remote, no fortune
too  magnificent. A vision of universal empire hovered before his  eyes. Allah, whose servant
he was, who had led him thus far,  would lead him onward still, to the glorious end.

For some months he remained at El Obeid, consolidating his  dominion. In a series of circular
letters, he described his  colloquies with the Almighty and laid down the rule of living  which
his followers were to pursue. The faithful, under pain of  severe punishment, were to return
to the ascetic simplicity of  ancient times. A criminal code was drawn up, meting out  executions,
mutilations, and floggings with a barbaric zeal. The  blasphemer was to be instantly hanged,
the adulterer was to be  scourged with whips of rhinoceros hide, the thief was to have his

right hand and his left foot hacked off in the marketplace.  No more were marriages to be celebrated
with pomp and feasting, no  more was the youthful warrior to swagger with flowing hair;  henceforth,
the believer must banquet on dates and milk, and his  head must be kept shaved. Minor transgressions
were punished by  confiscation of property or by imprisonment and chains. But the  rhinoceros
whip was the favourite instrument of chastisement. Men

were flogged for drinking a glass of wine, they were flogged for  smoking; if they swore, they
received eighty lashes for every  expletive; and after eighty lashes it was a common thing
to die.  Before long, flogging grew to be so everyday an incident that the

young men made a game of it, as a test of their endurance of  pain. 

With this Spartan ferocity there was mingled the glamour  and the mystery of the East. The
Mahdi himself, his four  Khalifas, and the principal Emirs, masters of sudden riches,  surrounded
themselves with slaves and women, with trains of  horses and asses, with body guards and glittering
arms. There  were rumours of debaucheries in high places-- of the Mahdi,  forgetful of his
own ordinances, revelling in the recesses of his

harem, and quaffing date syrup mixed with ginger out of the  silver cups looted from the church
of the Christians. But that  imposing figure had only to show itself for the tongue of scandal

to be stilled. The tall, broad-shouldered, majestic man, with the

dark face and black beard and great eyes--who could doubt that he

was the embodiment of a superhuman power? Fascination dwelt in  every movement, every glance.
The eyes, painted with antimony,  flashed extraordinary fires; the exquisite smile revealed,
beneath the vigorous lips, white upper teeth with a V-shaped  space between them-- the certain
sign of fortune. His turban was  folded with faultless art, his jibbeh, speckless, was perfumed
with sandal-wood, musk, and attar of roses. He was at once all  courtesy and all command. Thousands
followed him, thousands  prostrated themselves before him; thousands, when he lifted up  his
voice in solemn worship, knew that the heavens were opened  and that they had come near to
God. Then all at once the onbeia--

the elephant's-tusk trumpet--would give out its enormous sound.  The nahas--the brazen wardrums--
would summon, with their weird  rolling, the whole host to arms. The green flag and the red
flag  and the black flag would rise over the multitude. The great army  would move forward,
coloured, glistening, dark, violent, proud,  beautiful. The drunkenness, the madness of religion
would blaze  on every face; and the Mahdi, immovable on his charger, would let

the scene grow under his eyes in silence.

El Obeid fell in January, 1883. Meanwhile, events of the deepest  importance had occurred in
Egypt. The rise of Arabi had  synchronised with that of the Mahdi. Both movements were  nationalist;
both were directed against alien rulers who had  shown themselves unfit to rule. While the
Sudanese were shaking  off the yoke of Egypt, the Egyptians themselves grew impatient of

their own masters-- the Turkish and Circassian Pashas who filled  with their incompetence all
the high offices of state. The army  led by Ahmed Arabi, a Colonel of fellah origin, mutinied,
the  Khedive gave way, and it seemed as if a new order were about to  be established. A new
order was indeed upon the point of  appearing: but it was of a kind undreamt of in Arabi's
philosophy. At the critical moment, the English Government  intervened. An English fleet bombarded
Alexandria, an English  army landed under Lord Wolseley, and defeated Arabi and his  supporters
at Tel-el-kebir. The rule of the Pashas was nominally  restored; but henceforth, in effect,
the English were masters of  Egypt.  

Nevertheless, the English themselves were slow to recognise this  fact: their Government had
intervened unwillingly; the occupation

of the country was a merely temporary measure; their army was to  be withdrawn as soon as a
tolerable administration had been set  up. But a tolerable administration, presided over by
the Pashas,  seemed long in coming, and the English army remained. In the  meantime, the Mahdi
had entered El Obeid, and his dominion was  rapidly spreading over the greater part of the Sudan.

Then a terrible catastrophe took place. The Pashas, happy once  more in Cairo, pulling the
old strings and growing fat over the  old flesh-pots, decided to give the world an unmistakable
proof  of their renewed vigour. They would tolerate the insurrection in  the Sudan no longer;
they would destroy the Mahdi, reduce his  followers to submission, and re-establish their own
beneficent  rule over the whole country. To this end they collected together  an army of 10,000
men, and placed it under the command of Colonel

Hicks, a retired English officer. He was ordered to advance and  suppress the rebellion. In
these proceedings the English  Government refused to take any part. Unable, or unwilling, to
realise that, so long as there was an English army in Egypt they  could not avoid the responsibilities
of supreme power, they  declared that the domestic policy of the Egyptian administration  was
no concern of theirs. It was a fatal error--an error which  they themselves, before many weeks
were over, were to be forced  by the hard logic of events to admit. The Pashas, left to their
own devices, mismanaged the Hicks expedition to their hearts'  content. The miserable troops,
swept together from the relics of  Arabi's disbanded army, were dispatched to Khartoum in chains. 

After a month's drilling, they were pronounced to be fit to attack  the fanatics of the Sudan.
Colonel Hicks was a brave man; urged  on by the authorities in Cairo, he shut his eyes to the
danger  ahead of him, and marched out from Khartoum in the direction of  El Obeid at the beginning
of September, 1883. Abandoning his  communications, he was soon deep in the desolate wastes
of  Kordofan. As he advanced, his difficulties increased; the guides  were treacherous, the
troops grew exhausted, the supply of water  gave out. He pressed on, and at last, on November
5th, not far  from El Obeid, the harassed, fainting, almost desperate army  plunged into a
vast forest of gumtrees and mimosa scrub. There  was a sudden, appalling yell; the Mahdi, with
40,000 of his  finest men, sprang from their ambush. The Egyptians were  surrounded, and immediately
overpowered. It was not a defeat,  but an annihilation. Hicks and his European staff were 
slaughtered; the whole army was slaughtered; 300 wounded wretches

crept away into the forest.

The consequences of this event were felt in every part of the  Sudan. To the westward, in Darfur,
the Governor, Slatin Pasha,  after a prolonged and valiant resistance, was forced to  surrender,
and the whole province fell into the hands of the  rebels. Southwards, in the Bahr-el-Ghazal,
Lupton Bey was shut up

in a remote stronghold, while the country was overrun. The  Mahdi's triumphs were beginning
to penetrate even into the  tropical regions of Equatoria; the tribes were rising, and Emir
Pasha was preparing to retreat towards the Great Lakes. On the  cast, Osman Digna pushed the
insurrection right up to the shores  of the Red Sea and laid siege to Suakin. Before the year
was  over, with the exception of a few isolated and surrounded  garrisons, the Mahdi was absolute
lord of a territory equal to  the combined area of Spain, France, and Germany; and his  victorious
armies were rapidly closing round Khartoum.

When the news of the Hicks disaster reached Cairo, the Pashas  calmly announced that they would
collect another army of 10,000  men, and again attack the Mahdi; but the English Government
understood at last the gravity of the case. They saw that a  crisis was upon them, and that
they could no longer escape the  implications of their position in Egypt. What were they to
do?  Were they to allow the Egyptians to become more and more deeply  involved in a ruinous,
perhaps ultimately a fatal, war with the  Mahdi? And, if not, what steps were they to take? 

A small minority of the party then in power in England-- the Liberal  Party-- were anxious
to withdraw from Egypt altogether and at once.  On the other hand, another and a more influential
minority, with  representatives in the Cabinet, were in favour of a more active  intervention
in Egyptian affairs-- of the deliberate use of the  power of England to give to Egypt internal
stability and external

security; they were ready, if necessary, to take the field  against the Mahdi with English
troops. But the great bulk of the  party, and the Cabinet, with Mr. Gladstone at their head,
preferred a middle course. Realising the impracticality of an  immediate withdrawal, they were
nevertheless determined to remain

in Egypt not a moment longer than was necessary, and, in the  meantime, to interfere as little
as possible in Egyptian affairs.

From a campaign in the Sudan conducted by an English army they  were altogether averse. If,
therefore, the English army was not  to be used, and the Egyptian army was not fit to be used
against the Mahdi, it followed that any attempt to reconquer the  Sudan must be abandoned;
the remaining Egyptian troops must be  withdrawn, and in future military operations must be
limited to  those of a strictly defensive kind. Such was the decision of the  English Government.
Their determination was strengthened by two  considerations: in the first place, they saw that
the Mahdi's  rebellion was largely a nationalist movement, directed against an

alien power, and, in the second place, the policy of withdrawal  from the Sudan was the policy
of their own representative in  Egypt, Sir Evelyn Baring, who had lately been appointed Consul-
General at Cairo. There was only one serious obstacle in the way--  the attitude of the Pashas
at the head of the Egyptian  Government. The infatuated old men were convinced that they would

have better luck next time, that another army and another Hicks  would certainly destroy the
Mahdi, and that, even if the Mahdi  were again victorious, yet another army and yet another
Hicks  would no doubt be forthcoming, and that THEY would do the trick,  or, failing that ...
but they refused to consider eventualities  any further. In the face of such opposition, the
English  Government, unwilling as they were to interfere, saw that there  was no choice open
to them but to exercise pressure. They  therefore instructed Sir Evelyn Baring, in the event
of the  Egyptian Government refusing to withdraw from the Sudan, to  insist upon the Khedive's
appointing other Ministers who would be

willing to do so.

Meanwhile, not only the Government, but the public in England  were beginning to realise the
alarming nature of the Egyptian  situation. It was some time before the details of the Hicks
expedition were fully known, but when they were, andwhen the appalling  character of the disaster
was understood, a thrill of horror ran through  the country. The newspapers became full of
articles on the Sudan, of  personal descriptions of the Mahdi, of agitated letters from colonels
and clergymen demanding vengeance, and of serious discussions of future  policy in Egypt. Then,
at the beginning of the new year, alarming messages  began to arrive from Khartoum. Colonel
Coetlogon, who was in command of  the Egyptian troops, reported a menacing concentration of
the enemy. Day by day,  hour by hour, affairs grew worse. The Egyptians were obviously outnumbered:
they could not maintain themselves in the field; Khartoum was in danger; at  any moment, its
investment might be complete. And, with Khartoum once cut off  from communication with Egypt,
what might not happen?

Colonel Coetlogon began to calculate how long the city would hold

out. Perhaps it could not resist the Mahdi for a month, perhaps  for more than a month; but
he began to talk of the necessity of a

speedy retreat. It was clear that a climax was approaching, and  that measures must be taken
to forestall it at once. Accordingly,

Sir Evelyn Baring, on receipt of final orders from England,  presented an ultimatum to the
Egyptian Government: the Ministry  must either sanction the evacuation of the Sudan, or it
must  resign. The Ministry was obstinate, and, on January 7th, 1884,  it resigned, to be replaced
by a more pliable body of Pashas. On  the same day, General Gordon arrived at Southampton.
He was over  fifty, and he was still, by the world's measurements, an  unimportant man. In
spite of his achievements, in spite of a  certain celebrity-- for 'Chinese Gordon' was still
occasionally  spoken of-- he was unrecognised and almost unemployed. 

He had spent a lifetime in the dubious services of foreign governments,  punctuated by futile
drudgeries at home; and now, after a long idleness,  he had been sent for--to do what?--to
look after the Congo for the King  of the Belgians. At his age, even if he survived the work
and the climate,  he could hardly look forward to any subsequent appointment; he would  return
from the Congo, old and worn out, to a red-brick villa and

extinction. Such were General Gordon's prospects on January 7th,  1884. By January 18th, his
name was on every tongue, he was the  favourite of the nation, he had been declared to be the
one living man  capable of coping with the perils of the hour; he had been  chosen, with unanimous
approval, to perform a great task; and he  had left England on a mission which was to bring
him not only a  boundless popularity, but an immortal fame. The circumstances  which led to
a change so sudden and so remarkable are less easily

explained than might have been wished. An ambiguity hangs over  them-- an ambiguity which the
discretion of eminent persons has  certainly not diminished. But some of the facts are clear
enough.

The decision to withdraw from the Sudan had no sooner been taken  than it had become evident
that the operation would be a  difficult and hazardous one, and that it would be necessary
to  send to Khartoum an emissary armed with special powers and  possessed of special ability,
to carry it out. Towards the end of

November, somebody at the War Office--it is not clear who--had  suggested that this emissary
should be General Gordon. Lord  Granville, the Foreign Secretary, had thereupon telegraphed
to  Sir Evelyn Baring asking whether, in his opinion, the presence of

General Gordon would be useful in Egypt; Sir Evelyn Baring had  replied that the Egyptian Government
was averse to this  proposal, and the matter had dropped. 

There was no further reference to Gordon in the official dispatches  until after his return
to England. Nor, before that date, was any

allusion made to him as a possible unraveller of the Sudan difficulty,  in the Press. In all
the discussions which followed the news of the  Hicks disaster, his name is only to be found
in occasional and  incidental references to his work "In the Sudan". The "Pall Mall  Gazette",
which, more than any other newspaper, interested itself

in Egyptian affairs, alluded to Gordon once or twice as a  geographical expert; but, in an
enumeration of the leading  authorities on the Sudan, left him out of account altogether. Yet

it was from the "Pall Mall Gazette" that the impulsion which  projected him into a blaze of
publicity finally came. Mr. Stead,  its enterprising editor, went down to Southampton the day
after  Gordon's arrival there, and obtained an interview. Now when he  was in the mood-- after
a little b. and s., especially-- no one was  more capable than Gordon, with his facile speech
and his free- and-easy manners, of furnishing good copy for a journalist; and  Mr. Stead made
the most of his opportunity. The interview, copious  and pointed, was published next day in
the most prominent part of

the paper, together with a leading article, demanding that the  General should be immediately
dispatched to Khartoum with the  widest powers. The rest of the Press, both in London and in
the  provinces, at once took up the cry: General Gordon was a capable  and energetic officer,
he was a noble and God-fearing man, he was

a national asset, he was a statesman in the highest sense of the  word; the occasion was pressing
and perilous; General Gordon had  been for years Governor-General of the Sudan; General Gordon
alone had the knowledge, the courage, the virtue, which would  save the situation; General
Gordon must go to Khartoum. So, for a

week, the papers sang in chorus. But already those in high places

had taken a step. Mr. Stead's interview appeared on the afternoon

of January 9th, and on the morning of January 10th Lord Granville

telegraphed to Sir Evelyn Baring, proposing, for a second time,  that Gordon's services should
be utilised in Egypt. But Sir  Evelyn Baring, for the second time, rejected the proposal.

While these messages were flashing to and fro, Gordon himself was

paying a visit to the Rev. Mr. Barnes at the Vicarage of  Heavitree, near Exeter. The conversation
ran chiefly on Biblical  and spiritual matters-- on the light thrown by the Old Testament 
upon the geography of Palestine, and on the relations between man

and his Maker; but, there were moments when topics of a more  worldly interest arose. It happened
that Sir Samuel Baker,  Gordon's predecessor in Equatoria, lived in the neighbourhood. A  meeting
was arranged, and the two ex-Governors, with Mr. Barnes in  attendance, went for a drive together.
In the carriage, Sir  Samuel Baker, taking up the tale of the "Pall Mall Gazette",  dilated
upon the necessity of his friend's returning to the Sudan

as Governor-General. Gordon was silent; but Mr. Barnes noticed  that his blue eyes flashed,
while an eager expression passed over

his face. Late that night, after the Vicar had retired to bed, he

was surprised by the door suddenly opening, and by the appearance

of his guest swiftly tripping into the room. 'You saw me today?'  the low voice abruptly questioned.
'You mean in the carriage?'  replied the startled Mr. Barnes. 'Yes,' came the reply; 'you saw
ME--that was MYSELF--the self I want to get rid of.' There was a  sliding movement, the door
swung to, and the Vicar found himself  alone again.

It was clear that a disturbing influence had found its way into  Gordon's mind. His thoughts,
wandering through Africa, flitted to

the Sudan; they did not linger at the Congo. During the same  visit, he took the opportunity
of calling upon Dr. Temple, the  Bishop of Exeter, and asking him, merely as a hypothetical
question, whether, in his opinion, Sudanese converts to  Christianity might be permitted to
keep three wives. His Lordship

answered that this would be uncanonical.

A few days later, it appeared that the conversation in the  carriage at Heavitree had borne
fruit. Gordon wrote a letter to  Sir Samuel Baker, further elaborating the opinions on the
Sudan  which he had already expressed in his interview with Mr. Stead;  the letter was clearly
intended for publication, and published it

was in "The Times" of January 14th. On the same day, Gordon's name  began once more to buzz
along the wires in secret questions and  answers to and from the highest quarters.

'Might it not be advisable,' telegraphed Lord Granville to Mr.  Gladstone, to put a little
pressure on Baring, to induce him to  accept the assistance of General Gordon?' Mr. Gladstone
replied,  also by a telegram, in the affirmative; and on the 15th, Lord  Wolseley telegraphed
to Gordon begging him to come to London  immediately. Lord Wolseley, who was one of Gordon's
oldest  friends, was at that time Adjutant-General of the Forces; there  was a long interview;
and, though the details of the conversation

have never transpired, it is known that, in the course of it,  Lord Wolseley asked Gordon if
he would be willing to go to the  Sudan, to which Gordon replied that there was only one objection--
his prior engagement to the King of the Belgians. Before  nightfall, Lord Granville, by private
telegram, had 'put a little

pressure on Baring'. 'He had,' he said, 'heard indirectly that  Gordon was ready to go at once
to the Sudan on the following  rather vague terms: His mission to be to report to Her Majesty's
Government on the military situation, and to return without any  further engagement. He would
be under you for instructions and  will send letters through you under flying seal... He might
be of use,'  Lord Granville added, in informing you and us of the situation. It  would be popular
at home, but there may be countervailing objections.  Tell me,' such was Lord Granville's concluding
injunction, 'your real opinion.' 

It was the third time of asking, and Sir Evelyn Baring resisted no longer.  'Gordon,' he telegraphed
on the 16th, 'would be the best man if he will  pledge himself to carry out the policy of withdrawing
from the Sudan as  quickly as is possible, consistently with saving life. He must  also understand
that he must take his instructions from the  British representative in Egypt... I would rather
have him than anyone else,  provided there is a perfectly clear understanding with him as to
what his  position is to be and what line of policy he is to carry out. Otherwise,  not...
Whoever goes should be distinctly warned that he will undertake a  service of great difficulty
and danger.' 

In the meantime, Gordon, with the Sudan upon his lips, with the Sudan in  his imagination,
had hurried to Brussels, to obtain from the King of the  Belgians a reluctant consent to the
postponement of his Congo mission. On  the 17th he was recalled to London by a telegram from
Lord Wolseley. On the  18th the final decision was made. 'At noon,' Gordon told the Rev.

Mr. Barnes, Wolseley came to me and took me to the Ministers. He  went in and talked to the
Ministers, and came back and said: "Her

Majesty's Government wants you to undertake this. They said: "Yes", and it was over.'

Such was the sequence of events which ended in General Gordon's  last appointment. The precise
motives of those responsible for  these transactions are less easy to discern. It is difficult
to  understand what the reasons could have been which induced the  Government, not only to
override the hesitations of Sir Evelyn  Baring, but to overlook the grave and obvious dangers
involved in

sending such a man as Gordon to the Sudan. The whole history of  his life, the whole bent of
his character, seemed to disqualify  him for the task for which he had been chosen. He was
before all  things a fighter, an enthusiast, a bold adventurer; and he was  now to be entrusted
with the conduct of an inglorious retreat. He

was alien to the subtleties of civilised statesmanship, he was  unamenable to official control,
he was incapable of the skilful  management of delicate situations; and he was now to be placed in

a position of great complexity, requiring at once a cool  judgment, a clear perception of fact,
and a fixed determination  to carry out a line of policy laid down from above. He had, it is

true, been Governor-General of the Sudan; but he was now to  return to the scene of his greatness
as the emissary of a  defeated and humbled power; he was to be a fugitive where he had  once
been a ruler; the very success of his mission was to consist

in establishing the triumph of those forces which he had spent  years in trampling underfoot.
All this should have been clear to  those in authority, after a very little reflection. It
was clear  enough to Sir Evelyn Baring, though, with characteristic reticence,  he had abstained
from giving expression to his thoughts. But, even  if a general acquaintance with Gordon's
life and character were not  sufficient to lead to these conclusions, he himself had taken
care to  put their validity beyond reasonable doubt. 

Both in his interview with Mr. Stead and in his letter to Sir Samuel Baker,  he had indicated
unmistakably his own attitude towards the Sudan situation.  The policy which he advocated,
the state of feeling in which he showed  himself to be, was diametrically opposed to the declared
intentions of the  Government. He was by no means in favour of withdrawing from the  Sudan;
he was in favour, as might have been supposed, of vigorous

military action. It might be necessary to abandon, for the time  being, the more remote garrisons
in Darfur and Equatoria; but  Khartoum must be held at all costs. To allow the Mahdi to enter
Khartoum would not merely mean the return of the whole of the  Sudan to barbarism; it would
be a menace to the safety of Egypt  herself. To attempt to protect Egypt against the Mahdi
by  fortifying her southern frontier was preposterous. 'You might as  well fortify against
a fever.' Arabia, Syria, the whole  Mohammedan world, would be shaken by the Mahdi's advance.
'In  self-defence,' Gordon declared to Mr. Stead, the policy of  evacuation cannot possibly
be justified.' 

The true policy was obvious. A strong man--Sir Samuel Baker, perhaps-- must be sent to Khartoum,
with a large contingent of Indian and Turkish  troops and with two millions of money. He would
very soon overpower the  Mahdi, whose forces would 'fall to pieces of themselves'. For in 
Gordon's opinion it was 'an entire mistake to regard the Mahdi as

in any sense a religious leader'; he would collapse as soon as he

was face to face with an English general. Then the distant  regions of Darfur and Equatoria
could once more be occupied;  their original Sultans could be reinstated; the whole country
would be placed under civilised rule; and the slave-trade would  be finally abolished. These
were the views which Gordon publicly  expressed on January 9th and on January 14th; and it
certainly  seems strange that on January 10th and on January 14th, Lord  Granville should have
proposed, without a word of consultation  with Gordon himself, to send him on a mission which
involved, not

the reconquest, but the abandonment of the Sudan; Gordon, indeed,

when he was actually approached by Lord Wolseley, had apparently  agreed to become the agent
of a policy which was exactly the  reverse of his own. No doubt, too, it is possible for a
subordinate to suppress his private convictions and to carry out  loyally, in spite of them,
the orders of his superiors. But how  rare are the qualities of self-control and wisdom which
such a  subordinate must possess! And how little reason there was to  think that General Gordon
possessed them!

In fact, the conduct of the Government wears so singular an  appearance that it has seemed
necessary to account for it by some

ulterior explanation. It has often been asserted that the true  cause of Gordon's appointment
was the clamour in the Press. It is

said-- among others, by Sir Evelyn Baring himself, who has given  something like an official
sanction to this view of the case-- that  the Government could not resist the pressure of the
newspapers  and the feeling in the country which it indicated; that  Ministers, carried off
their feet by a wave of 'Gordon cultus',  were obliged to give way to the inevitable. But this
suggestion  is hardly supported by an examination of the facts. Already,  early in December,
and many weeks before Gordon's name had begun  to figure in the newspapers, Lord Granville
had made his first  effort to induce Sir Evelyn Baring to accept Gordon's services.  The first
newspaper demand for a Gordon mission appeared in the  "Pall Mall Gazette" on the afternoon
of January 9th; and the very

next morning, Lord Granville was making his second telegraphic  attack upon Sir Evelyn Baring.
The feeling in the Press did not  become general until the 11th, and on the 14th Lord Granville, in

his telegram to Mr. Gladstone, for the third time proposed the  appointment of Gordon. Clearly,
on the part of Lord Granville at  any rate, there was no extreme desire to resist the wishes of the

Press. Nor was the Government as a whole by any means incapable  of ignoring public opinion;
a few months were to show that,  plainly enough. It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that
if  Ministers had been opposed to the appointment of Gordon, he would

never have been appointed. As it was, the newspapers were in fact

forestalled, rather than followed, by the Government.

How, then, are we to explain the Government's action? Are we to  suppose that its members,
like the members of the public at  large, were themselves carried away by a sudden enthusiasm,
a  sudden conviction that they had found their saviour; that General

Gordon was the man--they did not quite know why, but that was of  no consequence--the one man
to get them out of the whole Sudan  difficulty--they did not quite know how, but that was of
no  consequence either if only he were sent to Khartoum? Doubtless  even Cabinet Ministers
are liable to such impulses; doubtless it  is possible that the Cabinet of that day allowed
itself to drift,

out of mere lack of consideration, and judgment, and foresight,  along the rapid stream of
popular feeling towards the inevitable  cataract. That may be so; yet there are indications
that a more  definite influence was at work. There was a section of the  Government which had
never become quite reconciled to the policy  of withdrawing from the Sudan. To this section--we
may call it  the imperialist section--which was led, inside the Cabinet, by  Lord Hartington,
and outside by Lord Wolseley, the policy which  really commended itself was the very policy
which had been  outlined by General Gordon in his interview with Mr. Stead and his  letter
to Sir Samuel Baker. They saw that it might be necessary  to abandon some of the outlying parts
of the Sudan to the Mahdi;  but the prospect of leaving the whole province in his hands was
highly distasteful to them; above all, they dreaded the loss of  Khartoum. Now, supposing that
General Gordon, in response to a  popular agitation in the Press, were sent to Khartoum, what would

follow? Was it not at least possible that, once there, with his  views and his character, he
would, for some reason or other,  refrain from carrying out a policy of pacific retreat? Was it not

possible that in that case he might so involve the English  Government that it would find itself
obliged, almost  imperceptibly perhaps, to substitute for its policy of withdrawal

a policy of advance? Was it not possible that General Gordon  might get into difficulties,
that he might be surrounded and cut  off from Egypt'? If that were to happen, how could the
English  Government avoid the necessity of sending an expedition to rescue

him? And, if an English expedition went to the Sudan, was it  conceivable that it would leave
the Mahdi as it found him? In  short, would not the dispatch of General Gordon to Khartoum
involve, almost inevitably, the conquest of the Sudan by British  troops, followed by a British
occupation? And, behind all these  questions, a still larger question loomed. The position
of the  English in Egypt itself was still ambiguous; the future was  obscure; how long, in
reality, would an English army remain in  Egypt? Was not one thing, at least, obvious-- that
if the English

were to conquer and occupy the Sudan, their evacuation of Egypt  would become impossible?

With our present information, it would be rash to affirm that  all, or any, of these considerations
were present to the minds of

the imperialist section of the Government. Yet it is difficult to

believe that a man such as Lord Wolseley, for instance, with his  knowledge of affairs and
his knowledge of Gordon, could have  altogether overlooked them. Lord Hartington, indeed, may
well  have failed to realise at once the implications of General  Gordon's appointment-- for
it took Lord Hartington some time to  realise the implications of anything; but Lord Hartington
was  very far from being a fool; and we may well suppose that he  instinctively, perhaps subconsciously,
apprehended the elements  of a situation which he never formulated to himself. However that

may be, certain circumstances are significant. It is significant  that the go-between who acted
as the Government's agent in its  negotiations with Gordon was an imperialist-- Lord Wolseley.
It  is significant that the 'Ministers' whom Gordon finally interviewed,  and who actually
determined his appointment were by no means the whole  of the Cabinet, but a small section
of it, presided over by Lord Hartington.  It is significant, too, that Gordon's mission was
represented both to Sir  Evelyn Baring, who was opposed to his appointment, and to Mr. Gladstone,
who  was opposed to an active policy in the Sudan, as a mission merely 'to  report'; while,
no sooner was the mission actually decided upon,  than it began to assume a very different
complexion. In his final

interview with the 'Ministers', Gordon we know (though he said  nothing about it to the Rev.
Mr Barnes) threw out the suggestion  that it might be as well to make him the Governor-General
of the  Sudan. The suggestion, for the moment, was not taken up; but it  is obvious that a
man does not propose to become a Governor- General in order to make a report.

We are in the region of speculations; one other presents itself.  Was the movement in the Press
during that second week of January  a genuine movement, expressing a spontaneous wave of popular
feeling? Or was it a cause of that feeling, rather than an  effect? The engineering of a newspaper
agitation may not have  been an impossibility-- even so long ago as 1884. One would like  to
know more than one is ever likely to know of the relations of  the imperialist section of the
Government with Mr. Stead.

But it is time to return to the solidity of fact. Within a few  hours of his interview with
the Ministers, Gordon had left  England forever. At eight o'clock in the evening, there was
a  little gathering of elderly gentlemen at Victoria Station.  Gordon, accompanied by Colonel
Stewart, who was to act as his  second-in-command, tripped on to the platform. Lord Granville
bought the necessary tickets; the Duke of Cambridge opened the  railway-carriage door. The
General jumped into the train; and  then Lord Wolseley appeared, carrying a leather bag, in
which was

£200 in gold, collected from friends at the last moment for the  contingencies of the journey.
The bag was handed through the  window. The train started. As it did so, Gordon leaned out
and  addressed a last whispered question to Lord Wolseley. Yes, it had

been done. Lord Wolseley had seen to it himself; next morning,  every member of the Cabinet
would receive a copy of Dr. Samuel  Clarke's Scripture Promises. That was all. The train rolled
out  of the station.

Before the travellers reached Cairo, steps had been taken which  finally put an end to the
theory-- if it had ever been seriously  held-- that the purpose of the mission was simply the
making of a

report. On the very day of Gordon's departure, Lord Granville  telegraphed to Sir Evelyn Baring
as follows: 'Gordon suggests  that it may be announced in Egypt that he is on his way to  Khartoum
to arrange for the future settlement of the Sudan for  the best advantage of the people.' Nothing
was said of  reporting. A few days later, Gordon himself telegraphed to Lord  Granville suggesting
that he should be made Governor-General of  the Sudan, in order to 'accomplish the evacuation',
and to  'restore to the various Sultans of the Sudan their independence'.

Lord Granville at once authorised Sir Evelyn Baring to issue, if  he thought fit, a proclamation
to this effect in the name of the  Khedive. Thus the mission 'to report' had already swollen
into a  Governor-Generalship, with the object, not merely of effecting  the evacuation of the
Sudan, but also of setting up 'various  Sultans' to take the place of the Egyptian Government.

In Cairo, in spite of the hostilities of the past, Gordon was  received with every politeness.
He was at once proclaimed  Governor-General of the Sudan, with the widest powers. He was on
the point of starting off again on his journey southwards, when a

singular and important incident occurred. Zobeir, the rebel  chieftain of Darfur, against whose
forces Gordon had struggled  for years, and whose son, Suleiman, had been captured and  executed
by Gessi, Gordon's lieutenant, was still detained at  Cairo. It so fell out that he went to
pay a visit to one of the  Ministers at the same time as the new Governor-General. The two
men met face to face, and, as he looked into the savage  countenance of his old enemy, an extraordinary
shock of  inspiration ran through Gordon's brain. He was seized, as he  explained in a State
paper, which he drew up immediately after  the meeting, with a 'mystic feeling' that he could
trust Zobeir.  It was true that Zobeir was 'the greatest slave-hunter who ever  existed'; it
was true that he had a personal hatred of Gordon,  owing to the execution of Suleiman--'and
one cannot wonder at it,

if one is a father'; it was true that, only a few days  previously, on his way to Egypt, Gordon
himself had been so  convinced of the dangerous character of Zobeir that he had  recommended
by telegram his removal to Cyprus. But such  considerations were utterly obliterated by that
one moment of  electric impact of personal vision; henceforward ,there was a  rooted conviction
in Gordon's mind that Zobeir was to be trusted,

that Zobeir must join him at Khartoum, that Zobeir's presence  would paralyse the Mahdi, that
Zobeir must succeed him in the  government of the country after the evacuation. Did not Sir
Evelyn Baring, too, have the mystic feeling? Sir Evelyn Baring  confessed that he had not.
He distrusted mystic feelings. Zobeir,

no doubt, might possibly be useful; but, before deciding upon so  important a matter, it was
necessary to reflect and to consult.

In the meantime, failing Zobeir, something might perhaps be done  with the Emir Abdul Shakur,
the heir of the Darfur Sultans. The  Emir, who had been living in domestic retirement in Cairo,
was  with some difficulty discovered, given £2,000, an embroidered  uniform, together with
the largest decoration that could be  found, and informed that he was to start at once with
General  Gordon for the Sudan, where it would be his duty to occupy the  province of Darfur,
after driving out the forces of the Mahdi.  The poor man begged for a little delay; but no
delay could be  granted. He hurried to the railway station in his frockcoat and  fez, and rather
the worse for liquor. Several extra carriages for

his twenty-three wives and a large quantity of luggage had then  to be hitched on to the Governor-General's
train; and at the last

moment some commotion was caused by the unaccountable disappearance  of his embroidered uniform.
It was found, but his troubles were not  over. On the steamer, General Gordon was very rude
to him, and he

drowned his chagrin in hot rum and water. At Assuan he disembarked,  declaring that he would
go no farther. Eventually, however, he got  as far as Dongola, whence, after a stay of a few
months, he returned  with his family to Cairo.

In spite of this little contretemps, Gordon was in the highest spirits. At last his capacities
had been recognised by his countrymen; at last he had been entrusted with a task great enough
to satisfy even his desires. He was already famous; he would soon be glorious. Looking out
once more over the familiar desert, he felt the searchings of his conscience stilled by the
manifest certainty that it was for this that Providence had been reserving him through all
these years of labour and of sorrow for this! What was the Mahdi to stand up against him! A
thousand schemes, a thousand possibilities sprang to life in his pullulating brain. A new intoxication
carried him away. 'Il faut etre toujours ivre. Tout est la: c'est l'unique question.' Little
though he knew it, Gordon was a disciple of Baudelaire. 'Pour ne pas sentir l'horrible fardeau
du Temps qui brise vos epaules et vous penche vers la terre, il faut vous enivrer sans treve.'
Yes- - but how feeble were those gross resources of the miserable Abdul-Shakur! Rum? Brandy?
Oh, he knew all about them; they were nothing. He tossed off a glass. They were nothing at
all. The true drunkenness lay elsewhere. He seized a paper and pencil, and dashed down a telegram
to Sir Evelyn Baring. Another thought struck him, and another telegram followed. And another,
and yet another. He had made up his mind; he would visit the Mahdi in person, and alone. He
might do that; or he might retire to the Equator. He would decidedly retire to the Equator,
and hand over the Bahr-el-Ghazal province to the King of the Belgians. A whole flock of telegrams
flew to Cairo from every stopping-place. Sir Evelyn Baring was patient and discrete; he could
be trusted with such confidences; but unfortunately Gordon's strange exhilaration found other
outlets. At Berber, in the course of a speech to the assembled chiefs, he revealed the intention
of the Egyptian Government to withdraw from the Sudan. The news was everywhere in a moment,
and the results were disastrous. The tribesmen, whom fear and interest had still kept loyal,
perceived that they need look no more for help or punishment from Egypt, and began to turn
their eyes towards the rising sun.

Nevertheless, for the moment, the prospect wore a favourable appearance. The Governor-General
was welcomed at every stage of his journey, and on February 18th he made a triumphal entry
into Khartoum. The feeble garrison, the panic-stricken inhabitants, hailed him as a deliverer.
Surely they need fear no more, now that the great English Pasha had come among them. His first
acts seemed to show that a new and happy era had begun. Taxes were remitted, the bonds of the
usurers were destroyed, the victims of Egyptian injustice were set free from the prisons; the
immemorial instruments of torture the stocks and the whips and the branding- irons were broken
to pieces in the public square. A bolder measure had been already taken. A proclamation had
been issued sanctioning slavery in the Sudan. Gordon, arguing that he was powerless to do away
with the odious institution, which, as soon as the withdrawal was carried out, would inevitably
become universal, had decided to reap what benefit he could from the public abandonment of
an unpopular policy. At Khartoum the announcement was received with enthusiasm, but it caused
considerable perturbation in England. The Christian hero, who had spent so many years of his
life in suppressing slavery, was now suddenly found to be using his high powers to set it up
again. The Anti-Slavery Society made a menacing movement, but the Government showed a bold
front, and the popular belief in Gordon's infallibility carried the day.

He himself was still radiant. Nor, amid the jubilation and the devotion which surrounded him,
did he forget higher things. In all this turmoil, he told his sister, he was 'supported'. As
the days went by, he began to feel at home again in the huge palace which he knew so well.
The glare and the heat of that southern atmosphere, the movement of the crowded city, the dark-
faced populace, the soldiers and the suppliants, the reawakened consciousness of power, the
glamour and the mystery of the whole strange scene--these things seized upon him, engulfed
him, and worked a new transformation on his intoxicated heart. England, with its complications
and its policies, became an empty vision to him; Sir Evelyn Baring, with his cautions and sagacities,
hardly more than a tiresome name. He was Gordon Pasha, he was the Governor-General, he was
the ruler of the Sudan. He was among his people--his own people, and it was to them only that
he was responsible--to them, and to God. Was he to let them fall without a blow into the clutches
of a sanguinary impostor? Never! He was there to prevent that. The distant governments might
mutter something about 'evacuation'; his thoughts were elsewhere. He poured them into his telegrams,
and Sir Evelyn Baring sat aghast. The man who had left London a month before, with instructions
to 'report upon the best means of effecting the evacuation of the Sudan', was now openly talking
of 'smashing up the Mahdi' with the aid of British and Indian troops. Sir Evelyn Baring counted
upon his fingers the various stages of this extraordinary development in General Gordon's opinions.
But he might have saved himself the trouble, for, in fact, it was less a development than a
reversion. Under the stress of the excitements and the realities of his situation at Khartoum,
the policy which Gordon was now proposing to carry out had come to tally, in every particular,
with the policy which he had originally advocated with such vigorous conviction in the pages
of the Pall Mall Gazette.

Nor was the adoption of that policy by the English Government by any means out of the question.
For, in the meantime, events had been taking place in the Eastern Sudan, in the neighbourhood
of the Red Sea port of Suakin, which were to have a decisive effect upon the prospects of Khartoum.
General Baker, the brother of Sir Samuel Baker, attempting to relieve the beleaguered garrisons
of Sinkat and Tokar, had rashly attacked the forces of Osman Digna, had been defeated, and
obliged to retire. Sinkat and Tokar had then fallen into the hands of the Mahdi's general.
There was a great outcry in England, and a wave of warlike feeling passed over the country.
Lord Wolseley at once drew up a memorandum advocating the annexation of the Sudan. In the House
of Commons even Liberals began to demand vengeance and military action, whereupon the Government
dispatched Sir Gerald Graham with a considerable British force to Suakin. Sir Gerald Graham
advanced, and in the battles of El Teb and Tamai inflicted two bloody defeats upon the Mahdi's
forces. It almost seemed as if the Government was now committed to a policy of interference
and conquest; as if the imperialist section of the Cabinet were at last to have their way.
The dispatch of Sir Gerald Graham coincided with Gordon's sudden demand for British and Indian
troops with which to 'smash up the Mahdi'. The business, he assured Sir Evelyn Baring, in a
stream of telegrams, could very easily be done. It made him sick, he said, to see himself held
in check and the people of the Sudan tyrannised over by 'a feeble lot of stinking Dervishes'.
Let Zobeir at once be sent down to him, and all would be well.

The original Sultans of the country had unfortunately proved disap-pointing. Their place should
be taken by Zobeir. After the Mahdi had been smashed up, Zobeir should rule the Sudan as a
subsidised vassal of England, on a similar footing to that of the Amir of Afghanistan. The
plan was perhaps feasible; but it was clearly incompatible with the policy of evacuation, as
it had been hitherto laid down by the English Government. Should they reverse that policy?
Should they appoint Zobeir, reinforce Sir Gerald Graham, and smash up the Mahdi? They could
not make up their minds. So far as Zobeir was concerned, there were two counterbalancing considerations;
on the one hand, Evelyn Baring now declared that he was in favour of the appointment; but,
on the other hand, would English public opinion consent to a man, described by Gordon himself
as 'the greatest slave-hunter who ever existed', being given an English subsidy and the control
of the Sudan? While the Cabinet was wavering, Gordon took a fatal step. The delay was intolerable,
and one evening, in a rage, he revealed his desire for Zobeir-- which had hitherto been kept
a profound official secret-- to Mr Power, the English Consul at Khartoum, and the special correspondent
of "The Times." Perhaps he calculated that the public announcement of his wishes would oblige
the Government to yield to them; if so, he was completely mistaken, for the result was the
very reverse. The country, already startled by the proclamation in favour of slavery, could
not swallow Zobeir. The Anti-Slavery Society set on foot a violent agitation, opinion in the
House of Commons suddenly stiffened, and the Cabinet, by a substantial majority, decided that
Zobeir should remain in Cairo. The imperialist wave had risen high, but it had not risen high
enough; and now it was rapidly subsiding. The Government's next action was decisive. Sir Gerald
Graham and his British Army were withdrawn from the Sudan.

The critical fortnight during which these events took place was the first fortnight of March.
By the close of it, Gordon's position had undergone a rapid and terrible change. Not only did
he find himself deprived, by the decision of the Government, both of the hope of Zobeir's assistance
and of the prospect of smashing up the Mahdi with the aid of British troops; the military movements
in the Eastern Sudan produced, at the very same moment, a yet more fatal consequence. The adherents
of the Mahdi had been maddened, they had not been crushed, by Sir Gerald Graham's victories.
When, immediately afterwards, the English withdrew to Suakin, from which they never again emerged,
the inference seemed obvious; they had been defeated, and their power was at an end. The warlike
tribes to the north and the northeast of Khartoum had long been wavering. They now hesitated
no longer, and joined the Mahdi. From that moment-- it was less than a month from Gordon's
arrival at Khartoum-- the situation of the town was desperate. The line of communications was
cut. Though it still might be possible for occasional native messengers, or for a few individuals
on an armed steamer, to win their way down the river into Egypt, the removal of a large number
of persons--the loyal inhabitants or the Egyptian garrison-- was henceforward an impossibility.
The whole scheme of the Gordon mission had irremediably collapsed; worse still, Gordon himself,
so far from having effected the evacuation of the Sudan, was surrounded by the enemy. 'The
question now is,' Sir Evelyn Baring told Lord Granville, on March 24th, 'how to get General
Gordon and Colonel Stewart away from Khartoum.'

The actual condition of the town, however, was not, from a military point of view, so serious
as Colonel Coetlogon, in the first moments of panic after the Hicks disaster, had supposed.
Gordon was of opinion that it was capable of sustaining a siege of many months. With his usual
vigour, he had already begun to prepare an elaborate system of earthworks, mines, and wire
entanglements. There was a five or six months' supply of food, there was a great quantity of
ammunition, the garrison numbered about 8,000 men. There were, besides, nine small paddle-wheel
steamers, hitherto used for purposes of communication along the Nile, which, fitted with guns
and protected by metal plates, were of considerable military value. 'We are all right,' Gordon
told his sister on March 15th. 'We shall, D. V., go on for months.' So far, at any rate, there
was no cause for despair. But the effervescent happiness of three weeks since had vanished.
Gloom, doubt, disillusionment, self-questioning, had swooped down again upon their victim.
'Our Lord's promise is not for the fulfilment of earthly wishes; therefore, if things come
to ruin here He is still faithful, and is carrying out His great work of divine wisdom.' How
could he have forgotten that? But he would not transgress again. 'I owe all to God, and nothing
to myself, for, humanly speaking, I have done very foolish things. However, if I am humbled,
the better for me.'

News of the changed circumstances at Khartoum was not slow in reaching England, and a feeling
of anxiety began to spread. Among the first to realise the gravity of the situation was Queen
Victoria. 'It is alarming,' she telegraphed to Lord Hartington on March 25th. 'General Gordon
is in danger; you are bound to try to save him... You have incurred a fearful responsibility.'
With an unerring instinct, Her Majesty  forestalled and expressed the popular sentiment. During
April, when it had become clear that the wire between Khartoum and Cairo had been severed;
when, as time passed, no word came northward, save vague rumours of disaster; when at last
a curtain of impenetrable mystery closed over Khartoum, the growing uneasiness manifested itself
in letters to the newspapers, in leading articles, and in a flood of subscriptions towards
a relief fund. At the beginning of May, the public alarm reached a climax. It now appeared
to be certain, not only that General Gordon was in imminent danger, but that no steps had yet
been taken by the Government to save him.

On the 5th, there was a meeting of protest and indignation at St. James's Hall; on the 9th
there was a mass meeting in Hyde Park; on the 11th there was a meeting at Manchester. The Baroness
Burdett-Coutts wrote an agitated letter to "The Times" begging for further subscriptions. Somebody
else proposed that a special fund should be started with which 'to bribe the tribes to secure
the General's personal safety'. A country vicar made another suggestion. Why should not public
prayers be offered up for General Gordon in every church in the kingdom? He himself had adopted
that course last Sunday. 'Is not this,' he concluded, 'what the godly man, the true hero, himself
would wish to be done?' It was all of no avail. General Gordon remained in peril; the Government
remained inactive. Finally, a vote of censure was moved in the House of Commons; but that too
proved useless. It was strange; the same executive which, two months before, had trimmed its
sails so eagerly to the shifting gusts of popular opinion, now, in spite of a rising hurricane,
held on its course. A new spirit, it was clear-- a determined, an intractable spirit- - had
taken control of the Sudan situation. What was it? The explanation was simple, and it was ominous.
Mr. Gladstone had intervened.

The old statesman was now entering upon the penultimate period of his enormous career. He who
had once been the rising hope of the stern and unbending Tories, had at length emerged, after
a lifetime of transmutations, as the champion of militant democracy. He was at the apex of
his power. His great rival was dead; he stood pre-eminent in the eye of the nation; he enjoyed
the applause, the confidence, the admiration, the adoration, even, of multitudes. Yet-- such
was the peculiar character of the man, and such was the intensity of the feelings which he
called forth-- at this very moment, at the height of his popularity, he was distrusted and
loathed; already an unparalleled animosity was gathering its forces against him. For, indeed,
there was something in his nature which invited --which demanded-- the clashing reactions of
passionate extremes. It was easy to worship Mr. Gladstone; to see in him the perfect model
of the upright man--the man of virtue and of religion-- the man whose whole life had been devoted
to the application of high principles to affairs of State; the man, too, whose sense of right
and justice was invigorated and ennobled by an enthusiastic heart. It was also easy to detest
him as a hypocrite, to despise him as a demagogue, and to dread him as a crafty manipulator
of men and things for the purposes of his own ambition.

It might have been supposed that one or other of these conflicting judgments must have been
palpably absurd, that nothing short of gross prejudice or wilful blindness, on one side or
the other, could reconcile such contradictory conceptions of a single human being. But it was
not so; 'the elements' were 'so mixed' in Mr. Gladstone that his bitterest enemies (and his
enemies were never mild) and his warmest friends (and his friends were never tepid) could justify,
with equal plausibility, their denunciations or their praises. What, then, was the truth? In
the physical universe there are no chimeras. But man is more various than nature; was Mr. Gladstone,
perhaps, a chimera of the spirit? Did his very essence lie in the confusion of incompatibles?
His very essence? It eludes the hand that seems to grasp it. One is baffled, as his political
opponents were baffled fifty years ago. The soft serpent coils harden into quick strength that
has vanished, leaving only emptiness and perplexity behind. Speech was the fibre of his being;
and, when he spoke, the ambiguity of ambiguity was revealed. The long, winding, intricate sentences,
with their vast burden of subtle and complicated qualifications, befogged the mind like clouds,
and like clouds, too, dropped thunder bolts. Could it not then at least be said of him with
certainty that his was a complex character? But here also there was a contradiction.

In spite of the involutions of his intellect and the contortions of his spirit, it is impossible
not to perceive a strain of naivete in Mr. Gladstone. He adhered to some of his principles
that of the value of representative institutions, for instance with a faith which was singularly
literal; his views upon religion were uncritical to crudeness; he had no sense of humour. Compared
with Disraeli's, his attitude towards life strikes one as that of an ingenuous child. His very
egoism was simple-minded; through all the labyrinth of his passions there ran a single thread.
But the centre of the labyrinth? Ah! the thread might lead there, through those wandering mazes,
at last. Only, with the last corner turned, the last step taken, the explorer might find that
he was looking down into the gulf of a crater. The flame shot out on every side, scorching
and brilliant; but in the midst, there was a darkness.

That Mr. Gladstone's motives and ambitions were not merely those of a hunter after popularity
was never shown more clearly than in that part of his career which, more than any other, has
been emphasised by his enemies--his conduct towards General Gordon. He had been originally
opposed to Gordon's appointment, but he had consented to it partly, perhaps, owing to the persuasion
that its purpose did not extend beyond the making of a 'report'. Gordon once gone, events had
taken their own course; the policy of the Government began to slide, automatically, down a
slope at the bottom of which lay the conquest of the Sudan and the annexation of Egypt. Sir
Gerald Graham's bloody victories awoke Mr. Gladstone to the true condition of affairs; he recognised
the road he was on and its destination; but there was still time to turn back.

It was he who had insisted upon the withdrawal of the English army from the Eastern Sudan.
The imperialists were sadly disappointed. They had supposed that the old lion had gone to sleep,
and suddenly he had come out of his lair, and was roaring. All their hopes now centred upon
Khartoum. General Gordon was cut off; he was surrounded, he was in danger; he must be relieved.
A British force must be sent to save him. But Mr. Gladstone was not to be caught napping a
second time. When the agitation rose, when popular sentiment was deeply stirred, when the country,
the Press, the Sovereign herself, declared that the national honour was involved with the fate
of General Gordon, Mr. Gladstone remained immovable. Others might picture the triumphant rescue
of a Christian hero from the clutches of heathen savages; before HIS eyes was the vision of
battle, murder, and sudden death, the horrors of defeat and victory, the slaughter and the
anguish of thousands, the violence of military domination, the enslavement of a people.

The invasion of the Sudan, he had flashed out in the House of Commons, would be a war of conquest
against a people struggling to be free. 'Yes, those people are struggling to be free, and they
are rightly struggling to be free.' Mr. Gladstone--it was one of his old-fashioned simplicities--believed
in liberty. If, indeed, it should turn out to be the fact that General Gordon was in serious
danger, then, no doubt, it would be necessary to send a relief expedition to Khartoum. But,
he could see no sufficient reason to believe that it was the fact. Communications, it was true,
had been interrupted between Khartoum and Cairo, but no news was not necessarily bad news,
and the little information that had come through from General Gordon seemed to indicate that
he could hold out for months. So his agile mind worked, spinning its familiar web of possibilities
and contingencies and fine distinctions. General Gordon, he was convinced, might be hemmed
in, but he was not surrounded. Surely, it was the duty of the Government to take no rash step,
but to consider and to inquire, and, when it acted, to act upon reasonable conviction. And
then, there was another question. If it was true--and he believed it was true--that General
Gordon's line of retreat was open, why did not General Gordon use it?

Perhaps he might be unable to withdraw the Egyptian garrison, but it was not for the sake of
the Egyptian garrison that the relief expedition was proposed; it was simply and solely to
secure the personal safety of General Gordon. And General Gordon had it in his power to secure
his personal safety himself; and he refused to do so; he lingered on in Khartoum, deliberately,
wilfully, in defiance of the obvious wishes of his superiors. Oh! it was perfectly clear what
General Gordon was doing: he was trying to force the hand of the English Government. He was
hoping that if he only remained long enough at Khartoum, he would oblige the English Government
to send an army into the Sudan which should smash up the Mahdi. That, then, was General Gordon's
calculation! Well, General Gordon would learn that he had made a mistake. Who was he that he
should dare to imagine that he could impose his will upon Mr. Gladstone? The old man's eyes
glared. If it came to a struggle between them--well, they should see! As the weeks passed,
the strange situation grew tenser. It was like some silent deadly game of bluff. And who knows
what was passing in the obscure depths of that terrifying spirit? What mysterious mixture of
remorse, rage, and jealousy? Who was it that was ultimately responsible for sending General
Gordon to Khartoum? But then, what did that matter? Why did not the man come back? He was a
Christian hero, wasn't he? Were there no other Christian heroes in the world? A Christian hero!
Let him wait until the Mahdi's ring was really round him, until the Mahdi's spear was really
about to fall! That would be the test of heroism! If he slipped back then, with his tail between
his legs--! The world would judge.

One of the last telegrams sent by Gordon before the wire was cut seemed to support exactly
Mr. Gladstone's diagnosis of the case. He told Sir Evelyn Baring that, since the Government
refused to send either an expedition or Zobeir, he would 'consider himself free to act according
to circumstances.' 'Eventually,' he said, 'you will be forced to smash up the Mahdi', and he
declared that if the Government persisted in its present line of conduct, it would be branded
with an 'indelible disgrace'. The message was made public, and it happened that Mr. Gladstone
saw it for the first time in a newspaper, during a country visit. Another of the guests, who
was in the room at the moment, thus describes the scene: 'He took up the paper, his eye instantly
fell on the telegram, and he read it through. As he read, his face hardened and whitened, the
eyes burned as I have seen them once or twice in the House of Commons when he was angered--
burned with a deep fire, as if they would have consumed the sheet on which Gordon's message
was printed, or as if Gordon's words had burned into his soul, which was looking out in wrath
and flame. He said not a word. For perhaps two or three minutes he sat still, his face all
the while like the face you may read of in Milton--like none other I ever saw. Then he rose,
still without a word, and was seen no more that morning.'

It is curious that Gordon himself never understood the part that Mr. Gladstone was playing
in his destiny. His Khartoum journals put this beyond a doubt. Except for one or two slight
and jocular references to Mr. Gladstone's minor idiosyncrasies--the shape of his collars, and
his passion for felling trees, Gordon leaves him unnoticed while he lavishes his sardonic humour
upon Lord Granville. But in truth Lord Granville was a nonentity. The error shows how dim the
realities of England had grown to the watcher in Khartoum. When he looked towards home, the
figure that loomed largest upon his vision was-- it was only natural that it should have been
so the nearest-- it was upon Sir Evelyn Baring that he fixed his gaze. For him, Sir Evelyn
Baring was the embodiment of England-- or rather the embodiment of the English official classes,
of English diplomacy, of the English Government with its hesitations, its insincerities, its
double-faced schemes. Sir Evelyn Baring, he almost came to think at moments, was the prime
mover, the sole contriver, of the whole Sudan imbroglio.

In this he was wrong; for Sir Evelyn Baring, of course, was an intermediary, without final
responsibility or final power; but Gordon's profound antipathy, his instinctive distrust, were
not without their justification. He could never forget that first meeting in Cairo, six years
earlier, when the fundamental hostility between the two men had leapt to the surface. 'When
oil mixes with water,' he said, 'we will mix together.' Sir Evelyn Baring thought so too; but
he did not say so; it was not his way. When he spoke, he felt no temptation to express everything
that was in his mind. In all he did, he was cautious, measured, unimpeachably correct. It would
be difficult to think of a man more completely the antithesis of Gordon. His temperament, all
in monochrome, touched in with cold blues and indecisive greys, was eminently unromantic. He
had a steely colourlessness, and a steely pliability, and a steely strength. Endowed beyond
most men with the capacity of foresight, he was endowed as very few men have ever been with
that staying-power which makes the fruit of foresight attainable. His views were long, and
his patience was even longer. He progressed imperceptibly; he constantly withdrew; the art
of giving way he practised with the refinement of a virtuoso. But, though the steel recoiled
and recoiled, in the end it would spring forward. His life's work had in it an element of paradox.
It was passed entirely in the East; and the East meant very little to him; he took no interest
in it. It was something to be looked after. It was also a convenient field for the talents
of Sir Evelyn Baring. Yet it must not be supposed that he was cynical; perhaps he was not quite
great enough for that. He looked forward to a pleasant retirement--a country place-- some literary
recreations. He had been careful to keep up his classics. His ambition can be stated in a single
phrase-- it was to become an institution; and he achieved it. No doubt, too, he deserved it.
The greatest of poets, in a bitter mood, has described the characteristics of a certain class
of persons, whom he did not like. 'They,' he says,

'that have power to hurt and will do none, That do not do the things they most do show, Who,
moving others, are themselves as stone, Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow, They rightly
do inherit heaven's graces, And husband nature's riches from expense; They are the lords and
owners of their faces...'

The words might have been written for Sir Evelyn Baring.

Though, as a rule, he found it easy to despise those with whom he came into contact, he could
not altogether despise General Gordon. If he could have, he would have disliked him less. He
had gone as far as his caution had allowed him in trying to prevent the fatal appointment;
and then, when it had become clear that the Government was insistent, he had yielded with a
good grace. For a moment, he had imagined that all might yet be well; that he could impose
himself, by the weight of his position and the force of his sagacity, upon his self-willed
subordinate; that he could hold him in a leash at the end of the telegraph wire to Khartoum.
Very soon he perceived that this was a miscalculation. To his disgust, he found that the telegraph
wire, far from being an instrument of official discipline, had been converted by the agile
strategist at the other end of it into a means of extending his own personality into the deliberations
at Cairo. Every morning Sir Evelyn Baring would find upon his table a great pile of telegrams
from Khartoum--twenty or thirty at least; and as the day went on, the pile would grow. When
a sufficient number had accumulated he would read them all through, with the greatest care.
There upon the table, the whole soul of Gordon lay before him--in its incoherence, its eccentricity,
its impulsiveness, its romance; the jokes, the slang, the appeals to the prophet Isaiah, the
whirl of contradictory policies--Sir Evelyn Baring did not know which exasperated him most.
He would not consider whether, or to what degree, the man was a maniac; no, he would not. A
subacid smile was the only comment he allowed himself. His position, indeed, was an extremely
difficult one, and all his dexterity would be needed if he was to emerge from it with credit.

On one side of him was a veering and vacillating Government; on the other, a frenzied enthusiast.
It was his business to interpret to the first the wishes, or rather the inspirations, of the
second, and to convey to the second the decisions, or rather the indecisions, of the first.
A weaker man would have floated helplessly on the ebb and flow of the Cabinet's wavering policies;
a rasher man would have plunged headlong into Gordon's schemes. He did neither; with a singular
courage and a singular caution he progressed along a razor-edge. He devoted all his energies
to the double task of evolving a reasonable policy out of Gordon's intoxicated telegrams, and
of inducing the divided Ministers at home to give their sanction to what he had evolved. He
might have succeeded, if he had not had to reckon with yet another irreconcilable; Time was
a vital element in the situation, and Time was against him. When the tribes round Khartoum
rose, the last hope of a satisfactory solution vanished. He was the first to perceive the altered
condition of affairs; long before the Government, long before Gordon himself, he understood
that the only remaining question was that of the extrication of the Englishmen from Khartoum.
He proposed that a small force should be dispatched at once across the desert from Suakin to
Barber, the point on the Nile nearest to the Red Sea, and thence up the river to Gordon; but,
after considerable hesitation, the military authorities decided that this was riot a practicable
plan. Upon that, he foresaw, with perfect lucidity, the inevitable development of events. Sooner
or later, it would be absolutely necessary to send a relief expedition to Khartoum; and, from
that premise, it followed, without a possibility of doubt, that it was the duty of the Government
to do so at once. This he saw quite clearly; but he also saw that the position in the Cabinet
had now altered, that Mr. Gladstone had taken the reins into his own hands. And Mr. Gladstone
did not wish to send a relief expedition. What was Sir Evelyn Baring to do? Was he to pit his
strength against Mr. Gladstone's? To threaten resignation? To stake his whole future upon General
Gordon's fate? For a moment he wavered; he seemed to hint that unless the Government sent a
message to Khartoum promising a relief expedition before the end of the year, he would be unable
to be a party to their acts. The Government refused to send any such message; and he perceived,
as he tells us, that 'it was evidently useless to continue the correspondence any further'.
After all, what could he do? He was still only a secondary figure; his resignation would be
accepted; he would be given a colonial governorship and Gordon would be no nearer safety. But
then, could he sit by and witness a horrible catastrophe, without lifting a hand? Of all the
odious dilemmas which that man had put him into this, he reflected, was the most odious. He
slightly shrugged his shoulders. No; he might have 'power to hurt', but he would 'do none'.
He wrote a dispatch--a long, balanced, guarded, grey dispatch, informing the Government that
he 'ventured to think' that it was 'a question worthy of consideration whether the naval and
military authorities should not take some preliminary steps in the way of preparing boats,
etc., so as to be able to move, should the necessity arise'. Then, within a week, before the
receipt of the Government's answer, he left Egypt. From the end of April until the beginning
of September-- during the most momentous period of the whole crisis, he was engaged in London
upon a financial conference, while his place was taken in Cairo by a substitute. With a characteristically
convenient unobtrusiveness, Sir Evelyn Baring had vanished from the scene.

Meanwhile, far to the southward, over the wide-spreading lands watered by the Upper Nile and
its tributaries, the power and the glory of him who had once been Mohammed Ahmed were growing
still. In the Bahr-el-Ghazal, the last embers of resistance were stamped out with the capture
of Lupton Bey, and through the whole of that vast province three times the size of England--every
trace of the Egyptian Government was obliterated. Still farther south the same fate was rapidly
overtaking Equatoria, where Emir Pasha, withdrawing into the unexplored depths of Central Africa,
carried with him the last vestiges of the old order. The Mahdi himself still lingered in his
headquarters at El Obeid; but, on the rising of the tribes round Khartoum, he had decided that
the time for an offensive movement had come, and had dispatched an arm of 30,000 men to lay
siege to the city. At the same time, in a long and elaborate proclamation, in which he asserted,
with all the elegance of oriental rhetoric, both the sanctity of his mission and the invincibility
of his troops, he called upon the inhabitants to surrender. Gordon read aloud the summons to
the assembled townspeople; with one voice they declared that they were ready to resist. This
was a false Mahdi, they said; God would defend the right; they put their trust in the Governor-
General. The most learned Sheikh in the town drew up a theological reply, pointing out that
the Mahdi did not fulfil the requirements of the ancient prophets. At his appearance, had the
Euphrates dried up and revealed a hill of gold? Had contradiction and difference ceased upon
the earth? And, moreover, did not the faithful know that the true Mahdi was born in the year
of the Prophet 255, from which it surely followed that he must be now 1,046 years old? And
was it not clear to all men that this pretender was not a tenth of that age?

These arguments were certainly forcible; but the Mahdi's army was more forcible still. The
besieged sallied out to the attack; they were defeated; and the rout that followed was so disgraceful
that two of the commanding officers were, by Gordon's orders, executed as traitors. From that
moment the regular investment of Khartoum began. The Arab generals decided to starve the town
into submission. When, after a few weeks of doubt, it became certain that no British force
was on its way from Suakin to smash up the Mahdi, and when, at the end of May, Berber, the
last connecting link between Khartoum and the outside world, fell into the hands of the enemy,
Gordon set his teeth, and sat down to wait and to hope, as best he might. With unceasing energy
he devoted himself to the strengthening of his defences and the organisation of his resources--to
the digging of earthworks, the manufacture of ammunition, the collection and the distribution
of food. Every day there were sallies and skirmishes; every day his little armoured steamboats
paddled up and down the river, scattering death and terror as they went. Whatever the emergency,
he was ready with devices and expedients. When the earthworks were still uncompleted he procured
hundreds of yards of cotton, which he dyed the colour of earth, and spread out in long, sloping
lines, so as to deceive the Arabs, while the real works were being prepared farther back. When
a lack of money began to make itself felt, he printed and circulated a paper coinage of his
own. To combat the growing discontent and disaffection of the townspeople, he instituted a
system of orders and medals; the women were not forgotten; and his popularity redoubled. There
was terror in the thought that harm might come to the Governor- General. Awe and reverence
followed him; wherever he went he was surrounded by a vigilant and jealous guard, like some
precious idol, some mascot of victory. How could he go away? How could he desert his people?
It was impossible. It would be, as he himself exclaimed in one of his latest telegrams to Sir
Evelyn Baring, 'the climax of meanness', even to contemplate such an act. Sir Evelyn Baring
thought differently. In his opinion it was General Gordon's plain duty to have come away from
Khartoum. To stay involved inevitably a relief expedition--a great expense of treasure and
the loss of valuable lives; to come away would merely mean that the inhabitants of Khartoum
would be 'taken prisoner by the Mahdi'. So Sir Evelyn Baring put it; but the case was not quite
so simple as that. When Berber fell, there had been a massacre lasting for days-- an appalling
orgy of loot and lust and slaughter; when Khartoum itself was captured, what followed was still
more terrible. Decidedly, it was no child's play to be 'taken prisoner by the Mahdi'. And Gordon
was actually there, among those people, in closest intercourse with them, responsible, beloved.
Yes; no doubt. But was that in truth, his only motive? Did he not wish in reality, by lingering
in Khartoum, to force the hand of the Government? To oblige them, whether they would or no,
to send an army to smash up the Mahdi? And was that fair? Was THAT his duty? He might protest,
with his last breath, that he had 'tried to do his duty'; Sir Evelyn Baring, at any rate, would
not agree.

But Sir Evelyn Baring was inaudible, and Gordon now cared very little for his opinions. Is
it possible that, if only for a moment, in his extraordinary predicament, he may have listened
to another and a very different voice--a voice of singular quality, a voice which--for so one
would fain imagine--may well have wakened some familiar echoes in his heart? One day, he received
a private letter from the Mahdi. The letter was accompanied by a small bundle of clothes. 'In
the name of God!' wrote the Mahdi, 'herewith a suit of clothes, consisting of a coat (jibbeh),
an overcoat, a turban, a cap, a girdle, and beads. This is the clothing of those who have given
up this world and its vanities, and who look for the world to come, for everlasting happiness
in Paradise. If you truly desire to come to God and seek to live a godly life, you must at
once wear this suit, and come out to accept your everlasting good fortune.' Did the words bear
no meaning to the mystic of Gravesend? But he was an English gentleman, an English officer.
He flung the clothes to the ground, and trampled on them in the sight of all. Then, alone,
he went up to the roof of his high palace, and turned the telescope once more, almost mechanically,
towards the north.

But nothing broke the immovability of that hard horizon; and, indeed, how was it possible that
help should come to him now? He seemed to be utterly abandoned. Sir Evelyn Baring had disappeared
into his financial conference. In England, Mr. Gladstone had held firm, had outfaced the House
of Commons, had ignored the Press. He appeared to have triumphed. Though it was clear that
no preparations of any kind were being made for the relief of Gordon, the anxiety and agitation
of the public, which had risen so suddenly to such a height of vehemence, had died down. The
dangerous beast had been quelled by the stern eye of its master. Other questions became more
interesting--the Reform Bill, the Russians, the House of Lords. Gordon, silent in Khartoum,
had almost dropped out of remembrance. And yet, help did come after all. And it came from an
unexpected quarter. Lord Hartington had been for some time convinced that he was responsible
for Gordon's appointment; and his conscience was beginning to grow uncomfortable.

Lord Hartington's conscience was of a piece with the rest of him. It was not, like Mr. Gladstone's,
a salamander-conscience--an intangible, dangerous creature, that loved to live in the fire;
nor was it, like Gordon's, a restless conscience; nor, like Sir Evelyn Baring's, a diplomatic
conscience; it was a commonplace affair. Lord Hartington himself would have been disgusted
by any mention of it. If he had been obliged, he would have alluded to it distantly; he would
have muttered that it was a bore not to do the proper thing. He was usually bored--for one
reason or another; but this particular form of boredom he found more intense than all the rest.
He would take endless pains to avoid it. Of course, the whole thing was a nuisance--an obvious
nuisance; and everyone else must feel just as he did about it. And yet people seemed to have
got it into their heads that he had some kind of special faculty in such matters--that there
was some peculiar value in his judgment on a question of right and wrong. He could not understand
why it was; but whenever there was a dispute about cards in a club, it was brought to him to
settle. It was most odd. But it was trite. In public affairs, no less than in private, Lord
Hartington's decisions carried an extraordinary weight. The feeling of his idle friends in
high society was shared by the great mass of the English people; here was a man they could
trust. For indeed he was built upon a pattern which was very dear to his countrymen. It was
not simply that he was honest: it was that his honesty was an English honesty--an honest which
naturally belonged to one who, so it seemed to them, was the living image of what an Englishman
should be.

