Yet I feared not so much as my friend, for he had a dim, small hope, and I had none. How could
I have? I--a man whose head had been painted? I--for whom her great heart had sorrowed as for
the thin, beaten cab-horses of Paris! Hope? All I could hope was that she might never know,
and I be left with some little shred of dignity in her eyes!

Who cannot see that it was for my friend to fear? At times, with him, it was despair, but of
that brave kind one loves to see--never a quiver of the lip, no winking of the eyes to keep
tears back. And I, although of a people who express everything in every way, I understood what
passed within him and found time to sorrow for him.

Most of all, I sorrowed for him as we waited for her on the terrace of the Bertolini, that
perch on the cliff so high that even the noises of the town are dulled and mingle with the
sound of the thick surf far below.

Across the city, and beyond, we saw, from the terrace, the old mountain of the warm heart,
smoking amiably, and the lights of Torre del Greco at its feet, and there, across the bay,
I beheld, as I had nightly so long ago, the lamps of Castellamare, of Sorrento; then, after
a stretch of water, a twinkling which was Capri. How good it was to know that all these had
not taken advantage of my long absence to run away and vanish, as I had half feared they would.
Those who have lived here love them well; and it was a happy thought that the beautiful lady
knew them now, and shared them. I had never known quite all their loveliness until I felt that
she knew it too. This was something that I must never tell her--yet what happiness there was in it!

I stood close to the railing, with a rambling gaze over this enchanted earth and sea and sky,
while my friend walked nervously up and down behind me. We had come to Naples in the late afternoon,
and had found a note from Mrs. Landry at our hotel, asking us for dinner. Poor Jr. had not
spoken more than twice since he had read me this kind invitation, but now I heard a low exclamation
from him, which let me know who was approaching; and that foolish trembling got hold of me
again as I turned.

Mrs. Landry came first, with outstretched hand, making some talk excusing delay; and, after
a few paces, followed the loveliest of all the world. Beside her, in silhouette against the
white window lights of the hotel, I saw the very long, thin figure of a man, which, even before
I recognized it, carried a certain ominousness to my mind.

Mrs. Landry, in spite of her florid contentedness, had sometimes a fluttering appearance of
trivial agitations.

"The Prince came down from Rome this morning," she said nervously, and I saw my friend throw
back his head like a man who declines the eye-bandage when they are going to shoot him. "He
is dining with us. I know you will be glad to meet him."

The beautiful lady took Poor Jr.'s hand, more than he hers, for he seemed dazed, in spite of
the straight way he stood, and it was easy to behold how white his face was. She made the presentation
of us both at the same time, and as the other man came into the light, my mouth dropped open
with wonder at the singular chances which the littleness of our world brings about.

"Prince Caravacioli, Mr. Poor. And this is Signor Ansolini."

It was my half-brother, that old Antonio!

Chapter Eight

Never lived any person with more possession of himself than Antonio; he bowed to each of us
with the utmost amiability; and for expression--all one saw of it was a little streak of light
in his eye-glass.

"It is yourself, Raffaele?" he said to me, in the politest manner, in our own tongue, the others
thinking it some commonplace, and I knew by his voice that the meeting was as surprising and
as exasperating to him as to me.

