A little girl nine years old, belonging to a very wealthy and highly esteemed family of Constantinople,
was carried away by bandits as she was promenading one day with her attendant outside the city.
The bandits carried their two captives to Anatolia, and there sold them.  The little girl,
who gave promise of great beauty, fell to the lot of a rich merchant of Broussa, the harshest,
most severe, and intractable man of the town; but the artless grace of this child touched even
his ferocious heart.  He conceived a great affection for her, and distinguished her from his
other slaves by giving her only light employment, such as the care of flowers, etc.  A European
gentleman who lived with this merchant offered to take charge of her education; to which the
man consented, all the more willingly since she had gained his heart, and he wished to make
her his wife as soon as she reached a marriageable age.  But the European had the same idea;
and as he was young, with an agreeable and intelligent countenance, and very rich, he succeeded
in winning the young slave's affection; and she escaped one day from her master, and, like
another Heloise, followed her Abelard to Kutahie, where they remained concealed for six months.

She was then ten years old.  Her preceptor, who became more devoted to her each day, carried
her to Constantinople, and confided her to the care of a Greek bishop, charging him to make
her a good Christian, and then returned to Vienna, with the intention of obtaining the consent
of his family and the permission of his government to marry a slave.

Two years then passed, and the poor girl heard nothing from her future husband.  Meanwhile
the bishop had died, and his heirs had abandoned Marie (this was the baptismal name of the
convert); and she, with no means and no protector, ran the risk of being at any moment discovered
by some relation or friend of her family--and it is well known that the Turks never forgive
a change of religion.

Tormented by a thousand fears, weary of her retreat and the deep obscurity in which she was
buried, she took the bold resolution of rejoining her benefactor, and not deterred by dangers
of the road set out from Constantinople alone on foot.  On her arrival in the capital of Austria,
she learned that her intended husband had been dead for more than a year.

The despair into which the poor girl was plunged by this sad news can be better imagined than
described.  What was to be done?  What would become of her?  She decided to return to her family,
and for this purpose repaired to Trieste, which town she found in a state of great commotion.
It had just received a French garrison; but the disturbances inseparable from war were not
yet ended, and young Marie consequently entered a Greek convent to await a suitable opportunity
of returning to Constantinople. There a sub-lieutenant of infantry, named Dartois, saw her,
became madly in love, won her heart, and married her at the end of a year.

The happiness which Madame Dartois now enjoyed did not cause her to renounce her plan of visiting
her own family; and, as she now had become a Frenchwoman, she thought this title would accelerate
her return to her parents' favor.  Her husband's regiment received orders to leave Trieste;
and this gave Madame Dartois the opportunity to renew her entreaties to be allowed to visit
Constantinople, to which her husband gave his consent, not without explaining to her, however,
all she had to fear, and all the dangers to which this journey would again expose her.  At
last she started, and a few days after her arrival was on the point of making herself known
to her family, when she recognized on the street through her veil, the Broussan merchant, her
former master, who was seeking her throughout Constantinople, and had sworn to kill her on sight.

This terrible 'rencontre' threw her into such a fright, that for three days she lived in constant
terror, scarcely daring to venture out, even on the most urgent business, and always fearing
lest she should see again the ferocious Anatolian.  From time to time she received letters
from her husband, who still marched with the French army; and, as it was now advancing, he
conjured her in his last letters to return to France, hoping to be able soon to rejoin her there.

Deprived of all hope of a reconciliation with her family, Madame Dartois determined to comply
with her husband's request; and, although the war between Russia and Turkey rendered the roads
very unsafe, she left Constantinople in the month of July, 1809.

After passing through Hungary and the midst of the Austrian camp, Madame Dartois bent her steps
towards Vienna, where she had the sorrow to learn that her husband had been mortally wounded
at the battle of Wagram, and was now in that town; she hastened to him, and he expired in her arms.

She mourned her husband deeply, but was soon compelled to think of the future, as the small
amount of money remaining to her when she left Constantinople had been barely sufficient for
the expenses of her journey, and M. Dartois had left no property.  Some one having advised
the poor woman to go to Schoenbrunn and ask his Majesty's assistance, a superior officer gave
her a letter of recommendation to M. Jaubert, interpreting secretary of the Emperor.

Madame Dartois arrived as his Majesty was preparing to leave Schoenbrunn, and made application
to M. Jaubert, the Duke of Bassano, General Lebrun, and many other persons who became deeply
interested in her misfortunes.

The Emperor, when informed by the Duke of Bassano of the deplorable condition of this woman,
at once made a special order granting Madame Dartois an annual pension of sixteen hundred francs,
the first year of which was paid in advance.  When the Duke of Bassano announced to the widow
his Majesty's decision, and handed her the first year's pension, she fell at his feet, and
bathed them with her tears.

The Emperor's fete was celebrated at Vienna with much brilliancy; and as all the inhabitants
felt themselves obliged to illumine their windows, the effect was extraordinarily brilliant.
They had no set illuminations; but almost all the windows had double sashes, and between these
sashes were placed lamps, candles, etc., ingeniously arranged, the effect of which was charming.
The Austrians appeared as gay as our soldiers; they had not feted their own Emperor with so
much ardor, and, though deep down in their hearts they must have experienced a feeling of constraint
at such unaccustomed joy, appearances gave no sign of this.

On the evening of the fete, during the parade, a terrible explosion was heard at Schoenbrunn,
the noise of which seemed to come from the town; and a few moments afterwards a gendarme appeared,
his horse in a gallop. "Oh, oh!"  said Colonel Mechnem, "there must be a fire at Vienna, if
a gendarme is galloping."  In fact, he brought tidings of a very deplorable event.  While an
artillery company had been preparing, in the arsenal of the town, numerous fireworks to celebrate
his Majesty's fete, one of them, in preparing a rocket, accidentally set the fuse on fire,
and becoming frightened threw it away from him. It fell on the powder which the shop contained,
and eighteen cannoneers were killed by the explosion, and seven wounded.

During his Majesty's fete, as I entered his cabinet one morning, I found with him M. Charles
Sulmetter, commissary general of the police of Vienna, whom I had seen often before.  He had
begun as head spy for the Emperor; and this had proved such a profitable business that he had
amassed an income of forty thousand pounds. He had been born at Strasburg; and in his early
life had been chief of a band of smugglers, to which vocation he was as wonderfully adapted
by nature as to that which he afterwards pursued.  He admitted this in relating his adventures,
and maintained that smuggling and police service had many points of similarity, since the great
art of smuggling was to know how to evade, while that of a spy was to know how to seek. He
inspired such terror in the Viennese that he was equal to a whole army-corps in keeping them
in subjection. His quick and penetrating glance, his air of resolution and severity, the abruptness
of his step and gestures, his terrible voice, and his appearance of great strength, fully justified
his reputation; and his adventures furnish ample materials for a romance. During the first
campaigns of Germany, being charged with a message from the French government to one of the
most prominent persons in the Austrian army, he passed among the enemy disguised as a German
peddler, furnished with regular passports, and provided with a complete stock of diamonds and
jewelry.  He was betrayed, arrested, and searched; and the letter concealed in the double bottom
of a gold box was found, and very foolishly read before him.  He was tried and condemned to
death, and delivered to the soldiers by whom he was to be executed; but as night had arrived
by this time, they postponed his execution till morning.  He recognized among his guards a
French deserter, talked with him, and promised him a large sum of money: he had wine brought,
drank with the soldiers, intoxicated them, and disguised in one of their coats, escaped with
the Frenchman.  Before re-entering the camp, however, he found means to inform the person for
whom the letter was intended, of its contents, and of what had happened.

Countersigns difficult to remember were often given in the army in order to attract the soldiers'
attention more closely.  One day the word was Pericles, Persepolis; and a captain of the guard
who had a better knowledge of how to command a charge than of Greek history and geography,
not hearing it distinctly, gave as the countersign, 'perce l'eglise', which mistake furnished
much amusement.  The old captain was not at all angry, and said that after all he was not very
far wrong.

The secretary of General Andreossy, Governor of Vienna, had an unfortunate passion for gambling;
and finding that he did not gain enough to pay his debts, sold himself to the enemy.  His correspondence
was seized; he admitted his treachery, and was condemned to death, and in confronting death
evinced astonishing self-possession.  "Come nearer," said he to the soldiers who were to shoot,
"so that you may see me better, and I will have less to suffer."

In one of his excursions in the environs of Vienna, the Emperor met a very young conscript
who was rejoining his corps.  He stopped him, asked his name, his age, regiment, and country.
"Monsieur," said the soldier, who did not know him, "my name is Martin; I am seventeen years
old, and from the Upper Pyrenees."--"you are a Frenchman, then?"--"yes, Monsieur." --"Ah, you
are a miserable' Frenchman.  Disarm this man, and hang him!"-- "Yes, you fool, I am French,"
repeated the conscript; "and Vive l'Empereur!"  His Majesty was much amused; the conscript
was undeceived, congratulated, and hastened to rejoin his comrades, with the promise of a reward,--a
promise which the Emperor was not slow to perform.

Two or three days before his departure from Schoenbrunn, the Emperor again came near being
assassinated.  This time the attack was to have been made by a woman.

The Countess at this time was well known, both on account of her astonishing beauty and the
scandal of her liaisons with Lord Paget, the English ambassador.

