And so God helped. One smooth stone, the first out of the sling, crunched through that big
bluffer's head like a baseball through a stained glass window, and the Philistine fell on his face.

Everybody's giant comes some day. Every fellow's big opportunity comes one time, at least,
and he can be just as ready for it as David was.

That's the big news to-day.

I like to think of the five smooth stones as representing five characteristics of David's readiness.

First Stone: (the one he slung) Faith. We have been talking about that--faith in God. David
prayed as he picked up those stones, you know he did.

Second Stone: A pure heart. God searched it that day at Bethlehem and approved him for anointing.
David was clean. You would never hear him telling smutty stories, nor did he think them.

Third Stone: Industrious habits. Think of his skill in playing the harp, and his effectiveness
with that deadly sling.

Fourth Stone: A courageous spirit. A lion's mane, a bear's skin, and a giant's head, of which
we know, bear testimony to this. No wonder the shepherd boy could stand before a king and reason
with him in the presence of a national crisis.

Fifth Stone: A humble spirit. Listed last, but not least by a good deal. "Thy servant will
go and fight this Philistine"; "Thy servant kept his father's sheep and--" "The Lord will"
do this thing--not I. David's humility throughout his boyhood and young manhood--indeed throughout
his whole life--is one of the fine and strong points of his character.

In the brook that runs alongside your lives, fellows, these five smooth stones and others are
waiting for each one of you. Put them in your "scrip" now and be ready for life's opportunities;
for they are coming, head on, to meet you, and God wants to be on your side.

     Read the seventeenth chapter of 1 Samuel.

XV

DRIFTING

Say, fellows, there is a little animal in the North Woods, called the weasel. In coldest winter
its fur turns snow white and its pelt is very valuable. The white fur of the weasel (sometimes
called the ermine) is used to make some of the most beautiful and expensive stoles that elegant
and wealthy ladies wear. Therefore, in very cold winters, trapping the weasel is profitable
as well as interesting.

Now here comes the queer part of this story: The weasel is small, and any scar made upon its
snow-white coat is doubly conspicuous. If the pelt is torn or injured it is rejected; so the
trapper must take his captive clean and scarless. The weasel will not enter a cage trap, and
the much used snap-jaw steel trap would tear the skin. But the weasel likes to lick a smooth
surface, especially if it is the slightest bit greasy; so the trapper smears with grease the
blade of a large knife and lays it on top of the snow, secured by a chain attached to the handle,
and covers the chain with snow to hide it.

The weasel comes along and immediately indulges its natural desire to lick the smooth blade,
and instantly the end of its tongue clings fast to the cold steel. Try as it may, it cannot
pull loose without tearing its tongue out, which usually it will not do, but sits quietly by,
until released by the trapper, released only to die. Luckless weasel, trapped by the tongue.

Now, fellows, the weasel does no more wicked thing than to follow its natural inclinations;
but natural inclinations are not safe guides; they more frequently lead to death. We folks
are much like the weasel; we are much of the time dead bent in the direction of what is worst
for us. Is not our God good to give us the plain warnings which we as intelligent beings can
see and understand--and, seeing and understanding, "Stop, Look, and Listen!"--turn about and
head toward safety, success, and happiness! Surely, He is good. But what matters how good God
is and how plain His warnings if we go right on in the wrong direction?

If a weasel could understand a warning and should say, "Yes, I know, but I am just going to
lick this once," what would it matter how clear the warning was?

God's warnings are such as should turn us face about; right now, before we are hard and fast
in one of the devil's many crafty snares, for he always lays his snares along the path of our
natural inclinations. God warns: "Abhor evil," learn to hate it, pray to hate it. The
color of this fish is like that of mongrullo, their meat is yellow and is estimated as as zurubí.

The
assembly is thick and strong, but not great, his back and sides are
full of tips strong and sharp: when you are caught, growls and does
what he can to come.

Therefore it is necessary him in the head before touching his hand. This fish commonly weighs
from four to six pounds, their flesh is white and sound.

The stripes are so abundant in the Paraná, the sand banks are fully
covered of them, are contained oval, about three quarters of a yard
long.

The back is black and white belly are flat like ours, have their mouths in the middle of the belly,
being certainly the best part of the meat.
 Naturally,
we try to "get even" with the fellow who does us a mean turn; God says turn that matter over
to Him; He will take care of it. And when that fellow needs help, as surely he will sooner
or later (maybe right now), make him the special object of our kindness.

Oh, yes, I know, fellows, it is much easier to do the way you feel like doing. But when your
boat is drifting down the current, which is the natural way, it takes a Real Fellow to dig
his oars in and turn and row up-stream. And that's what you propose to be: a Real Fellow, and
the best part of it is you then become a Yoke-fellow with Jesus Christ; and let me tell you,
He pulls a good oar!

Fellows, drifting means "over the falls." "There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but
the end thereof are the ways of death" (Prov. 16:25). Pulling up-stream with Christ means getting
to the sunshine of the eternal hills. "But the path of the righteous is as the dawning light,
that shineth more and more unto the perfect day" (Prov. 4:18).

Fellows, I had rather PULL with Christ than DRIFT with the devil, wouldn't you?

     Read the twelfth chapter of Romans.

XVI

RESURRECTION

Say, fellows, I'll never forget one exciting morning on the banks of the Etowah River, a treacherous
stream that threads its way through the red hills of northwest Georgia. A bunch of us boys
were spending that morning in swimming. Not much swimming, either, for only one boy in the
crowd could swim, and all except him were under thirteen years old. Bob was fifteen, and a
good swimmer. One of the boys waded out pretty deep, and the undercurrent swept him off his
feet. There was a cry, and he sank.

Then it was that Bob did a fine thing, which has caused the rest of us to look upon him as
a real hero ever since. He ran along the bank, down-stream a little way, and jumped in, rapidly
made his way to a point a few yards below where the boy had gone down, dived, and came up with
him. The rest of us waded out as far as we dared, to meet him, and all together we drew the
couple to shore. But, fellows, that boy was dead--at least he seemed to be, and we were certain
of it.

We lifted his limp body out of the water and laid it on the ground. We were three miles from
town. Scared? We were terrified! All of us were trembling from head to foot with fright. There
were no Boy Scouts in those days, and boys had not learned the scientific way to restore a
drowned person to life. We were alone and helpless in the presence of sudden death, and knew
not what to do.

One boy suggested that we ought to "get the water out of him," and that was followed by another
suggestion, to put the body over the lower limb of a near-by tree letting the head hang down,
so the water could run out of the mouth. This we proceeded to do, with a great deal of difficulty,
but finally we got it up there, hanging across the limb, pretty much like a wet necktie.

After the body had hung in the tree about five minutes, while we stood about, panting, pale,
and terror-stricken, we again took it down and laid it out on the ground. All of a sudden,
to our amazement there was a movement about the mouth and a little gasp, as for breath. The
rough handling of the body getting it in and out of the tree had had some effect.

Instinctively we began to roll him over and move his arms about. We knew nothing of the proper
method, but the mouth opened and he breathed again--then again--and as we let him rest a moment
on his back, he opened his eyes and looked at us, from one to the other.

Fellows, can you imagine how we felt? Well, we couldn't speak; we just jumped around like Indians
and shouted and laughed and cried. It was wonderful--the most thrilling experience I think
I ever had, but I was wobbly in the knees for a week afterward.

The thing which tremendously impressed me was the coming back from death to life--for so it
seemed to us. But what do you suppose must have been the feelings of those two women and the
disciples, on that astonishing morning when the two Marys went at early dawn with spices to
place about the Lord's body,--the body which they had seen die upon the cross two days before;
the body they had seen lifted down from the cross and which they had helped to prepare for
burial; the body they had seen sealed up in the tomb as the sun went down on the darkest, saddest
day the world ever knew?

What must have been their feelings, I say, fellows, when suddenly He appeared before them alive
and well and speaking? How they must have leaped to do the thing their risen Lord commanded:
"Go quickly--tell."

Do you know what it all means to you fellows who have accepted Him as your Saviour and Friend
and Guide?

It means this: that you in your youth, full of life and with all the thrill of growing strength
and manhood, have no dead and lifeless program to follow, no fickle and disappointing "rewards"
which perish with using; but yours is always a forward, up-going experience--something doing
every day that is worth while, something that brings a thrill which does not die out and leave
you weaker, but makes you stronger every day, and prepares you for a yet bigger task,--a living
task and a living reward--Eternal Life!

     Read John 20:1-21.

XVII

KNOWING HOW

Say, fellows, have you heard of the expert who was called in to start the big engine? Every
wheel in the plant had come to a sudden standstill. 

    For a moment the stage is empty. Brianda is in the back as Dona opens the
    front door once more. Trumpets are sounding. D. Ramon enters with his army
    and two hooded black figures.
     Still that engineer fumbled around. The "super"
telephoned for the expert to come at once and see what was the matter.

Directly, he walked quietly in, glanced at the steam gauge and turned the throttle wheel a
bit. Then, with a tiny hammer which he drew from his pocket he lightly tapped some parts of
the machine, here and there. He paused at a certain pipe leading to the steam chest, called
for a wrench, removed a tap and a plate, peered in, then carefully picked out a piece of cotton
waste and replaced the plate and tap. "Now open your throttle," he said to the engineer. The
big engine moved off like a thing of life, pulleys began to whirl and belts to whirr, and a
thousand hands resumed their work.

In the office the expert handed in his memorandum charge. It was fifty dollars and fifty cents.

"It is all right," said the superintendent, "we're glad to pay it, but would you mind telling
me what the fifty cents is for?"

The expert smiled, "Why, that is my charge for the one minute spent in locating your trouble,
the fifty dollars is for knowing how."

Fellows, your life is a great big costly engine, built with infinite skill, and you are the
engineer. It is a wonderful thing running that engine,--wonderful because it is the motive
power to turn many wheels and affect many lives. Rightly understood and properly handled it
will produce great values, and be a blessing to the world. Misunderstood and carelessly handled,
it will cause loss and suffering to you and perhaps many others.

As a boy, I used to go to the engine room of my father's mill and watch the engineer. Continually,
he moved about, watching its movements, its big flywheel half below in the pit, half above,
and the broad belt that glided over it and disappeared through the brick wall into the mill;
now he would be refilling the oil cups, now noting the steam gauge, or polishing the shining
brass trimmings almost with a caress. He was the first man on hand in the morning, and the
last man to leave at night. Oh, how well he must know his engine, how carefully he must guard
its movements, how always he must be on the job, if he would be a capable, successful, happy
engineer!

And what is God's Word telling us about it to-day? Listen, "Happy is the man that findeth wisdom
[to know God, to know himself, to know his engine], and the man that getteth understanding
[how to run his engine]. For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver,
and the gain thereof than fine gold. Length of days is in her right hand [a long and happy
career of productive energy] and in her left hand riches [the actual wealth which God promises
to those who obey His law and love His service, and the inexpressible satisfaction which comes
with the honour that honours God first of all]."

Every fellow can have this wisdom for the asking. Every fellow can know how to run his life
engine, to avoid the breakdowns, to keep the wheels humming the song of industry and success.
Life is the most interesting thing in the world, and God gives it abundantly. "If any of you
lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and
it shall be given him."

Now, fellows, here is the whole matter in a nutshell: Your life machine is the most wonderful,
the most mysterious, and at the same time the most "runnable" thing that the great God has
created; but to run it successfully, as God designed it to be run, you must get your instructions
from Him, the Maker of it. His Book of Rules, the Bible, must be your daily guide, and through
it He will speak to you in your wonderful day as you live it in His companionship.

Fellows, it is the Life!

     Read Psalm 119:1-11.

XVIII

FRIENDSHIP

Say, fellows, if you were blindfolded and walking a plank above Niagara Falls, humanly speaking
your chances would be about as good as David's were when King Saul in a frenzy of rage and
jealousy was seeking his life. David sized it up when he said: "There is but a step between
me and death."

If ever a fellow needed a friend, David needed one at that time.

And a friend he had--a friend with a backbone, a true friend--as brave as any knight who sat
at King Arthur's Table Round or followed in the train of Richard Coeur de Lion.

Young gentlemen, meet Prince Jonathan!

He never got to be a king, but he had a kingly spirit--if that means something high and noble.
He never deserted a cause which had a claim upon him. He was true to Saul, his father; he fell
at Gilboa fighting by his side. He was true to David, his friend, unto the point of death.

You may recall that in a former chapter I mentioned the opinion that David was the kind of
a fellow any red-blooded boy would like. On that day of wonders, when in the twinkling of an
eye the shepherd lad became the champion of two armies, when the musical fingers of the boy
who played a harp and tended sheep did the execution which routed the enemy and laid a giant's
head at the feet of the king--that day Jonathan's soul was knit to the soul of David in a lifelong
friendship. It was the kind of friendship which stands the test of adversity. 

A short distance further down in this last lap, makes a great circle forming a peninsula that is almost
round, the neck, or entrance is about 3 miles wide, 6 leagues crossing. Flames Tehuelches fencing,
or Tehuel-malal. The river has, to the formation of the peninsula, high slopes, and mountains on
either side, but so far, there in many Parages between them and the river, two or three miles
wide, very abundant in pastures.r, two or three miles
wide, very abundant in pastures.

But the tide turned, and there came a day when it was expensive and hazardous to be a friend
of David. Jonathan's position became both delicate and perilous. Saul his father was a despot
who would take his own son's life if he sought to excuse or defend one whom the king conceived
to be his enemy. Jonathan's friendship stood the test. His own life hung lightly in the balance,
but Jonathan would rather have given his life than fail his friend. He took it in his hand
that evening at the royal feast of the new moon; and he played with death as the javelin of
the infuriated Saul came hurtling across the table.

Then it was that this thing called Friendship sprang forth in all its wonderful strength and
beauty and found its place in poetry and song. Ah! there is the best friend of all--Jesus!
And what did He do? Well, He did this, which proves it:

There came a day when you and I were fugitives from the king--not a tyrant king, like Saul,
but a just and holy God; not an innocent fugitive, like David, but a sinner meriting the King's
wrath and curse; and One stood in the councils of Eternity--the Great White Prince--and said,
"Father, forgive him; let me take his place; let me suffer his punishment; let me bear his
shame; but him forgive and restore to a place in court and to the joy of the Royal Service."

And the King consented, and the Son came to earth and died upon the cross to satisfy the law
and make it possible for you and me, fugitive sinners, to return to the King's Table--forgiven
and restored!

Let's go!

     Read the twentieth chapter of 1 Samuel.

XIX

ALABASTER

Say, fellows, a bunch of college students were talking over the news that had come to the campus
that morning about Bob Allman. They were not only surprised; they were mad, for "Bob Allman
had done the biggest fool thing ever committed by any decent fellow that the college had sent
out,"--that was the unanimous verdict. And of all the bunch in last year's graduating class,
Bob was the last one you would have suspected of such a thing, he had so much at stake. He
was the clearest-headed, the best-balanced, the finest physical specimen, the smartest chap
in the lot. Bob was one of those rare fellows who could stand high in his classes and be popular
with the boys and the professors alike. He was president of his class and captain of the 'varsity
football team, and everybody was glad of it.

The amazing news had arrived, in a letter from Bob, himself, to one of the boys stating that
he was that very week at Vancouver, taking ship for China, where he had accepted a position
as school-teacher on the banks of the Yangtse; there he would preside over a room full of Chinese
boys about seven hours every day, while they monotonously swayed backward and forward to the
droning of their "study voices" in the characteristic Chinese fashion.

