CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS

                   AND THE NEW WORLD OF HIS DISCOVERY

                      A NARRATIVE BY FILSON YOUNG

                              Volume 7

TOWARDS THE SUNSET

CHAPTER I

DEGRADATION

The first things seen by Francisco de Bobadilla when he entered the harbour of San Domingo
on the morning of the 23rd of August 1500 were the bodies of several Spaniards, hanging from
a gibbet near the water-side --a grim confirmation of what he had heard about the troubled
state of the island.  While he was waiting for the tide so that he might enter the harbour
a boat put off from shore to ascertain who was on board the caravels; and it was thus informally
that Bobadilla first announced that he had come to examine into the state of the island.  Columbus
was not at San Domingo, but was occupied in settling the affairs of the Vega Real; Bartholomew
also was absent, stamping out the last smouldering embers of rebellion in Xaragua; and only
James was in command to deal with this awkward situation.

Bobadilla did not go ashore the first day, but remained on board his ship receiving the visits
of various discontented colonists who, getting early wind of the purpose of his visit, lost
no time in currying favour with him, Probably he heard enough that first day to have damned
the administration of a dozen islands; but also we must allow him some interest in the wonderful
and strange sights that he was seeing; for Espanola, which has perhaps grown wearisome to us,
was new to him.  He had brought with him an armed body-guard of twenty-five men, and in the
other caravel were the returned slaves, babies and all, under the charge of six friars.  On
the day following his arrival Bobadilla landed and heard mass in state, afterwards reading
out his commission to the assembled people.  Evidently he had received a shocking impression
of the state of affairs in the island; that is the only explanation of the action suddenly
taken by him, for his first public act was to demand from James the release of all the prisoners
in the fortress, in order that they and their accusers should appear before him.

James is in a difficulty; and, mule-like, since he does not know which way to turn, stands
stock still.  He can do nothing, he says, without the Admiral's consent.  The next day Bobadilla,
again hearing mass in state, causes further documents to be read showing that a still greater
degree of power had been entrusted to his hands.  Mule-like, James still stands stock still;
the greatest power on earth known to him is his eldest brother, and he will not, positively
dare not, be moved by anything less than that.  He refuses to give up the prisoners on any
grounds whatsoever, and Bobadilla has to take the fortress by assault--an easy enough matter
since the resistance is but formal.

The next act of Bobadilla's is not quite so easy to understand.  He quartered himself in Columbus's
house; that perhaps was reasonable enough since there may not have been another house in the
settlement fit to receive him; but he also, we are told, took possession of all his papers,
public and private, and also seized the Admiral's store of money and began to pay his debts
with it for him, greatly to the satisfaction of San Domingo.  There is an element of the comic
in this interpretation of a commissioner's powers; and it seemed as though he meant to wind
up the whole Columbus business, lock, stock, and barrel.  It would not be in accordance with
our modern ideas of honour that a man's private papers should be seized unless he were suspected
of treachery or some criminal act; but apparently Bobadilla regarded it as necessary.  We must
remember that although he had only heard one side of the case it was evidently so positive,
and the fruits of misgovernment were there so visibly before his eyes, that no amount of evidence
in favour of Columbus would make him change his mind as to his fitness to govern.  Poor James,
witnessing these things and unable to do anything to prevent them, finds himself suddenly relieved
from the tension of the situation.  Since inaction is his note, he shall be indulged in it;
and he is clapped in irons and cast into prison.  James can hardly believe the evidence of
his senses.  He has been studying theology lately, it appears, with a view to entering the
Church and perhaps being some day made Bishop of Espanola, but this new turn of affairs looks
as though there were to be an end of all careers for him, military and ecclesiastical alike.

Christopher at Fort Concepcion had early news of the arrival of Bobadilla, but in the hazy
state of his mind he did not regard it as an event of sufficient importance to make his immediate
presence at San Domingo advisable.  The name of Bobadilla conveyed nothing to him; and when
he heard that he had come to investigate, he thought that he came to set right some disputed
questions between the Admiral and other navigators as to the right of visiting Espanola and
the Paria coast. As the days went on, however, he heard more disquieting rumours; grew at last
uneasy, and moved to a fort nearer San Domingo in case it should be necessary for him to go
there.  An officer met him on the road bearing the proclamations issued by Bobadilla, but not
the message from the Sovereigns requiring the Admiral's obedience to the commissioner. Columbus
wrote to the commissioner a curious letter, which is not preserved, in which he sought to gain
time; excusing himself from responsibility for the condition of the island, and assuring Bobadilla
that, as he intended to return to Spain almost immediately, he (Bobadilla) would have ample
opportunity for exercising his command in his absence.  He also wrote to the Franciscan friars
who had accompanied Bobadilla asking them to use their influence--the Admiral having some vague
connection with the Franciscan order since his days at La Rabida.

No reply came to any of these letters, and Columbus sent word that he still regarded his authority
as paramount in the island.  For reply to this he received the Sovereigns' message to him which
we have seen, commanding him to put himself under the direction of Bobadilla.  There was no
mistaking this; there was the order in plain words; and with I know not what sinkings of heart
Columbus at last set out for San Domingo. Bobadilla had expected resistance, but the Admiral,
whatever his faults, knew how to behave with, dignity in a humiliating position; and he came
into the city unattended on August 23, 1500.  On the outskirts of the town he was met by Bobadilla's
guards, arrested, put in chains, and lodged in the fortress, the tower of which exists to this
day.  He seemed to himself to be the victim of a particularly petty and galling kind of treachery,
for it was his own cook, a man called Espinoza, who riveted his gyves upon him.

There remained Bartholomew to be dealt with, and he, being at large and in command of the army,
might not have proved such an easy conquest, but that Christopher, at Bobadilla's request,
wrote and advised him to submit to arrest without any resistance.  Whether Bartholomew acquiesced
or not is uncertain; what is certain is that he also was captured and placed in irons, and
imprisoned on one of the caravels.  James in one caravel, Bartholomew in another, and Christopher
in the fortress, and all in chains--this is what it has come to with the three sons of old
Domenico.

The trial was now begun, if trial that can be called which takes place in the absence of the
culprit or his representative.  It was rather the hearing of charges against Christopher and
his brothers; and we may be sure that every discontented feeling in the island found voice
and was formulated into some incriminating charge.  Columbus was accused of oppressing the
Spanish settlers by making them work at harsh and unnecessary labour; of cutting down their
allowance of food, and restricting their liberty; of punishing them cruelly and unduly; of
waging wars unjustly with the natives; of interfering with the conversion of the natives by
hastily collecting them and sending them home as slaves; of having secreted treasures which
should have been delivered to the Sovereigns--this last charge, like some of the others, true.
He had an accumulation of pearls of which he had given no account to Fonseca, and the possession
of which he excused by the queer statement that he was waiting to announce it until he could
match it with an equal amount of gold!  He was accused of hating the Spaniards, who were represented
as having risen in the late rebellion in order to protect the natives and avenge their own
wrongs--, and generally of having abused his office in order to enrich his own family and gratify
his own feelings.  Bobadilla appeared to believe all these charges; or perhaps he recognised
their nature, and yet saw that there was a sufficient degree of truth in them to disqualify
the Admiral in his position as Viceroy.  In all these affairs his right-hand man was Roldan,
whose loyalty to Columbus, as we foresaw, had been short-lived.  Roldan collects evidence;
Roldan knows where he can lay his hands on this witness; Roldan produces this and that proof;
Roldan is here, there, and everywhere--never had Bobadilla found such a useful, obliging man
as Roldan.  With his help Bobadilla soon collected a sufficient weight of evidence to justify
in his own mind his sending Columbus home to Spain, and remaining himself in command of the island.

The caravels having been made ready, and all the evidence drawn up and documented, it only
remained to embark the prisoners and despatch them to Spain.  Columbus, sitting in his dungeon,
suffering from gout and ophthalmic as well as from misery and humiliation, had heard no news;
but he had heard the shouting of the people in the streets, the beating of drums and blowing
of horns, and his own name and that of his brothers uttered in derision; and he made sure that
he was going to be executed. Alonso de Villegio, a nephew of Bishop Fonseca's, had been appointed
to take charge of the ships returning to Spain; and when he came into the prison the Admiral
thought his last hour had come.

"Villegio," he asked sadly, "where are you taking me?"

"I am taking you to the ship, your Excellency, to embark," replied the other.

"To embark?" repeated the Admiral incredulously.  "Villegio! are you speaking the truth?"

"By the life of your Excellency what I say is true," was the reply, and the news came with
a wave of relief to the panic-stricken heart of the Admiral.

In the middle of October the caravels sailed from San Domingo, and the last sounds heard by
Columbus from the land of his discovery were the hoots and jeers and curses hurled after him
by the treacherous, triumphant rabble on the shore.  Villegio treated him and his brothers
with as much kindness as possible, and offered, when they had got well clear of Espanola, to
take off the Admiral's chains.  But Columbus, with a fine counterstroke of picturesque dignity,
refused to have them removed.  Already, perhaps, he had realised that his subjection to this
cruel and quite unnecessary indignity would be one of the strongest things in his favour when
he got to Spain, and he decided to suffer as much of it as he could.  "My Sovereigns commanded
me to submit to what Bobadilla should order.  By his authority I wear these chains, and I shall
continue to wear them until they are removed by order of the Sovereigns; and I will keep them
afterwards as reminders of the reward I have received for my services."  Thus the Admiral,
beginning to pick up his spirits again, and to feel the better for the sea air.

The voyage home was a favourable one and in the course of it Columbus wrote the following letter
to a friend of his at Court, Dona Juana de la Torre, who had been nurse to Prince Juan and
was known by him to be a favourite of the Queen:

     "MOST VIRTUOUS LADY,--Though my complaint of the world is new, its
     habit of ill-using is very ancient.  I have had a thousand struggles
     with it, and have thus far withstood them all, but now neither arms
     nor counsels avail me, and it cruelly keeps me under water.  Hope in
     the Creator of all men sustains me: His help was always very ready;
     on another occasion, and not long ago, when I was still more
     overwhelmed, He raised me with His right arm, saying, 'O man of
     little faith, arise: it is I; be not afraid.'

     "I came with so much cordial affection to serve these Princes, and
     have served them with such service, as has never been heard of or
     seen.

     "Of the new heaven and earth which our Lord made, when Saint John
     was writing the Apocalypse, after what was spoken by the mouth of
     Isaiah, He made me the messenger, and showed me where it lay.  In
     all men there was disbelief, but to the Queen, my Lady, He gave the
     spirit of understanding, and great courage, and made her heiress of
     all, as a dear and much loved daughter.  I went to take possession
     of all this in her royal name.  They sought to make amends to her
     for the ignorance they had all shown by passing over their little
     knowledge and talking of obstacles and expenses.  Her Highness, on
     the other hand, approved of it, and supported it as far as she was
     able.

     "Seven years passed in discussion and nine in execution.  During
     this time very remarkable and noteworthy things occurred whereof no
     idea at all had been formed.  I have arrived at, and am in, such a
     condition that there is no person so vile but thinks he may insult
     me: he shall be reckoned in the world as valour itself who is
     courageous enough not to consent to it.

     "If I were to steal the Indies or the land which lies towards them,
     of which I am now speaking, from the altar of Saint Peter, and give
     them to the Moors, they could not show greater enmity towards me in
     Spain.  Who would believe such a thing where there was always so
     much magnanimity?

     "I should have much desired to free myself from this affair had it
     been honourable towards my Queen to do so.  The support of our Lord
     and of her Highness made me persevere: and to alleviate in some
     measure the sorrows which death had caused her, I undertook a fresh
     voyage to the new heaven and earth which up to that time had
     remained hidden; and if it is not held there in esteem like the
     other voyages to the Indies, that is no wonder, because it came to
     be looked upon as my work.

     "The Holy Spirit inflamed Saint Peter and twelve others with him,
     and they all contended here below, and their toils and hardships
     were many, but last of all they gained the victory.

     "This voyage to Paria I thought would somewhat appease them on
     account of the pearls, and of the discovery of gold in Espanola.
     I ordered the pearls to be collected and fished for by people with
     whom an arrangement was made that I should return for them, and, as
     I understood, they were to be measured by the bushel.  If I did not
     write about this to their Highnesses, it was because I wished to
     have first of all done the same thing with the gold.

