Yes, it was the end of the world. Only a couple of days previously Peter Gudge had been a devout
member of the First Apostolic Church, otherwise known as the Holy Rollers, and had listened
at prayer-meetings to soul-shaking imaginings out of the Book of Revelations. So Peter knew
that this was it; and having many sins upon his conscience, and being in no way eager to confront
his God, he looked out over the bodies of the dead and the writhing wounded, and saw a row
of boxes standing against the building, having been placed there by people who wished to see
over the heads of the crowd. Peter started to crawl, and found that he was able to do so, and
wormed his way behind one of these packing-boxes, and got inside and lay hidden from his God.

There was blood on him, and he did not know whether it was his own or other peoples'. He was
trembling with fright, his crooked teeth were hammering together like those of an angry woodchuck.
But the effects of the shock continued to pass away, and his wits to come back to him, and
at last Peter realized that he never had taken seriously the ideas of the First Apostolic Church
of American City. He listened to the moans of the wounded, and to the shouts and uproar of
the crowd, and began seriously figuring out what could have happened. There had once been an
earthquake in American City; could this be another one? Or had a volcano opened up in the midst
of Main Street? Or could it have been a gas-main? And was this the end, or would it explode
some more? Would the volcano go on erupting, and blow Peter and his frail packing-box thru
the walls of Guggenheim's Department-store?

So Peter waited, and listened to the horrible sounds of people in agony, and pleading with
others to put them out of it. Peter heard voices of men giving orders, and realized that these
must be policemen, and that no doubt there would be ambulances coming. Maybe there was something
the matter with him, and he ought to crawl out and get himself taken care of. All of a sudden
Peter remembered his stomach; and his wits, which had been sharpened by twenty years' struggle
against a hostile world, realized in a flash the opportunity which fate had brought to him.
He must pretend to be wounded, badly wounded; he must be unconscious, suffering from shock
and shattered nerves; then they would take him to the hospital and put him in a soft bed and
give him things to eat--maybe he might stay there for weeks, and they might give him money
when he came out.

Or perhaps he might get a job in the hospital, something that was easy, and required only alert
intelligence. Perhaps the head doctor in the hospital might want somebody to watch the other
doctors, to see if they were neglecting the patients, or perhaps flirting with some of the
nurses--there was sure to be something like that going on. It had been that way in the orphans'
home where Peter had spent a part of his childhood till he ran away. It had been that way again
in the great Temple of Jimjambo, conducted by Pashtian el Kalandra, Chief Magistrian of Eleutherinian
Exoticism. Peter had worked as scullion in the kitchen in that mystic institution, and had
worked his way upward until he possessed the confidence of Tushbar Akrogas, major-domo and
right hand man of the Prophet himself.

Wherever there was a group of people, and a treasure to be administered, there Peter knew was
backbiting and scandal and intriguing and spying, and a chance for somebody whose brains were
"all there." It might seem strange that Peter should think about such things, just then when
the earth had opened up in front of him and the air had turned to roaring noise and blinding
white flame, and had hurled him against the side of a building and dropped the bleeding half
of a woman's body across his chest; but Peter had lived from earliest childhood by his wits
and by nothing else, and such a fellow has to learn to use his wits under any and all circumstances,
no matter how bewildering. Peter's training covered almost every emergency one could think
of; he had even at times occupied himself by imagining what he would do if the Holy Rollers
should turn out to be right, and if suddenly Gabriel's trumpet were to blow, and be were to
find himself confronting Jesus in a long white night-gown.

Section 3

Peter's imaginings were brought to an end by the packing-box being pulled out from the wall.
"Hello!" said a voice.

Peter groaned, but did not look up. The box was pulled out further, and a face peered in. "What
you hidin' in there for?"

Peter stammered feebly: "Wh-wh-what?"

"You hurt?" demanded the voice.

"I dunno," moaned Peter.

The box was pulled out further, and its occupant slid out. Peter looked up, and saw three or
four policemen bending over him; he moaned again.

"How did you get in there?" asked one.

"I crawled in."

"What for?"

"To g-g-get away from the--what was it?"

"Bomb," said one of the policemen; and Peter was astounded that for a moment he forgot to be
a nervous wreck.

"Bomb!" he cried; and at the same moment one of the policemen lifted him to his feet.

"Can you stand up?" he demanded; and Peter tried, and found that he could, and forgot that
he couldn't. He was covered with blood and dirt, and was an unpresentable object, but he was
really relieved to discover that his limbs were intact.

"What's your name?" demanded one of the policemen, and when Peter answered, he asked, "Where
do you work?"

"I got no job," replied Peter.

"Where'd you work last?" And then another broke in, "What did you crawl in there for?"

"My God!" cried Peter. "I wanted to get away!"

The policemen seemed to find it suspicious that he had stayed hidden so long. They were in
a state of excitement themselves, it appeared; a terrible crime had been committed, and they
were hunting for any trace of the criminal. Another man came up, not dressed in uniform, but
evidently having authority, and he fell onto Peter, demanding to know who he was, and where
he had come from, and what he had been doing in that crowd. And of course Peter had no very
satisfactory answers to give to any of these questions. His occupations had been unusual, and
not entirely credible, and his purposes were hard to explain to a suspicious questioner. The
man was big and burly, at least a foot taller than Peter, and as he talked he stooped down
and stared into Peter's eyes as if he were looking for dark secrets hidden back in the depths
of Peter's skull. Peter remembered that he was supposed to be sick, and his eyelids drooped
and he reeled slightly, so that the policemen had to hold him up.

"I want to talk to that fellow," said the questioner. "Take him inside." One of the officers
took Peter under one arm, and the other under the other arm, and they half walked and half
carried him across the street and into a building.

Section 4

It was a big store which the police had opened up. Inside there were wounded people lying on
the floor, with doctors and others attending them. Peter was marched down the corridor, and
into a room where sat or stood several other men, more or less in a state of collapse like
himself; people who had failed to satisfy the police, and were being held under guard.

Peter's two policemen backed him against the wall and proceeded to go thru his pockets, producing
the shameful contents--a soiled rag, and two cigarette butts picked up on the street, and a
broken pipe, and a watch which had once cost a dollar, but was now out of order, and too badly
damaged to be pawned. That was all they had any right to find, so far as Peter knew. But there
came forth one thing more--the printed circular which Peter had thrust into his pocket. The
policeman who pulled it out took a glance at it, and then cried, "Good God!" He stared at Peter,
then he stared at the other policeman and handed him the paper.

At that moment the man not in uniform entered the room. "Mr. Guffey!" cried the policeman.
"See this!" The man took the paper, and glanced at it, and Peter, watching with bewildered
and fascinated eyes, saw a most terrifying sight. It was as if the man went suddenly out of
his mind. He glared at Peter, and under his black eyebrows the big staring eyes seemed ready
to jump out of his head.

"Aha!" he exclaimed; and then, "So I've got you!" The hand that held the paper was trembling,
and the other hand reached out like a great claw, and fastened itself in the neck of Peter's
coat, and drew it together until Peter was squeezed tight. "You threw that bomb!" hissed the man.

"Wh-what?" gasped Peter, his voice almost fainting. "B-b-bomb?"

"Out with it!" cried the man, and his face came close to Peter's, his teeth gleaming as if
he were going to bite off Peter's nose. "Out with it! Quick! Who helped you?"

"My G-God!" said Peter. "I d-dunno what you mean."

"You dare lie to me?" roared the man; and he shook Peter as if he meant to jar his teeth out.
"No nonsense now! Who helped you make that bomb?"

Peter's voice rose to a scream of terror: "I never saw no bomb! I dunno what you're talkin' about!"

"You, come this way," said the man, and started suddenly toward the door. It might have been
more convenient if he had turned Peter around, and got him by the back of his coat-collar;
but he evidently held Peter's physical being as a thing too slight for consideration--he just
kept his grip in the bosom of Peter's jacket, and half lifted him and half shoved him back
out of the room, and down a long passage to the back part of the building. And all the time
he was hissing into Peter's face: "I'll have it out of you! Don't think you can lie to me!
Make up your mind to it, you're going to come thru!"

The man opened a door. It was some kind of storeroom, and he walked Peter inside and slammed
the door behind him. "Now, out with it!" he said. The man thrust into his pocket the printed
circular, or whatever it was--Peter never saw it again, and never found out what was printed
on it. With his free hand the man grabbed one of Peter's hands, or rather one finger of Peter's
hand, and bent it suddenly backward with terrible violence. "Oh!" screamed Peter. "Stop!" And
then, with a wild shriek, "You'll break it."

"I mean to break it! mean to break every bone in your body! I'll tear your finger-nails out;
I'll tear the eyes out of your head, if I have to! You tell me who helped you make that bomb!"

Peter broke out in a storm of agonized protest; he had never heard of any bomb, he didn't know
what the man was talking about; he writhed and twisted and doubled himself over backward, trying
to evade the frightful pain of that pressure on his finger.

"You're lying!" insisted Guffey. "I know you're lying. You're one of that crowd."

"What crowd? Ouch! I dunno what you mean!"

"You're one of them Reds, aint you?"

"Reds? What are Reds?"

"You want to tell me you don't know what a Red is? Aint you been giving out them circulars
on the street?"

"I never seen the circular!" repeated Peter. "I never seen a word in it; I dunno what it is."

"You try to stuff me with that?"

"Some woman gimme that circular on the street! Ouch! Stop! Jesus! I tell you I never looked
at the circular!"

"You dare go on lying?" shouted the man, with fresh access of rage. "And when I seen you with
them Reds? I know about your plots, I'm going to get it out of you." He grabbed Peter's wrist
and began to twist it, and Peter half turned over in the effort to save himself, and shrieked
again, in more piercing tones, "I dunno! I dunno!"

