"I guess that's why they stayed together so long," he said. "They complemented each other."
He leaned forward, the inevitable prelude to a confidential remark. "I'll tell you something
off the record, Mister," he said. "Those two were smarter than they knew. Their partnership
was never legalized, it was never anything more than a piece of paper. And there's a bunch
of fellas around here mighty unhappy about that today. Jafe McCann is the one who handled all
the money matters, like I said. He's got IOU's all over town."

"And they can't collect from Karpin?"

He nodded. "Jafe McCann died just a bit too soon. He was sharp and cheap, but he was honest.
If he'd lived, he would have repaid all his debts, I'm sure of it. And if this strike they
made is as good as I hear, he would have been able to repay them with no trouble at all."

I nodded, somewhat impatiently. I had the feeling by now that I was talking to a man who was
one of those who had a Jafe McCann IOU in his pocket. "How long has it been since you've seen
Karpin?" I asked him, wondering what Karpin's attitude and expression was now that his partner
was dead.

"Oh, Lord, not for a couple of months," he said. "Not since they went out together the last
time and made that strike."

"Didn't Karpin come in to make his claim?"

"Not here. Over to Chemisant City. That was the nearest M&R to the strike."

"Oh." That was a pity. I would have liked to have known if there had been a change of any kind
in Karpin since his partner's death. "I'll tell you what the situation is," I said, with a
false air of truthfulness. "We have some misgivings about McCann's death. Not suspicions, exactly,
just misgivings. The timing is what bothers us."

"You mean, because it happened just after the strike?"

"That's it," I answered frankly.

He shook his head. "I wouldn't get too excited about that, if I were you," he said. "It wouldn't
be the first time it's happened. A man makes the big strike after all, and he gets so excited
he forgets himself for a minute and gets careless. And you only have to be careless once out here."

"That may be it," I said. I got to my feet, knowing I'd picked up all there was from this man.
"Thanks a lot for your cooperation," I said.

"Any time," he said. He stood and shook hands with me.

I went back out through the chatting prospectors and crossed the echoing cavern that was level
one, aiming to rent myself a scooter.

       *       *       *       *       *

I don't like rockets. They're noisy as the dickens, they steer hard and drive erratically,
and you can never carry what I would consider a safe emergency excess of fuel. Nothing like
the big steady-g interplanetary liners. On those I feel almost human.

The appearance of the scooter I was shown at the rental agency didn't do much to raise my opinion
of this mode of transportation. The thing was a good ten years old, the paint scraped and scratched
all over its egg-shaped, originally green-colored body, and the windshield--a silly term, really,
for the front window of a craft that spends most of its time out where there isn't any wind--was
scratched and pockmarked to the point of translucency by years of exposure to the asteroidal dust.

The rental agent was a sharp-nosed thin-faced type who displayed this refugee from a melting
vat without a blush, and still didn't blush when he told me the charges. Twenty credits a day,
plus fuel.

I paid without a murmur--it was the company's money, not mine--and paid an additional ten credits
for the rental of a suit to go with it. I worked my way awkwardly into the suit, and clambered
into the driver's seat of the relic. I attached the suit to the ship in all the necessary places,
and the agent closed and spun the door.

Most of the black paint had worn off the handles of the controls, and insulation peeked through
rips in the plastic siding here and there. I wondered if the thing had any slow leaks and supposed
fatalistically that it had. The agent waved at me, stony-faced, the conveyor belt trundled
me outside the dome, and I kicked the weary rocket into life.

The scooter had a tendency to roll to the right. If I hadn't kept fighting it back, it would
have soon worked up a dandy little spin. I was spending so much time juggling with the controls
that I practically missed a couple of my beacon rocks, and that would have been just too bad.
If I'd gotten off the course I had carefully outlined for myself, I'd never have found my bearings
again, and I would have just floated around amid the scenery until some passerby took pity
and towed me back home.

But I managed to avoid getting lost, which surprised me, and after four nerve-wracking hours
I finally spotted the yellow-painted X of a registered claim on a half-mile-thick chunk of
rock dead ahead. As I got closer, I spied a scooter parked near the X, and beside it an inflated
portable dome. The scooter was somewhat larger than mine, but no newer and probably even less
safe. The dome was varicolored, from repeated patching.

This would be the claim, and this is where I would find Karpin, sitting on his property while
waiting for the sale to go through. Prospectors like Karpin are free-lance men, working for
no particular company. They register their claims in their own names, and then sell the rights
to whichever company shows up first with the most attractive offer. There's a lot of paperwork
to such a sale, and it's all handled by the company. While waiting, the smart prospector sits
on his claim and makes sure nobody chips off a part of it for himself, a stunt that still happens
now and again. It doesn't take too much concentrated explosive to make two rocks out of one
rock, and a man's claim is only the rock with his X on it.

I set the scooter down next to the other one, and flicked the toggle for the air pumps, then
put on the fishbowl and went about unattaching the suit from the ship. When the red light flashed
on and off, I spun the door, opened it, and stepped out onto the rock, moving very cautiously.
It isn't that I don't believe the magnets in the boot soles will work, it's just that I know
for a fact that they won't work if I happen to raise both feet at the same time.

I clumped across the crude X to Karpin's dome. The dome had no viewports at all, so I wasn't
sure Karpin was aware of my presence. I rapped my metal glove on the metal outer door of the
lock, and then I was sure.

But it took him long enough to open up. I had just about decided he'd joined his partner in
the long sleep when the door cracked open an inch. I pushed it open and stepped into the lock,
ducking my head. The door was only five feet high, and just as wide as the lock itself, three
feet. The other dimensions of the lock were: height, six feet six; width, one foot. Not exactly
room to dance in.

       *       *       *

When the red light high on the left-hand wall clicked off, I rapped on the inner door. It promptly
opened, I stepped through and removed the fishbowl.

Karpin stood in the middle of the room, a small revolver in his hand. "Shut the door," he said.

I obeyed, moving slowly. I didn't want that gun to go off by mistake.

"Who are you?" Karpin demanded. The M&R man had been right. Ab Karpin was a dead ringer for
all those other prospectors I'd seen back at Atronics City. Short and skinny and grizzled and
ageless. He could have been forty, and he could have been ninety, but he was probably somewhere
the other side of fifty. His hair was black and limp and thinning, ruffled in little wisps
across his wrinkled pate. His forehead and cheeks were lined like a plowed field, and were
much the same color. His eyes were wide apart and small, so deep-set beneath shaggy brows that
they seemed black. His mouth was thin, almost lipless. The hand holding the revolver was nothing
but bones and blue veins covered with taut skin.

He was wearing a dirty undershirt and an old pair of trousers that had been cut off raggedly
just above his knobby knees. Faded slippers were on his feet. He had good reason for dressing
that way, the temperature inside the dome must have been nearly ninety degrees. The dome wasn't
reflecting away the sun's heat as well as it had when it was young.

I looked at Karpin, and despite the revolver and the tense expression on his face, he was the
least dangerous-looking man I'd ever run across. All at once, the idea that this anti-social
old geezer had the drive or the imagination to murder his partner seemed ridiculous.

Apparently, I spent too much time looking him over, because he said again, "Who are you?" And
this time he motioned impatiently with the revolver.

"Stanton," I told him. "Ged Stanton, Tangiers Mutual Insurance. I have identification, but
it's in my pants pocket, down inside this suit."

"Get it," he said. "And move slow."

"Right you are."

I moved slow, as per directions, and peeled out of the suit, then reached into my trouser pocket
and took out my ID clip. I flipped it open and showed him the card bearing my signature and
picture and right thumb-print and the name of the company I represented, and he nodded, satisfied,
and tossed the revolver over onto his bed. "I got to be careful," he said. "I got a big claim
here."

"I know that," I told him. "Congratulations for it."

"Thanks," he said, but he still looked peevish. "You're here about Jafe's insurance, right?"

"That I am."

"Don't want to pay up, I suppose. That doesn't surprise me."

Blunt old men irritate me. "Well," I said, "we do have to investigate."

"Sure," he said. "You want some coffee?"

"Thank you."

"You can sit in that chair there. That was Jafe's."

I settled gingerly in the cloth-and-plastic foldaway chair he'd pointed at, and he went over
to the kitchen area of the dome to start coffee. I took the opportunity to look the dome over.
It was the first portable dome I'd ever been inside.

       *       *       *

It was all one room, roughly circular, with a diameter of about fifteen feet. The sides went
straight up for the first seven feet, then curved gradually inward to form the roof. At the
center of the dome, the ceiling was about twelve feet high.

The floor of the room was simply the asteroidal rock surface, not completely level and smooth.
There were two chairs and a table to the right of the entry lock, two foldaway cots around
the wall beyond them, the kitchen area next and a cluttered storage area around on the other
side. There was a heater standing alone in the center of the room, but it certainly wasn't
needed now. Sweat was already trickling down the back of my neck and down my forehead into
my eyebrows. I peeled off my shirt and used it to wipe sweat from my face. "Warm in here," I said.

"You get used to it," he muttered, which I found hard to believe.

He brought over the coffee, and I tasted it. It was rotten, as bitter as this old hermit's
soul, but I said, "Good coffee. Thanks a lot."

"I like it strong," he said.

I looked around at the room again. "All the comforts of home, eh? Pretty ingenious arrangement."

"Sure," he said sourly. "How about getting to the point, Mister?"

There's only one way to handle a blunt old man. Be blunt right back. "I'll tell you how it
is," I said. "The company isn't accusing you of anything, but it has to be sure everything's
on the up and up before it pays out any ten thousand credits. And your partner just happening
to fill out that cash-return form just before he died--well, you've got to admit it is a funny
kind of coincidence."

"How so?" He slurped coffee, and glowered at me over the cup. "We made this strike here," he
said. "We knew it was the big one. Jafe had that insurance policy of his in case he never did
make the big strike. As soon as we knew this was the big one, he said, 'I guess I don't need
that retirement now,' and sat right down and wrote out the cash-return. Then we opened a bottle
of liquor and celebrated, and he got himself killed."

The way Karpin said it, it sounded smooth and natural. Too smooth and natural. "How did this
accident happen anyway?" I asked him.

"I'm not one hundred per cent sure of that myself," he said. "I was pretty well drunk myself
by that time. But he put on his suit and said he was going out to paint the X. He was falling
all over himself, and I tried to tell him it could wait till we'd had some sleep, but he wouldn't
pay any attention to me."

"So he went out," I said.

He nodded. "He went out first. After a couple minutes, I got lonesome in here, so I suited
up and went out after him. It happened just as I was going out the lock, and I just barely
got a glimpse of what happened."

       *       *       *

He attacked the coffee again, noisily, and I prompted him, saying, "What did happen, Mister
Karpin?"

"Well, he was capering around out there, waving the paint tube and such. There's a lot of sharp
rock sticking out around here. Just as I got outside, he lost his balance and kicked out, and
scraped right into some of that rock, and punctured his suit."

"I thought the body was lost," I said.

He nodded. "It was. The last thing in life Jafe ever did was try to shove himself away from
those rocks. That, and the force of air coming out of that puncture for the first second or
two, was enough to throw him up off the surface. It threw him up too high, and he never got
back down."

My doubt must have showed in my face, because he added, "Mister, there isn't enough gravity
on this place to shoot craps with."

He was right. As we talked, I kept finding myself holding unnecessarily tight to the arms of
the chair. I kept having the feeling I was going to float out of the chair and hover around
up at the top of the dome if I were to let go. It was silly of course--there was some gravity
on that planetoid, after all--but I just don't seem to get used to low-gee.

Nevertheless, I still had some more questions. "Didn't you try to get his body back? Couldn't
you have reached him?"

"I tried to, Mister," he said. "Old Jafe McCann was my partner for fifteen years. But I was
drunk, and that's a fact. And I was afraid to go jumping up in the air, for fear I'd go floating
away, too."

"Frankly," I said, "I'm no expert on low gravity and asteroids. But wouldn't McCann's body
just go into orbit around this rock? I mean, it wouldn't simply go floating off into space,
would it?"

"It sure would," he said. "There's a lot of other rocks out here, too, Mister, and a lot of
them are bigger than this one and have a lot more gravity pull. I don't suppose there's a navigator
in the business who could have computed Jafe's course in advance. He floated up, and then he
floated back over the dome here and seemed to hover for a couple minutes, and then he just
floated out and away. His isn't the only body circling around the sun with all these rocks,
you know."

I chewed a lip and thought it all over. I didn't know enough about asteroid gravity or the
conditions out here to be able to say for sure whether Karpin's story was true or not. Up to
this point, I couldn't attack the problem on a fact basis. I had to depend on feeling now,
the hunches and instincts of eight years in this job, hearing some people tell lies and other
people tell the truth.

And my instinct said Ab Karpin was lying in his teeth. That dramatic little touch about McCann's
body hovering over the dome before disappearing into the void, that sounded more like the embellishment
of fiction than the circumstance of truth. And the string of coincidences were just too much.
McCann just coincidentally happens to die right after he and his partner make their big strike.
He happens to write out the cash-return form just before dying. And his body just happens to
float away, so nobody can look at it and check Karpin's story.

       *       *       *

But no matter what my instinct said, the story was smooth. It was smooth as glass, and there
was no place for me to get a grip on it.

What now? There wasn't any hole in Karpin's story, at least none that I could see. I had to
break his story somehow, and in order to do that I had to do some nosing around on this planetoid.
I couldn't know in advance what I was looking for, I could only look. I'd know it when I found
it. It would be something that conflicted with Karpin's story.

And for that, I had to be sure the story was complete. "You said McCann had gone out to paint
the X," I said. "Did he paint it?"

Karpin shook his head. "He never got a chance. He spent all his time dancing, up till he went
and killed himself."

"So you painted it yourself."

He nodded.

"And then you went on into Atronics City and registered your claim, is that the story?"

"No. Chemisant City was closer than Atronics City right then, so I went there. Just after Jafe's
death, and everything--I didn't feel like being alone any more than I had to."

"You said Chemisant City was closer to you then," I said. "Isn't it now?"

"Things move around a lot out here, Mister," he said. "Right now, Chemisant City's almost twice
as far from here as Atronics City. In about three days, it'll start swinging in closer again.
Things keep shifting around out here."

"So I've noticed," I said. "When you took off to go to Chemisant City, didn't you make a try
for your partner's body then?"

He shook his head. "He was long out of sight by then," he said. "That was ten, eleven hours
later, when I took off."

"Why's that? All you had to do was paint the X and take off."

"Mister, I told you. I was drunk. I was falling down drunk, and when I saw I couldn't get at
Jafe, and he was dead anyway, I came back in here and slept it off. Maybe if I'd been sober
I would have taken the scooter and gone after him, but I was drunk."

"I see." And there just weren't any more questions I could think of to ask, not right now.
So I said, "I've just had a shaky four-hour ride coming out here. Mind if I stick around a
while before going back?"

"Help yourself," he said, in a pretty poor attempt at genial hospitality. "You can sleep over,
if you want."

"Fine," I said. "I think I'd like that."

"You wouldn't happen to play cribbage, would you?" he asked, with the first real sign of animation
I'd seen in him yet.

"I learn fast," I told him.

"Okay," he said. "I'll teach you." And he produced a filthy deck of cards and taught me.

       *       *       *       *       *

After losing nine straight games of cribbage, I quit, and got to my feet. I was at my most
casual as I stretched and said, "Okay if I wander around outside for a while? I've never been
on an asteroid like this before. I mean, a little one like this. I've just been to the company
cities up to now."

"Go right ahead," he said. "I've got some polishing and patching to do, anyway." He made his
voice sound easy and innocent, but I noticed his eyes were alert and wary, watching me as I
struggled back into my suit.

I didn't bother to put my shirt back on first, and that was a mistake. The temperature inside
an atmosphere suit is a steady sixty-eight degrees. That had never seemed particularly chilly
before, but after the heat of that dome, it seemed cold as a blizzard inside the suit.

I went on out through the airlock, and moved as briskly as possible in the cumbersome suit,
while the sweat chilled on my back and face, and I accepted the glum conviction that one thing
I was going to get out of this trip for sure was a nasty head cold.

I went over to the X first, and stood looking at it. It was just an X, that's all, shakily
scrawled in yellow paint, with the initials "J-A" scrawled much smaller beside it.

I left the X and clumped away. The horizon was practically at arm's length, so it didn't take
long for the dome to be out of sight. And then I clumped more slowly, studying the surface
of the asteroid.

What I was looking for was a grave. I believed that Karpin was lying, that he had murdered
his partner. And I didn't believe that Jafe McCann's body had floated off into space. I was
convinced that his body was still somewhere on this asteroid. Karpin had been forced to concoct
a story about the body being lost because the appearance of the body would prove somehow that
it had been murder and not accident. I was convinced of that, and now all I had to do was prove it.

But that asteroid was a pretty unlikely place for a grave. That wasn't dirt I was walking on,
it was rock, solid metallic rock. You don't dig a grave in solid rock, not with a shovel. You
maybe can do it with dynamite, but that won't work too well if your object is to keep anybody
from seeing that the hole has been made. Dirt can be patted down. Blown-up rock looks like
blown-up rock, and that's all there is to it.

I considered crevices and fissures in the surface, some cranny large enough for Karpin to have
stuffed the body into. But I didn't find any of these either as I plodded along, being sure
to keep one magnetted boot always in contact with the ground.

Karpin and McCann had set their dome up at just about the only really level spot on that entire
planetoid. The rest of it was nothing but jagged rock, and it wasn't easy traveling at all,
maneuvering around with magnets on my boots and a bulky atmosphere suit cramping my movements.

       *       *       *

And then I stopped and looked out at space and cursed myself for a ring-tailed baboon. McCann's
body might be anywhere in the Solar System, anywhere at all, but there was one place I could
be sure it wasn't, and that place was this asteroid. No, Karpin had not blown a grave or stuffed
the body into a fissure in the ground. Why not? Because this chunk of rock was valuable, that's
why not. Because Karpin was in the process of selling it to one of the major companies, and
that company would come along and chop this chunk of rock to pieces, getting the valuable metal
out, and McCann's body would turn up in the first week of operations if Karpin were stupid
enough to bury it here.

Ten hours between McCann's death and Karpin's departure for Chemisant City. He'd admitted that
already. And I was willing to bet he'd spent at least part of that time carrying McCann's body
to some other asteroid, one he was sure was nothing but worthless rock. If that were true,
it meant the mortal remains of Jafe McCann were now somewhere--anywhere--in the Asteroid Belt.
Even if I assumed that the body had been hidden on an asteroid somewhere between here and Chemisant
City--which wasn't necessarily so--that wouldn't help at all. The relative positions of planetoids
in the Belt just keep on shifting. A small chunk of rock that was between here and Chemisant
City a few weeks ago--it could be almost anywhere in the Belt right now.

The body, that was the main item. I'd more or less counted on finding it somehow. At the moment,
I couldn't think of any other angle for attacking Karpin's story.

As I clopped morosely back to the dome, I nibbled at Karpin's story in my mind. For instance,
why go to Chemisant City? It was closer, he said, but it couldn't have been closer by more
than a couple of hours. The way I understood it, Karpin was well-known back on Atronics City--it
was the normal base of operations for he and his partner--and he didn't know a soul at Chemisant
City. Did it make sense for him to go somewhere he wasn't known after his partner's death,
even if it was an hour closer? No, it made a lot more sense for a man in that situation to
go where he's known, go someplace where he has friends who'll sympathize with him and help
him over the shock of losing a partner of fifteen years' standing, even if going there does
mean traveling an hour longer.

And there was always the cash-return form. That was what I was here about in the first place.
It just didn't make sense for McCann to have held up his celebration while he filled out a
form that he wouldn't be able to mail until he got back to Atronics City. And yet the company's
handwriting experts were convinced that it wasn't a forgery, and I could pretty well take their
word for it.

Mulling these things over as I tramped back toward the dome, I suddenly heard a distant bell
ringing way back in my head. The glimmering of an idea, not an idea yet but just the hint of
one. I wasn't sure where it led, or even if it led anywhere at all, but I was going to find out.

       *       *       *       *       *

Karpin opened the doors for me. By the time I'd stripped off the suit he was back to work.
He was cleaning the single unit which was his combination stove and refrigerator and sink and
garbage disposal.

I looked around the dome again, and I had to admit that a lot of ingenuity had gone into the
manufacture and design of this dome and its contents. The dome itself, when deflated, folded
down into an oblong box three feet by one foot by one foot. The lock itself, of course, folded
separately, into another box somewhat smaller than that.

As for the gear inside the dome, it was functional and collapsible, and there wasn't a single
item there that wasn't needed. There were the two chairs and the two cots and the table, all
of them foldaway. There was that fantastic combination job Karpin was cleaning right now, and
that had dimensions of four feet by three feet by three feet. The clutter of gear over to the
left wasn't as much of a clutter as it looked. There was a Geiger counter, an automatic spectrograph,
two atmosphere suits, a torsion densimeter, a core-cutting drill, a few small hammers and picks,
two spare air tanks, boxes of food concentrate, a paint tube, a doorless jimmy-john and two
small metal boxes about eight inches cube. These last were undoubtedly Karpin's and McCann's
pouches, where they kept whatever letters, money, address books or other small bits of possessions
they owned. Back of this mound of gear, against the wall, stood the air reconditioner, humming
quietly to itself.

In this small enclosed space there was everything a man needed to keep himself alive. Everything
except human company. And if you didn't need human company, then you had everything. Just on
the other side of that dome, there was a million miles of death, in a million possible ways.
On this side of the dome, life was cozy, if somewhat Spartan and very hot.

I knew for sure I was going to get a head cold. My body had adjusted to the sixty-eight degrees
inside the suit, finally, and now was very annoyed to find the temperature shooting up to ninety
again.

Since Karpin didn't seem inclined to talk, and I would rather spend my time thinking than talking
anyway, I took a hint from him and did some cleaning. I'd noticed a smeared spot about nose-level
on the faceplate of my fishbowl, and now was as good a time as any to get rid of it. It had
a tendency to make my eyes cross.

My shirt was sodden and wrinkled by this time anyway, having first been used to wipe sweat
from my face and later been rolled into a ball and left on the chair when I went outside, so
I used it for a cleaning rag, buffing like mad the silvered surface of the faceplate. Faceplates
are silvered, not so the man inside can look out and no one else can look in, but in order
to keep some of the more violent rays of the sun from getting through to the face.

I buffed for a while, and then I put the fishbowl on my head and looked through it. The spot
was gone, so I went over and reattached it to the rest of the suit, and then settled back in
my chair again and lit a cigarette.

Karpin spoke up. "Wish you wouldn't smoke. Makes it tough on the conditioner."

"Oh," I said. "Sorry." So I just sat, thinking morosely about non-forged cash-return forms,
and coincidences, and likely spots to hide a body in the Asteroid Belt.

       *       *       *

Where would one dispose of a body in the asteroids? I went back through my thinking on that
topic, and I found holes big enough to drive Karpin's claim through. This idea of leaving the
body on some worthless chunk of rock, for instance. If Karpin had killed his partner--and I
was dead sure he had--he'd planned it carefully and he wouldn't be leaving anything to chance.
Now, an asteroid isn't worthless to a prospector until that prospector has landed on it and
tested it. Karpin might know that such-and-such an asteroid was nothing but worthless stone,
but the guy who stops there and finds McCann's body might not know it.

No, Karpin wouldn't leave that to chance. He would get rid of that body, and he would do it
in such a way that nobody would ever find it.

How? Not by leaving it on a worthless asteroid, and not by just pushing it off into space.
The distance between asteroids is large, but so's the travel. McCann's body, floating around
in the blackness, might just be found by somebody.

And that, so far as I could see, eliminated the possibilities. McCann's body was in the Belt.
I'd eliminated both the asteroids themselves and the space around the asteroids as hiding places.
What was left?

The sun, of course.

I thought that over for a while, rather surprised at myself for having noticed the possibility.
Now, let's say Karpin attaches a small rocket to McCann's body, stuffed into its atmosphere
suit. He sets the rocket going, and off goes McCann. Not that he aims it toward the sun, that
wouldn't work well at all. Instead of falling into the sun, the body would simply take up a
long elliptical orbit around the sun, and would come back to the asteroids every few hundred
years. No, he would aim McCann back, in the direction opposite to the direction or rotation
of the asteroids. He would, in essence, slow McCann's body down, make it practically stop in
relation to the motion of the asteroids. And then it would simply fall into the sun.

None of my ideas, it seemed, were happy ones. If McCann's body were even at this moment falling
toward the sun, it was just as useful to me as if it were on some other asteroid.

But, wait a second. Karpin and McCann had worked with the minimum of equipment, I'd already
noticed that. They didn't have extras of anything, and they certainly wouldn't have extra rockets.
Except for one fast trip to Chemisant City--when he had neither the time nor the excuse to
buy a jato rocket--Karpin had spent all of his time since McCann's death right here on this
planetoid.

So that killed that idea.

While I was hunting around for some other idea, Karpin spoke up again, for the first time in
maybe twenty minutes. "You think I killed him, don't you?" he said, not looking around from
his cleaning job.

I considered my answer. There was no reason at all to be overly polite to this sour old buzzard,
but at the same time I am naturally the soft-spoken type. "We aren't sure," I said. "We just
think there are some odd items to be explained."

"Such as what?" he demanded.

"Such as the timing of McCann's cash-return form."

"I already explained that," he said.

"I know. You've explained everything."

