KLONDYKE NUGGETS

A Brief Description of the Great Gold Regions in the Northwest Territories and Alaska

BY

JOSEPH LADUE

Founder of Dawson City, N.W.T.

Explorer, Miner and Prospector

September, 1897

PREFACE.

The extraordinary excitement arising from the reports of the discovery of Gold in the Klondyke
region in the great Canadian Northwest is not surprising to one who, through personal residence
and practical experience, is thoroughly conversant with the locality.

Having recently returned for a temporary stay, after a somewhat successful experience, I have
received applications for information in numbers so great that it far exceeds my ability and
the time at my disposal to make direct replies.

I have therefore arranged with the American Technical Book Co., 45 Vesey Street, New York City,
for the issue of this brief description, preparatory to the publication of my larger book,
"Klondyke Facts," a book of 224 pages, with illustrations and maps, in which will be found
a vast fund of practical information, statistics, and all particulars sought for by those who
intend emigrating to this wonderful country.

It is well-nigh impossible to tell the truth of these recent discoveries of gold, but while
I can only briefly describe the territory in this small work, it shall be my endeavor to give
the intending prospector, in the large work above mentioned, as many facts as possible, and
these may thoroughly be relied upon, as from one who has lived continuously in those regions
since 1882.

JOSEPH LADUE.

       *       *       *       *       *

KLONDYKE NUGGETS

CHAPTER I.

KLONDYKE.

Klondyke! The word and place that has startled the civilized world is to-day a series of thriving
mining camps on the Yukon River and its tributaries in the Canadian Northwest Territories.

Prior to August 24, 1896, this section of the country had never been heard of. It was on this
day that a man named Henderson discovered the first gold.

On the first day of the following month the writer commenced erecting the first house in this
region and called the place Dawson City, now the central point of the mining camps.

Dawson City is now the most important point in the new mining regions. Its population in June,
1897; exceeded 4,000; by June next it cannot be less than 25,000. It has a saw-mill, stores,
churches, of the Presbyterian, Baptist, Methodist and Roman Catholic denominations. It is the
headquarters of the Canadian Northwest Mounted Police, and perfect law and order is maintained.

It is at Dawson City that the prospector files his claims with the Government Gold Commissioner,
in the recording offices.

Dawson City faces on one of the banks of the Yukon River, and now occupies about a mile of
the bank. It is at the junction of the Klondyke River with the Yukon River. It is here where
the most valuable mining claims are being operated on a scale of profit that the world has
hitherto never known. The entire country surrounding is teeming with mineral wealth.

Copper, silver and coal can be found in large quantities, but little or no attention is now
being paid to these valuable minerals, as every one is engaged in gold-hunting and working
the extraordinary placer mining claims already located.

The entire section is given up to placer mining. Very few claims had been filed for quartz
mining. The fields of gold will not be exhausted in the near future. No man can tell what the
end will be. From January to April, 1897, about $4,000,000 were taken out of the few placer
claims then being worked. This was done in a territory not exceeding forty square miles. All
these claims are located on Klondyke River and the little tributaries emptying into it, and
the districts are known as Big Bonanza, Gold Bottom and Honker.

I have asked old and experienced miners at Dawson City who mined through California in Bonanza
days, and some who mined in Australia, what they thought of the Klondyke region, and their
reply has invariably been, "The world never saw so vast and rich a find of gold as we are working
now."

Dawson City is destined to be the greatest mining camp in the history of mining operations.

CHAPTER II.

KLONDYKE FACTS.

There is a great popular error in reference to the climate of the gold regions. Many reports
have appeared in the newspapers which are misleading. It has been even stated that the cold
is excessive almost throughout the year. This is entirely a mis-statement.

I have found I have suffered more from winter cold in Northern New York than I ever did in
Alaska or the Canadian Northwest.

I have chopped wood in my shirt-sleeves in front of my door at Dawson City when the thermometer
was 70 degrees below zero, and I suffered no inconvenience. We account for this from the fact
that the air is very dry. It is a fact that you do not feel this low temperature as much as
you would 15 below zero in the East.

We usually have about three feet of snow in winter and it is as dry as sawdust.

As we have no winter thaws no crust forms on the snow, therefore we travel from the various
points that may be necessary with snowshoes. These may be purchased from the Indians in the
vicinity of Dawson City at from $5.00 to $10.00 per pair according to the quality.

The winter days are very short. In this region there are only two hours from sunrise to sunset.
The sun rises and sets away in the south but there is no pitch darkness.

The twilight lasts all night and the Northern Lights are very common. Then in summer it is
exactly the other way. The day there in July is about twenty hours long. The sun rising and
setting in the north. A great deal has been said about the short seasons, but as a matter of
fact a miner can work 12 months in the year when in that region.

Spring opens about May 1st and the ice commences to break up about that time. The Yukon River
is generally clear of ice about May 15. The best part of the miner's work commences then and
lasts till about October 1st.

The winter commences in October but the miner keeps on working through the winter. The rainy
season commences in the latter part of August and lasts two or three weeks.

A fall of two feet of snow is considered heavy.

There is a wide difference in the quantity of snow that accumulates on the coast and the ranges
in the interior where the principal mining claims are located.

While the fall of snow on the coast is heavy the depth of snow as far down as the Yukon, Stewart
and Klondyke rivers is inconsiderable. 

That so much of hopeful humanity is found in these unwholesome and congested wards proves the
quality worth saving and elevating.

[Sidenote: Story of a Sweat-shop Girl]

Here is an illustration of
the resolute spirit which conditions cannot crush.

A young Polish girl was brought by her widowed mother to America, in hope of bettering their
condition. The mother died soon afterward, leaving the orphan dependent.

Then came the disappointments, one after another, and finally, the almost inevitable result in
such cases, the fall into the slums and the sweat-shops.

By hard work six days in the week, fourteen or more hours a day,
this girl of tender age could make $4 a week!

She had to get up at half past five every morning and make herself a cup of coffee, which with a
bit of bread and sometimes fruit made her breakfast.

Listen to her story:

[Sidenote: Her Own Story]

"The machines go like mad all day, because
the faster you work the more money you get.

Sometimes in my haste the finger gets caught and the needle goes right through it. We all
have accidents like that. Sometimes a finger has to come off.... For the last two winters I
have been going to night school.

I have learned reading, writing, and arithmetic. I can read quite well in English now, and
I look at the newspapers every day. I am going back to night school
again this winter.

Some of the women in my class are more than forty years of age. Like me, they did not have a chance
to learn anything in the old country.

It is good to have an education; it makes you feel higher. Ignorant people are all low. People
say now that I am clever and fine in conversation. There is a little expense for charity, too. If
any worker is injured or sick we all give money to help."[74]

[Sidenote: Possibilities]

Surely this is good material. A changed and Christian environment would make shining lights
out of these poor immigrants, who are kept in the subways of American life, instead of being
given a fair chance out in the open air and sunlight of decently paid service.

[Sidenote: A Foreign System]

Practically all of the work in tenements is carried on by foreign-born men and women, and more
than that, by the latest arrivals and the lowest conditioned of the foreign-born. Tenement-house
legislation has been practically forced upon New York, Massachusetts, and Pennsylvania, whose
ports of entry receive the first impact of immigration, by two of the races that have been crowding
into the cities--the Italian and Hebrew. The Italian woman, working in her close tenement, has by
her cheap labor almost driven out all other nationalities from that
class of work still done in the home, the hand sewing on coats and
trousers. Of the 20,000 licenses granted by the New York factory inspector
for "home finishing" in New York City, ninety-five per cent. are held
by Italians. This work has to be done because the husband is not making
enough to support the family. These men work mostly as street laborers,
hucksters, and peddlers. To make both ends meet not only the wife
but children have to work.
Only natives who are thoroughly familiar with the river are entrusted with the piloting of
boats up the stream during the season of low water. Even at the season of high water it is
still so shallow as not to be navigable anywhere by seagoing vessels, but only by flat-bottomed
boats with a carrying capacity of four to five hundred tons. The draft of steamers on the Yukon
should not exceed three and a half feet.

"The Yukon district, which is within the jurisdiction of the Canadian Government and in which
the bulk of the gold has been found, has a total area, approximately, of 192,000 square miles,
of which 150,768 square miles are included in the watershed of the Yukon. Illustrating this,
so that it may appeal with definiteness to the reader, it may be said that this territory is
greater by 71,100 square miles than the area of Great Britain, and is nearly three times that
of all the New England States combined.

"A further fact must be borne in mind. The Yukon River is absolutely closed to navigation during
the winter months. In the winter the frost-king asserts his dominion and locks up all approaches
with impenetrable ice, and the summer is of the briefest. It endures only for twelve to fourteen
weeks, from about the first of June to the middle of September. Then an unending panorama of
extraordinary picturesqueness is unfolded to the voyager. The banks are fringed with flowers,
carpeted with the all-pervading moss or tundra. Birds countless in numbers and of infinite
variety in plumage, sing out a welcome from every treetop. Pitch your tent where you will in
midsummer, a bed of roses, a clump of poppies and a bunch of bluebells will adorn your camping.
But high above this paradise of almost tropical exuberance giant glaciers sleep in the summit
of the mountain wall, which rises up from a bed of roses. By September everything is changed.
The bed of roses has disappeared before the icy breath of the winter king, which sends the
thermometer down sometimes to seventy degrees below freezing point. The birds fly to the southland
and the bear to his sleeping chamber in the mountains. Every stream becomes a sheet of ice,
mountain and valley alike are covered with snow till the following May.

"That part of the basin of the Yukon in which gold in greater or less quantities has actually
been found lies partly in Alaska and partly in British territory. It covers an area of some
50,000 square miles. But so far the infinitely richest spot lies some one hundred miles east
of the American boundary, in the region drained by the Klondyke and its tributaries. This is
some three hundred miles by river from Circle City.

"We have described some of the beauties of the Yukon basin in the summer season, but this radiant
picture has its obverse side.

"Horseflies, gnats and mosquitoes add to the joys of living throughout the entire length of
the Yukon valley. The horsefly is larger and more poignantly assertive than the insect which
we know by that name. In dressing or undressing, it has a pleasant habit of detecting any bare
spot in the body and biting out a piece of flesh, leaving a wound which a few days later looks
like an incipient boil. Schwatka reports that one of his party, so bitten was completely disabled
for a week. 'At the moment of infliction.' he adds, 'it was hard to believe that one was not
disabled for life.'

"The mosquitoes according to the same authority are equally distressing. They are especially
fond of cattle, but without any reciprocity of affection. 'According to the general terms of
the survival of the fittest and the growth of muscles most used to the detriment of others,'
says the lieutenant in an unusual burst of humor, 'a band of cattle inhabiting this district,
in the far future, would be all tail and no body, unless the mosquitoes should experience a
change of numbers.'"

I am indebted to Wm. Ogilvie, Esq., for the following valuable information relative to The
Yukon District.

"The Yukon District comprises, speaking generally, that part of the Northwest Territories lying
west of the water shed of the Mackenzie River; most of it is drained by the Yukon River and
its tributaries. It covers a distance of about 650 miles along the river from the coast range
of mountains.

"In 1848 Campbell established Fort Selkirk at the confluence of the Pelly and Lewes Rivers;
it was plundered and destroyed in 1852 by the Coast Indians, and only the ruins now exist of
what was at one time the most important post of the Hudson's Bay Company to the west of the
Rocky Mountains in the far north. In 1869 the Hudson's Bay Company's officer was expelled from
Fort Yukon by the United States Government, they haying ascertained by astronomical observations
that the post was not located in British territory. The officer thereupon ascended the Porcupine
to a point which was supposed to be within British jurisdiction, where he established Rampart
House; but in 1890 Mr. J.H. Turner of the United States Coast Survey found it to be 20 miles
within the lines of the United States. Consequently in 1891 the post was moved 20 miles further
up the river to be within British territory.

"The next people to enter the country for trading purposes were Messrs. Harper and McQuestion.
They have been trading in the country since 1873 and have occupied numerous posts all along
the river, the greater number of which have been abandoned. Mr. Harper is now located as a
trader at Fort Selkirk, with Mr. Joseph Ladue under the firm name of Harper & Ladue, and Mr.
McQuestion is in the employ of the Alaska Commercial Company at Circle City, which is the distributing
point for the vast regions surrounding Birch Creek, Alaska. In 1882 a number of miners entered
the Yukon country by the Taiya Pass; it is still the only route used to any extent by the miners,
and is shorter than the other passes though not the lowest. In 1883 Lieutenant Schwatka crossed
this same pass and descended the Lewes and Yukon Rivers to the ocean.

"The explorers found that in proximity to the boundary line there existed extensive and valuable
placer gold mines, in which even then as many as three hundred miners were at work. Mr. Ogilvie
determined, by a series of lunar observations, the point at which the Yukon River is intersected
by the 141st meridian, and marked the same on the ground. He also determined and marked the
point at which the western affluent of the Yukon, known as Forty Mile Creek, is crossed by
the same meridian line, that point being situated at a distance of about twenty-three miles
from the mouth of the creek. This survey proved that the place which had been selected as the
most convenient, owing to the physical conformation of the region, from which to distribute
the supplies imported for the various mining camps, and from which to conduct the other business
incident to the mining operations--a place situate at the confluence of the Forty Mile Creek
and the Yukon, and to which the name of Fort Cudahy has been given--is well within Canadian
territory. The greater proportion of the mines then being worked Mr. Ogilvie found to be on
the Canadian side of the international boundary line, but he reported the existence of some
mining fields to the south, the exact position of which with respect to the boundary he did
not have the opportunity to fix.

"The number of persons engaged in mining in the locality mentioned has steadily increased year
by year since the date of Mr. Ogilvie's survey, and it is estimated that at the commencement
of the past season not less than one thousand men were so employed. Incident to this mineral
development there must follow a corresponding growth in the volume of business of all descriptions,
particularly the importation of dutiable goods, and the occupation of tracts of the public
lands for mining purposes which according to the mining regulations are subject to the payment
of certain prescribed dues and charges. The Alaska Commercial Company, for many years subsequent
to the retirement of the Hudson's Bay Company, had a practical monopoly of the trade of the
Yukon, carrying into the country and delivering at various points along the river, without
regard to the international boundary line or the customs laws and regulations of Canada, such
articles of commerce as were required for the prosecution of the fur trade and latterly of
placer mining, these being the only two existing industries. With the discovery of gold, however,
came the organization of a competing company known as the North American Transportation and
Trading Company, having its headquarters in Chicago and its chief trading and distributing
post at Cudahy. This company has been engaged in this trade for over three years, and during
the past season despatched two ocean steamers from San Francisco to St. Michael, at the mouth
of the Yukon, the merchandise from which was, at the last mentioned point, transhipped into
river steamers and carried to points inland, but chiefly to the company's distributing centre
within Canadian territory. Importations of considerable value, consisting of the immediately
requisite supplies of the miners, and their tools, also reach the Canadian portion of the Yukon
District from Juneau, in the United States, by way of the Taiya Inlet, the mountain passes,
and the chain of waterways leading therefrom to Cudahy. Upon none of these importations had
any duty been collected, except a sum of $3,248.80 paid to Inspector Constantine in 1894, by
the North American Transportation and Trading Company and others, and it is safe to conclude,
especially when it is remembered that the country produces none of the articles consumed within
it except fresh meat, that a large revenue was being lost to the public exchequer under the
then existing conditions.

"For the purpose of ascertaining officially and authoritatively the condition of affairs to
which the correspondence referred to in the next preceding paragraph relates, the Honorable
the President of the Privy Council, during the spring of 1894, despatched Inspector Charles
Constantine, of the Northwest Mounted Police Force, accompanied by Sergeant Brown, to Fort
Cudahy and the mining camps in its vicinity. The report made by Mr. Constantine on his return,
established the substantial accuracy of the representations already referred to. The value
of the total output of gold for the season of 1894 he estimated at $300,000.

"The facts recited clearly establish--first, that the time had arrived when it became the duty
of the Government of Canada to make more efficient provision for the maintenance of order,
the enforcement of the laws, and the administration of justice in the Yukon country, especially
in that section of it in which placer mining for gold is being prosecuted upon such an extensive
scale, situated near to the boundary separating the Northwest Territories from the possessions
of the United States in Alaska; and, second, that while such measures as were necessary to
that end were called for in the interests of humanity, and particularly for the security and
safety of the lives and property of the Canadian subjects of Her Majesty resident in that country
who are engaged in legitimate business pursuits, it was evident that the revenue justly due
to the Government of Canada, under its customs, excise and land laws, and which would go a
long way to pay the expenses of government, was being lost for the want of adequate machinery
for its collection.

"Accordingly in June last a detachment[1] of twenty members of the Mounted Police Force including
officers was detailed for service in that portion of the Northwest Territories. The officer
in command, in addition to the magisterial and other duties he is required to perform by virtue
of his office and under instructions from the Department of Mounted Police, was duly authorized
to represent where necessary, and until other arrangements can be made, all the departments
of the government having interests in that region. Particularly he is authorized to perform
the duties of Dominion lands agent, collector of customs, and collector of inland revenue.
At the same time instructions were given Mr. William Ogilvie, the surveyor referred to as having,
with Dr. Dawson, been entrusted with the conduct of the first government expedition to the
Yukon, to proceed again to that district for the purpose of continuing and extending the work
of determining the 141st meridian, of laying out building lots and mining claims, and generally
of performing such duties as may be entrusted to him from time to time. Mr. Ogilvie's qualifications
as a surveyor, and his previous experience as explorer of this section of the Northwest, peculiarly
fit him for the task.

[Footnote 1: The detachment was made up as follows:--Inspector C. Constantine, Officer Commanding
Yukon Detachment N.W.M. Police; Inspector, D.A.E. Strickland; Assistant Surgeon, A.E. Wills;
2 Staff Sergeants; 2 Corporals; 13 Constables.]

"As it appears quite certain, from the report made by Mr. Ogilvie on his return to Ottawa,
in 1889, and from the report of Mr. Constantine, that the operations of the miners are being
conducted upon streams which have their sources in the United States Territory of Alaska, and
flow into Canada on their way to join the Yukon, and as doubtless some of the placer diggings
under development are situated on the United States side of the boundary it is highly desirable,
both for the purpose of settling definitely to which country any land occupied for mining or
other purposes actually belongs, and in order that the jurisdiction of the courts and officers
of the United States and Canada, for both civil and criminal purposes, may be established,
that the determination of the 141st meridian west of Greenwich from the point of its intersection
with the Yukon, as marked by Mr. Ogilvie in 1887-88, for a considerable distance south of the
river, and possibly also for some distance to the north, should be proceeded with at once.
Mr. Ogilvie's instructions require him to go on with the survey with all convenient speed,
but in order that this work may be effective for the accomplishment of the object in view the
co-operation of the Government of the United States is necessary. Correspondence is in progress
through the proper authorities with a view to obtaining this co-operation. It may be mentioned
that a United States surveyor has also determined the points at which the Yukon River and Forty
Mile Creek are intersected by the 141st meridian."

ROUTES, DISTANCES, AND TRANSPORTATION.

After considerable experience I have decided that the best route for a man to take to the gold
regions is from Seattle, Washington, to Juneau, Alaska, and then to Dawson City, by the pass
and waterways, and I will therefore describe this route more in detail than any of the others.

I am devoting a special chapter to the outfit for travellers, and will therefore deal in this
chapter with the route only.

The traveller having paid his fare to Seattle should on arrival there have not less than $500.
This is the minimum sum necessary to pay his fare from Seattle to Juneau, purchase his outfit
and supplies for one year and pay his necessary expenses in the gold region for that length
of time.

I think it deplorable that so many are starting at this time for the gold-fields. I do not
recommend starting before March 15. I will return at that time to my claims on the Klondyke,
if it were wise to go sooner, I should certainly go.

The reason March 15 is best is that the season is better then. If a man has only, say, $500
and wants to do his own packing over the Taiya Pass, it gives him time to do it by starting
March 15, as he will then be in Juneau April 1st. I fear a great deal of hardship for those
who started out so as to reach Juneau for winter travel.

Of course while I say $500 is sufficient to go to Dawson City, a man should take $1,000 or
even more if possible as he will have many opportunities to invest the surplus.

While prices will undoubtedly advance at Dawson City owing to the large influx of people, I
do not think the advance will be excessive. The Emperor showed every token of submission and
respect when the dead Emperor told him of many things, all of which
concerned Genji's interests.

The Emperor became alarmed, and when he awoke he told his mother all about his dream. She, however,
told him that on such occasions, when the storm rages, and the sky is obscured by the disturbance
of the elements, all things, especially on which our thoughts have been long occupied, appear to
us in a dream in a disturbed sleep; and she continued, "I further counsel you not to be too
hastily alarmed by such trifles."

From this time he began to suffer from sore eyes, which may have resulted from the angry glances
of his father's spirit. About the same time the father of the Empress-mother died. His death
was by no means premature; but yet, when such events take place repeatedly, it causes the
mind to imagine there is something more than natural going on, and this made the Empress-mother
feel a little indisposed.

The Emperor then constantly told her that if Genji were left in his present condition it might
induce evil, and, therefore, it would be better to recall him, and restore his titles and honors
to him. She obstinately opposed these ideas, saying, "If a person who proved to be guilty, and has
retired from the capital, were to be recalled before the expiration of at least three years,
it would naturally show the weakness of authority."

She gained her point, and thus the days were spent and the year changed.

The Emperor still continually suffered from indisposition, and the unsettled state of things
remained the same as before. A prince had been born to him, who was now about two years old,
and he began to think of abdicating the throne in favor of the Heir-apparent, the child of
the Princess Wistaria.

When he looked around to see who would best minister public affairs, he came to think that the
disgrace of Genji was a matter not to be allowed to continue, and at last, contrary to the advice
of his mother, he issued a public permission for Genji's return to
the capital, which was repeated at the end of July.

Genji therefore prepared to come back. Before, however, he started, a month passed away, which
time was mostly spent in the society of the lady of the hill-side mansion. The expected journey
of Genji was now auspicious, even to him, and ought also to have
been so to the family of the priest, but parting has always something
painful in its nature.

This was more so because the girl had by this time the witness of their love in her bosom, but
he told her that he would send for her when his position was assured in the capital.

Towards the middle of August everything was in readiness, and Genji started on his journey homeward.
He went to Naniwa, where he had the ceremony of Horai performed. To the temple of Sumiyoshi
he sent a messenger to say that the haste of his journey prevented him coming at this time, but
that he would fulfil his vows as soon as circumstances would permit.

From Naniwa he proceeded to the capital, and returned once more, after an absence of nearly
three years, to his mansion at Nijiô. The joy and excitement of the inmates of the mansion were
unbounded, and the development of Violet charmed his eyes. His delight was great and the pleasure
of his mind was of the most agreeable nature; still, from time to time, in the midst of this
very pleasure, the recollection of the maiden whom he had left at Akashi occurred to his thoughts.
But this kind of perturbation was only the result of what had arisen from the very nature of Genji's
character.

Before the lapse of many days all his titles and honors were restored
to him, and he was soon created an extra Vice-Dainagon.

All those who had lost dignities or office on account of Genji's complications were also restored
to them. It seemed to these like a sudden and unexpected return of
spring to the leafless tree.

In the course of a few days Genji was invited by the Emperor to come and see him. The latter
had scarcely recovered from his indisposition, and was still looking
weak and thin.

When Genji appeared before him, he manifested great pleasure, and they conversed together in
a friendly way till the evening.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 118: A religious feast in the Imperial Palace, in which Nin-wô-kiô, one of the Buddhist
Bibles, was read, an event which rarely took place. Its object was to tranquillize the country.]

[Footnote
119: The god of the sea.]

[Footnote 120: The "biwa," more than any other instrument, is played by blind performers, who accompany
it with ballads.]

[Footnote 121: The services performed by rigid priests were six times daily--namely, at early
morn, mid-day, sunset, early evening, midnight, and after midnight.]

[Footnote 122: The Buddhist idea that when we get into Paradise we take our seat upon the lotus flower.]

CHAPTER
XIV

THE BEACON

Genji well remembered the dream which he had dreamt at Suma, and in which his father, the late
ex-Emperor, had made a faint allusion to his fallen state.

He was always thinking of having solemn service performed for him, which might prove to be
a remedy for evils.

He was now in the capital, and at liberty to do anything he wished. In October, therefore, he
ordered the grand ceremony of Mihakkô to be performed for the repose
of the dead.

Meanwhile the respect of the public towards Genji had now returned to its former state, and
he himself had become a distinguished personage in the capital. The Empress-mother, though indisposed,
regretted she had not ruined Genji altogether; while the Emperor, who had not forgotten the
injunction of the late ex-Emperor, felt satisfied with his recent disposition towards his half-brother,
which he believed to be an act of goodness.

This he felt the more, because he noticed the improvement in his health continued from day to
day, and he experienced a sensation of fresh vigor. He did not, however, believe he should be long
on the throne, and when he found himself lonely, he often sent for Genji, and spent hours conversing
with him, without any reserve, on public affairs.

In February of the next year the ceremony of the "Gembuk" of the Heir-apparent, who was eleven
years of age, was performed.

At the end of the same month the Emperor abdicated the throne in favor of the Heir-apparent,
and his own son was made the Heir-apparent to the new Emperor.

The suddenness of these changes struck the Empress-mother with surprise, but she was told by her
son that his abdication had been occasioned by his desire to enjoy quiet and repose.

The new reign opened with several changes in public affairs. Genji had been made Naidaijin. He
filled this extra office of Daijin because there was no vacancy either
in the Sadaijin or the Udaijin.

He was to take an active part in the administration, but as he was not yet disposed to engage
in the busy cares of official life, the ex-Sadaijin, his father-in-law, was solicited to become
the regent for the young Emperor. He at first declined to accept the office, on the ground that
he was advanced in age, that he had already retired from official life, and that the decline
of his life left him insufficient energy.

There was, however, an example in a foreign State, where some wise councillors, who resigned
and had retired into the far-off mountains when their country was in a disturbed state, came
forth from their retreat, with their snow-crowned heads, and took
part in the administration of affairs.

Nor was it an unusual thing for a statesman who had retired from
political scenes to assume again a place under another government.

So the ex-Sadaijin did not persist in his refusal, but finally accepted the post of Dajiôdaijin (the
Premier). He was now sixty-three years of age.

His former retirement had taken place more on account of his disgust with the world than from
his indisposition, and hence, when he accepted his new post, he at once showed how capable
he was of being a responsible Minister. Tô-no-Chiûjiô, his eldest son, was also made the Gon-Chiûnagon.
His daughter by his wife, the fourth daughter of Udaijin, was now twelve years old, and was
shortly expected to be presented at Court; while his son, who had sung the "high sand" at a summer-day
reunion at Genji's mansion, received a title.

The young Genji too, the son of the late Lady Aoi, was admitted to the Court of the Emperor
and of the Heir-apparent.

The attendants who faithfully served the young Genji, and those in the mansion at Nijiô, had all
received a satisfactory token of appreciation from Genji, who now began to have a mansion repaired,
which was situated to the east of the one in which he resided, and which had formerly belonged to
his father. This he did with a notion of placing there some of his intimate friends, such as
the younger one of the ladies in the "Villa of Falling Flowers."

                                                 

Now the young maiden also, whom Genji had left behind
at Akashi, and who had been in delicate health, did not
pass away from his thoughts. He despatched a messenger
there on the first of March, as he deemed the happy event
would take place about that time. When the messenger
returned, he reported that she was safely delivered of
a girl on the sixteenth of the month.

He remembered the prediction of an astrologer who had
told him that an Emperor would be born to him, and another
son who would eventually become a Dajiôdaijin. He also
                                                 remembered
that a daughter, who would be afterwards an Empress, would be also
born to him, by a lady inferior to the mothers of the other two children.

When he reflected on this prediction and on the series of events, he began thinking of the remarkable
coincidences they betrayed; and as he thought of sending for her, as soon as the condition
of the young mother's health would admit, he hurried forward the repairs of the eastern mansion.
He also thought that as there might not be a suitable nurse at Akashi for the child, he ought
to send one from the capital. Fortunately there was a lady there who had lately been delivered
of a child. Her mother, who had waited at Court when the late ex-Emperor lived, and her father,
who had been some time Court Chamberlain, were both dead. She was now in miserable circumstances.
Genji sounded her, through a certain channel, whether she would not be willing to be useful to
him. This offer on his part she accepted without much hesitation, and was despatched with
a confidential servant to attend on the new-born child. He also sent with her a sword and other
presents. She left the capital in a carriage, and proceeded by boat to the province of Settsu,
and thence on horseback to Akashi.

When she arrived the priest was intensely delighted, and the young mother, who had been gradually
improving in health, felt great consolation. The child was very healthy, and the nurse at once
began to discharge her duties most faithfully.

Hitherto Genji did not confide the story of his relations with the maiden of Akashi to Violet,
but he thought he had better do so, as the matter might naturally reach her ears. He now, therefore,
informed her of all the circumstances, and of the birth of the child, saying, "If you feel
any unpleasantness about the matter, I cannot blame you in any way. It was not the blessing
which I desired.

How greatly do I regret that in the quarter where I wished to see the heavenly gift, there is none,
but see it in another, where there was no expectation. The child is merely a girl too, and I
almost think that I need pay no further attention.

But this would make me heartless towards my undoubted offspring. I shall send for it and show it
to you, and hope you will be generous to her. Can you assure me you will be so?" At these words
Violet's face became red as crimson, but she did not lose her temper, and quietly replied:

"Your saying this only makes me contemptible to myself, as I think my generosity may not yet be
fully understood; but I should like to know when and where I could have learnt to be ungenerous."

"These
words sound too hard to me," said he. "How can you be so cruel to me? Pray don't attribute
any blame to me; I never thought of it. How miserable am I!" And he began to drop tears when
he came to reflect how faithful she had been all the time, and how affectionate, and also
how regular had been her correspondence. He felt sorry for her, and continued, "In my anxious
thoughts about this child, I have some intentions which may be agreeable to you also, only
I will not tell you too hastily, since, if I do so now, they might
not be taken in a favorable light.

The attractions of the mother seem only to have arisen from the position in which she was placed.
You must not think of the matter too seriously." He then briefly sketched her character and her
skill in music.

But on the part of Violet she could not but think that it was cruel to her to give away part
of his heart, while her thoughts were with no one but him, and she was quite cast down for some
time.

Genji tried to console her. He took up a kin and asked her to play and sing with him; but she
did not touch it, saying that she could not play it so well as the maiden of Akashi. This very
manner of her mild jealousy made her more captivating to him, and without further remarks the subject
was dropped.

The fifth of May was the fiftieth day of the birth of the child, so Genji sent a messenger
to Akashi a few days before the time when he would be expected. At Akashi the feast for the
occasion was arranged with great pains, and the arrival of Genji's messenger was most opportune.

Let
us now relate something about the Princess Wistaria.--Though she had become a nun, her title of
ex-Empress had never been lost; and now the change in the reigning sovereign gave her fresh
honors. She had been recognized as equivalent to an Empress-regnant
who had abdicated.

A liberal allowance was granted to her, and a becoming household was established for her private
use. She, however, still continued her devotion to religion, now and then coming to Court
to see her son, where she was received with all cordiality; so that her rival, the mother of
the ex-Emperor, whose influence was overwhelming till lately, now
began to feel like one to whom the world had become irksome.

In the meantime, public affairs entirely changed their aspects, and
the world seemed at this time to have been divided between the Dajiôdaijin
and his son-in-law, Genji, by whose influence all things in public
were swayed.

In August, of this year, the daughter of Gon-Chiûnagon (formerly Tô-no-Chiûjiô)
was introduced at Court.

She took up her abode in the Kokiden, which had been formerly occupied by her maternal aunt,
and she was also styled from this time the Niogo of Kokiden.

Prince Hiôb-Kiô had also the intention of introducing his second
daughter at Court, but Genji took no interest in this.

What will he eventually do about this matter?

In the same autumn Genji went to the Temple of Sumiyoshi to fulfil his vows. His party consisted
of many young nobles and Court retainers, besides his own private attendants.

By a coincidence the maiden of Akashi, who had been prevented from coming to the Temple since
the last year, happened to arrive there on the same day. Her party travelled in a boat, and
when it reached the beach they saw the procession of Genji's party crossing before them. They
did not know what procession it was, and asked the bystanders about it, who, in return, asked
them sarcastically, "Can there be anyone who does not know of the coming of Naidaijin, the Prince
Genji, here to-day to fulfil his vows?"

Most of the young nobles were on horseback, with beautifully made saddles; and others, including
Ukon-no-Jiô, Yoshikiyo, and Koremitz, in fine uniforms of different colors (blue, green, or
scarlet), according to their different ranks, formed the procession, contrasting with the hue
of the range of pine-trees on both sides of the road.

Genji was in a carriage, which was followed by ten boy pages, granted by the Court in the same way as
a late Sadaijin, Kawara, had been honored.

They were dressed in admirable taste, and their hair was twisted up in the form of a double
knot, with ribbons of gorgeous purple. The young Genji was also in the procession on horseback,
and followed the carriage.

The maiden of Akashi witnessed the procession, but she avoided making herself known. She thought
she had better not go up to the Temple on that day; but she could not sail back to Akashi,
so she had her boat moored in the bay of Naniwa for the night.

As to Genji, he knew nothing of the maiden being a spectator of the procession, and spent
the whole night in the Temple with his party in performing services which might please the God.

It
was then that he was informed by Koremitz that he had seen the maiden
of Akashi in a boat.

On the morrow Genji and his party set off for their homes.

As they proceeded Genji hummed,

"Ima hata onaji Naniwa nal,"[123]

and he stopped, while contemplating the bay.

Koremitz, who stood beside him, and divined what he was thinking
about, took out a small pen from his pocket and presented it to Genji,
who took it and wrote the following on a piece of paper, which he
sent to the maiden by one of his attendants who knew her whereabouts:--

"Divinely
led by love's bright flame, To this lone temple's shrine we come;
And as yon beacon meets our eye, To dream, perchance, of days gone
by."

                                                   
A few words more. The change of the ruler had brought a change
of the Saigû; and the Lady of Rokjiô, with her daughter,
returned to the capital. Her health, however, began to fail,
and she became a nun, and after some time died.

Before her death Genji visited her, and with her last breath she consigned her daughter to
his care.

Genji was thinking, therefore, of introducing her at Court at some future time.

FOOTNOTES:

                                                   [Footnote
123: A line of an old ode about the beacon in the bay of
Naniwa, at the same time expressing the desire of meeting
with a loved one. It is impossible to translate this ode
literally, as in the original there is a play upon words,
the word beacon (in Japanese) also meaning "enthusiastic
endeavor." The word "myo-tzkushi" (= beacon) more properly
means "water-marker" though disused in the modern Japanese.
In the translation a little liberty has been taken.]

CHAPTER XV

OVERGROWN MUGWORT

When Genji was an exile on the sea-coast, many people had
been longing for his return. Among these was the Princess
Hitachi. She was, as we have seen, the survivor of his Royal
father, and the kindness which she had received from Genji
was to her like the reflection of the broad starlit sky
in a basin of water. After Genji left the capital, however,
no correspondence ever passed between them. Several of her
servants left her, and her residence became more lonely
than ever. A fox might have found a covert in the overgrown
shrubbery, and the cry of the owl might have been heard
among the thick branches. One might imagine some mysterious
"tree-spirit" to reign there. Nevertheless, such grounds
as these, surrounded with lofty trees, are more tempting
to those who desire to have a stylish dwelling. Hence there
were several Duriôs (local governors) who had become rich,
and having returned from different provinces, sounded the
Princess to see if she were inclined to part with her residence;
but this she always refused to do, saying that, however unfortunate
she might be, she was not able to give up a mansion inherited from
her parents.

The mansion contained also a store of rare and antique
articles. Several fashionable persons endeavored to induce the Princess
to part with them; but such people appeared only contemptible to her,
as she looked upon them as proposing such a thing solely because they
knew she was poor. Her attendants sometimes suggested to her that
it was by no means an uncommon occurrence for one to dispose of such
articles when destiny necessitated the sacrifice; but her reply was
that these things had been handed down to her only that she might
make use of them, and that she would be violating the wishes of the
dead if she consented to part with them, allowing them to become the
ornament of the dwellings of some lowborn upstarts.

Scarcely anyone
paid a visit to her dwelling, her only occasional visitor being her
brother, a priest, who came to see her when he came to the capital,
but he was a man of eccentric character, and was not very flourishing
in his circumstances.

Such being the state of affairs with the Princess
Hitachi, the grounds of her mansion became more and more desolate
and wild, the mugwort growing so tall that it reached the veranda.
The surrounding walls of massive earth broke down here and there and
crumbled away, being trampled over by wandering cattle. In spring
and summer boys would sometimes play there. In the autumn a gale blew
down a corridor, and carried away part of the shingle roof. Only one
blessing remained there--no thief intruded into the enclosure, as
no temptation was offered to them for their attack.

But never did
the Princess lose her accustomed reserve, which her parents had instilled
into her mind. Society for her had no attractions. She solaced the
hours of her loneliness by looking over ancient story-books and poems,
which were stored in the old bookshelves, such as the Karamori, Hakoya-no-toji,
or Kakya-hime. These, with their illustrations, were her chief resources.

Now
a sister of the Princess's mother had married a Duriô, and had already
borne him a daughter. This marriage had been considered an unequal
match by the father of the Princess, and for this reason she was not
very friendly with the family. Jijiû, however, who was a daughter
of the Princess's nurse, and who still remained with the Princess,
used to go to her. This aunt was influenced by a secret feeling of
spite, and when Jijiû visited her she often whispered to her many
things which did not become her as a lady. It seems to me that where
a lady of ordinary degree is elevated to a higher position, she often
acquires a refinement like one originally belonging to it; but there
are other women, who when degraded from their rank spoil their taste
and habits just like the lady in question. She fondly hoped to revenge
herself for having been formerly looked down upon, by showing an apparent
kindness to the Princess Hitachi, and by wishing to take her into
her home, and make her wait upon her daughters. With this view she
told Jijiu to tell her mistress to come to her, and Jijiu did so;
but the Princess did not comply with this request.

In the meantime
the lady's husband was appointed Daini (Senior Secretary to the Lord-Lieutenant),
and they were to go down to Tzkushi (modern Kiusiu). She wished to
take the Princess with her, and told her that she felt sorry to go
to such a far-off locality, leaving her in her present circumstances;
but the latter still unhesitatingly replied in the negative, and declined
the offer; whereupon her aunt tauntingly remarked that she was too
proud, and that, however exalted she might think herself, no one,
not even Genji, would show her any further attention.

About this
time Genji returned, but for some while she heard nothing from him,
and only the public rejoicing of many people, and the news about him
from the outside world reached her ears. This gave her aunt a further
opportunity of repeating the same taunts. She said, "See now who cares
for you in your present circumstances.                                    667.43

"Another route is now being explored between Telegraph Creek and Teslin Lake and will soon
be opened. Telegraph Creek is the head of steamer navigation on the Stikine River and is about
150 miles from Teslin Lake. The Yukon is navigable for steamers from its mouth to Teslin Lake,
a distance of 2,300 miles. A road is being located by the Dominion Government. A grant of $2,000
has been made by the province of British Columbia for opening it.

"J. Dalton, a trader, has used a route overland from Chilkat Inlet to Fort Selkirk. Going up
the Chilkat and Klaheela Rivers, he crosses the divide to the Tahkeena River and continues
northward over a fairly open country practicable for horses. The distance from the sea to Fort
Selkirk is 350 miles.

"Last summer a Juneau butcher sent 40 head of cattle to Cudahy. G. Bounds, the man in charge,
crossed the divide over the Chilkat Pass, followed the shore of Lake Arkell and, keeping to
the east of Dalton's trail, reached the Yukon just below the Rink Rapids. Here the cattle were
slaughtered and the meat floated down on a raft to Cudahy, where it retailed at $1 a pound.

"It is proposed to establish a winter road somewhere across the country travelled over by Dalton
and Bounds. The Yukon cannot be followed, the ice being too much broken, so that any winter
road will have to be overland. A thorough exploration is now being made of all the passes at
the head of Lynn Canal and of the upper waters of the Yukon. In a few months it is expected
that the best routes for reaching the district from Lynn Canal will be definitely known.

"It is said by those familiar with the locality that the storms which rage in the upper altitudes
of the coast range during the greater part of the time, from October to March, are terrific.
A man caught in one of them runs the risk of losing his life, unless he can reach shelter in
a short time. During the summer there is nearly always a wind blowing from the sea up Chatham
Strait and Lynn Canal, which lie in almost a straight line with each other, and at the head
of Lynn Canal are Chilkat and Chilkoot Inlets. The distance from the coast down these channels
to the open sea is about 380 miles. The mountains on each side of the water confine the currents
of air, and deflect inclined currents in the direction of the axis of the channel, so that
there is nearly always a strong wind blowing up the channel. Coming from the sea, this wind
is heavily charged with moisture, which is precipitated when the air currents strike the mountains,
and the fall of rain and snow is consequently very heavy.

"In Chilkat Inlet there is not much shelter from the south wind, which renders it unsafe for
ships calling there. Capt. Hunter told me he would rather visit any other part of the coast
than Chilkat.

"To carry the survey from the island across to Chilkoot Inlet I had to get up on the mountains
north of Haines mission, and from there could see both inlets. Owing to the bad weather I could
get no observation for azimuth, and had to produce the survey from Pyramid Island to Taiya
Inlet by reading the angles of deflection between the courses. At Taiya Inlet I got my first
observation, and deduced the azimuths of my courses up to that point. Taiya Inlet has evidently
been the valley of a glacier; its sides are steep and smooth from glacial action; and this,
with the wind almost constantly blowing landward, renders getting upon the shore difficult.
Some long sights were therefore necessary. The survey was made up to the head of the Inlet
on the 2d of June. Preparations were then commenced for taking the supplies and instruments
over the coast range of mountains to the head of Lake Lindeman on the Lewes River. Commander
Newell kindly aided me in making arrangements with the Indians, and did all he could to induce
them to be reasonable in their demands. This, however, neither he nor any one else could accomplish.
They refused to carry to the lake for less than $20 per hundred pounds, and as they had learned
that the expedition was an English one, the second chief of the Chilkoot Indians recalled some
memories of an old quarrel which the tribe had with the English many years ago, in which an
uncle of his was killed, and he thought we should pay for the loss of his uncle by being charged
an exorbitant price for our packing, of which he had the sole control. Commander Newell told
him I had a permit from the Great Father at Washington to pass through his country safely,
that he would see that I did so, and if the Indians interfered with me they would be punished
for doing so. After much talk they consented to carry our stuff to the summit of the mountain
for $10 per hundred pounds. This is about two-thirds of the whole distance, includes all the
climbing and all the woods, and is by far the most difficult part of the way.

"On the 6th of June 120 Indians, men, women and children, started for the summit. I sent two
of my party with them to see the goods delivered at the place agreed upon. Each carrier when
given a pack also got a ticket, on which was inscribed the contents of the pack, its weight,
and the amount the individual was to get for carrying it. They were made to understand that
they had to produce these tickets on delivering their packs, but were not told for what reason.
As each pack was delivered one of my men receipted the ticket and returned it. The Indians
did not seem to understand the import of this; a few of them pretended to have lost their tickets;
and as they could not get paid without them, my assistant, who had duplicates of every ticket,
furnished them with receipted copies, after examining their packs.

"While they were packing to the summit I was producing the survey, and I met them on their
return at the foot of the cañon, about eight miles from the coast, where I paid them. They
came to the camp in the early morning before I was up, and for about two hours there was quite
a hubbub. When paying them I tried to get their names, but very few of them would give any
Indian name, nearly all, after a little reflection, giving some common English name. My list
contained little else than Jack, Tom, Joe, Charlie, &c. some of which were duplicated three
and four times. I then found why some of them had pretended to lose their tickets at the summit.
Three or four who had thus acted presented themselves twice for payment, producing first the
receipted ticket, afterwards the one they claimed to have lost, demanding pay for both. They
were much taken aback when they found that their duplicity had been discovered.

"These Indians are perfectly heartless. They will not render even the smallest aid to each
other without payment; and if not to each other, much less to a white man. I got one of them,
whom I had previously assisted with his pack, to take me and two of my party over a small creek
in his canoe. After putting us across he asked for money, and I gave him half a dollar. Another
man stepped up and demanded pay, stating that the canoe was his. To see what the result would
be, I gave to him the same amount as to the first. Immediately there were three or four more
claimants for the canoe. I dismissed them with a blessing, and made up my mind that I would
wade the next creek.

"While paying them I was a little apprehensive of trouble, for they insisted on crowding into
my tent, and for myself and the four men who were with me to have attempted to eject them would
have been to invite trouble. I am strongly of the opinion that these Indians would have been
much more difficult to deal with if they had not known that Commander Newell remained in the
inlet to see that I got through without accident.

"While making the survey from the head of tide water I took the azimuths and altitudes of several
of the highest peaks around the head of the inlet, in order to locate them, and obtain an idea
of the general height of the peaks in the coast range. As it does not appear to have been done
before, I have taken the opportunity of naming all the peaks, the positions of which I fixed
in the above way. The names and altitudes appear on my map.

"While going up from the head of canoe navigation on the Taiya River I took the angles of elevation
of each station from the preceding one. I would have done this from tide water up, but found
many of the courses so short and with so little increase in height that with the instrument
I had it was inappreciable. From these angles I have computed the height of the summit of the
Taiya Pass,[2] above the head of canoe navigation, as it appeared to me in June, 1887, and
find it to be 3,378 feet. What depth of snow there was I cannot say. The head of canoe navigation
I estimate at about 120 feet above tide water. Dr. Dawson gives it as 124 feet.

[Footnote 2: The distance from the head of Taiya Inlet to the summit of the pass is 15 miles,
and the whole length of the pass to Lake Lindeman is 23 miles. Messrs. Healy and Wilson, dealers
in general merchandise and miners' supplies at Taiya, have a train of pack horses carrying
freight from the head of Lynn Canal to the summit. They hope to be able to take freight through
to Lake Lindeman with their horses during the present season.]

"I determined the descent from the summit to Lake Lindeman by carrying the aneroid from the
lake to the summit and back again, the interval of time from start to return being about eight
hours. Taking the mean of the readings at the lake, start and return, and the single reading
at the summit, the height of the summit above the lake was found to be 1,237 feet. While making
the survey from the summit down to the lake I took the angles of depression of each station
from the preceding one, and from these angles I deduced the difference of height, which I found
to be 1,354 feet, or 117 feet more than that found by the aneroid. This is quite a large difference;
but when we consider the altitude of the place, the sudden changes of temperature, and the
atmospheric conditions, it is not more than one might expect.

"While at Juneau I heard reports of a low pass from the head of Chilkoot Inlet to the head
waters of Lewes River. During the time I was at the head of Taiya Inlet I made inquiries regarding
it, and found that there was such a pass, but could learn nothing definite about it from either
whites or Indians. As Capt. Moore, who accompanied me, was very anxious to go through it, and
as the reports of the Taiya Pass indicated that no wagon road or railroad could ever be built
through it, while the new pass appeared, from what little knowledge I could get of it, to be
much lower and possibly feasible for a wagon road, I determined to send the captain by that
way, if I could get an Indian to accompany him. This, I found, would be difficult to do. None
of the Chilkoots appeared to know anything of the pass, and I concluded that they wished to
keep its existence and condition a secret. The Tagish, or Stick Indians, as the interior Indians
are locally called, are afraid to do anything in opposition to the wishes of the Chilkoots;
so it was difficult to get any of them to join Capt. Moore; but after much talk and encouragement
from the whites around, one of them named "Jim" was induced to go. He had been through this
pass before, and proved reliable and useful. The information obtained from Capt. Moore's exploration
I have incorporated in my plan of the survey from Taiya Inlet, but it is not as complete as
I would have liked. I have named this pass "White Pass," in honor of the late Hon. Thos. White,
Minister of the Interior, under whose authority the expedition was organized. Commencing at
Taiya Inlet, about two miles south of its north end, it follows up the valley, of the Shkagway
River to its source, and thence down the valley of another river which Capt. Moore reported
to empty into the Takone or Windy Arm of Bove Lake (Schwatka). Dr. Dawson says this stream
empties into Taku Arm, and in that event Capt. Moore is mistaken. Capt. Moore did not go all
the way through to the lake, but assumed from reports he heard from the miners and others that
the stream flowed into Windy Arm, and this also was the idea of the Indian "Jim" from what
I could gather from his remarks in broken English and Chinook. Capt. Moore estimates the distance
from tide water to the summit at about 18 miles, and from the summit to the lake at about 22
to 23 miles. He reports the pass as thickly timbered all the way through.

"The timber line on the south side of the Taiya Pass, as determined by barometer reading, is
about 2,300 feet above the sea, while on the north side it is about 1,000 feet below the summit.
This large difference is due, I think, to the different conditions in the two places. On the
south side the valley is narrow and deep, and the sun cannot produce its full effect. The snow
also is much deeper there, owing to the quantity which drifts in from the surrounding mountains.
On the north side the surface is sloping, and more exposed to the sun's rays. On the south
side the timber is of the class peculiar to the coast, and on the north that peculiar to the
interior. The latter would grow at a greater altitude than the coast timber. It is possible
that the summit of White Pass is not higher than the timber line on the north of the Taiya
Pass, or about 2,500 feet above tide water, and it is possibly even lower than this, as the
timber in a valley such as the White Pass would hardly live at the same altitude as on the
open slope on the north side.

"Capt. Moore has had considerable experience in building roads in mountainous countries. He
considers that this would be an easy route for a wagon road compared with some roads he has
seen in British Columbia. Assuming his distances to be correct, and the height of the pass
to be probably about correctly indicated, the grades would not be very steep, and a railroad
could easily be carried through if necessary.

"After completing the survey down to the lake, I set about getting my baggage down too. Of
all the Indians who came to the summit with packs, only four or five could be induced to remain
and pack down to the lake, although I was paying them at the rate of $4 per hundred pounds.
After one trip down only two men remained, and they only in hopes of stealing something. One
of them appropriated a pair of boots, and was much surprised to find that he had to pay for
them on being settled with. I could not blame them much for not caring to work, as the weather
was very disagreeable--it rained or snowed almost continuously. After the Indians left I tried
to get down the stuff with the aid of my own men, but it was slavish and unhealthy labor, and
after the first trip one of them was laid up with what appeared to be inflammatory rheumatism.
The first time the party crossed, the sun was shining brightly, and this brought on snow blindness,
the pain of which only those who have suffered from this complaint can realize. I had two sleds
with me which were made in Juneau specially for the work of getting over the mountains and
down the lakes on the ice. With these I succeeded in bringing about a ton and a-half to the
lakes, but found that the time it would take to get all down in this way would seriously interfere
with the programme arranged with Dr. Dawson, to say nothing of the suffering of the men and
myself, and the liability to sickness which protracted physical exertion under such uncomfortable
conditions and continued suffering from snow blindness expose us to. I had with me a white
man who lived at the head of the inlet with a Tagish Indian woman. This man had a good deal
of influence with the Tagish tribe, of whom the greater number were then in the neighborhood
where he resided, trying to get some odd jobs of work, and I sent him to the head of the inlet
to try and induce the Tagish Indians to undertake the transportation, offering them $5 per
hundred pounds. In the meantime Capt. Moore and the Indian "Jim" had rejoined me. I had their
assistance for a day or two, and "Jim's" presence aided indirectly in inducing the Indians
to come to my relief.

"The Tagish are little more than slaves to the more powerful coast tribes, and are in constant
dread of offending them in any way. One of the privileges which the coast tribes claim is the
exclusive right to all work on the coast or in its vicinity, and the Tagish are afraid to dispute
this claim. When my white man asked the Tagish to come over and pack they objected on the grounds
mentioned. After considerable ridicule of their cowardice, and explanation of the fact that
they had the exclusive right to all work in their own country, the country on the side of the
north side of the coast range being admitted by the coast Indians to belong to the Tagish tribe
just as the coast tribes had the privilege of doing all the work on the coast side of the mountains,
and that one of their number was already working with me unmolested, and likely to continue
so, nine of them came over, and in fear and trembling began to pack down to the lake. After
they were at work for a few days some of the Chilkoots came out and also started to work. Soon
I had quite a number at work and was getting my stuff down quite fast. But this good fortune
was not to continue. Owing to the prevailing wet, cold weather on the mountains, and the difficulty
of getting through the soft wet snow, the Indians soon began to quit work for a day or two
at a time, and to gamble with one another for the wages already earned. Many of them wanted
to be paid in full, but this I positively refused, knowing that to do so was to have them all
apply for their earnings and leave me until necessity compelled them to go to work again. I
once for all made them distinctly understand that I would not pay any of them until the whole
of the stuff was down. As many of them had already earned from twelve to fifteen dollars each,
to lose which was a serious matter to them, they reluctantly resumed work and kept at it until
all was delivered. This done, I paid them off, and set about getting my outfit across the lake,
which I did with my own party and the two Peterborough canoes which I had with me.

"These two canoes travelled about 3,000 miles by rail and about 1,000 miles by steamship before
being brought into service. They did considerable work on Chilkoot and Tagish Inlets, and were
then packed over to the head of Lewes River (Lake Lindeman), from where they were used in making
the survey of Lewes and Yukon Rivers. In this work they made about 650 landings. They were
then transported on sleighs from the boundary on the Yukon to navigable water on the Porcupine.

"In the spring of 1888 they descended the latter river, heavily loaded, and through much rough
water, to the mouth of Bell's River, and up it to McDougall's Pass. They were then carried
over the pass to Poplar River and were used in going down the latter to Peel River, and thence
up Mackenzie River 1,400 miles; or, exclusive of railway and ship carriage, they were carried
about 170 miles and did about 2,500 miles of work for the expedition, making in all about 1,700
landings in no easy manner and going through some very bad water. I left them at Fort Chipewyan
in fairly good condition, and, with a little painting, they would go through the same ordeal again.

"After getting all my outfit over to the foot of Lake Lindeman I set some of the party to pack
it to the head of Lake Bennet.

"I employed the rest of the party in looking for timber to build a boat to carry my outfit
of provisions and implements down the river to the vicinity of the international boundary,
a distance of about 700 miles. It took several days to find a tree large enough to make plank
for the boat I wanted, as the timber around the upper end of the lake is small and scrubby.
My boat was finished on the evening of the 11th of July, and on the 12th I started a portion
of the party to load it and go ahead with it and the outfit to the cañon. They had instructions
to examine the cañon and, if necessary, to carry a part of the outfit past it--in any case,
enough to support the party back to the coast should accident necessitate such procedure. With
the rest of the party I started to carry on the survey, which may now be said to have fairly
started ahead on the lakes. This proved tedious work, on account of the stormy weather.

"In the summer months there is nearly always a wind blowing in from the coast; it blows down
the lakes and produces quite a heavy swell. This would not prevent the canoes going with the
decks on, but, as we had to land every mile or so, the rollers breaking on the generally flat
beach proved very troublesome. On this account I found I could not average more than ten miles
per day on the lakes, little more than half of what could be done on the river.

"The survey was completed to the cañon on the 20th of July. There I found the party with the
large boat had arrived on the 18th, having carried a part of the supplies past the cañon, and
were awaiting my arrival to run through it with the rest in the boat. Before doing so, however,
I made an examination of the cañon. The rapids below it, particularly the last rapid of the
series (called the White Horse by the miners), I found would not be safe to run. I sent two
men through the cañon in one of the canoes to await the arrival of the boat, and to be ready
in case of an accident to pick us up. Every man in the party was supplied with a life-preserver,
so that should a casualty occur we would all have floated. Those in the canoe got through all
right; but they would not have liked to repeat the trip. They said the canoe jumped about a
great deal more than they thought it would, and I had the same experience when going through
in the boat.

"The passage through is made in about three minutes, or at the rate of about 12-1/2 miles an
hour. If the boat is kept clear of the sides there is not much danger in high water; but in
low water there is a rock in the middle of the channel, near the upper end of the cañon, that
renders the passage more difficult. I did not see this rock myself, but got my information
from some miners I met in the interior, who described it as being about 150 yards down from
the head and a little to the west of the middle of the channel. In low water it barely projects
above the surface. When I passed through there was no indication of it, either from the bank
above or from the boat.

"The distance from the head to the foot of the cañon is five-eighths of a mile. There is a
basin about midway in it about 150 yards in diameter. This basin is circular in form, with
steep sloping sides about 100 feet high. The lower part of the cañon is much rougher to run
through than the upper part, the fall being apparently much greater. The sides are generally
perpendicular, about 80 to 100 feet high, and consist of basalt, in some places showing hexagonal
columns.

"The White Horse Rapids are about three-eighths of a mile long. They are the most dangerous
rapids on the river, and are never run through in boats except by accident. They are confined
by low basaltic banks, which, at the foot, suddenly close in and make the channel about 30
yards wide. It is here the danger lies, as there is a sudden drop and the water rashes through
at a tremendous rate, leaping and seething like a cataract. The miners have constructed a portage
road on the west side, and put down rollways in some places on which to shove their boats over.
They have also made some windlasses with which to haul their boats up hill, notably one at
the foot of the cañon. This roadway and windlasses must have cost them many hours of hard labor.
Should it ever be necessary, a tramway could be built past the cañon on the east side with
no great difficulty. With the exception of the Five Finger Rapids these appear to be the only
serious rapids on the whole length of the river.

"Five Finger Rapids are formed by several islands standing in the channel and backing up the
water so much as to raise it about a foot, causing a swell below for a few yards. The islands
are composed of conglomerate rock, similar to the cliffs on each side of the river, whence
one would infer that there has been a fall here in past ages. For about two miles below the
rapids there is a pretty swift current, but not enough to prevent the ascent of a steamboat
of moderate power, and the rapids themselves I do not think would present any serious obstacle
to the ascent of a good boat. In very high water warping might be required. Six miles below
these rapids are what are known as 'Rink Rapids,' This is simply a barrier of rocks, which
extends from the westerly side of the river about half way across. Over this barrier there
is a ripple which would offer no great obstacle to the descent of a good canoe. On the easterly
sides there is no ripple, and the current is smooth and the water apparently deep. I tried
with a 6 foot paddle, but could not reach the bottom.

"On the 11th of August I met a party of miners coming out who had passed Stewart River a few
days before. They saw no sign of Dr. Dawson having been there. This was welcome news for me,
as I expected he would have reached that point long before I arrived, on account of the many
delays I had met with on the coast range. These miners also gave me the pleasant news that
the story told at the coast about the fight with the Indians at Stewart River was false, and
stated substantially what I have already repeated concerning it. The same evening I met more
miners on their way out, and the next day met three boats, each containing four men. In the
crew of one of them was a son of Capt. Moore, from whom the captain got such information as
induced him to turn back and accompany them out.

"Next day, the 13th, I got to the mouth of the Pelly, and found that Dr. Dawson had arrived
there on the 11th. The doctor also had experienced many delays, and had heard the same story
of the Indian uprising in the interior. I was pleased to find that he was in no immediate want
of provisions, the fear of which had caused me a great deal of uneasiness on the way down the
river, as it was arranged between us in Victoria that I was to take with me provisions for
his party to do them until their return to the coast. The doctor was so much behind the time
arranged to meet me that he determined to start for the coast at once. I therefore set about
making a short report and plan of my survey to this point; and, as I was not likely to get
another opportunity of writing at such length for a year, I applied myself to a correspondence
designed to satisfy my friends and acquaintances for the ensuing twelve months. This necessitated
three days' hard work.

"On the morning of the 17th the doctor left for the outside world, leaving me with a feeling
of loneliness that only those who have experienced it can realize. I remained at the mouth
of the Pelly during the next day taking magnetic and astronomical observations, and making
some measurements of the river. On the 19th I resumed the survey and reached White River on
the 25th. Here I spent most of a day trying to ascend this river, but found it impracticable,
on account of the swift current and shallow and very muddy water. The water is so muddy that
it is impossible to see through one-eighth of an inch of it. The current is very strong, probably
eight miles or more per hour, and the numerous bars in the bed are constantly changing place.
After trying for several hours, the base men succeeded in doing about half a mile only, and
I came to the conclusion that it was useless to try to get up this stream to the boundary with
canoes. Had it proved feasible I had intended making a survey of this stream to the boundary,
to discover more especially the facilities it offered for the transport of supplies in the
event of a survey of the International Boundary being undertaken.

"I reached Stewart River on the 26th. Here I remained a day taking magnetic observations, and
getting information from a miner, named McDonald, about the country up that river. McDonald
had spent the summer up the river prospecting and exploring. His information will be given
in detail further on.

"Fort Reliance was reached on the 1st of September, and Forty Mile River (Cone-Hill River of
Schwatka) on the 7th. In the interval between Fort Reliance and Forty Mile River there were
several days lost by rain.

"At Forty Mile River I made some arrangements with the traders there (Messrs. Harper & McQuestion)
about supplies during the winter, and about getting Indians to assist me in crossing from the
Yukon to the head of the Porcupine, or perhaps on to the Peel River. I then made a survey of
the Forty Mile River up to the cañon. I found the canon would be difficult of ascent, and dangerous
to descend, and therefore, concluded to defer further operations until the winter, and until
after I had determined the longitude of my winter post near the boundary, when I would be in
a much better position to locate the intersection of the International Boundary with this river,
a point important to determine on account of the number and richness of the mining claims on
the river.

"I left Forty Mile River for the boundary line between Alaska and the Northwest Territories
on the 12th September, and finished the survey to that point on the 14th. I then spent two
days in examining the valley of the river in the vicinity of the boundary to get the most extensive
view of the horizon possible, and to find a tree large enough to serve for a transit stand.

"Before leaving Toronto I got Mr. Foster to make large brass plates with V's on them, which
could be screwed firmly to a stump, and thus be made to serve as a transit stand. I required
a stump at least 22 inches in diameter to make a base large enough for the plates when properly
placed for the transit. In a search which covered about four miles of the river bank, on both
sides, I found only one tree as large as 18 inches. I mention this fact to give an idea of
the size of the trees along the river in this vicinity. I had this stump enlarged by firmly
fixing pieces on the sides so as to bring it up to the requisite size. This done, I built around
the stump a small transit house of the ordinary form and then mounted and adjusted my transit.
Meanwhile, most of the party were busy preparing our winter quarters and building a magnetic
observatory. As I had been led to expect extremely low temperatures during the winter, I adopted
precautionary measures, so as to be as comfortable as circumstances would permit during our
stay there.

DESCRIPTION OF THE YUKON, ITS AFFLUENT STREAMS, AND THE ADJACENT COUNTRY.

"I will now give, from my own observation and from information received, a more detailed description
of the Lewes River, its affluent streams, and the resources of the adjacent country.

"For the purpose of navigation a description of the Lewes River begins at the head of Lake
Bennet. Above that point, and between it and Lake Lindeman, there is only about three-quarters
of a mile of river, which is not more than fifty or sixty yards wide, and two or three feet
deep, and is so swift and rough that navigation is out of the question.

"Lake Lindeman is about five miles long and half a mile wide. It is deep enough for all ordinary
purposes. Lake Bennet[3] is twenty-six and a quarter miles long, for the upper fourteen of
which it is about half a mile wide. About midway in its length an arm comes in from the west,
which Schwatka appears to have mistaken for a river, and named Wheaton River. This arm is wider
than the other arm down to that point, and is reported by Indians to be longer and heading
in a glacier which lies in the pass at the head of Chilkoot Inlet. This arm is, as far as seen,
surrounded by high mountains, apparently much higher than those on the arm we travelled down.
Below the junction of the two arms the lake is about one and a half miles wide, with deep water.
Above the forks the water of the east branch is muddy. This is caused by the streams from the
numerous glaciers on the head of the tributaries of Lake Lindeman.

[Footnote 3: A small saw-mill has been erected at the head of Lake Bennet; lumber for boat
building sells at $100 per M. Boats 25 feet long and 5 feet beam are $60 each. Last year the
ice broke up in the lake on the 12th June, but this season is earlier and the boats are expected
to go down the lake about the 1st of June.]

"A stream which flows into Lake Bennet at the south-west corner is also very dirty, and has
shoaled quite a large portion of the lake at its mouth. The beach at the lower end of this
lake is comparatively flat and the water shoal. A deep, wide valley extends northwards from
the north end of the lake, apparently reaching to the cañon, or a short distance above it.
This may have been originally a course for the waters of the river. The bottom of the valley
is wide and sandy, and covered with scrubby timber, principally poplar and pitch-pine. The
waters of the lake empty at the extreme north-east angle through a channel not more than one
hundred yards wide, which soon expands into what Schwatka called Lake Nares.[4] Through this
narrow channel there is quite a current, and more than 7 feet of water, as a 6 foot paddle
and a foot of arm added to its length did not reach the bottom.

[Footnote 4: The connecting waters between Lake Bennet and Tagish Lake constitute what is now
called Caribou Crossing.]

"The hills at the upper end of Lake Lindeman rise abruptly from the water's edge. At the lower
end they are neither so steep nor so high.

"Lake Nares is only two and a half miles long, and its greatest width is about a mile; it is
not deep, but is navigable for boats drawing 5 or 6 feet of water; it is separated from Lake
Bennet by a shallow sandy point of not more than 200 yards in length.

"No streams of any consequence empty into either of these lakes. A small river flows into Lake
Bennet on the west side, a short distance north of the fork, and another at the extreme north-west
angle, but neither of them is of any consequence in a navigable sense.

"Lake Nares flows through a narrow curved channel into Bove Lake (Schwatka). This channel is
not more than 600 or 700 yards long, and the water in it appears to be sufficiently deep for
boats that could navigate the lake. The land between the lakes along this channel is low, swampy,
and covered with willows, and, at the stage in which I saw it, did not rise more than 3 feet
above the water. The hills on the south-west side slope up easily, and are not high; on the
north side the deep valley already referred to borders it; and on the east side the mountains
rise abruptly from the lake shore.

"Bove Lake (called Tagish Lake by Dr. Dawson) is about a mile wide for the first two miles
of its length, when it is joined by what the miners have called the Windy Arm. One of the Tagish
Indians informed me they called it Takone Lake. Here the lake expands to a width of about two
miles for a distance of some three miles, when it suddenly narrows to about half a mile for
a distance of a little over a mile, after which it widens again to about a mile and a half or more.

"Ten miles from the head of the lake it is joined by the Taku Arm from the south. This arm
must be of considerable length, as it can be seen for a long distance, and its valley can be
traced through the mountains much farther than the lake itself can be seen. It is apparently
over a mile wide at its mouth or junction.

"Dr. Dawson includes Bove Lake and these two arms under the common name of Tagish Lake. This
is much more simple and comprehensive than the various names given them by travellers. These
waters collectively are the fishing and hunting grounds of the Tagish Indians, and as they
are really one body of water, there is no reason why they should not be all included under
one name.

"From the junction with the Taku Arm to the north end of the lake the distance is about six
miles, the greater part being over two miles wide. The west side is very flat and shallow,
so much so that it was impossible in many places to get our canoes to the shore, and quite
a distance out in the lake there was not more than 5 feet of water. The members of my party
who were in charge of the large boat and outfit, went down the east side of the lake and reported
the depth about the same as I found on the west side, with many large rocks. They passed through
it in the night in a rainstorm, and were much alarmed for the safety of the boat and provisions.
It would appear that this part of the lake requires some improvement to make it in keeping
with the rest of the water system with which it is connected.

"Where the river debouches from it, it is about 150 yards wide, and for a short distance not
more than 5 or 6 feet deep. The depth is, however, soon increased to 10 feet or more, and so
continues down to what Schwatka calls Marsh Lake. The miners call it Mud Lake, but on this
name they do not appear to be agreed, many of them calling the lower part of Tagish or Bove
Lake "Mud Lake," on account of its shallowness and flat muddy shores, as seen along the west
side, the side nearly always travelled, as it is more sheltered from the prevailing southerly
winds. The term "Mud Lake" is, however, not applicable to this lake, as only a comparatively
small part of it is shallow or muddy; and it is nearly as inapplicable to Marsh Lake, as the
latter is not markedly muddy along the west side, and from the appearance of the east shore
one would not judge it to be so, as the banks appear to be high and gravelly.

"Marsh Lake is a little over nineteen miles long, and averages about two miles in width. I
tried to determine the width of it as I went along with my survey, by taking azimuths of points
on the eastern shore from different stations of the survey; but in only one case did I succeed,
as there were no prominent marks on that shore which could be identified from more than one
place. The piece of river connecting Tagish and Marsh Lakes is about five miles long, and averages
150 to 200 yards in width, and, as already mentioned, is deep, except for a short distance
at the head. On it are situated the only Indian houses to be found in the interior with any
pretension to skill in construction. They show much more labor and imitativeness than one knowing
anything about the Indian in his native state would expect. The plan is evidently taken from
the Indian houses on the coast, which appear to me to be a poor copy of the houses which the
Hudson's Bay Company's servants build around their trading posts. These houses do not appear
to have been used for some time past, and are almost in ruins. The Tagish Indians are now generally
on the coast, as they find it much easier to live there than in their own country. As a matter
of fact, what they make in their own country is taken from them by the Coast Indians, so that
there is little inducement for them to remain.

"The Lewes River, where it leaves Marsh Lake, is about 200 yards wide, and averages this width
as far as the cañon. I did not try to find bottom anywhere as I went along, except where I
had reason to think it shallow, and there I always tried with my paddle. I did not anywhere
find bottom with this, which shows that there is no part of this stretch of the river with
less than six feet of water at medium height, at which stage it appeared to me the river was
at that time.

"From the head of Lake Bennet to the cañon the corrected distance is ninety-five miles, all
of which is navigable for boats drawing 5 feet or more. Add to this the westerly arm of Lake
Bennet, and the Takone or Windy Arm of Tagish Lake, each about fifteen miles in length, and
the Taku Arm of the latter lake, of unknown length, but probably not less than thirty miles,
and we have a stretch of water of upwards of one hundred miles in length, all easily navigable;
and, as has been pointed out, easily connected with Taiya Inlet through the White Pass.

"No streams of any importance enter any of these lakes so far as I know. A river, called by
Schwatka "McClintock River," enters Marsh Lake at the lower end from the east. It occupies
a large valley, as seen from the westerly side of the lake, but the stream is apparently unimportant.
Another small stream, apparently only a creek, enters the south-east angle of the lake. It
is not probable that any stream coming from the east side of the lake is of importance, as
the strip of country between the Lewes and Teslintoo is not more than thirty or forty miles
in width at this point.

"The Taku Arm of Tagish Lake, is, so far, with the exception of reports from Indians, unknown;
but it is equally improbable that any river of importance enters it, as it is so near the source
of the waters flowing northwards. However, this is a question that can only be decided by a
proper exploration. The cañon I have already described and will only add that it is five-eighths
of a mile long, about 100 feet wide, with perpendicular banks of basaltic rock from 60 to 100
feet high.

"Below the cañon proper there is a stretch of rapids for about a mile; then about half a mile
of smooth water, following which are the White Horse Rapids, which are three-eighths of a mile
long, and unsafe for boats.

"The total fall in the cañon and succeeding rapids was measured and found to be 32 feet. Were
it ever necessary to make this part of the river navigable it will be no easy task to overcome
the obstacles at this point; but a tram or railway could, with very little difficulty, be constructed
along the east side of the river past the cañon.

"For some distance below the White Horse Rapids the current is swift and the river wide, with
many gravel bars. The reach between these rapids and Lake Labarge, a distance of twenty-seven
and a half miles, is all smooth water, with a strong current. The average width is about 150
yards. There is no impediment to navigation other than the swift current, and this is no stronger
than on the lower part of the river, which is already navigated; nor is it worse than on the
Saskatchewan and Red Rivers in the more eastern part of our territory.

"About midway in this stretch the Tahkeena River[5] joins the Lewes. This river is, apparently,
about half the size of the latter. Its waters are muddy, indicating the passage through a clayey
district. I got some indefinite information about this river, from an Indian who happened to
meet me just below its mouth, but I could not readily make him understand me, and his replies
were a compound of Chinook, Tagish, and signs, and therefore largely unintelligible. From what
I could understand with any certainty, the river was easy to descend, there being no bad rapids,
and it came out of a lake much larger than any I had yet passed.

[Footnote 5: The Tahkeena was formerly much used by the Chilkat Indians as a means of reaching
the interior, but never by the miners owing to the distance from the sea to its head.]

"Here I may remark that I have invariably found it difficult to get reliable or definite information
from Indians. The reasons for this are many. Most of the Indians it has been my lot to meet
are expecting to make something, and consequently are very chary about doing or saying anything
unless they think they will be well rewarded for it. They are naturally very suspicions of
strangers, and it takes some time, and some knowledge of their language, to overcome this suspicion
and gain their confidence. If you begin at once to ask questions about their country, without
previously having them understand that you have no unfriendly motive in doing so, they become
alarmed, and although you may not meet with a positive refusal to answer questions, you make
very little progress in getting desired information. On the other hand I have met cases where,
either through fear or hope of reward, they were only too anxious to impart all they knew or
had heard, and even more if they thought it would please their hearer. I need hardly say that
such information is often not at all in accordance with the facts.

"I have several times found that some act of mine when in their presence has aroused either
their fear, superstition or cupidity. As an instance: on the Bell River I met some Indians
coming down stream as I was going up. We were ashore at the time, and invited them to join
us. They started to come in, but very slowly, and all the time kept a watchful eye on us. I
noticed that my double-barrelled shot gun was lying at my feet, loaded, and picked it up to
unload it, as I knew they would be handling it after landing. This alarmed them so much that
it was some time before they came in, and I don't think they would have come ashore at all
had they not heard that a party of white men of whom we answered the description, were coming
through that way (they had learned this from the Hudson's Bay Company's officers), and concluded
we were the party described to them. After drinking some of our tea, and getting a supply for
themselves, they became quite friendly and communicative.

"I cite these as instances of what one meets with who comes in contact with Indians, and of
how trifles affect them. A sojourn of two or three days with them and the assistance of a common
friend would do much to disabuse them of such ideas, but when you have no such aids you must
not expect to make much progress.

"Lake Labarge is thirty-one miles long. In the upper thirteen it varies from three to four
miles in width; it then narrows to about two miles for a distance of seven miles, when it begins
to widen again, and gradually expands to about, two and a-half or three miles, the lower six
miles of it maintaining the latter width. The survey was carried along the western shore, and
while so engaged I determined the width of the upper wide part by triangulation at two points,
the width of the narrow middle part at three points, and the width of the lower part, at three
points. Dr. Dawson on his way out made a track survey of the eastern shore. The western shore
is irregular in many places, being indented by large bays, especially at the upper and lower
ends. These bays are, as a rule, shallow, more especially those at the lower end.

"Just above where the lake narrows in the middle there is a large island. It is three and a-half
miles long and about half a mile in width. It is shown on Schwatka's map as a peninsula, and
called by him Richtofen Rocks. How he came to think it a peninsula I cannot understand, as
it is well out in the lake; the nearest point of it to the western shore is upwards of half
a mile distant, and the extreme width of the lake here is not more than five miles, which includes
the depth of the deepest bays on the western side. It is therefore difficult to understand
that he did not see it as an island. The upper half of this island is gravelly, and does not
rise very high above the lake. The lower end is rocky and high, the rock being of a bright
red color.

"At the lower end of the lake there is a large valley extending northwards, which has evidently
at one time been the outlet of the lake. Dr. Dawson has noted it and its peculiarities. His
remarks regarding it will be found on pages 156-160 of his report entitled 'Yukon District
and Northern portion of British Columbia,' published in 1889.

"The width of the Lewes River as it leaves the lake is the same as at its entrance, about 200
yards. Its waters when I was there were murky. This is caused by the action of the waves on
the shore along the lower end of the lake. The water at the upper end and at the middle of
the lake is quite clear, so much so that the bottom can be distinctly seen at a depth of 6
or 7 feet. The wind blows almost constantly down this lake, and in a high wind it gets very
rough. The miners complain of much detention owing to this cause, and certainly I cannot complain
of a lack of wind while I was on the lake. This lake was named after one Mike Labarge, who
was engaged by the Western Union Telegraph Company, exploring the river and adjacent country
for the purpose of connecting Europe and America by telegraph through British Columbia, and
Alaska, and across Behring Strait to Asia, and thence to Europe. This exploration took place
in 1867, but it does not appear that Labarge then, nor for some years after, saw the lake called
by his name. The successful laying of the Atlantic cable in 1866 put a stop to this project,
and the exploring parties sent out were recalled as soon as word could be got to them. It seems
that Labarge had got up as far as the Pelly before he received his recall; he had heard something
of a large lake some distance further up the river, and afterwards spoke of it to some traders
and miners who called it after him.

"After leaving Lake Labarge the river, for a distance of about five miles, preserves a generally
uniform width and an easy current of about four miles per hour. It then makes a short turn
round a low gravel point, and flows in exactly the opposite of its general course for a mile
when it again turns sharply to its general direction. The current around this curve and for
some distance below it--in all four or five miles--is very swift. I timed it in several places
and found it from six to seven miles an hour. It then moderates to four or five, and continues
so until the Teslintoo River is reached, thirty-one and seven tenths miles from Lake Labarge.
The average width of this part of the river is about 150 yards, and the depth is sufficient
to afford passage for boats drawing at least 5 feet. It is, as a rule, crooked, and consequently
a little difficult to navigate.

"The Teslintoo[6] was so called by Dr. Dawson--this, according to information obtained by him,
being the Indian name. It is called by the miners 'Hootalinkwa' or Hotalinqua, and was called
by Schwatka, who appears to have bestowed no other attention to it, the Newberry, although
it is apparently much larger than the Lewes. This was so apparent that in my interim reports
I stated it as a fact. Owing to circumstances already narrated, I had not time while at the
mouth to make any measurement to determine the relative size of the rivers; but on his way
out Dr. Dawson made these measurements, and his report, before referred to, gives the following
values of the cross sections of each stream: Lewes, 3,015 feet; Teslintoo, 3,809 feet. In the
same connection he states that the Lewes appeared to be about 1 foot above its lowest summer
level, while the Teslintoo appeared to be at its lowest level. Assuming this to be so, and
taking his widths as our data, it would reduce his cross section of the Lewes to 2,595 feet.
Owing, however, to the current in the Lewes, as determined by Dr. Dawson, being just double
that of the Teslintoo, the figures being 5.68 and 2.88 miles per hour, respectively, the discharge
of the Lewes, taking these figures again in 18,644 feet, and of the Teslintoo 11,436 feet.
To reduce the Lewes to its lowest level the doctor says would make its discharge 15,600 feet.

[Footnote 6: The limited amount of prospecting that has been done on this river is said to
be very satisfactory, fine gold having been found in all parts of the river. The lack of supplies
is the great drawback to its development, and this will not be overcome to any extent until
by some means heavy freight can be brought over the coast range to the head of the river. Indeed,
owing to the difficulties attending access and transportation, the great drawback to the entire
Yukon district at present is the want of heavy mining machinery and the scarcity of supplies.
The government being aware of the requirements and possibilities of the country, has undertaken
the task of making preliminary surveys for trails and railroads, and no doubt in the near future
the avenue for better and quicker transportation facilities will be opened up.]

"The water of the Teslintoo is of a dark brown color, similar in appearance to the Ottawa River
water, and a little turbid. Notwithstanding the difference of volume of discharge, the Teslintoo
changes completely the character of the river below the junction, and a person coming up the
river would, at the forks, unhesitatingly pronounce the Teslintoo the main stream. The water
of the Lewes is blue in color, and at the time I speak of was somewhat dirty--not enough so,
however, to prevent one seeing to a depth of two or three feet.

"At the junction of the Lewes and Teslintoo I met two or three families of the Indians who
hunt in the vicinity. One of them could speak a little Chinook. As I had two men with me who
understood his jargon perfectly, with their assistance I tried to get some information from
him about the river. He told me the river was easy to ascend, and presented the same appearance
eight days journey up as at the mouth; then a lake was reached, which took one day to cross;
the river was then followed again for half a day to another lake, which took two days to traverse:
into this lake emptied a stream which they used as a highway to the coast, passing by way of
the Taku River. He said it took four days when they had loads to carry, from the head of canoe
navigation on the Teslintoo to salt water on the Taku Inlet; but when they come light they
take only one to two days. He spoke also of a stream entering the large lake from the east
which came from a distance; but they did not seem to know much about it, and considered it
outside their country. If their time intervals are approximately accurate, they mean that there
are about 200 miles of good river to the first lake, as they ought easily to make 25 miles
a day on the river as I saw it. The lake takes one day to traverse, and is at least 25 miles
long, followed by say 12 of river, which brings us to the large lake, which takes two days
to cross, say 50 or 60 more--in all about 292 miles--say 300 to the head of canoe navigation;
while the distance from the head of Lake Bennet to the junction is only 188. Assuming the course
of the Teslintoo to be nearly south (it is a little to the east of it), and throwing out every
fourth mile for bends, the remainder gives us in arc three degrees and a quarter of latitude,
which, deducted from 61° 40', the latitude of the junction, gives us 58° 25', or nearly the
latitude of Juneau.

"To make sure that I understood the Indian aright, and that he knew what he was speaking about,
I got him to sketch the river and lake, as he described them, on the sand, and repeat the same
several times.

"I afterwards met Mr. T. Boswell, his brother, and another miner, who had spent most of the
summer on the river prospecting, and from them I gathered the following:

"The distance to the first, and only lake which they saw, they put at 175 miles, and the lake
itself they call at least 150 miles long, as it took them four days to row in a light boat
from end to end. The portage to the sea they did not appear to know anything about, but describe
a large bay on the east side of the lake, into which a river of considerable size entered.
This river occupies a wide valley, surrounded by high mountains. They thought this river must
head near Liard River. This account differs materially from that given by the Indian, and to
put them on their guard, I told them what he had told me, but they still persisted in their
story, which I find differs a good deal from the account they gave Dr. Dawson, as incorporated
in his report.

"Many years ago, sixteen I think, a man named Monroe prospected up the Taku and learned from
the Indians something of a large lake not far from that river. He crossed over and found it,
and spent some time in prospecting, and then recrossed to the sea. This man had been at Forty
Mile River, and I heard from the miners there his account of the appearance of the lake, which
amounted generally to this: The Boswells did not know anything about it." It was unfortunate
the Boswells did not remain at Forty Mile all winter, as by a comparison of recollections they
might have arrived at some correct conclusion.

"Conflicting as these descriptions are, one thing is certain: this branch, if it has not the
greater discharge, is the longer and more important of the two, and offers easy and uninterrupted
navigation for more than double the distance which the Lewes does, the cañon being only ninety
miles above the mouth of the Teslintoo. The Boswells reported it as containing much more useful
timber than the Lewes, which indeed one would infer from its lower altitude.

"Assuming this as the main river, and adding its length to the Lewes-Yukon below the junction,
gives upward of 2,200 miles of river, fully two-thirds of which runs through a very mountainous
country, without an impediment to navigation.

"Some indefinite information, was obtained as to the position of this river in the neighborhood
of Marsh Lake tending to show that the distance between them was only about thirty or forty miles.

"Between the Teslintoo and the Big Salmon, so called by the miners, or D'Abbadie by Schwatka,
the distance is thirty-three and a-half miles, in which the Lewes preserves a generally uniform
width and current. For a few miles below the Teslintoo it is a little over the ordinary width,
but then contracts to about two hundred yards which it maintains with little variation. The
current is generally from four to five miles per hour.

"The Big Salmon I found to be about one hundred yards wide near the mouth, the depth not more
than four or five feet, and the current, so far as could be seen, sluggish. None of the miners
I met could give me any information concerning this stream; but Dr. Dawson was more fortunate,
and met a man who had spent most of the summer of 1887 prospecting on it. His opinion was that
it might be navigable for small stern-wheel steamers for many miles. The valley, as seen from
the mouth, is wide, and gives one the impression of being occupied by a much more important
stream. Looking up it, in the distance could be seen many high peaks covered with snow. As
the date was August it is likely they are always so covered, which would make their probable
altitude above the river 5,000 feet or more.

"Dr. Dawson, in his report, incorporates fully the notes obtained from the miners. I will trespass
so far on these as to say that they called the distance to a small lake near the head of the
river, 190 miles from the mouth. This lake was estimated to be four miles in length; another
lake about 12 miles above this was estimated to be twenty-four miles long, and its upper end
distant only about eight miles from the Teslintoo. These distances, if correct, make this river
much more important than a casual glance at it would indicate; this, however, will be more
fully spoken of under its proper head.

"Just below the Big Salmon the Lewes takes a bend of nearly a right angle. Its course from
the junction with the Tahkeena to this point is generally a little east of north; at this point
it turns to nearly west for some distance. Its course between here and its confluence with
the Pelly is north-west, and, I may add, it preserves this general direction down to the confluence
with the Porcupine. The river also changes in another respect; it is generally wider, and often
expands into what might be called lakes, in which are islands. Some of the lakes are of considerable
length, and well timbered.

"To determine which channel is the main one, that is, which carries the greatest volume of
water, or is best available for the purposes of navigation, among these islands, would require
more time than I could devote to it on my way down; consequently I cannot say more than that
I have no reason to doubt that a channel giving six feet or more of water could easily be found.
Whenever, in the main channel, I had reason to think the water shallow, I tried it with my
paddle, but always failed to find bottom, which gives upward of six feet. Of course I often
found less than this, but not in what I considered the main channel.

"Thirty-six and a quarter miles below the Big Salmon, the Little Salmon--the Daly of Schwatka--enters
the Lewes. This river is about 60 yards wide at the mouth, and not more than two or three feet
in depth. The water is clear and of a brownish hue; there is not much current at the mouth,
nor as far as can be seen up the stream. The valley which, from the mouth, does not appear
extensive, bears north-east for some distance, when it appears to turn more to the east. Six
or seven miles up, and apparently on the north side, some high cliffs of red rock, apparently
granite, can be seen. It is said that some miners have prospected this stream, but I could
learn nothing definite about it.

"Lewes River makes a turn here to the south-west, and runs in that direction six miles, when
it again turns to the north-west for seven miles, and then makes a short, sharp turn to the
south and west around a low sandy point, which will, at some day in the near future, be cut
through by the current, which will shorten the river three or four miles.

"Eight miles below Little Salmon River, a large rock called the Eagle's Nest, stands up in
a gravel slope on the easterly bank of the river. It rises about five hundred feet above the
river, and is composed of a light gray stone. What the character of this rock is I could not
observe, as I saw it only from the river, which is about a quarter of a mile distant. On the
westerly side of the river there are two or three other isolated masses of apparently the same
kind of rock. One of them might be appropriately called a mountain; it is south-west from the
Eagle's Nest and distant from it about three miles.

"Thirty-two miles below Eagle's Nest Rock, Nordenskiold River enters from the west. It is an
unimportant stream, being not more than one hundred and twenty feet wide at the mouth, and
only a few inches deep. The valley, as far as can be seen, is not extensive, and, being very
crooked, it is hard to tell what its general direction is.

"The Lewes, between the Little Salmon and the Nordenskiold, maintains a width of from two to
three hundred yards, with an occasional expansion where there are islands. It is serpentine
in its course most of the way, and where the Nordenskiold joins it is very crooked, running
several times under a hill, named by Schwatka Tantalus Butte, and in other places leaving it,
for a distance of eight miles. The distance across from point to point is only half a mile.

"Below this to Five Finger Rapids, so-called from the fact that five large masses of rock stand
in mid-channel, the river assumes its ordinary straightness and width, with a current from
four to five miles per hour. I have already described Five Finger Rapids; I do not think they
will prove anything more than a slight obstruction in the navigation of the river. A boat of
ordinary power would probably have to help herself up with windlass and line in high water.

"Below the rapids, for about two miles, the current is strong--probably six miles per hour--but
the water seems to be deep enough for any boat that is likely to navigate it.

"Six miles below this, as already noticed, Rink Rapids are situated. They are of no great importance,
the westerly half of the stream only being obstructed. The easterly half is not in any way
affected, the current being smooth and the water deep.

"Below Five Finger Rapids about two miles a small stream enters from the east. It is called
by Dr. Dawson Tatshun River. It is not more than 30 or 40 feet wide at the mouth, and contains
only a little clear, brownish water. Here I met the only Indians seen on the river between
Teslintoo and Stewart Rivers. They were engaged in catching salmon at the mouth of the Tatshun,
and were the poorest and most unintelligent Indians it has ever been my lot to meet. It is
needless to say that none of our party understood anything they said, as they could not speak
a word of any language but their own. I tried by signs to get some information from them about
the stream they were fishing in, but failed. I tried in the same way to learn if there were
any more Indians in the vicinity, but again utterly failed. I then tried by signs to find out
how many days it took to go down to Pelly River, but although I have never known these signs
to fail in eliciting information in any other part of the territory, they did not understand.
They appeared to be alarmed by our presence; and, as we had not yet been assured as to the
rumor concerning the trouble between the miners and Indians, we felt a little apprehensive,
but being able to learn nothing from them we had to put our fears aside and proceed blindly.

"Between Five Finger Rapids and Pelly River, fifty-eight and a half-miles, no streams of any
importance enter the Lewes; in fact, with the exception of the Tatshun, it may be said that
none at all enter.

"About a mile below Rink Rapids the river spreads out into a lake-like expanse, with many islands;
this continues for about three miles, when it contracts to something like the usual width;
but bars and small islands are very numerous all the way to Pelly River. About five miles above
Pelly River there is another lake-like expanse filled with islands. The river here for three
or four miles is nearly a mile wide, and so numerous and close are the islands that it is impossible
to tell when floating among them where the shores of the river are. The current, too, is swift,
leading one to suppose the water shallow; but I think even here a channel deep enough for such
boats as will navigate this part of the river can be found. Schwatka named this group of islands
"Ingersoll Islands."

"At the mouth of the Pelly the Lewes is about half a mile wide, and here too there are many
islands, but not in groups as at Ingersoll Islands.

"About a mile below the Pelly, just at the ruins of Fort Selkirk, the Yukon was found to be
565 yards wide; about two-thirds being ten feet deep, with a current of about four and three-quarter
miles per hour; the remaining third was more than half taken up by a bar, and the current between
it and the south shore was very slack.

"Pelly River at its mouth is about two hundred yards wide, and continues this width as far
up as could be seen. Dr. Dawson made a survey and examination of this river, which will be
found in his report already cited, "Yukon District and Northern British Columbia."

"Just here for a short distance the course of the Yukon is nearly west, and on the south side,
about a mile below the mouth of the Lewes, stands all that remains of the only trading post
ever built by white men in the district. This post was established by Robert Campbell, for
the Hudson's Bay Company in the summer of 1848. It was first built on the point of land between
the two rivers, but this location proving untenable on account of flooding by ice jams in the
spring, it was, in the season of 1852, moved across the river to where the ruins now stand.
It appears that the houses composing the post were not finished when the Indians from the coast
on Chilkat and Chilkoot Inlets came down the river to put a stop to the competitive trade which
Mr. Campbell had inaugurated, and which they found to seriously interfere with their profits.
Their method of trade appears to have been then pretty much as it is now--very onesided. What
they found it convenient to take by force they took, and what it was convenient to pay for
at their own price they paid for.

"Rumors had reached the post that the coast Indians contemplated such a raid, and in consequence
the native Indians in the vicinity remained about nearly all summer. Unfortunately, they went
away for a short time, and during their absence the coast Indians arrived in the early morning,
and surprised Mr. Campbell in bed. He makes the total material value of the property of the Italian
colony in New York to be over $60,000,000, and says this value is relatively below that of the
Italian possessions in Saint Louis, Boston, and Chicago. The Italian Chamber of Commerce has
over two hundred members, and has done much to promote the interests of the immigrants. There
is one distinctively Italian Savings Bank, with an aggregate of deposits
approximating $1,100,000, and about 7,000 open accounts.

Sixteen daily and weekly Italian newspapers in New York alone indicate that the people are reading,
and that not all are illiterates by any means. The Italian Hospital, the Italian Benevolent
Institute, and over 150 Italian societies for mutual aid and social improvement--all this in New
York--indicate a degree of enterprise and progress. In the smaller cities the condition of
the Italians is in many respects much better than in the great centers, since the tenement evils
are escaped.

The reports from such cities as Bridgeport, Connecticut, and Schenectady, New York, are most
favorable as to the general character of the Italians as faithful workers and peaceful residents.

[Sidenote:
Increasing Land Values]

In the cities and on the small farms of the South and West the prosperity of the Italians is
marked. They take unproductive land and make it fertile soil for truck-gardening, and have increased
the value of surrounding lands in Louisiana and other states by showing what can be done. If they
can be distributed properly, and gotten out of the congested city wards, there is unquestionably
a future of prosperity for them. A Texas colony described by Signor Rossi, who recently investigated
conditions with view to securing a better distribution by informing intending emigrants as to
the openings for them in agricultural sections, illustrates the success of the Italians as gardeners
and farmers.

[Sidenote: Successful Truck Farmers]

In the neighborhood of San Francisco Italians have cultivated about 250 truck farms. They "obtain
the manure from the city stables gratis, and transform into fertile farms the original sand dunes."
Nearly all our cities where Italians have settled are receiving vegetables and fruit as the
product of Italian labor, and the Italian is first in the market.

They are found on Long Island and Staten Island, in New Jersey and Delaware, in Virginia, and
in all the New England states. Near Memphis, Tennessee, there is a large and noted colony of truck
farmers, and they have done much to remove the prejudice formerly existing against Italian
labor in the South.[58] In this connection we give hearty second to the statesmanlike proposition
made by a Christian worker who has been brought into close touch with the Italians and other
foreign peoples in Brooklyn:[59]

[Sidenote: A Good Proposition]

"Pure philanthropy could not find a better field for the investment of a few hundred thousand
dollars than in the organization of farm and garden colonies a few
miles out from our great city.

On Long Island there are many thousands of acres of light, arable land perfectly adapted to the
raising of small fruits and garden products. Irrigation plants could
be provided at moderate cost, insuring generous crops. The Italian
is prepared by nature, and by training in his own home land, for the
cultivation of the soil. In a small way he has demonstrated his ability
in the land of his adoption to do the very things here suggested.
What he needs is a fair chance.

[Sidenote: Strong Guiding Hand Needed]

[Sidenote:
The Crucial Point]

"What is needed is the guiding hand of 'philanthropy
and five per cent.' to lead out of the congested and squalid tenement
districts thousands of these poor yet industrious people who could
make our deserts of Long Island sand and scrub oak blossom as the
rose. It
would be futile for me to try to ascribe an origin for these fears, my knowledge of their language
and idiosyncrasies being so limited.

"Nothing more was ever done in the vicinity of Fort Selkirk[7] by the Hudson's Bay Company
after these events, and in 1869 the Company was ordered by Capt. Charles W. Raymond, who represented
the United States Government, to evacuate the post at Fort Yukon, he having found that it was
west of the 141st meridian. The post was occupied by the Company, however, for some time after
the receipt of this order, and until Rampart House was built, which was intended to be on British
territory, and to take the trade previously done at Fort Yukon.

[Footnote 7: This is now a winter port for steamboats of the North American Transportation
and Trading Company, plying the Yukon and its tributaries. There is also a trading post here
owned by Harper & Ladue.]

"Under present conditions the Company cannot very well compete with the Alaska Commercial Company,
whose agents do the only trade in the district,[8] and they appear to have abandoned--for the
present at least--all attempt to do any trade nearer to it than Rampart House to which point,
notwithstanding the distance and difficulties in the way, many of the Indians on the Yukon
make a trip every two or three years to procure goods in exchange for their furs. The clothing
and blankets brought in by the Hudson's Bay Company they claim are much better than those traded
on their own river by the Americans. Those of them that I saw who had any English blankets
exhibited them with pride, and exclaimed 'good,' They point to an American blanket in contempt,
with the remark 'no good,' and speak of their clothing in the same way.

[Footnote 8: Since the date of this report the North American Transportation and Trading Company,
better known in the Yukon valley as "Captain Healy's Company," has established a number of
posts on the river.]

"On many maps of Alaska a place named 'Reed's House' is shown on or near the upper waters of
Stewart River. I made enquiries of all whom I thought likely to know anything concerning this
post, but failed to elicit any information showing that there ever had been such a place. I
enquired of Mr. Reid, who was in the Company's service with Mr. Campbell at Fort Selkirk, and
after whom I thought, possibly, the place had been called, but he told me he knew of no such
post, but that there was a small lake at some distance in a northerly direction from Fort Selkirk,
where fish were procured. A sort of shelter had been made at that point for the fishermen,
and a few furs might have been obtained there, but it was never regarded as a trading post.

"Below Fort Selkirk, the Yukon River is from five to six hundred yards broad, and maintains
this width down to White River, a distance of ninety-six miles. Islands are numerous, so much
so that there are very few parts of the river where there are not one or more in sight. Many
of them are of considerable size, and nearly all are well timbered. Bars are also numerous,
but almost all are composed of gravel, so that navigators will not have to complain of shifting
sand bars. The current as a general thing, is not so rapid as in the upper part of the river,
averaging about four miles per hour. The depth in the main channel was always found to be more
than six feet.

"From Pelly River to within twelve miles of White River the general course of the river is
a little north of west; it then turns to the north, and the general course as far as the site
of Fort Reliance is due north.

"White River enters the main river from the west. At the mouth it is about two hundred yards
wide, but a great part of it is filled with ever-shifting sand-bars, the main volume of water
being confined to a channel not more than one hundred yards in width. The current is very strong,
certainly not less than eight miles per hour. The color of the water bears witness to this,
as it is much the muddiest that I have ever seen.[9]

[Footnote 9: The White River very probably flows over volcanic deposits as its sediments would
indicate; no doubt this would account for the discoloration of its waters. The volcanic ash
appears to cover a great extent of the Upper Yukon basin drained by the Lewes and Pelly Rivers.
The valley as far as can be seen from the mouth, runs about due west for a distance of eight
miles; it then appears to bear to the south-west; it is about two miles wide where it joins
the Pelly valley and apparently keeps the same width as far as it can be seen.

"Mr. Harper, of the firm of Harper & Ladue, went up this river with sleds in the fall of 1872
a distance of fifty or sixty miles. He describes it as possessing the same general features
all the way up, with much clay soil along its banks. Its general course, as sketched by him
on a map of mine, is for a distance of about thirty miles a little north-west, thence south-west
thirty or thirty-five miles, when it deflects to the north-west running along the base of a
high mountain ridge. If the courses given are correct it must rise somewhere near the head
of Forty Mile River; and if so, its length is not at all in keeping with the volume of its
discharge, when compared with the known length and discharge of other rivers in the territory.
Mr. Harper mentioned an extensive flat south of the mountain range spoken of, across which
many high mountain peaks could be seen. One of these he thought must be Mount St. Elias, as
it overtopped all the others; but, as Mount St. Elias is about one hundred and eighty miles
distant, his conclusion is not tenable. From his description of this mountain it must be more
than twice the height of the highest peaks seen anywhere on the lower river, and consequently
must be ten or twelve thousand feet above the sea. He stated that the current in the river
was very swift, as far as he ascended, and the water muddy. The water from this river, though
probably not a fourth of the volume of the Yukon, discolors the water of the latter completely;
and a couple of miles, below the junction the whole river appears almost as dirty as White River.

"Between White and Stewart Rivers, ten miles, the river spreads out to a mile and upwards in
width, and is a maze of islands and bars. The survey was carried down the easterly shore, and
many of the channels passed through barely afforded water enough to float the canoes. The main
channel is along the westerly shore, down which the large boat went, and the crew reported
plenty of water.

"Stewart River enters from the east in the middle of a wide valley, with low hills on both
sides, rising on the north sides in steps or terraces to distant hills of considerable height.
The river half a mile or so above the mouth, is two hundred yards in width. The current is
slack and the water shallow and clear, but dark colored.

"While at the mouth I was fortunate enough to meet a miner who had spent the whole of the summer
of 1887 on the river and its branches prospecting and exploring. He gave me a good deal of
information of which I give a summary. He is a native of New Brunswick, Alexander McDonald
by name, and has spent some years mining in other places, but was very reticent about what
he had made or found. Sixty or seventy miles up the Stewart a large creek enters from the south
which he called Rose Bud Creek or River, and thirty or forty miles further up a considerable
stream flows from the north-east, which appears to be Beaver River, as marked on the maps of
that part of the country. From the head of this stream he floated down on a raft taking five
days to do so. He estimated his progress at forty or fifty miles each day, which gives a length
of from two hundred to two hundred and fifty miles. This is probably an over-estimate, unless
the stream is very crooked, which, he stated, was not the case. As much of his time would be
taken up in prospecting, I should call thirty miles or less a closer estimate of his progress.
This river is from fifty to eighty yards wide and was never more than four or five feet deep,
often being not more than two or three; the current, he said, was not at all swift. Above the
mouth of this stream the main river is from one hundred to one hundred and thirty yards wide
with an even current and clear water. Sixty or seventy miles above the last-mentioned branch
another large branch joins, which is possibly the main river. At the head of it he found a
lake nearly thirty miles long, and averaging a mile and a half in width, which he called Mayhew
Lake, after one of the partners in the firm of Harper, McQuestion & Co.

"Thirty miles or so above the forks on the other branch there are falls, which McDonald estimated
to be from one to two hundred feet in height. I met several parties who had seen these falls,
and they corroborate this estimate of their height. McDonald went on past the falls to the
head of this branch and found terraced gravel hills to the west and north; he crossed them
to the north and found a river flowing northward. On this he embarked on a raft and floated
down it for a day or two, thinking it would turn to the west and join the Stewart, but finding
it still continuing north, and acquiring too much volume to be any of the branches he had seen
while passing up the Stewart, he returned to the point of his departure, and after prospecting
among the hills around the head of the river, he started westward, crossing a high range of
mountains composed principally of shales with many thin seams of what he called quartz, ranging
from one to six inches in thickness.

"On the west side of this range he found a river flowing out of what he called Mayhew Lake,
and crossing this got to the head of Beaver River, which he descended as before mentioned.

"It is probable the river flowing northwards, on which he made a journey and returned, was
a branch of Peel River. He described the timber on the gravel terraces of the watershed as
small and open. He was alone in this unknown wilderness all summer, not seeing even any of
the natives. There are few men so constituted as to be capable of isolating themselves in such
a manner. Judging from all I could learn it is probable a light-draught steamboat could navigate
nearly all of Stewart Iver and its tributaries.

"From Stewart River to the site of Fort Reliance,[10] seventy-three and a quarter miles, the
Yukon is broad and full of islands. The average width is between a half and three quarters
of a mile, but there are many expansions where it is over a mile in breadth; however, in these
places it cannot be said that the waterway is wider than at other parts of the river, the islands
being so large and numerous. In this reach no streams of any importance enter.

[Footnote 10: This was at one time a trading post occupied by Messrs. Harper & McQuestion.]

"About thirteen miles below Stewart River a large valley joins that of the river, but the stream
occupying it is only a large creek. This agrees in position with what has been called Sixty
Mile Creek, which was supposed to be about that distance above Fort Reliance, but it does not
agree with descriptions which I received of it; moreover as Sixty Mile Creek is known to be
a stream of considerable length, this creek would not answer its description.

"Twenty-two and a half miles from Stewart River another and larger creek enters from the same
side; it agrees with the descriptions of Sixty Mile Creek, and I have so marked it on my map.
This stream is of no importance, except for what mineral wealth may be found on it.[11]

[Footnote 11: Sixty Mile Creek is about one hundred miles long, very crooked, with a swift
current and many rapids, and is therefore not easy to ascend.

Miller, Glacier, Gold, Little Gold and Bedrock Creeks are all tributaries of Sixty Mile. Some
of the richest discoveries in gold so far made in the interior since 1894 have been upon these
creeks, especially has this been the case upon the two first mentioned. There is a claim upon
Miller Creek owned by Joseph Boudreau from which over $100,000 worth of gold is said to have
been taken out.

Freight for the mines is taken up Forty Mile Creek in summer for a distance of 30 miles, then
portaged across to the heads of Miller and Glacier Creeks. In the winter it is hauled in by dogs.

The trip from Cudahy to the post at the mouth of Sixty Mile River is made by ascending Forty
Mile River a small distance, making a short portage to Sixty Mile River and running down with
its swift current. Coming back on the Yukon, nearly the whole of the round trip is made down
stream.

Indian Creek enters the Yukon from the east about 30 miles below Sixty Mile. It is reported
to be rich in gold, but owing to the scarcity of supplies its development has been retarded.

At the mouth of Sixty Mile Creek a townsite of that name is located, it is the headquarters
for upwards of 100 miners and where they more or less assemble in the winter months.

Messrs. Harper & Co. have a trading post and a saw-mill on an island at the mouth of the creek;
both, of which are in charge of Mr. J. Ladue, one of the partners of the firm, and who was
at one time in the employ of the Alaska Commercial Company.]

"Six and a half miles above Port Reliance the Thron-Diuck[12] River of the Indians (Deer River
of Schwatka) enters from the east. It is a small river about forty yards wide at the mouth,
and shallow; the water is clear and transparent, and of beautiful blue color. The Indians catch
great numbers of salmon here. They had been fishing shortly before my arrival, and the river,
for some distance up, was full of salmon traps.

[Footnote 12: Dawson City is situated at the mouth of the Thron-Diuck now known as Klondyke,
and although it was located only a few months ago it is the scene of great activity. Very rich
deposits of gold have been lately found on Bonanza Creek and other affluents of the Thron-Diuck.]

"A miner had prospected up this river for an estimated distance of forty miles, in the season
of 1887. I did not see him, but got some of his information at second hand. The water being
so beautifully clear I thought it must come through a large lake not far up; but as far as
he had gone no lakes were seen. He said the current was comparatively slack, with an occasional
'ripple' or small rapid. Where he turned back the river is surrounded by high mountains, which
were then covered with snow, which accounts for the purity and clearness of the water.

"It appears that the Indians go up this stream a long distance to hunt, but I could learn nothing
definite as to their statements concerning it.

"Twelve and a half miles below Fort Reliance, the Chandindu River, as named by Schwatka, enters
from the east. It is thirty to forty yards wide at the mouth, very shallow, and for half a
mile up is one continuous rapid. Its valley is wide and can be seen for a long distance looking
north-eastward from the mouth.

"Between Fort Reliance and Forty Mile River (called Cone Hill River by Schwatka) the Yukon
assumes its normal appearance, having fewer islands and being narrower, averaging four to six
hundred yards wide, and the current being more regular. This stretch is forty-six miles long,
but was estimated by the traders at forty, from which the Forty Mile River took its name.

"Forty Mile River[13] joins the main river from the west. Its general course as far up as the
International Boundary, a distance of twenty-three miles, is south-west; after this it is reported
by the miners to run nearer south. Many of them claim to have ascended this stream for more
than one hundred miles, and speak of it there as quite a large river. They say that at that
distance it has reached the level of the plateau, and the country adjoining it they describe
as flat and swampy, rising very little above the river. It is only a short distance across
to the Tanana River--a large tributary of the Yukon--which is here described as an important
stream. However, only about twenty-three miles of Forty Mile River are in Canada; and the upper
part of it and its relation to other rivers in the district have no direct interest for us.

[Footnote 13: Forty Mile townsite is situated on the south side of the Forty Mile River at
its junction with the Yukon. The Alaska Commercial Company has a station here which was for
some years in charge of L.N. McQuestion; there are also several blacksmith shops, restaurants,
billiard halls, bakeries, an opera house and so on. Rather more than half a mile below Forty
Mile townsite the town of Cudahy was founded on the north side of Forty Mile River in the summer
of 1892. It is named after a well known member of the North American Transportation and Trading
Company. In population and extent of business the town bears comparison with its neighbor across
the river. The opposition in trade has been the means of very materially reducing the cost
of supplies and living. The North American Transportation and Trading Company has erected a
saw-mill and some large warehouses. It should be watchfully protected from sun and rain. If
a farmer has no shed under which to keep his manure, he should scatter it on his fields as fast
as it is made.

He should understand also that liquid manure is of more value than solid, because that important
plant food, nitrogen, is found almost wholly in the liquid portion. Some of the phosphoric acid
and considerable amounts of the potash are also found in the liquid manure. Hence economy requires
that none of this escape either by leakage or by fermentation. Sometimes one can detect the
smell of ammonia in the stable. This ammonia is formed by the decomposition of the liquid manure,
and its loss should be checked by sprinkling some floats, acid phosphate, or muck over the stable
floor.

Many farmers find it desirable to buy fertilizers to use with the manure made on the farm.
In this case it is helpful to understand the composition, source, and availability of the various
substances composing commercial fertilizers. The three most valuable things in commercial
fertilizers are nitrogen, potash, and phosphoric acid.

The nitrogen is obtained from (1) nitrate of soda mined in Chile, (2) ammonium sulphate, a by-product
of the gas works, (3) dried blood and other by-products of the slaughter-houses, and (4) cotton-seed
meal. Nitrate of soda is soluble in water and may therefore be washed away before being used by
plants. For this reason it should be applied in small quantities and at intervals of a few weeks.

Potash
is obtained in Germany, where it is found in several forms.

It is put on the market as muriate of potash, sulphate of potash, kainite, which contains salt
as an impurity, and in other impure forms. Potash is found also in unleached wood ashes.

Phosphoric acid is found in various rocks of Tennessee, Florida, and
South Carolina, and also to a large extent in bones.

The rocks or bones are usually treated with sulphuric acid. This treatment changes the phosphoric
acid into a form ready for plant use.

These three kinds of plant food are ordinarily all that we need to supply. In some cases, however,
lime has to be added. Besides being a plant food itself, lime helps most soils by improving
the structure of the grains; by sweetening the soil, thereby aiding
the little living germs called bacteria; by hastening the decay of
organic matter; and by setting free the potash that is locked up in
the soil.

CHAPTER II

THE SOIL AND THE PLANT

SECTION VIII. ROOTS

You have perhaps observed the regularity of arrangement in the twigs and branches of trees. Now
pull up the roots of a plant, as, for example, sheep sorrel, Jimson weed, or some other plant.
Note the branching of the roots.

In these there is no such regularity as is seen in the twig. Trace the rootlets to their finest
tips. How small, slender, and delicate they are! Still we do not see the finest of them, for
in taking the plant from the ground we tore the most delicate away.
In order to see the real construction of a root we must grow one so
that we may examine it uninjured. To do this, sprout some oats in
a germinator or in any box in which one glass side has been arranged
and allow the oats to grow till they are two or more inches high.
Now examine the roots and you will see very fine hairs, similar to
those shown in the accompanying figure, forming a fuzz over the surface
of the roots near the tips. This fuzz is made of small hairs standing
so close together that there are often as many as 38,200 on a single
square inch. Fig. 17 shows how a root looks when it has been cut crosswise
into what is known as a cross section. The figure is much increased
in size. You can see how the root-hairs extend from the root in every
direction. This so provoked him that
he gathered all his strength and energy for one grand effort and gave her a kick that sent
her clean across the river. On landing she was converted into the mass of rock which remains
to this day a memorial of her viciousness and a warning to all future scolds. The metamorphosis
was effected by the Tshaumen, but how the necessary force was acquired to send her across the
river (here about half a mile wide), or whether the kick was administered by the Tshaumen or
the husband, my narrator could not say. He was altogether at a loss to account for conversion
of the husband into the mass of rock on the west side of the river; nor can I offer any theory
unless it is that he was petrified by astonishment at the result.

"Such legends as this would be of interest to ethnologists if they could be procured direct
from the Indians, but repeated by men who have little or no knowledge of the utility of legendary
lore, and less sympathy with it, they lose much of their value.

"Between Forty Mile River and the boundary line no stream of any size joins the Yukon; in fact,
there is only one stream, which some of the miners have named Sheep Creek, but as there is
another stream further down the river, called by the same name, I have named it Coal Creek.
It is five miles below Forty Mile, and comes in from the east, and is a large creek, but not
at all navigable. On it some extensive coal seams were seen, which will be more fully referred
to further on.

       *       *       *       *       *

"At the boundary the river is somewhat contracted, and measures only 1,280 feet across in the
winter; but in summer, at ordinary water level, it would be about one hundred feet wider. Immediately
below the boundary it expands to its usual width, which is about 2,000 feet. The area of the
cross section measured is 22,268 feet, the sectional area of the Teslintoo, as determined by
Dr. Dawson and already referred to, is 3,809 feet; that of the Lewes at the Teslintoo, from
the same authority, is 3,015 feet. Had the above cross-section been reduced to the level at
which the water ordinarily stands during the summer months, instead of to the height at which
it stood in the middle of September when it was almost at its lowest, the sectional area would
have been at least 50 per cent more, and at spring flood level about double the above area.

"It is a difficult matter to determine the actual discharge at the place of the cross-section,
owing to the irregularity in the depth and current, the latter being in the deep channel at
the east side, when I tried it in September, approximately 4.8 miles per hour; while on the
bar in midstream it was not more than 2.5 miles per hour; and between the bar and the westerly
shore there was very little current.

"The river above this for some miles was no better for the purpose of cross-section measurement.
At the boundary it is narrow and clear of bars and islands for some miles, but here I did not
have an opportunity to determine the rate of the current before the river froze up, and after
it froze the drift ice was jammed and piled so high that it would have been an almost endless
task to cut holes through it.

"The current from the boundary down to the confluence with the Porcupine is said to be strong
and much the same as that above; from the Porcupine down, for a distance of five or six hundred
miles it is called medium and the remainder easy.

"From Stewart River to the mouth of the Yukon is about 1,650 miles, and the only difficult
place in all this distance is the part near the confluence with the Porcupine, which has evidently
been a lake in past ages but is now filled with islands; it is said that the current here is
swift, and the channels generally narrow, rendering navigation difficult."

CHAPTER III.

ADVICE TO BEGINNERS.

Men who are thinking of going to the Klondyke regions and taking a trip of this character for
the first time, will do well to carefully read the chapter on "Outfit for Miners." It is a
great mistake to take anything except what is necessary; the trip is a long arduous one, and
a man should not add one pound of baggage to his outfit that can be dispensed with. I have
known men who have loaded themselves up with rifles, revolvers and shot-guns. This is entirely
unnecessary. Revolvers will get you into trouble, and there is no use of taking them with you,
as large game of any character is rarely found on the trip. I have prospected through this
region for some years and have only seen one moose. You will not see any large game whatever
on your trip from Juneau to Dawson City, therefore do not take any firearms along.

You will find a list of the implements for the miner in the chapter on "Outfit for Miners."

The miners here are a very mixed class of people. They represent many nationalities and come
from all climates. Their lives are certainly not enviable.

The regulation miner's cabin is 12 by 14 with walls six feet high and gables eight feet in
height. The roof is heavily earthed and the cabin is generally kept very warm. Two, or sometimes
three or four men will live in a house of this size. The ventilation is usually bad, the windows
being very small. Those miners who do not work their claims during the winter confine themselves
to these small huts most of the time. Very often they become indolent and careless, only eating
those things which are most easily cooked or prepared. During the busy time in summer when
they are shovelling in, they work hard and for long hours, sparing little time for eating and
much less for cooking.

This manner of living is quite common amongst beginners, and soon leads to debility and sometimes
to scurvy. Old miners have learned from experience to value health more than gold, and they
therefore spare no expense in procuring the best and most varied outfit of food that can be
obtained.

In a cold climate such as this, where it is impossible to get fresh vegetables and fruits,
it is most important that the best substitutes for these should be provided. Nature helps to
supply these wants by growing cranberries and other wild fruits in abundance, but men in summer
are usually too busy to avail themselves of these.

The diseases met with in this country are dyspepsia, anaemia, scurvy caused by improperly cooked
food, sameness of diet, overwork, want of fresh vegetables, overheated and badly ventilated
houses; rheumatism, pneumonia, bronchitis, enteritis, cystitis and other acute diseases, from
exposure to wet and cold; debility and chronic diseases, due to excesses.

Men coming to Klondyke should be sober, strong and healthy. They should be practical men, able
to adapt themselves quickly to their surroundings. Special care should be taken to see that
their lungs are sound, that they are free from rheumatism and rheumatic tendency, and that
their joints, especially knee joints, are strong and have never been weakened by injury, synovitis
or other disease. It is also very important to consider their temperaments. Men should be of
cheerful, hopeful dispositions and willing workers. Those of sullen, morose natures, although
they may be good workers, are very apt, as soon as the novelty of the country wears off, to
become dissatisfied, pessimistic and melancholy.

CHAPTER IV.

OUTFIT FOR MINERS.

In giving any advice for outfits for miners, I should first state that it is a great mistake
to purchase anything whatever before arriving at Juneau, Alaska. This has been a supply point
for that region for upwards of ten years, and store-keepers and supply companies carry in stock
exactly what is necessary for the miners. You will find that their prices are reasonable, considering
the difference in cost of transportation at any point you might decide to purchase from in
the United States; in fact it is the saving of money to buy in Juneau.

In the matter of clothing, of course, it must be left to the individual taste and means of
the purchaser, but the miners usually adopt the native costume of the region. The boots are
generally made by the coast Indians and are of different varieties. The water boot is made
of seal and walrus. It is important to take a pair of rubber boots along. Additional boots
can be purchased at Dawson City. Not wishing to spend the ten days there, doing absolutely nothing,
we decided to go farther south, to Tesbel Bay, and try our luck at recruiting there, as we had
another boy, Macao, from that district. George gave leave to Bourbaki, who had been somewhat
savage these last days, to stay at home till our return, and he seemed delighted to have a
holiday. We were all the more surprised when, just before we weighed anchor, Bourbaki came back,
shaking hands without a word. We were quite touched by this remarkable sign of his affection,
pardoned his many objectionable ways, and never thought that perhaps he might have ample reason not
to feel altogether safe and comfortable at home.

The wind being contrary, we had to tack about all night long without
advancing.

Squalls rushed over the water, and then, again, the breeze died down completely, only black, jagged
clouds drifted westward across the sky, and here and there a few stars were visible. The cutter's
deck was crowded with stuff, and there seemed less room for us than
ever, except in the hateful cabin.

The boys sang monotonously "for wind," quite convinced that the next breeze would be due to
their efforts.

A fat old man sang
all night long in falsetto
in three notes;
 it was unbearably
 silly and irritating,
 yet one could hardly stop
 the poor devil and
 rob him of his
 only pleasure in that
 dark night. We felt
 damp, restless and sleepless,
and tried in vain to find some comfort.

Next evening we reached the entrance of Tesbel Bay, and the wind
having died down, we had to work our way in with the oars, a slow
and hard task.

Bourbaki yelled and pulled at the oars with all his might, encouraging the others. These are
the joys of sailing.

Tesbel Bay is framed on two sides by high cliffs.


The following tools should he brought as part of the outfit:--These will be found absolutely
necessary to build a boat at Lake Lindeman:--

1 jack plane, 1 whip saw, 1 cross-cut saw, 1 axe, 1 hatchet, 1 hunting-knife. 6 pounds of assorted
nails, 1 pound of oakum, 5 pounds of pitch, 150 feet of rope, 1 Juneau sled.

It is also necessary to have one good duck tent and a rubber blanket.

A good piece of mosquito netting will not be heavy and will also be very great comfort on the trip.

Do not forget to put in a good supply of matches, and take a small supply of fishing tackle,
hooks, etc.

It is very important that you have a pair of snow glasses to guard against snow blindness.

It will be interesting to know the prices at Dawson City for supplies:

When I left in June, 1896.

Flour was sold in 50 pound bags at $6.00 a bag.

Fresh beef was supplied at 50 cents a pound.

Bacon was 40 cents.

Coffee was 50 cents per pound.

Brown sugar was 20 cents per pound and granulated sugar was 25 cents a pound.

Condensed milk was 50 cents per can.

Pick axes were $6.00 each.

Miners' shovels were $2.00 each.

Lumber right at Dawson City was $130.00 per thousand feet undressed, and $150.00 per thousand
feet dressed.

It is well perhaps to advise the traveller to supply himself with a small medicine box which
can be purchased in Juneau, but it is not necessary if he enjoys good rugged health.

On arriving at Dawson City, luxuries will be found to be very high; what is to be considered
a very cheap cigar in the United States, two for 5 cents, sells in Dawson City at 50 cents each.

Liquors command very high prices. Whisky sells in the saloons for 50 cents a glass, and fluctuates
from $15.00 to $25.00 per gallon, according to the supplies received from the at present overtaxed
transportation companies. There was about 12,000 gallons of whisky imported into the territory
from Canada the past year. Smoking tobacco was selling at $1.50 a pound and good plug cut and
fancy tobacco was selling at $2.00 a pound.

The demand for medicine is very light, but the local traders carry a small stock of patent
and proprietary medicines. 

Once admitted at Ellis Island, the alien is free to go where he will;
or rather, where he can, for his place of residence is restricted,
after all.

If he is an Italian, he will naturally and almost of necessity go
to one of the Little Italies; if a Jew, to the ghetto of the East
Side; if a Bohemian, to Little Bohemia; and so on.

In other words, he will go, naturally and almost inevitably, to the colonies which tend to perpetuate
race customs and prejudices, and to prevent assimilation

.
 The ground dug up was found to measure but 40 square feet.
This was an exceptional find. The men are of course working the claim and had 460 square feet
on the claim still to work out when I left for the East.

People in the East or elsewhere can hardly realize what a small space a mining claim is in
this vast and comparatively unexplored territory.

William Leggatt on Claim No. 13, Eldorado, together with William Gates and a miner named Shoots,
purchased their claim from a miner named Stewart, and his partner, for the sum of $45,000.00.
They did not have money to make the payment in cash but made a first payment of $2,000.00 with
the agreement to pay the balance of the purchase price, $43,000.00, prior to July 1st, 1897.
They sunk a shaft and commenced taking out $1,000.00 per day.

They worked the pay dirt until about May 15, 1897, when they found that they had taken out
$62,000.00, and the space of the claim worked was only twenty-four square feet.

A young man who went to the Klondyke recently writes that he is taking out $1,800.00 a day
from his claim.

It is stated on good authority that one claim yielded $90,000 in 45 feet up and down the stream.
Clarence Berry bought out his two partners, paying one $35,000 and the other $60,000, and has
taken up $140,000 from the winter dump alone. Peter Wiborg has purchased more ground. He purchased
his partner's interest in a claim, paying $42,000. A man by the name of Wall has all he thinks
he wants, and is coming out. He sold his interests for $50,000. Nearly all the gold is found
in the creek bed on the bed rock, but there are a few good bench diggings.

Perhaps the most interesting reading in the Mining Record is the letters written by men in
the Klondyke to friends in Juneau. Here is one from "Casey" Moran:

DAWSON, March 20, 1897.

"FRIEND GEORGE: Don't pay any attention to what any one says, but come in at your earliest
opportunity. My God! it is appalling to hear the truth, but nevertheless the world has never
produced its equal before. Well, come. That's all. Your friend,

"CASEY."

Burt Shuler, writing from Klondyke under date of June 5, says:

"We have been here but a short time and we all have money. Provisions are much higher than
they were two years ago and clothing is clean out of sight. SERVANT.--Oh sir! that is all very
well; but pray excuse me for this time.

HUSBAND.--No, no! you must please do this for me; for I will not so much as let her point a finger
at you.

SERVANT.--Please, please let me off!

HUSBAND.--Gracious goodness! The fellow heeds what my wife says, and won't heed what I say
myself! Do you mean that you have made up your mind to brave me?

[Threatening
to beat him.

SERVANT.--Oh! I will obey.

HUSBAND.--No, no! you mean
to brave me!

SERVANT.--Oh no, sir! surely I have no choice but to
obey.

HUSBAND.--Really and truly?

SERVANT.--Yes, really and truly.

HUSBAND.--My
anger was only a feint. Well, then, take my place, please.

SERVANT.--Yes,
to be sure; if it is your desire, I will do so. I have seen gold dust until it seems almost as cheap as sawdust. If you are coming
in, come prepared to stay two years at least; bring plenty of clothing and good rubber boots."

Thus far little attempt to mine quartz has been made in the interior of Alaska and the Northwest,
although many quartz croppings have been seen. It would cost too much to take in the machinery
and to build a plant until transportation facilities are better. In time, however, quartz mining
operations will commence, for the placer mines were washed down from the mother veins somewhere.
If the washings have made the richest placers in the world, what must the mother veins be?
One dares hardly to imagine.

This is a brief description of the gold region in the Northwest.

For further and more detailed information on Routes and Distances, Transportations, Mining
Laws, How to Stake a Claim, Where to Register Your Claim, Modes of Placer Mining and Quartz
Mining, Return of Gold from the Diggings, Mortality, Cost of Living, etc., I refer the reader
to my book on this subject entitled "Klondyke Facts," a work of about 224 pages. It is published
in paper covers at 50 cents a copy with maps and illustrations, and is sent postpaid by the
publishers on receipt of 50 cents.

AMERICAN TECHNICAL BOOK CO., 45 Vesey Street, New York, N.Y., U.S.A.

       *       *       *       *       *

*ABC of Electricity*. Now in its 62d thousand. By WM. H. MEADOWCROFT. 1 volume, 12mo, cloth,
50 cents Fully illustrated.

This excellent primary book has taken the first place in elementary scientific works. It has
received the endorsement of Thomas A Edison. MITSUNAKA.--Why stayed'st thou my hand? Haste thou
now and slay Bijiyau with this my sword.

NAKAMITSU.--Your commands shall be obeyed. [He retires into another apartment.] What is this horror
unutterable?

'Tis no mere passing fit of anger. What shall I do?--Ah! I have it! I have it! I will take upon
myself to contrive some plan for his escape. Kauzhiyu, Kauzhiyu, art thou there?

KAUZHIYU.--Behold me at thy service.

NAKAMITSU.--Where is my lord Bijiyau?
KAUZHIYU.--All my prayers have been unavailing to make him leave
this spot.

NAKAMITSU.--But why will he not seek refuge somewhere?
Here am I come from my lord, his father, as a messenger of death!
[Bijiyau shows himself.

BIJIYAU.--That I am alive here at this moment
is thy doing.

Everyone has been waiting for this work to give full information of Professor Rontgen's marvellous
discovery. The work explains in clear and simple style how these extraordinary pictures are
taken through solids. Full description is given of the apparatus used, and the text is profusely
illustrated with half tone illustrations giving fac-simile copies of the pictures taken from
the negatives of the author. The subjects are varied.

*The A B C of the X Ray*. By WM.H. MEADOWCROFT. 1 volume, 12mo, cloth and gold, 75 cloth; paper,
50 cents.

The first primary work on the subject. A book for the people. The author of "A B C of Electricity,"
showed clearly in that work his ability to explain a technical subject for the laymen who know
nothing of scientific terms. He has written this work about the X Ray in his usual clear and
simple style, and a wide circulation of this useful book is assured. The texts of the author
is beautifully embellished with fine engravings, and nothing is omitted that will give the
public a clear knowledge of this remarkable discovery of Prof. Rontgen. The public would do
well to secure both of these important works.

*The Art of Cooking by Gas*. By MARION HARLAND 226 pages, 12mo, paper, 50 cents; cloth, 75 cents.

A timely work by a recognized authority. This new book shows the economy, cleanliness and comfort
of cooking by gas There are nearly 1000 recipes which are excellent. This valuable work will
save its price many times to all housekeepers.

Any of the above books sent, postpaid, on receipt of price

