On the Tuesday, in proper course, he was due at Miss Baker's. But for this turn, Miss Baker
must be neglected. At the same hour he again knocked at the door of the Paragon, and was again
admitted, and now Miss Todd was all alone. She was rarely left so very long, and the precious
moments must be seized at once. Sir Lionel, with that military genius which was so peculiarly
his own, determined to use his yesterday's defeat in aid of to-day's victory. He would make
even Mrs. Shortpointz serviceable.

When gentlemen past sixty make love to ladies past forty, it may be supposed that they are
not so dilatory in their proceedings as younger swains and younger maidens. Time is then behind
them, not before them; and urges them on to quick decisions. It may be presumed, moreover,
that this pair knew their own minds.

"How cruel you were to me yesterday!" said Sir Lionel, seating himself not very close to her--nor
yet very far from her. 

"Then what happened?" I exacted.

I waited, knowing what was coming, but I dreaded to hear it.

"He
gave him a threshing, ma'am," I heard Hilton's voice saying, far away,
as though it came to me over a long-distance telephone on a wet night. I wished
that Mrs. Shortpointz was hanging--anywhere except on my arm. I did, indeed."

"Ha! ha! ha! Poor Mrs. Shortpointz! And she was so full of you last night. The beau ideal of
manly beauty! that was what she called you. She did indeed. Ha! ha! ha!"

"She was very kind."

"And then we all quizzed her about you; and Miss Finesse called her Lady Bertram. You can't
think how funny we old women are when we get together. There wasn't a gentleman in the room--except
Mr. Fuzzybell; and he never seems to make any difference. But I tell you what, Sir Lionel;
a certain friend of yours didn't seem to like it when we called Mrs. Shortpointz Lady Bertram."

"And were you that friend, Miss Todd?"

"I! Ha! ha! ha! No; not I, but Miss Baker. And I'll tell you what, Sir Lionel," said Miss Todd,
intending to do a kinder act for Miss Baker than Miss Baker would have done for her. "And I'll
tell you what; Miss Baker is the nicest-looking woman of her time of life in Littlebath. I
don't care who the other is. I never saw her look better than she did last night; never." This
was good-natured on the part of Miss Todd; but it sounded in Sir Lionel's ears as though it
did not augur well for his hopes.

"Yes; she's very nice; very nice indeed. But I know one, Miss Todd, that's much nicer." And
Sir Lionel drew his chair a little nearer.

"What, Mrs. Shortpointz, I suppose. Ha! ha! ha! Well, every man to his taste."

"I wonder whether I may speak to you seriously, Miss Todd, for five minutes?"

"Oh laws, yes; why not? But don't tell me any secrets, Sir Lionel; for I shan't keep them."

"I hope what I may say need not be kept a secret long. You joke with me about Miss Baker; but
you cannot really believe that my affections are placed there? You must, I think, have guessed
by this time--"

"I am the worst hand in the world at guessing anything."

"I am not a young man, Miss Todd--"

"No; and she isn't a young woman. She's fifty. It would all be very proper in that respect."

"I'm not thinking of Miss Baker, Miss Todd."

"Dear! well now, I really thought you were thinking of her. And I'll tell you this, Sir Lionel;
if you want a wife to look after you, you couldn't do better than think of her--a nice, good-tempered,
cheerful, easy, good-looking woman; with none of the Littlebath nastiness about her;--and a
little money too, I've no doubt. How could you do better than think of her?" Would it not have
softened Miss Baker's heart towards her friend if she could have heard all this?

"Ah; you say this to try me. I know you do."

"Try you! no; but I want you to try Miss Baker."

"Well; I am going to make an attempt of that kind, certainly; certainly I am. But it is not
with Miss Baker, as I cannot but think you know;" and then he paused to collect his ideas,
and take in at a coup d'oeil the weak point to which his attack should be turned. Meanwhile,
Miss Todd sat silent. She knew by this time what was coming; and knew also, that in courtesy
the gentleman should be allowed to have his say. Sir Lionel drew his chair again nearer--it
was now very near--and thus began:--

"Dear Sarah!--" How he had found out that Miss Todd's name was Sarah it might be difficult
to say. Her signature was S. Todd; and Sir Lionel had certainly never heard her called by her
Christian name. But facts were with him. She undoubtedly had been christened Sarah.

"Dear Sarah!--"

"Ha! ha! ha! Ha! ha! ha!" laughed Miss Todd, with terrible loudness, with a shaking of her
sides, throwing herself backwards and forwards in the corner of her sofa. It was not civil,
and so Sir Lionel felt. When you first call your lady-love by her Christian name, you do not
like to have the little liberty made a subject of ridicule--you feel it by far less if the
matter be taken up seriously against you as a crime on your part.

"Ha! ha! ha!" continued Miss Todd, roaring in her laughter louder than ever; "I don't think,
Sir Lionel, I was ever called Sarah before since the day I was born; and it does sound so funny.
Sarah! Ha! ha! ha!"

Sir Lionel was struck dumb. What could he say when his little tenderness was met in such a manner?

"Call me Sally, if you like, Sir Lionel. My brothers and sisters, and uncles and aunts, and
all those sort of people, always called me Sally. But, Sarah! Ha! ha! ha! Suppose you call
me Sally, Sir Lionel."

Sir Lionel tried, but he could not call her Sally; his lips at that moment would not form the
sound.

But the subject had now been introduced. If he should ever be able to claim her as his own,
he might then call her Sarah, or Sally, or use any other term of endearment which the tenderness
of the moment might suggest. When that day should come, perhaps he might have his own little
joke; but, in the meantime, the plunge had been taken, and he could now swim on.

"Miss Todd, you now know what my feelings are, and I hope that you will at any rate not disapprove
of them. We have known each other for some time, and have, I hope, enjoyed and valued each
other's society." Miss Todd here made a little bow, but she said nothing. She had a just perception
that Sir Lionel should be permitted to have his say, and that, as matters had become serious,
it would be well for her to wait till he had done, and then she might have her say. So she
merely bowed, by way of giving a civil acquiescence in Sir Lionel's last little suggestion.

"I have hoped so, dear Miss Todd"--he had taken a moment to consider, and thought that he had
better drop the Sarah altogether for the present. "In myself, I can safely say that it has
been so. With you, I feel that I am happy, and at my ease. Your modes of thought and way of
life are all such as I admire and approve,"--Miss Todd again bowed--"and--and--what I mean
is, that I think we both live very much after the same fashion."

Miss Todd, who knew everything that went on in Littlebath, and was au fait at every bit of
scandal and tittle-tattle in the place, had probably heard more of the fashion of Sir Lionel's
life than he was aware. In places such as Littlebath, ladies such as Miss Todd do have sources
of information which are almost miraculous. But still she said nothing. She merely thought
that Sir Lionel was a good deal mistaken in the opinion which he had last expressed.

"I am not a young man," continued Sir Lionel. "My brother, you know, is a very old man, and
there are but fifteen years' difference between us." This was a mistake of Sir Lionel's; the
real difference being ten years. "And you, I know, are hardly yet past your youth."

"I was forty-five last Guy Fawkes' day," said Miss Todd.

"Then there are fifteen years difference between us." The reader will please to read "twenty."
"Can you look over that difference, and take me, old as I am, for your companion for life?
Shall we not both be happier if we have such a companion? As to money--"

"Oh, Sir Lionel, don't trouble about that; nor yet about your age. If I wanted to marry, I'd
as lief have an old man as a young one; perhaps liefer: and as to money, I've got enough for
myself, and I have no doubt you have too"--nevertheless, Miss Todd did know of that heavy over-due
bill at the livery stables, and had heard that the very natty groom who never left Sir Lionel's
phaëton for a moment was a sworn bailiff; sworn to bring the carriage and horses back to the
livery-stable yard--"but the fact is, I don't want to marry."

"Do you mean, Miss Todd, that you will prefer to live in solitude for ever?"

"Oh, as for solitude, I'm not much of a Robinson Crusoe, nor yet an Alexander Selkirk. I never
found any of its charms. We doubt not, however, that notwithstanding these deteriorating admixtures,
there may be said to have been many--aye, a glorious multitude--who held the truth in its primitive
power, and in a large measure of primitive simplicity.

Still, when these are compared with the whole population of the countries
where the Truth was preached, the real converts must be spoken of
as a few, and thus was it evident that there was still an inherent
opposition in man to the restraining and purifying doctrines of the
gospel of Christ.

And when in later years, whole nations and peoples were said to become Christians, it may well
be doubted whether in such times there had not been as great a reduction of the number of true
converts of old standing, as there was addition of this class amongst
the new ones. Lady Bertram, I am quite sure, will be a fortunate and happy woman; but then,
she'll be number two, I take it. Eh, Sir Lionel?"

Sir Lionel smiled and laughed, and looked at the ground, and then looked up again; but he did
not deny the imputation. "Well," said he, "I trust we shall still remain friends."

"Oh, certainly; why not?" replied Miss Todd.

And so they parted. Sir Lionel took his hat and stick, and went his way.

CHAPTER II.

HE TRIES HIS HAND AGAIN.

Miss Todd shook hands with him as he went, and then, putting on her bonnet and cloak, got into
her fly.

She felt some little triumph at her heart in thinking that Sir Lionel had wished to marry her.
Had she not, she would hardly have been a woman. But by far her strongest feeling was one of
dislike to him for not having wished to marry Miss Baker. She had watched the gallant soldier
closely for the last year, and well knew how tenderly he had been used to squeeze Miss Baker's
hand. He had squeezed her own hand too; but what was that? She made others the subject of jokes,
and was prepared to be joked upon herself. Whatever Oliver Sir Lionel, or other person, might
give her, she would give back to him or to her--always excepting Mrs. Leake--a Rowland that
should be quite as good. But Miss Baker was no subject for a joke, and Sir Lionel was in duty
bound to have proposed to her.

It is perhaps almost true that no one can touch pitch and not be defiled. Miss Todd had been
touching pitch for many years past, and was undoubtedly defiled to a certain extent. But the
grime with her had never gone deep; it was not ingrained; it had not become an ineradicable
stain; it was dirt on which soap-and-water might yet operate. May we not say that her truth
and good-nature, and love of her fellow-creatures, would furnish her at last with the means
whereby she might be cleansed?

She was of the world, worldly. It in no way disgusted her that Sir Lionel was an old rip, and
that she knew him to be so. There were a great many old male rips at Littlebath and elsewhere.
Miss Todd's path in life had brought her across more than one or two such. She encountered
them without horror, welcomed them without shame, and spoke of them with a laugh rather than
a shudder. Her idea was, that such a rip as Sir Lionel would best mend his manners by marriage;
by marriage, but not with her. She knew better than trust herself to any Sir Lionel.

And she had encountered old female rips; that is, if dishonesty in money-dealings, selfishness,
coarseness, vanity, absence of religion, and false pretences, when joined to age, may be held
as constituting an old female rip. Many such had been around her frequently. She would laugh
with them, feed them, call on them, lose her money to them, and feel herself no whit degraded.
Such company brought on her no conviction of shame. But yet she was not of them. Coarse she
was; but neither dishonest, nor selfish, nor vain, nor irreligious, nor false.

Such being the nature of the woman, she had not found it necessary to display any indignation
when Sir Lionel made his offer; but she did feel angry with him on Miss Baker's behalf. Why
had he deceived that woman, and made an ass of himself? Had he had any wit, any knowledge of
character, he would have known what sort of an answer he was likely to get if he brought his
vows and offers to the Paragon. There he had been received with no special favour. No lures
had been there displayed to catch him. He had not been turned out of the house when he came
there, and that was all. So now, as she put on her bonnet, she determined to punish Sir Lionel.

But in accusing her suitor of want of judgment, she was quite in the dark as to his real course
of action. She little knew with how profound a judgment he was managing his affairs. Had she
known, she would hardly have interfered as she now did. As she put her foot on the step of
the fly she desired her servant to drive to Montpellier Terrace.

She was shown into the drawing-room, and there she found Miss Baker and Miss Gauntlet; not
our friend Adela, but Miss Penelope Gauntlet, who was now again settled in Littlebath.

"Well, ladies," said Miss Todd, walking up the room with well-assured foot and full comfortable
presence, "I've news to tell you."

They both of them saw at a glance that she had news. Between Miss P. Gauntlet and Miss Todd
there had never been cordiality. Miss Todd was, as we have said, of the world, worldly; whereas
Miss Gauntlet was of Dr. Snort, godly. She belonged plainly to the third set of which we have
spoken; Miss Todd was an amalgamation of the two first. Miss Baker, however, was a point of
union, a connecting rod. There was about her a savouring of the fragrance of Ebenezer, but
accompanied, it must be owned, by a whiff of brimstone. Thus these three ladies were brought
together; and as it was manifest that Miss Todd had news to tell, the other two were prepared
to listen.

"What do you think, ladies?" and she sat herself down, filling an arm-chair with her goodly
person. "What do you think has happened to me to-day?"

"Perhaps the doctor has been with you," said Miss P. Gauntlet, not alluding to the Littlebath
Galen, but meaning to insinuate that Miss Todd might have come thither to tell them of her
conversion from the world.

"Better than ten doctors, my dear"--Miss Penelope drew herself up very stiffly--"or twenty!
I've had an offer of marriage. What do you think of that?"

Miss P. Gauntlet looked as though she thought a great deal of it. She certainly did think that
had such an accident happened to her, she would not have spoken of it with such a voice, or
before such an audience. But now her face, which was always long and thin, became longer and
thinner, and she sat with her mouth open, expecting further news.

Miss Baker became rather red, then rather pale, and then red again. She put out her hand, and
took hold of the side of the chair in which she sat; but she said nothing. Her heart told her
that that offer had been made by Sir Lionel.

"You don't wish me joy, ladies," said Miss Todd.

"But you have not told us whether you accepted it," said Miss Penelope.

"Ha! ha! ha! No, that's the worst of it. No, I didn't accept it. But, upon my word, it was made."

Then it was not Sir Lionel, thought Miss Baker, releasing her hold of the chair, and feeling
that the blood about her heart was again circulating.

"And is that all that we are to know?" asked Miss Penelope.

"Oh, my dears, you shall know it all. I told my lover that I should keep no secrets. But, come,
you shall guess. Who was it, Miss Baker?"

"I couldn't say at all," said Miss Baker, in a faint voice.

"Perhaps Mr. O'Callaghan," suggested Miss Penelope, conscious, probably, that an ardent young
evangelical clergyman is generally in want of an income.

"Mr. O'Callaghan!" shouted Miss Todd, throwing up her head with scorn. "Pho! The gentleman
I speak of would have made me a lady. Lady--! Now who do you think it was, Miss Baker?"

"Oh, I couldn't guess at all," said poor Miss Baker. But she now knew that it was Sir Lionel.
It might have been worse, however, and that she felt--much worse!

"Was it Sir Lionel Bertram?" asked the other.

"Ah! Miss Gauntlet, you know all about the gentlemen of Littlebath. I can see that. It was
Sir Lionel. Wasn't that a triumph?"

"And you refused him?" asked Miss Penelope.

"Of course I did. You don't mean to say that you think I would have accepted him?"

To this Miss Penelope made no answer. Her opinions were of a mixed sort. She partly misbelieved
Miss Todd--partly wondered at her. He's a private detective, and he'll keep busy until he gets
the boy back."
Duncan got up from the table, rather heavily. He stood hesitating
a moment and then stepped closer to my chair.

"I know it's hard,"
he said as he put a hand on my shoulder. Miss
Penelope could not believe that Miss Todd had rejected Sir Lionel; but at the same time she
could not but be startled also by the great fact of such a rejection. At any rate her course
of duty was open. Littlebath should be enlightened on the subject before the drawing-room candles
were lit that evening; or at any rate that set in Littlebath to which she belonged. So she
rose from her chair, and, declaring that she had sat an unconscionable time with Miss Baker,
departed, diligent, about her work.

"Well, what do you think of that, my dear?" said Miss Todd, as soon as the two of them were
left alone.

It was strange that Miss Todd, who was ordinarily so good-natured, who was so especially intent
on being good-natured to Miss Baker, should have thus roughly communicated to her friend tidings
which were sure to wound. But she had omitted to look at it in this light. Her intention had
been to punish Sir Lionel for having been so grossly false and grossly foolish. She had seen
through him--at least, hardly through him; had seen at least that he must have been doubting
between the two ladies, and that he had given up the one whom he believed to be the poorer.
She did not imagine it possible that, after having offered to her, he should then go with a
similar offer to Miss Baker. Had such an idea arisen in her mind, she would certainly have
allowed Miss Baker to take her chance of promotion unmolested.

Miss Baker gave a long sigh. Now that Miss Gauntlet was gone she felt herself better able to
speak; but, nevertheless, any speech on the subject was difficult to her. Her kind heart at
once forgave Miss Todd. There could now be no marriage between that false one and her friend;
and therefore, if the ice would only get itself broken, she would not be unwilling to converse
upon the subject. But how to break the ice!

"I always thought he would," at last she said.

"Did you?" said Miss Todd. "Well, he certainly used to come there, but I never knew why. Sometimes
I thought it was to talk about you.