From incidental notices in the following History, we learn that he was born towards the close
of the reign of Vespasian, who died in the year 79 of the Christian era.  He lived till the
time of Hadrian, under whose administration he filled the office of secretary; until, with
several others, he was dismissed for presuming on familiarities with the empress Sabina, of
which we have no further account than that they were unbecoming his position in the imperial
court.  How long he survived this disgrace, which appears to have befallen him in the year
121, we are not informed; but we find that the leisure afforded him by his retirement, was
employed in the composition of numerous works, of which the only portions now extant are collected
in the present volume.

Several of the younger Pliny's letters are addressed to Suetonius, with whom he lived in the
closest friendship.  They afford some brief, but generally pleasant, glimpses of his habits
and career; and in a letter, in which Pliny makes application on behalf of his friend to the
emperor Trajan, for a mark of favour, he speaks of him as "a most excellent, honourable, and
learned man, whom he had the pleasure of entertaining under his own roof, and with whom the
nearer he was brought into communion, the more he loved him." [1]

The plan adopted by Suetonius in his Lives of the Twelve Caesars, led him to be more diffuse
on their personal conduct and habits than on public events.  He writes Memoirs rather than
History.  He neither dwells on the civil wars which sealed the fall of the Republic, nor on
the military expeditions which extended the frontiers of the empire; nor does he attempt to
develop the causes of the great political changes which marked the period of which he treats.

When we stop to gaze in a museum or gallery on the antique busts of the Caesars, we perhaps
endeavour to trace in their sculptured physiognomy the characteristics of those princes, who,
for good or evil, were in their times masters of the destinies of a large portion of the human
race.  The pages of Suetonius will amply gratify this natural curiosity. In them we find a
series of individual portraits sketched to the life, with perfect truth and rigorous impartiality.
La Harpe remarks of Suetonius, "He is scrupulously exact, and strictly methodical.  He omits
nothing which concerns the person whose life he is writing; he relates everything, but paints
nothing.  His work is, in some sense, a collection of anecdotes, but it is very curious to
read and consult." [2]

Combining as it does amusement and information, Suetonius's "Lives of the Caesars" was held
in such estimation, that, so soon after the invention of printing as the year 1500, no fewer
than eighteen editions had been published, and nearly one hundred have since been added to
the number. Critics of the highest rank have devoted themselves to the task of correcting and
commenting on the text, and the work has been translated into most European languages.  Of
the English translations, that of Dr. Alexander Thomson, published in 1796, has been made the
basis of the present.  He informs us in his Preface, that a version of Suetonius was with him
only a secondary object, his principal design being to form a just estimate of Roman literature,
and to elucidate the state of government, and the manners of the times; for which the work
of Suetonius seemed a fitting vehicle.  Dr. Thomson's remarks appended to each successive reign,
are reprinted nearly verbatim in the present edition. His translation, however, was very diffuse,
and retained most of the inaccuracies of that of Clarke, on which it was founded; considerable
care therefore has been bestowed in correcting it, with the view of producing, as far as possible,
a literal and faithful version.

To render the works of Suetonius, as far as they are extant, complete,
his Lives of eminent Grammarians, Rhetoricians, and Poets, of which a
translation has not before appeared in English, are added.  These Lives
abound with anecdote and curious information connected with learning and
literary men during the period of which the author treats.
                                                            T. F.

CONTENTS

   I.  LIVES OF THE TWELVE CAESARS
       1.  Julius Caesar
       2.  Augustus
       3.  Tiberius
       4.  Caligula
       5.  Claudius
       6.  Nero
       7.  Galba
       8.  Otho
       9.  Vitellius
      10.  Vespasian
      11.  Titus
      12.  Domitian
  II.  LIVES OF THE GRAMMARIANS AND THE HISTORIANS
 III.  LIVES OF THE POETS
       Terence
       Juvenal
       Persius
       Horace
       Lucan
       Pliny
 FOOTNOTES
 INDEX

(1)

THE TWELVE CAESARS.

CAIUS JULIUS CAESAR.

I.  Julius Caesar, the Divine [3], lost his father [4] when he was in the sixteenth year of
his age [5]; and the year following, being nominated to the office of high-priest of Jupiter
[6], he repudiated Cossutia, who was very wealthy, although her family belonged only to the
equestrian order, and to whom he had been contracted when he was a mere boy.  He then married
(2) Cornelia, the daughter of Cinna, who was four times consul; and had by her, shortly afterwards,
a daughter named Julia.  Resisting all the efforts of the dictator Sylla to induce him to divorce
Cornelia, he suffered the penalty of being stripped of his sacerdotal office, his wife's dowry,
and his own patrimonial estates; and, being identified with the adverse faction [7], was compelled
to withdraw from Rome.  After changing his place of concealment nearly every night [8], although
he was suffering from a quartan ague, and having effected his release by bribing the officers
who had tracked his footsteps, he at length obtained a pardon through the intercession of the
vestal virgins, and of Mamercus Aemilius and Aurelius Cotta, his near relatives.  We are assured
that when Sylla, having withstood for a while the entreaties of his own best friends, persons
of distinguished rank, at last yielded to their importunity, he exclaimed--either by a divine
impulse, or from a shrewd conjecture: "Your suit is granted, and you may take him among you;
but know," he added, "that this man, for whose safety you are so extremely anxious, will, some
day or other, be the ruin of the party of the nobles, in defence of which you are leagued with
me; for in this one Caesar, you will find many a Marius."

II.  His first campaign was served in Asia, on the staff of the praetor, M. Thermus; and being
dispatched into Bithynia [9], to bring thence a fleet, he loitered so long at the court of
Nicomedes, as to give occasion to reports of a criminal intercourse between him and that prince;
which received additional credit from his hasty return to Bithynia, under the pretext of recovering
a debt due to a freed-man, his client.  The rest of his service was more favourable to his
reputation; and (3) when Mitylene [10] was taken by storm, he was presented by Thermus with
the civic crown. [11]

III.  He served also in Cilicia [12], under Servilius Isauricus, but only for a short time;
as upon receiving intelligence of Sylla's death, he returned with all speed to Rome, in expectation
of what might follow from a fresh agitation set on foot by Marcus Lepidus.  Distrusting, however,
the abilities of this leader, and finding the times less favourable for the execution of this
project than he had at first imagined, he abandoned all thoughts of joining Lepidus, although
he received the most tempting offers.

IV.  Soon after this civil discord was composed, he preferred a charge of extortion against
Cornelius Dolabella, a man of consular dignity, who had obtained the honour of a triumph. 
On the acquittal of the accused, he resolved to retire to Rhodes [13], with the view not only
of avoiding the public odium (4) which he had incurred, but of prosecuting his studies with
leisure and tranquillity, under Apollonius, the son of Molon, at that time the most celebrated
master of rhetoric.  While on his voyage thither, in the winter season, he was taken by pirates
near the island of Pharmacusa [14], and detained by them, burning with indignation, for nearly
forty days; his only attendants being a physician and two chamberlains.  For he had instantly
dispatched his other servants and the friends who accompanied him, to raise money for his ransom
[15].  Fifty talents having been paid down, he was landed on the coast, when, having collected
some ships [16], he lost no time in putting to sea in pursuit of the pirates, and having captured
them, inflicted upon them the punishment with which he had often threatened them in jest. 
At that time Mithridates was ravaging the neighbouring districts, and on Caesar's arrival at
Rhodes, that he might not appear to lie idle while danger threatened the allies of Rome, he
passed over into Asia, and having collected some auxiliary forces, and driven the king's governor
out of the province, retained in their allegiance the cities which were wavering, and ready
to revolt.

V.  Having been elected military tribune, the first honour he received from the suffrages of
the people after his return to Rome, he zealously assisted those who took measures for restoring
the tribunitian authority, which had been greatly diminished during the usurpation of Sylla.
He likewise, by an act, which Plotius at his suggestion propounded to the people, obtained
the recall of Lucius Cinna, his wife's brother, and others with him, who having been the adherents
of Lepidus in the civil disturbances, had after that consul's death fled to Sertorius [17];
which law he supported by a speech.

VI.  During his quaestorship he pronounced funeral orations from the rostra, according to custom,
in praise of his aunt (5) Julia, and his wife Cornelia.  In the panegyric on his aunt, he gives
the following account of her own and his father's genealogy, on both sides: "My aunt Julia
derived her descent, by the mother, from a race of kings, and by her father, from the Immortal
Gods.  For the Marcii Reges [18], her mother's family, deduce their pedigree from Ancus Marcius,
and the Julii, her father's, from Venus; of which stock we are a branch.  We therefore unite
in our descent the sacred majesty of kings, the chiefest among men, and the divine majesty
of Gods, to whom kings themselves are subject." To supply the place of Cornelia, he married
Pompeia, the daughter of Quintus Pompeius, and grand-daughter of Lucius Sylla; but he afterwards
divorced her, upon suspicion of her having been debauched by Publius Clodius.  For so current
was the report, that Clodius had found access to her disguised as a woman, during the celebration
of a religious solemnity [19], that the senate instituted an enquiry respecting the profanation
of the sacred rites.

VII.  Farther-Spain [20] fell to his lot as quaestor; when there, as he was going the circuit
of the province, by commission from the praetor, for the administration of justice, and had
reached Gades, seeing a statue of Alexander the Great in the temple of Hercules, he sighed
deeply, as if weary of his sluggish life, for having performed no memorable actions at an age
[21] at which Alexander had already conquered the world.  He, therefore, immediately sued for
his discharge, with the view of embracing the first opportunity, which might present itself
in The City, of entering upon a more exalted career.  In the stillness of the night following,
he dreamt that he lay with his own mother; but his confusion was relieved, and his hopes were
raised to the highest pitch, by the interpreters of his dream, who expounded it as an omen
that he should possess universal empire; for (6) that the mother who in his sleep he had found
submissive to his embraces, was no other than the earth, the common parent of all mankind.

VIII.  Quitting therefore the province before the expiration of the usual term, he betook himself
to the Latin colonies, which were then eagerly agitating the design of obtaining the freedom
of Rome; and he would have stirred them up to some bold attempt, had not the consuls, to prevent
any commotion, detained for some time the legions which had been raised for service in Cilicia.
But this did not deter him from making, soon afterwards, a still greater effort within the
precincts of the city itself.

IX.  For, only a few days before he entered upon the aedileship, he incurred a suspicion of
having engaged in a conspiracy with Marcus Crassus, a man of consular rank; to whom were joined
Publius Sylla and Lucius Autronius, who, after they had been chosen consuls, were convicted
of bribery.  The plan of the conspirators was to fall upon the senate at the opening of the
new year, and murder as many of them as should be thought necessary; upon which, Crassus was
to assume the office of dictator, and appoint Caesar his master of the horse [22].  When the
commonwealth had been thus ordered according to their pleasure, the consulship was to have
been restored to Sylla and Autronius.  Mention is made of this plot by Tanusius Geminus [23]
in his history, by Marcus Bibulus in his edicts [24], and by Curio, the father, in his orations
[25]. Cicero likewise seems to hint at this in a letter to Axius, where he says, that Caesar
(7) had in his consulship secured to himself that arbitrary power [26] to which he had aspired
when he was edile.  Tanusius adds, that Crassus, from remorse or fear, did not appear upon
the day appointed for the massacre of the senate; for which reason Caesar omitted to give the
signal, which, according to the plan concerted between them, he was to have made.  The agreement,
Curio says, was that he should shake off the toga from his shoulder.  We have the authority
of the same Curio, and of M. Actorius Naso, for his having been likewise concerned in another
conspiracy with young Cneius Piso; to whom, upon a suspicion of some mischief being meditated
in the city, the province of Spain was decreed out of the regular course [27].  It is said
to have been agreed between them, that Piso should head a revolt in the provinces, whilst the
other should attempt to stir up an insurrection at Rome, using as their instruments the Lambrani,
and the tribes beyond the Po.  But the execution of this design was frustrated in both quarters
by the death of Piso.

X.  In his aedileship, he not only embellished the Comitium, and the rest of the Forum [28],
with the adjoining halls [29], but adorned the Capitol also, with temporary piazzas, constructed
for the purpose of displaying some part of the superabundant collections (8) he had made for
the amusement of the people [30].  He entertained them with the hunting of wild beasts, and
with games, both alone and in conjunction with his colleague.  On this account, he obtained
the whole credit of the expense to which they had jointly contributed; insomuch that his colleague,
Marcus Bibulus, could not forbear remarking, that he was served in the manner of Pollux.  For
as the temple [31] erected in the Forum to the two brothers, went by the name of Castor alone,
so his and Caesar's joint munificence was imputed to the latter only.  To the other public
spectacles exhibited to the people, Caesar added a fight of gladiators, but with fewer pairs
of combatants than he had intended.  For he had collected from all parts so great a company
of them, that his enemies became alarmed; and a decree was made, restricting the number of
gladiators which any one was allowed to retain at Rome.

XI.  Having thus conciliated popular favour, he endeavoured, through his interest with some
of the tribunes, to get Egypt assigned to him as a province, by an act of the people.  The
pretext alleged for the creation of this extraordinary government, was, that the Alexandrians
had violently expelled their king [32], whom the senate had complimented with the title of
an ally and friend of the Roman people.  This was generally resented; but, notwithstanding,
there was so much opposition from the faction of the nobles, that he could not carry his point.
In order, therefore, to diminish their influence by every means in his power, he restored the
trophies erected in honour of Caius Marius, on account of his victories over Jugurtha, the
Cimbri, and the Teutoni, which had been demolished by Sylla; and when sitting in judgment upon
murderers, he treated those as assassins, who, in the late proscription, had received money
from the treasury, for bringing in the heads of Roman citizens, although they were expressly
excepted in the Cornelian laws.

XII.  He likewise suborned some one to prefer an impeachment (9) for treason against Caius
Rabirius, by whose especial assistance the senate had, a few years before, put down Lucius
Saturninus, the seditious tribune; and being drawn by lot a judge on the trial, he condemned
him with so much animosity, that upon his appealing to the people, no circumstance availed
him so much as the extraordinary bitterness of his judge.

XIII.  Having renounced all hope of obtaining Egypt for his province, he stood candidate for
the office of chief pontiff, to secure which, he had recourse to the most profuse bribery.
Calculating, on this occasion, the enormous amount of the debts he had contracted, he is reported
to have said to his mother, when she kissed him at his going out in the morning to the assembly
of the people, "I will never return home unless I am elected pontiff."  In effect, he left
so far behind him two most powerful competitors, who were much his superiors both in age and
rank, that he had more votes in their own tribes, than they both had in all the tribes together.

XIV.  After he was chosen praetor, the conspiracy of Catiline was discovered; and while every
other member of the senate voted for inflicting capital punishment on the accomplices in that
crime [33], he alone proposed that the delinquents should be distributed for safe custody among
the towns of Italy, their property being confiscated.  He even struck such terror into those
who were advocates for greater severity, by representing to them what universal odium would
be attached to their memories by the Roman people, that Decius Silanus, consul elect, did not
hesitate to qualify his proposal, it not being very honourable to change it, by a lenient interpretation;
as if it had been understood in a harsher sense than he intended, and Caesar would certainly
have carried his point, having brought over to his side a great number of the senators, among
whom was Cicero, the consul's brother, had not a speech by Marcus Cato infused new vigour into
the resolutions of the senate.  He persisted, however, in obstructing the measure, until a
body of the Roman knights, who stood under arms as a guard, threatened him with instant death,
if he continued his determined opposition.  They even thrust at him with their drawn swords,
so that those who sat next him moved away; (10) and a few friends, with no small difficulty,
protected him, by throwing their arms round him, and covering him with their togas.  At last,
deterred by this violence, he not only gave way, but absented himself from the senate-house
during the remainder of that year.

XV.  Upon the first day of his praetorship, he summoned Quintus Catulus to render an account
to the people respecting the repairs of the Capitol [34]; proposing a decree for transferring
the office of curator to another person [35].  But being unable to withstand the strong opposition
made by the aristocratical party, whom he perceived quitting, in great numbers, their attendance
upon the new consuls [36], and fully resolved to resist his proposal, he dropped the design.

XVI.  He afterwards approved himself a most resolute supporter of Caecilius Metullus, tribune
of the people, who, in spite of all opposition from his colleagues, had proposed some laws
of a violent tendency [37], until they were both dismissed from office by a vote of the senate.
He ventured, notwithstanding, to retain his post and continue in the administration of justice;
but finding that preparations were made to obstruct him by force of arms, he dismissed the
lictors, threw off his gown, and betook himself privately to his own house, with the resolution
of being quiet, in a time so unfavourable to his interests.  He likewise pacified the mob,
which two days afterwards flocked about him, and in a riotous manner made a voluntary tender
of their assistance in the vindication of his (11) honour.  This happening contrary to expectation,
the senate, who met in haste, on account of the tumult, gave him their thanks by some of the
leading members of the house, and sending for him, after high commendation of his conduct,
cancelled their former vote, and restored him to his office.

XVII.  But he soon got into fresh trouble, being named amongst the accomplices of Catiline,
both before Novius Niger the quaestor, by Lucius Vettius the informer, and in the senate by
Quintus Curius; to whom a reward had been voted, for having first discovered the designs of
the conspirators.  Curius affirmed that he had received his information from Catiline.  Vettius
even engaged to produce in evidence against him his own hand-writing, given to Catiline.  Caesar,
feeling that this treatment was not to be borne, appealed to Cicero himself, whether he had
not voluntarily made a discovery to him of some particulars of the conspiracy; and so baulked
Curius of his expected reward.  He, therefore, obliged Vettius to give pledges for his behaviour,
seized his goods, and after heavily fining him, and seeing him almost torn in pieces before
the rostra, threw him into prison; to which he likewise sent Novius the quaestor, for having
presumed to take an information against a magistrate of superior authority.

XVIII.  At the expiration of his praetorship he obtained by lot the Farther-Spain [38], and
pacified his creditors, who were for detaining him, by finding sureties for his debts [39].
Contrary, however, to both law and custom, he took his departure before the usual equipage
and outfit were prepared.  It is uncertain whether this precipitancy arose from the apprehension
of an impeachment, with which he was threatened on the expiration of his former office, or
from his anxiety to lose no time in relieving the allies, who implored him to come to their
aid.  He had no (12) sooner established tranquillity in the province, than, without waiting
for the arrival of his successor, he returned to Rome, with equal haste, to sue for a triumph
[40], and the consulship.  The day of election, however, being already fixed by proclamation,
he could not legally be admitted a candidate, unless he entered the city as a private person
[41].  On this emergency he solicited a suspension of the laws in his favour; but such an indulgence
being strongly opposed, he found himself under the necessity of abandoning all thoughts of
a triumph, lest he should be disappointed of the consulship.

