Tulaji  Angria  was dark, inclined to be fat, and not unpleasant in feature. But it was with
a scowling brow that he replied to Diggle. Desmond was no coward, but he afterward confessed
that as he stood there watching the two faces, the dark, lowering face of Angria, the smiling,
scarcely less swarthy face of Diggle, he felt his knees tremble under him.  What  was the Pirate
saying? That he was the subject of their conversation was plain from the glances thrown at
him; that he was at a crisis in his fate he knew by instinct; but, ignorant of the tongue they
spoke, he could but wait in fearful anxiety and mistrust.

He learned afterwards the purport of the talk.

"That is your man?" said Angria. 'You have deceived me. I looked for a man of large stature
and robust make, like the Englishmen I already have. What good will this slim, starved stripling
be in my barge?"

"You must not be impatient, huzur {lord}," replied Diggle. "He is a stripling, it is true;
slim, certainly; starved--well, the work on board ship does not tend to fatten a man. But give
him time; he is but sixteen or seventeen years old, young in my country. In a year or two,
under your regimen, he will develop; he comes of a hardy stock, and already he can make himself
useful. He was one of the quickest and handiest on board our ship, though this was his first
voyage."

"But you yourself admit that he is not yet competent for the oar in my barge. What is to recompense
me for the food he will eat while he is growing? No, Diggle sahib, if I take him I must have
some allowance off the price. In truth, I will not take him unless you send me from your vessel
a dozen good muskets. That is my word."

"Still, huzur--" began Diggle, but Angria cut him short with a gesture of impatience.

"That is my word, I say. Shall I, Tulaji Angria, dispute with you? I will have twenty muskets,
or you may keep the boy."

Diggle shrugged and smiled.

"Very well, huzur. You drive a hard bargain; but it shall be as you say. I will send a chit
to the captain, and you shall have the muskets before the ship sails."

Angria made a sign to one of his attendants. The man approached Desmond, took him by the sleeve,
and signed for him to come away. Desmond threw a beseeching look at Diggle, and said hurriedly:

"Mr. Diggle, please tell me--"

But Angria rose to his feet in wrath, and shouted to the man who had Desmond by the sleeve.
Desmond made no further resistance. His head swam as he passed between the dusky ranks out
into the courtyard.

"What does it all mean?" he asked himself.

His guide hurried him along until they came to a barn-like building under the northwest angle
of the fort. The Maratha unlocked the door, signed to Desmond to enter, and locked him in.
He was alone.

He spent three miserable hours. Bitterly did he now regret having cast in his lot with the
smooth-spoken stranger who had been so sympathetic with him in his troubles at home. He tried
to guess what was to be done with him. He was in Angria's power, a prisoner, but to what end?
Had he run from the tyranny at home merely to fall a victim to a worse tyranny at the hands
of an oriental? He knew so little of Angria, and his brain was in such a turmoil, that he could
not give definite shape to his fears.

He paced up and down the hot, stuffy shed, awaiting, dreading, he knew not what. Through the
hole that served for a window he saw men passing to and fro across the courtyard, but they
were all swarthy, all alien; there was no one from whom he could expect a friendly word.

Toward evening, as he looked through the hole, he saw Diggle issue from the door of the palace
and cross towards the outer gate.

"Mr. Diggle! Mr. Diggle!" he called. "Please! I am locked up here."

Diggle looked round, smiled, and leisurely approached the shed.

"Why have they shut me up here?" demanded Desmond. "Captain Barker said I was to return at
once. Do get the door unlocked."

"You ask the impossible, my young friend," replied Diggle through the hole. "You are here by
the orders of Angria, and 'twould be treason in me to pick his locks."

"But why? what right has he to lock me up? and you, why did you let him? You  said  you  were
my friend; you promised--oh, you know what you promised."

"I promised? Truly, I promised that, if you were bent on accompanying me to these shores, I
would use my influence to procure you employment with one of my friends among the native princes.
Well, I have kept my word; firmavi fidem, as the Latin hath it. Angria is my friend; I have
used my influence with him; and you are now in the service of one of the most potent of Indian
princes. True, your service is but beginning. It may be arduous at first; it may be long ab
ovo usque ad mala; the egg may be hard, and the apples, perchance, somewhat sour; but as you
become inured to your duties, you will learn resignation and patience, and--"

"Don't!" burst out Desmond, unable to endure the smooth-flowing periods of the man now self-confessed
a villain. "What does it mean? Tell me plainly; am I a slave?"

"Servulus, non servus, my dear boy. What is the odds whether you serve Dick Burke, a booby
farmer, or Tulaji Angria, a prince and a man of intelligence? Yet there is a difference, and
I would give you a word of counsel. Angria is an oriental, and a despot; it were best to serve
him with all diligence, or--"

He finished the sentence with a meaning grimace.

"Mr. Diggle, you can't mean it," said Desmond. "Don't leave me here! I implore you to release
me. What have I ever done to you? Don't leave me in this awful place."

Diggle smiled and began to move away. At the sight of his malicious smile the prisoner's despair
was swept away before a tempest of rage.

"You scoundrel! You shameless scoundrel!"

The words, low spoken and vibrant with contempt, reached Diggle when he was some distance from
the shed. He turned and sauntered back.

"Heia! contumeliosae voces! 'Tis pretty abuse. My young friend, I must withdraw my ears from
such shocking language. But stay! if you have any message for Sir Willoughby, your squire,
whose affections you have so diligently cultivated to the prejudice of his nearest and dearest,
it were well for you to give it. 'Tis your last opportunity; for those who enter Angria's service
enjoy a useful but not a long career. And before I return to Gheria from a little journey I
am about to make, you may have joined the majority of those who have tempted fate in this insalubrious
clime. Horae momento cita mors yen it--you remember the phrase?"

Diggle leaned against the wooden wall, watching with malicious enjoyment the effect of his
words. Desmond was very pale; all his strength seemed to have deserted him. Finding that his
taunts provoked no reply, Diggle went on:

"Time presses, my young friend. You will be logged a deserter from the Good  Intent. 'Tis my
fervent hope you never fall into the hands of Captain Barker; as you know, he is a terrible
man when roused."

Waving  his  gloved  hand, he moved away. Desmond did not watch his departure.  Falling back
from the window, he threw himself upon the ground, and gave way to a long fit of black despair. 

§7. As the object of a just war is to obtain justice, a nation, when it has declared war, has
a right to use all necessary means, and no other, for attaining that
end. A just war gives the right to take the life of the enemy; but
there are limits to this right.
Ranged along one of the walls, they squatted on the floor, and for some minutes afterwards
Desmond heard the clank of irons and the harsh grating of a key. Then a big Maratha came to
him, searched him thoroughly, clapped iron bands upon his ankles, and locked the chains to
staples in the wall. Soon the door was shut, barred, and locked, and Desmond found himself
a prisoner with eight others.

For a little they spoke among themselves, in the low tones of men utterly spent and dispirited.
Then all was silent, and they slept. But Desmond lay wide awake, waiting for the morning.

The shed was terribly hot. Air came only through the one narrow opening, and before an hour
was past the atmosphere was foul, seeming the more horrible to Desmond by contrast with the
freshness of his life on the ocean. Mosquitoes nipped him until he could scarcely endure the
intense irritation. He would have given anything for a little water; but though he heard a
sentry pacing up and down outside, he did not venture to call to him, and could only writhe
in heat and torture, longing for the dawn, yet fearing it and what it might bring forth.

Worn and haggard after his sleepless night, Desmond had scarcely spirit enough to look with
curiosity on his fellow prisoners when the shed was faintly  lit by the morning sun. But he
saw that the eight men, all natives, were lying on crude charpoys {mat beds} along the wall,
each man chained to a staple like his own. One of the men was awake; and, catching Desmond's
lusterless eyes fixed upon him, he sat up and returned his gaze.

"Your Honor is an English gentleman?"

The words caused Desmond to start: they were so unexpected in such a place. The Indian spoke
softly and carefully, as if anxious not to awaken his companions.

"Yes," replied Desmond. "Who are you?"

"My name, sir, is Surendra Nath Chuckerbutti. I was lately a clerk in the employ of a burra
{great} sahib, English factor, at Calcutta."

"How did you get here?"

"That, sahib, is a moving tale. While on a visit of condolence to my respectable uncle and
aunt at Chittagong, I was kidnapped by Sandarband piratical  dogs. Presto!--at that serious
crisis a Dutch ship makes apparition and rescues me; but my last state is more desperate than
the first. The Dutch vessel will not stop to replace me on mother earth; she is for Bombay,
across the kala pani {black water}, as we say. I am not a swimmer; besides, what boots it?--we
are ten miles from land, to say nothing of sharks and crocodiles and the lordly tiger. Senators
and representatives must be of the Protestant religion. Quorum, a majority.

Bills passed against the veto by two-thirds majorities--also become
laws if not returned within five days, unless the return is prevented
by adjournment.

Executive. It is now two years
since this untoward catastrophe. With the crew I am conveyed hither and eat the bitter crust
of  servitude. Some of the Dutchmen are consigned to other forts in possession of the Pirate,
and three serve here in his state barge."

Desmond glanced at the sleeping forms.

"No, sir, they are not here," said the Babu {equivalent to Mr.; applied by the English to the
native clerk}, catching his look. "They share another apartment with your countrymen--chained?
Oh, yes! These, my bedfellows of misfortune, are Indians, not of Bengal, like myself; two are
Biluchis hauled from a country ship; two are Mussulmans from Mysore; one a Gujarati; two Marathas.
We are a motley crew--a miscellany, no less."

"What do they do with you in the daytime?"

"I,  sir,  adjust  accounts of the Pirate's dockyard; for this I am qualified  by  prolonged
driving of quill in Calcutta, to expressed satisfaction of Honorable John Company and English
merchants. But my position, sir, is of Damoclean anxiety. I am horrified by conviction that
one small error of calculation will entail direst retribution. Videlicet, sir, this week a
fellow captive is minus a finger and thumb--and all for oversight of six annas {the anna is
the 16th part of a rupee}. But I hear the step of our jailer; I must bridle my tongue."

The Babu had spoken throughout in a low monotonous tone that had not disturbed  the  slumbers
of his fellow prisoners. But they were all awakened by the noisy opening of the door and the
entrance of their jailer. He went to each in turn, and unlocked their fetters; then they filed
out in dumb submission, to be escorted by armed sentries to the different sheds where they
fed, each caste by itself.

When the eight had disappeared the jailer turned to Desmond, and, taking him by the sleeve,
led him across the courtyard into the palace. Here, in a little room, he was given a meager
breakfast of rice; after which he was taken to another room where he found Angria in company
with a big Maratha, who had in his hand a long bamboo cane. The Pirate was no longer in durbar
{council, ceremonial} array, but was clad in a long yellow robe with a lilac-colored shawl.

Conscious that he made a very poor appearance in his tatters, Desmond felt that the two men
looked at him with contempt. A brief conversation passed between them; then the Maratha salaamed
to Angria and went from the room, beckoning Desmond to follow him. They went out of the precincts
of the palace, and through a part of the town, until they arrived at the docks. There the laborers,
slaves and free, were already at work. Desmond at the first glance noticed several Europeans
among them, miserable objects who scarcely lifted their heads to look at this latest newcomer
of their race. His guide called up one of the foremen shipwrights, and instructed him to place
the boy among a gang of the workmen. Then he went away. Scarcely a minute had elapsed when
Desmond heard a cry, and looking round, saw the man brutally belaboring with his rattan the
bare shoulders of a native. He quivered; the incident seemed of ill augury.

In a few minutes Desmond found himself among a gang of men who were working at a new gallivat
in process of construction for Angria's own use. He received his orders in dumb show from the
foreman of the gang. Miserable as he was, he would not have been a boy if he had not been interested
in his novel surroundings; and no intelligent boy could have failed to take an interest in
the construction of a gallivat. It was a large rowboat of from thirty to seventy tons, with
two masts, the mizzen being very slight. The mainmast bore one huge sail, triangular in form,
its peak extending to a considerable height above the mast. The smaller gallivats were covered
with a spar deck made of split bamboos, their armament consisting of pettararoes fixed on swivels
in the gunwale. But the larger vessels had a fixed deck on which were mounted six or eight
cannon, from two to four pounders; and in addition to their sail they had from forty to fifty
oars, so that, with a stout crew, they attained a rate of four or five miles an hour.

One of the first things Desmond learned was that the Indian mode of ship building differed
fundamentally from the European. The timbers were fitted in after the planks had been put together;
and the planks were put together, not with flat edges, but rabbited, the parts made to correspond
with  the greatest exactness. When a plank was set up, its edge was smeared with red lead,
and the edge of the plank to come next was pressed down upon it, the inequalities in its surface
being thus shown by the marks of the lead. These being smoothed away, if necessary several
times, and the edges fitting exactly, they were rubbed with da'ma, a sort of glue that in course
of time became as hard as iron. The planks were then firmly riveted with pegs, and by the time
the work was finished the seams were scarcely visible, the whole forming apparently one entire
piece of timber.

The process of building a gallivat was thus a very long and tedious one; but the vessel when
completed was so strong that it could go to sea for many years before the hull needed repair.

