  As we pass by we can see inside the walls of the English
Legation grounds; a magnificent garden of shady avenues, asphalt walks, and dark-green banks
of English ivy that trail over the ground and climb half-way up the trunks of the trees.  A
square-turreted clock-tower and a building that resembles some old ancestral manor, imparts
to "the finest piece of property in Teheran" a home-like appearance; the representative of
Her Majesty's Government, separated from the outer world by a twenty-four-foot brick wall,
might well imagine himself within an hour's ride of London.

Beyond the third gate, the character of the soil changes from the stone- strewn gravel of the
northern side, to red stoneless earth, and both inside and outside the ramparts fields of winter
wheat and hardy vegetables form a refreshing relief from the barren character of the surface
generally.  The Ispahan gate, on the southern side, appears the busiest and most important
entrance to the city; by this gate enter the caravans from Bushire, bringing English goods,
from Bagdad, Ispahan, Tezd, and all the cities of the southern provinces.  Numbers of caravans
are camped in the vicinity of the gate, completing their arrangements for entering the city
or departing for some distant commercial centre; many of the waiting camels arc kneeling beneath
their heavy loads and quietly feeding. They are kneeling in small, compact circles, a dozen
camels in a circle with their heads facing inward.  In the centre is placed a pile of chopped
straw; as each camel ducks his head and takes a mouthful, and then elevates his head again
while munching it with great gusto, wearing meanwhile an expression of intense satisfaction
mingled with timidity, as though he thinks the enjoyment too good to last long, they look as
cosey and fussy as a gathering of Puritanical grand-dames drinking tea and gossiping over the
latest news.  Within a mile of the Ispahan gate are two other gates, and between them is an
area devoted entirely to the brick-making industry.  Here among the clay-pits and abandoned
kilns we obtain a momentary glimpse of a jackal, drinking from a ditch.  He slinks off out
of sight among the caves and ruins, as though conscious of acting an ungenerous part in seeking
his living in a city already full of gaunt, half-starved pariahs, who pass their lives in wandering
listlessly and hungrily about for stray morsels of offal.  Several of these pariahs have been
so unfortunate as to get down into the rampart ditch; we can see the places where they have
repeatedly made frantic rushes for liberty up the almost perpendicular escarp, only to fall
helplessly back to the bottom of their roofless dungeon, where they will gradually starve to
death.  The natives down in this part of the city greet us with curious looks; they are wondering
at the sight of two Ferenghis promenading the ramparts, far away from the European quarter;
we can hear them making remarks to that effect, and calling one another's attention.  The sun
gets warm, although it is January, as we pass the Doshan Tepe and the Meshed gates, remarking
as we go past that the Shah's summer palace on the hill to the east compares favorably in whiteness
with the snow on the neighboring mountains.  As we again reach the Gulaek gate and descend
from the ramparts at the place we started, the clock in the English Legation tower strikes twelve.

"How many miles do you call it." asks my companion.  "Just about twelve miles," I reply; "what
do you make it?" "That's about it," he agrees; "twelve miles round, and eleven gates.  We have
walked or climbed over the archway of eight of the gates; and at the other three we had to
climb off the ramparts and on again." As far as can be learned, this is the first time any
Ferenghi has walked clear around the ramparts of Teheran. It is nothing worth boasting about;
only a little tramp of a dozen miles, and there is little of anything new to be seen.  All
around the outside is the level plain, verdureless, except an occasional cultivated field,
and the orchards of the tributary villages scattered here and there.  In certain quarters of
Teheran one happens across a few remaining families of guebres, or fire-worshippers; remnant
representatives of the ancient Parsee religion, whose devotees bestowed their strange devotional
offerings upon the fires whose devouring flames they constantly fed, and never allowed to be
extinguished.  These people are interesting as having kept their heads above the overwhelming
flood of Mohammedanism that swept over their country, and clung to their ancient belief through
thick and thin - or, at all events, to have steadfastly refused to embrace any other. Little
evidence of their religion remains in Persia at the present day, except their "towers of silence"
and the ruins of their old fire-temples. These latter were built chiefly of soft adobe bricks,
and after the lapse of centuries, are nothing more than shapeless reminders of the past.  A
few miles southeast of Teheran, in a desolate, unfrequented spot, is the guebre "tower of silence,"
where they dispose of their dead.  On top of the tower is a kind of balcony with an open grated
floor; on this the naked corpses are placed until the carrion crows and the vultures pick the
skeleton perfectly clean; the dry bones are then cast into a common receptacle in the tower.
The guebre communities of Persia are too impecunious or too indifferent to keep up the ever-burning-fires
nowadays; the fires of Zoroaster, which in olden and more prosperous times were fed with fuel
night and day, are now extinguished forever, and the scattering survivors of this ancient form
of worship form a unique item in the sum total of the population of Persia.

The head-quarters - if they can be said to have any head-quarters - of the Persian guebres
are at Yezd, a city that is but little known to Europeans, and which is all but isolated from
the remainder of the country by the great central desert.  One great result of this geographical
isolation is to be observed to-day, in the fact that the guebres of Yezd held their own against
the unsparing sword of Islam better than they did in more accessible quarters; consequently
they are found in greater numbers there now than in other Persian cities.  Curiously enough,
the chief occupation - one might say the sole occupation - of the guebres throughout Persia,
is taking care of the suburban gardens and premises of wealthy people.  For this purpose I
am told guebre families are in such demand, that if they were sufficiently numerous to go around,
there would be scarcely a piece of valuable garden property in all Persia without a family
of guebres in charge of it.  They are said to be far more honest and trustworthy than the Persians,
who, as Shiite Mohammedans, consider themselves the holiest people on earth; or the Armenians,
who hug the flattering unction of being Christians and not Mohammedans to their souls, and
expect all Christendom to regard them benignly on that account.  It is doubtless owing to this
invaluable trait of their character, that the guebres have naturally drifted to their level
of guardians over the private property of their wealthy neighbors.

The costume of the guebre female consists of Turkish trousers with very loose, baggy legs,
the material of which is usually calico print, and a mantle of similar material is wrapped
about the head and body.  Unlike her Mohammedan neighbor, she 'makes no pretence of concealing
her features; her face is usually a picture of pleasantness and good-nature rather than strikingly
handsome or passively beautiful, as is the face of the Persian or Armenian belle.  The costume
of the men differs but little from the ordinary costume of the lower-class Persians.  Like
all the people in these Mohammedan countries, who realize the weakness of their position as
a small body among a fanatical population, the Teheran guebres have long been accustomed to
consider themselves as under the protecting shadow of the English Legation; whenever they meet
a "Sahib" on the street, they seem to expect a nod of recognition.

Among the people who awaken special interest in Europeans here, may be mentioned Ayoob Khan,
and his little retinue of attendants, who may be seen on the streets almost any day.  Ayoob
Khan is in exile here at Teheran in accordance with some mutual arrangement between the English
and Persian governments.  On almost any afternoon, about four o'clock, he may be met with riding
a fine, large chestnut stallion, accompanied by another Afghan on an iron gray.  I have never
seen them riding faster than a walk, and they are almost always accompanied by four foot-runners,
also Afghans, two of whom walk behind their chieftain and two before.  These runners carry
stout staves with which to warn off mendicants, and with a view to making it uncomfortable
for any irrepressible Persian rowdy who should offer any insults.  Both Ayoob Khan and his
attendants retain their national costume, the main distinguishing features being a huge turban
with about two feet of the broad band left dangling down behind; besides this, they wear white
cotton pantalettes even in mid-winter.  They wear European shoes and overcoats, as though they
had profited by their intercourse with Anglo-Indians to the extent of at least shoes and coat.
The foot-runners have their legs below the knee bound tightly with strips of dark felt.  Judging
from outward appearances, Ayoob Khan wears his exile lightly, for his rotund countenance looks
pleasant always, and I have never yet met him when he was not chatting gayly with his companion.
Of the interesting scenes and characters to be seen every day on the streets of Teheran, their
name is legion.  The peregrinating tchai-venders, who, with their little cabinet of tea and
sugar in one hand, and samovar with live charcoals in the other, wander about the city picking
up stray customers, for whom they are prepared to make a glass of hot tea at one minute's notice;
the scores of weird-looking mendicants and dervishes with their highly fantastic costumes,
assailing you with " huk, yah huk," the barbers shaving the heads of their customers on the
public streets - shaving their pates clean, save little tufts to enable Mohammed to pull them
up to Paradise; and many others the description and enumeration of which would, of themselves,
fill a good-sized volume.