There was something of a shudder about Clarence as he went to unbolt the back door; Martyn
kept close to him.  We saw them outside, and then Emily flew after them.  From my window I
could watch them advancing on the central gravel walk, Emily standing still between her brothers,
clasping an arm of each.  I saw the light near the ruin, and caught some sounds as of shrieks
and of threatening voices, the light flitted towards the gable of the mullion rooms, and then
was the concluding scream.  All was over, and the three came back much agitated, Emily sinking
into an armchair, panting, her hands over her face, and a nervous trembling through her whole
frame, Martyn's eyes looking wide and scared, Clarence with the well-known look of terror on
his face.  He hurried to fetch the tray of wine and water that was always left on the table
when anyone went to a party at night, but he shivered too much to prevent the glasses from
jingling, and I had to pour out the sherry and administer it to Emily.  'Oh! poor, poor thing,'
she gasped out.

'You saw?' I exclaimed.

'They did,' said Martyn; 'I only saw the light, and heard!  That was enough!' and he shuddered
again.

'Then Emily did,' I began, but Clarence cut me short.  'Don't ask her to-night.'

'Oh! let me tell,' cried Emily; 'I can't go away to bed till I have had it out.'

Then she gave the details, which were the more notable because she had not, like Martyn, been
studying our jottings, and had heard comparatively little of the apparition.

'When I joined the boys,' she said, 'I looked toward the mullion rooms; I saw the windows lighted
up, and heard a sobbing and crying inside.'

'So did I,' put in Martyn, and Clarence bent his head.

'Then,' added Emily, 'by the moonlight I saw the gable end, not blank, and covered by the magnolia
as it is now, but with stone steps up to the bricked-up doorway.  The door opened, the light
spread, and there came out a lady in black, with a lamp in one hand, and a kind of parcel in
the other, and oh, when she turned her face this way, it was Ellen's!'

'So you called out,' whispered Martyn.

'Dear Ellen, not as she used to be,' added Emily, 'but like what she was when last I saw her;
no, hardly that either, for this was sad, sad, scared, terrified, with eyes all tears, as Ellen
never, never was.'

'I saw,' added Clarence, 'I saw the shape, but not the countenance and expression as I used to do.'

'She came down the steps,' continued Emily, 'looking about her as if making her escape, but,
just as she came opposite to us, there was a sound of tipsy laughing and singing from the gate
up by the wood.'

'I thought it real,' said Martyn.

'Then,' continued Emily, 'she wavered, then turned and went under an arch in the ruin--I fancied
she was hiding something--then came out and fled across to the steps; but there were two dark
men rushing after her, and at the stone steps there was a frightful shriek, and then it was
all over, the steps gone, all quiet, and the magnolia leaves glistening in the moonshine. 
Oh! what can it all mean?'

'Went under the arch,' repeated Clarence.  'Is it what she hid there that keeps her from resting?'

'Then you believe it really happened?' said Emily, 'that some terrible scene is being acted
over again.  Oh! but can it be the real spirits!'

'That is one of the great mysteries,' answered Martyn; 'but I could tell you of other instances.'

'Don't now,' I interposed; 'Emily has had quite enough.'

We reminded her that the ghastly tragedy was over and would not recur again for another year;
but she was greatly shaken, and we were very sorry for her, when the clock warned her to go
to her own room, whither Martyn escorted her.  He lighted every candle he could find, and revived
the fire; but she was sadly overcome by what she had witnessed, she lay awake all the rest
of the night, and in the morning, looked so unwell, and had so little to tell about the party
that my mother thought her spirits had been too much broken for gaieties.

The real cause could not be confessed, for it would have been ascribed to some kind of delirium,
and have made a commotion for which my father was unfit.  Besides, we had reached an age when,
though we would not have disobeyed, liberty of thought and action had become needful.  All
our private confabulations were on this extraordinary scene.  We looked for the arch in the
ruin, but there was, as our morning senses told us, nothing of the kind.  She tried to sketch
her remembrance of both that and the gable of the mullion chamber, and Martyn prowled about
in search of some hiding-place. Our antiquarian friend, Mr. Stafford, had made a conjectural
drawing of the Chapel restored, and all the portfolios about the house were searched for it,
disquieting mamma, who suspected Martyn's Oxford notions of intending to rebuild it, nor would
he say that it ought not to be done.  However, he with his more advanced ecclesiology, pronounced
Mr. Stafford's reconstruction to be absolutely mistaken and impossible, and set to work on
a fresh plan, which, by the bye, he derides at present.  It afforded, however, an excuse for
routing under the ivy and among the stones, but without much profit.  From the mouldings on
the materials and in the stables and the front porch, it was evident that the chapel had been
used as a quarry, and Emily's arch was very probably that of the entrance door.  In a dry summer,
the foundations of the walls and piers could be traced on the turf, and the stumps of one or
two columns remained, but the rest was only a confused heap of fragments within which no one
could have entered as in that strange vision.

Another thing became clear.  There had once been a wall between the beech wood and the lawn,
with a gate or door in it; Chapman could just remember its being taken down, in James Winslow's
early married life, when landscape gardening was the fashion.  It must have been through this
that the Winslow brothers were returning, when poor Margaret perhaps expected them to enter
by the front.

We wished we could have consulted Dame Dearlove, but she had died a few years before, and her
school was extinct.

CHAPTER XLI--WILLS OLD AND NEW

'And that to-night thou must watch with me
   To win the treasure of the tomb.'

SCOTT.

Some seasons seem to be peculiarly marked, as if Death did indeed walk forth in them.

Old Mr. Frith died in the spring of 1841, and it proved that he had shown his gratitude to
Clarence by a legacy of shares in the firm amounting to about 2000 pounds.  The rest of his
interest therein went to Lawrence Frith, and his funded property to his sister, Mrs. Stevens,
a very fair and upright disposition of his wealth.

Only six weeks later, my father had a sudden seizure, and there was only time to summon Clarence
from London and Martyn from Oxford, before a second attack closed his righteous and godly career
upon earth.

My mother was very still and calm, hardly shedding a tear, but her whole demeanour was as if
life were over for her, and she had nothing to do save to wait.  She seemed to care very little
for tendernesses or attentions on our part.  No doubt she would have been more desolate without
them, but we always had a baffled feeling, as though our affection were contrasted with her
perfect union with her husband.  Yet they had been a singularly undemonstrative couple; I never
saw a kiss pass between them, except as greeting or farewell before or after a journey; and
if my mother could not use the terms papa or your father, she always said, 'Mr. Winslow.' 
There was a large gathering at the funeral, including Mr. Fordyce, but he slept at Hillside,
and we scarcely saw him--only for a few kind words and squeezes of the hand.  Holy Week was
begun, and he had to hurry back to Beachharbour that very night.

The will had been made on my father's coming into the inheritance. It provided a jointure of
800 pounds per annum for my mother, and gave each of the younger children 3000 pounds.  A codicil
had been added shortly after Griffith's death, written in my father's hand, and witnessed by
Mr. Henderson and Amos Bell.  This put Clarence in the position of heir; secured 500 pounds
a year to Griffith's widow, charged on the estate, and likewise an additional 200 pounds a
year to Emily and to me, hers till marriage, mine for life, 300 pounds a year to Martyn, until
Earlscombe Rectory should be voided, when it was to be offered to him.  The executors had originally
been Mr. Castleford and my mother, but by this codicil, Clarence was substituted for the former.

The legacies did not come out of the Chantry House property, for my father had, of course,
means of his own besides, and bequests had accrued to both him and my mother; but Clarence
was inheriting the estate much more burthened than it had been in 1829, having 2000 pounds
a year to raise out of its proceeds.

My mother was quite equal to business, with a sort of outside sense, which she applied to it
when needful.  Clarence made it at once evident to her that she was still mistress of Chantry
House, and that it was still to be our home; and she immediately calculated what each ought
to contribute to the housekeeping.  She looked rather blank when she found that Clarence did
not mean to give up business, nor even to become a sleeping partner; but when she examined
into ways and means, she allowed that he was prudent, and that perhaps it was due to Mr. Castleford
not to deprive him of an efficient helper under present circumstances.  Meantime she was content
to do her best for Earlscombe 'for the present,' by which she meant till her son brought home
a wife; but we knew that to him the words bore a different meaning, though he was still in
doubt and uncertainty how to act, and what might be the wrong to be undone.

He was anxious to persuade her to go from home for a short time, and prevailed on her at last
to take Emily and me to Dawlish, while the repairs went on which had been deferred during my
father's feebleness; at least that was the excuse.  We two, going with great regret, knew that
his real reason was to have an opportunity for a search among the ruins.

It was in June, just as Martyn came back from Oxford, eager to share in the quest.  Those two
brothers would trust no one to help them, but one by one, in the long summer evenings, they
moved each of those stones; I believe the servants thought they were crazed, but they could
explain with some truth that they wanted to clear up the disputed points as to the architecture,
as indeed they succeeded in doing.

They had, however, nearly given up, having reached the original pavement and disinterred the
piscina of the side altar, also a beautiful coffin lid with a floriated cross; when, in a kind
of hollow, Martyn lit upon the rotten remains of something silken, knotted together.  It seemed
to have enclosed a bundle.  There were some rags that might have been a change of clothing,
also a Prayer- book, decayed completely except the leathern covering, inside which was the
startling inscription, 'Margaret Winslow, her booke; Lord, have mercy on a miserable widow
woman.'  There was also a thick leathern roll, containing needles, pins, and scissors, entirely
corroded, and within these a paper, carefully folded, but almost destroyed by the action of
damp and the rust of the steel, so that only thus much was visible.  'I, Margaret Winslow,
being of sound mind, do hereby give and bequeath--'

Then came stains that defaced every line, till the extreme end, where a seal remained; the
date 1707 was legible, and there were some scrawls, probably the poor lady's signature, and
perhaps that of witnesses.  Clarence and Martyn said very little to one another, but they set
out for Dawlish the next day.

'Found' was indicated to us, but no more, for they arrived late, and had to sleep at the hotel,
after an evening when we were delighted to hear my mother ask so many questions about household
and parish affairs.  In the morning she was pleased to send all 'the children' out on the beach,
then free from the railway.  It was a beautiful day, with the intensely blue South Devon sea
dancing in golden ripples, and breaking on the shore with the sound Clarence loved so well,
as, in the shade of the dark crimson cliffs, Emily sat at my feet and my brothers unfolded
their strange discoveries into her lap.  There was a kind of solemnity in the thing; we scarcely
spoke, except that Emily said, 'Oh, will she come again,' and, as the tears gathered at sight
of the pathetic petition in the old book, 'Was that granted?'

We reconstructed our theory.  The poor lady must have repented of the unjust will forced from
her by her stepsons, and contrived to make another; but she must have been kept a captive until,
during their absence at some Christmas convivialities, she tried to escape; but hearing sounds
betokening their return, she had only time to hide the bundle in the ruin before she was detected,
and in the scuffle received a fatal blow.

'But why,' I objected, 'did she not remain hidden till her enemies were safe in the house?'

'Terrified beyond the use of her senses,' said Clarence.

'By all accounts,' said Martyn, 'the poor creature must have been rather a silly woman.'

'For shame, Martyn,' cried Emily, 'how can you tell?  They might have seen her go in, or she
might have feared being missed.'

'Or if you watch next Christmas you may see it all explained.'

To which Emily replied with a shiver that nothing would induce her to go through it again,
and indeed she hoped the spirit would rest since the discovery had been made.

'And then?'--one of us said, and there was a silence, and another futile attempt to read the will.

'I shall take it to London and see what an expert can do with it,' said Clarence.  'I have
heard of wonderful decipherings in the Record Office; but you will remember that even if it
can be made out, it will hardly invalidate our possession after a hundred and thirty years.'

'Clarence!' cried Emily in a horrified voice; and I asked if the date were not later than that
by which we inherited.

'Three years,' Clarence said, 'yes; but as things stand, it is absolutely impossible for me
to make restitution at present.'

'On account of the burthens on the estate?' I said.

'Oh, but we could give up,' said Emily.

'I dare say!' said Clarence, smiling; 'but to say nothing of poor Selina, my mother would hardly
see it in the same light, nor should I deal rightly, even if I could make any alterations;
I doubt whether my father would have held himself bound--certainly not while no one can read
this document.'

'It would simply outrage his legal mind,' said Martyn.

'Then what is to be done?  Is the injustice to be perpetual?' asked Emily.

'This is what I have thought of,' said Clarence.  'We must leave matters as they are till I
can realise enough either to pay off all these bequests, or to offer Mr. Fordyce the value
of the estate.'

'It is not the whole,' I said.

'Not the Wattlesea part.  This means Chantry House and the three farms in the village.  10,000
pounds would cover it.'

'Is it possible?' asked Emily.

'Yes,' returned Clarence, 'God helping me.  You know our concern is bringing in good returns,
and Mr. Castleford will put me in the way of doing more with my available capital.'

'We will save so as to help you!' added Emily.  At which he smiled.

Clarence went to London according to his determination, and as he had for some time been urgent
that I should try some newly-invented mechanical appliances, he took me with him, this being
the last expedition of the ancient yellow chariot.  One of his objects was that I should see
St. Paul's, Knightsbridge, which was then the most distinguished church of our school of thought,
and where there was to be some special preaching.  The Castlefords had a seat there, and I
was settled there in good time, looking at the few bits of stained glass then in the east window,
when, as the clergy came in from the vestry, I beheld a familiar face, and recognised the fine
countenance and bearing of our dear old friend Frank Fordyce.

Then, looking at the row of ladies in front of me, I beheld for a moment an outline of a profile
recalling many things.  No doubt, Anne Fordyce was there, though instead of barely emulating
my stunted stature, she towered above her companions, looking to my mind most fresh and graceful
in her pretty summer dress; and I knew that Clarence saw her too.

I had never heard Mr. Fordyce preach before, as in his flying visits his ministrations were
due at Hillside; and I certainly should have been struck with the force and beauty of his sermon
if I had never known him before.  It was curious that it was on the 49th Psalm, meant perhaps
for the fashionable congregation, but remarkably chiming in with the feelings of us, who were
conscious of an inheritance of evil from one who had 'done well unto himself;' though, no doubt,
that was the last thing honest Parson Frank was thinking of.

When the service was over, and Anne turned, she became aware of us, and her face beamed all
over.  It was a charming face, with a general likeness to dear Ellen's, but without the fragile
ethereal look, and all health, bloom, and enjoyment recalling her father's. She was only moving
to let her pew-fellows pass out, and was waiting for him to come for her, as he did in a few
moments, and he too was all pleasure and cordiality.  He told us when we were outside that
he had come up to preach, and 'had brought Miss Anne up for a spree.'  They were at a hotel,
Mrs. Fordyce was at home, and the Lesters were not in town this season--a matter of rejoicing
to us. Could we not come home and dine with them at once?  We were too much afraid of disappointing
Gooch to do so, but they made an appointment to meet us at the Royal Academy as soon as it
was open the next morning.

There was a fortnight of enjoyment.  Parson Frank was like a boy out for a holiday.  He had
not spent more than a day or two in town for many years; Anne had not been there since early
childhood, and they adopted Clarence as their lioniser, going through such a country- cousin
course of delights as in that memorable time with Ellen. They even went down to Eton and Windsor,
Frank Fordyce being an old Etonian.  I doubt whether Clarence ever had a more thoroughly happy
time, not even in the north of Devon, for there was no horse on his mind, and he was not suppressed
as in those days.  Indeed, I believe, it is the experience of others besides ourselves that
there is often more unmixed pleasure on casual holidays like this than in those of early youth;
for even if spirits are less high (which is not always the case), anticipations are less eager,
there is more readiness to accept whatever comes, more matured appreciation, and less fret
and friction at contretemps.

I was not much of a drag, for when I could not be with the others, I had old friends, and the
museum was as dear to me as ever, in those recesses that had been the paradise of my youth;
but there was a good deal in which we could all share, and as usual they were all kind consideration.

Anne overflowed with minute remembrances of her old home, and Clarence so basked in her sunshine
that it began to strike me that here might be the solution of all the perplexities especially
after the first evening, when he had shown his strange discovery to Mr. Fordyce, who simply
laughed and said we need not trouble ourselves about it.  Illegible was it?  He was heartily
glad to hear that it was.  Even otherwise, forty years' possession was quite enough, and then
he pointed to the grate, and said that was the best place for such things.  There was no fire,
but Clarence could hardly rescue the paper from being torn up.

As to the ghost, he knew much less than his daughter Ellen had done. He said his old aunt had
some stories about Chantry House being haunted, and had thought it incumbent on her to hate
the Winslows, but he had thought it all nonsense, and such stories were much better forgotten.
'Would he not see if there were any letters?'

There might be, perhaps in the solicitor's office at Bath, but if he ever got hold of them,
he should certainly burn them.  What was the use of being Christians, if such quarrels were
to be remembered?

Anne knew nothing.  Aunt Peggy had died before she could remember, and even Martyn had been
discreet.  Clarence said no more after that one conversation, and seemed to me engrossed between
his necessary business at the office, and the pleasant expeditions with the Fordyces.  Only
when they were on the point of returning home, did he tell me that the will had been pronounced
utterly past deciphering, and that he thought he saw a way of setting all straight.  'So do
I,' was my rejoinder, and there must have been a foolishly sagacious expression about me that
made him colour up, and say, 'No such thing, Edward.  Don't put that into my head.'

'Isn't it there already?'

'It ought not to be.  It would be mere treachery in these sweet, fresh, young, innocent, days
of hers, knowing too what her mother would think of it and of me.  Didn't you observe in old
Frank's unguarded way of reading letters aloud, and then trying to suppress bits, that Mrs.
Fordyce was not at all happy at our being so much about with them, poor woman.  No wonder!
the child is too young,' he added, showing how much, after all, he was thinking of it.  'It
would be taking a base advantage of them NOW.'

'But by and by?'

'If she should be still free when the great end is achieved and the evil repaired, then I might
dare.'

He broke off with a look of glad hope, and I could see it was forbearance rather than constitutional
diffidence that withheld him from awakening the maiden's feelings.  He was a very fine looking
man, in his prime--tall, strong, and well made, with a singularly grave, thoughtful expression,
and a rare but most winning smile; and Anne was overflowing with affectionate gladness at intercourse
with one who belonged to the golden age of her childhood.  I could scarcely believe but that
in the friction of the parting the spark would be elicited, and I should even have liked to
kindle it for them myself, being tolerably certain that warm-hearted, unguarded Parson Frank
would forget all about his lady and blow it with all his might.

We dined with the Fordyces at their hotel, and sat in the twilight with the windows open, and
we made Anne and Clarence sing, as both could do without notes, but he would not undertake
to remember anything with an atom of sentiment in it, and when Anne did sing, 'Auld lang syne,'
with all her heart, he went and got into a dark corner, and barely said, 'Thank you.'

Not a definite answer could be extracted from him in reply to all the warm invitations to Beachharbour
that were lavished on us by the father, while the daughter expatiated on its charms; the rocks
I might sketch, the waves and the delicious boating, and above all the fisher children and
the church.  Nothing was wanting but to have us all there!  Why had we not brought Mrs. Winslow,
and Emily, and Martyn, instead of going to Dawlish?

Good creatures, they little knew the chill that had been cast upon Martyn.  They even bemoaned
the having seen so little of him.  And we knew all the time that they were mice at play in
the absence of their excellent and cautious cat.

'Now mind you do come!' said Anne, as we were in the act of taking leave.  'It would be as
good as Hillside to have you by my Lion rock.  He has a nose just like old Chapman's, and you
must sketch it before it crumbles off.  Yes, and I want to show you all the dear old things
you made for my baby-house after the fire, your dear little wardrobe and all.'

She was coming out with us, oblivious that a London hotel was not like her own free sea-side
house.  Her father was out at the carriage door, prepared to help me in, Clarence halted a moment -

'Please, pray, go back, Anne,' he said, and his voice trembled. 'This is not home you know.'

She started back, but paused.  'You'll not forget.'

'Oh no; no fear of my forgetting.'

And when seated beside me, he leant back with a sigh.

'How could you help?' I said.

'How?  Why the perfect, innocent, childish, unconsciousness of the thing,' he said, and became
silent except for one murmur on the way.

'Consequences must be borne--'

CHAPTER XLIII--THE PRICE

'With thee, my bark, I'll swiftly go
   Athwart the foaming brine.'

LORD BYRON.

Clarence would not tell me his purpose, he said, till he had considered it more fully; nor
could we have much conversation on the way home, as my mother had arranged that we should bring
an old friend of hers back with us to pay her a visit.  So I had to sit inside and make myself
agreeable to Mrs. Wrightson, while Clarence had plenty of leisure for meditation outside on
the box seat.  The good lady said much on the desirableness of marriage for Clarence, and the
comfort it would be to my mother to see Emily settled.

We had heard much in town of railway shares; and the fortunes of Hudson, the railway king,
were under discussion.  I suspected Clarence of cogitating the using his capital in this manner;
and hoped that when he saw his way, he might not think it dishonourable to come into further
contact with Anne, and reveal his hopes.  He allowed that he was considering of such investments,
but would not say any more.

My mother and Emily had, in the meantime, been escorted home by Martyn.  The first thing Clarence
did was to bespeak Emily's company in a turn in the garden.  What passed then I never knew
nor guessed for years after.  He consulted her whether, in case he were absent from England
for five, seven, or ten years, she would be equal to the care of my mother and me.  Martyn,
when ordained, would have duties elsewhere, and could only be reckoned upon in emergencies.
My mother, though vigorous and practical, had shown symptoms of gout, and if she were ill,
I could hardly have done much for her; and on the other hand, though my health and powers of
moving were at their best, and I was capable of the headwork of the estate, I was scarcely
fit to be the representative member of the family. Moreover, these good creatures took into
consideration that poor mamma and I would have been rather at a loss as each other's sole companions.
I could sort shades for her Berlin work, and even solve problems of intricate knitting, and
I could read to her in the evening; but I could not trot after her to her garden, poultry-yard,
and cottages; nor could she enter into the pursuits that Emily had shared with me for so many
years.  Our connecting link, that dear sister, knew how sorely she would be missed, and she
told Clarence that she felt fully competent to undertake, conjointly with us, all that would
be incumbent on Chantry House, if he really wanted to be absent.  For the rest, Clarence believed
my mother would be the happier for being left regent over the estate; and his scheme broke
upon me that very forenoon, when my mother and he were settling some executor's business together,
and he told her that Mr. Castleford wished him to go out to Hong Kong, which was then newly
ceded to the English, and where the firm wished to establish a house of business.

'You can't think of it,' she exclaimed, and the sound fell like a knell on my ears.

'I think I must,' was his answer.  'We shall be cut out if we do not get a footing there, and
there is no one who can quite answer the purpose.'

'Not that young Frith--'

'Ten to one but he is on his way home.  Besides, if not, he has his own work at Canton.  We
see our way to very considerable advantages, if--'

'Advantages!' she interrupted.  'I hate speculation.  I should have thought you might be contented
with your station; but that is the worst of merchants,--they never know when to stop.  I suppose
your ambition is to make this a great overgrown mansion, so that your father would not know
it again.'

'Certainly not that, mamma,' said Clarence smiling; 'it is the last thing I should think of;
but stopping would in this case mean going backward.'

'Why can't Mr. Castleford send one of his own sons?'

'Probably Walter may come out by and by, but he has not experience enough for this.'

Clarence had not in the least anticipated my mother's opposition, for he had come to underestimate
her affection for and reliance on him.  He had us all against him, for not only could we not
bear to part with him; but the climate of Hong-Kong was in evil repute, and I had become persuaded
that, with his knowledge of business, railway shares and scrip might be made to realise the
amount needed, but he said, 'That is what I call speculation.  The other matter is trade in
which, with Heaven's blessing, I can hope to prosper.'

He explained that Mr. Castleford had received him on his coming to London with almost a request
that he would undertake this expedition; but with fears whether, in his new position, he could
or would do so, although his presence in China would be very important to the firm at this
juncture; and there would be opportunities which would probably result in very considerable
profits after a few years.  If Clarence had been, as before, a mere younger brother, it would
have been thought an excellent chance; and he would almost have felt bound by his obligations
to Mr. Castleford to undertake the first starting of the enterprise, if it had not been for
our recent loss, and the doubt whether he could he spared from home.

He made light of the dangers of climate.  He had never suffered in that way in his naval days,
and scarcely knew what serious illness meant.  Indeed, he had outgrown much of that sensibility
of nerve which had made him so curiously open to spiritual or semi-spiritual impressions.

'Any way,' he said, 'the thing is right to be done, provided my mother does not make an absolute
point of my giving it up; and whether she does or not depends a good deal on how you others
put it to her.'

'Right on Mr. Castleford's account?' I asked.

'That is one side of it.  To refuse would put him in a serious difficulty; but I could perhaps
come home sooner if it were not for this other matter.  I told him so far as that it was an
object with me to raise this sum in a few years, and he showed me how there is every likelihood
of my being able to do so out there.  So now I feel in your hands.  If you all, and Edward
chiefly, set to and persuade my mother that this undertaking is a dangerous business, and that
I can only be led to it by inordinate love of riches--'

'No, no--'

'That's what she thinks,' pursued Clarence, 'and that I want to be a grander man than my father.
That's at the bottom of her mind, I see.  Well, if you deplore this, and let her think the
place can't do without me, she will come out in her strength and make it my duty to stay at home.'

'It is very tempting,' said Emily.

'We all undertook to give up something.'

'We never thought it would come in this way!'

'We never do,' said Clarence.

'Tell me,' said Martyn, 'is this to content that ghost, poor thing? For it is very hard to
believe in her, except in the mullion room in December.'

'Exactly so, Martyn,' he answered.  'Impressions fade, and the intellect fails to accept them.
But I do not think that is my motive.  We know that a wicked deed was done by our ancestor,
and we hardly have the right to pray, "Remember not the sins of our forefathers," unless, now
that we know the crime, we attempt what restitution in us lies.'

There was no resisting after this appeal, and after the first shock, my mother was ready to
admit that as Clarence owed everything to Mr. Castleford, he could not well desert the firm,
if it were really needful for its welfare that he should go out.  We got her to look on Mr.
Castleford as captain of the ship, and Clarence as first lieutenant; and when she was once
convinced that he did not want to aggrandise the family, but to do his duty, she dropped her
objections; and we soon saw that the occupations that his absence would impose on her would
be a fresh interest in life.

Just as the decision was thus ratified, a packet from Canton arrived for Clarence from Bristol.
It was the first reply of young Frith to the tidings of the bequest which had changed the poor
clerk to a wealthy man, owning a large proportion of the shares of the prosperous house.

I asked if he were coming home, and Clarence briefly replied that he did not know,--'it depended--'

'Is he going to wed a fair Chinese with lily feet?' asked Martyn, to which the reply was an
unusually discourteous 'Bosh,' as Clarence escaped with his letter.  He was so reticent about
it that I required a solemn assurance that poor Lawrence's head had not been turned by his
fortune, and that there was nothing wrong with him. Indeed, there was great stupidity in never
guessing the purport of that thick letter, nor that it contained one for Emily, where Lawrence
Frith laid himself, and all that he had, at her feet, ascribing to her all the resolution with
which he had kept from evil, and entreating permission to come home and endeavour to win her
heart.  We lived so constantly together that it is surprising that Clarence contrived to give
the letter to Emily in private.  She implored him to say nothing to us, and brought him the
next day her letter of uncompromising refusal.

He asked whether it would have been the same if he had intended to remain at home.

'As if you were a woman, you conceited fellow,' was all the answer she vouchsafed him.

Nor could he ascertain, nor perhaps would she herself examine, on which side lay her heart
of hearts.  The proof had come whether she would abide by her pledge to him to accept the care
of us in his absence.  When he asked it, it had not occurred to him that it might be a renunciation
of marriage.  Now he perceived that so it had been, but she kept her counsel and so did he.
We others never guessed at what was going on between those two.

CHAPTER XLIV--PAYING THE COST

'But oh! the difference to me.'

WORDSWORTH.

So Clarence was gone, and our new life begun in its changed aspect. Emily showed an almost
feverish eagerness to make it busy and cheerful, getting up a sewing class in the village,
resuming the study of Greek, grappling with the natural system in botany, all of which had
been fitfully proposed but hindered by interruptions and my father's feebleness.

