A light singularly bright shone in the Governor's eyes, significant of a happy idea, and with
more haste than he had yet evinced, he replied:

"O Princess, the name of the Arab is Aboo-Obeidah; in the desert they call him the Singing
Sheik, and among Moslems, city bred and tent born alike, he is great and beloved. Such is his
sanctity that all doors he knocks at open to him, even those of harems zealously guarded. When
he arrives at Adrianople, in his first day there he will be conducted to the Hanoum of the
Sultan, and at her signal the ladies of the household will flock to hear him. Now, would it
please you, I will prevail on him to delay his journey that he may visit you at your palace."

"The adventure might distress him," she replied.

"Say not so. In such a matter I dare represent and pledge him. Only give me where you would
have him come, and the time, O Princess, and he will be there, not a star in the sky more constant."

"With my promise of good welcome to him then," she said, well pleased, "be my messenger, Sir
Governor, and say in the morning day after to-morrow at my palace by Therapia. And now thanks
again, and farewell."

So saying she held her hand to him, and he kissed it, and assisted her into the boat.

The adieux of the others, the Prince of India, Sergius and Lael, were briefer. The Governor
was polite to each of them; at the same time, his eyes, refusing restraint, wandered to where
the Princess sat looking at him with unveiled face.

In the mouth of the river the boats were brought together, and, while drifting, she expressed
the pleasure she had from the fortunate meeting with the Prince; his presence, she doubted
not, contributed greatly to the good conclusion of what in its beginning seemed so unpromising.

"Nor can I convey an idea of the confidence and comfortable feeling I derived from the society
of thy daughter," she added, speaking to the Prince, but looking at Lael. "She was courageous
and sensible, and I cannot content myself until she is my guest at Therapia."

"I would be greatly pleased," Lael said, modestly.

"Will the Princess appoint a time?" the Wanderer asked.

"To-morrow--or next week--at your convenience. These warm months are delightful in the country
by the water side. At Therapia, Prince--thou and thine. The blessing of the Saints go with
you--farewell."

Then though the boats kept on down toward Constantinople, they separated, and in good time
the Prince of India and Lael were at home; while the Princess carried Sergius to her palace
in the city. Next day, having provided him with the habit approved by metropolitan Greek priests,
she accompanied him to the patriarchal residence, introduced him with expressions of interest,
and left him in the holy keeping.

Sergius was accepted and rated a neophyte, the vanity of the Byzantine clergy scorning thought
of excellence in a Russian provincial. He entered upon the life, however, with humility and
zeal, governed by a friendly caution from the Princess.

"Remember," she said to him, as they paused on the patriarchal doorsteps for permission to
enter, "remember Father Hilarion is regarded here as a heretic. The stake, imprisonment in
darkness for life, the lions in the Cynegion, punishment in some form of approved cruelty awaits
a follower of his by open avowal. Patience then; and when endurance is tried most, and you
feel it must break, come to me at Therapia. Only hold yourself in readiness, by reading and
thought, to speak for our Christian faith unsullied by human inventions, and bide my signal."

And so did he observe everything and venture nothing that presently he was on the road to high
favor.

CHAPTER XVI

AN EMBASSY TO THE PRINCESS IRENE

When the Princess Irene returned to Therapia next day, she found awaiting her the Dean of the
Court, an official of great importance to whom the settlement of questions pertinent to rank
was confided. The state barge of fifteen oars in which he arrived was moored to the marbles
of the quay in front of her palace, a handsomely ornamented vessel scarcely needing its richly
liveried rowers to draw about it the curious and idle of the town in staring groups. At sight
of it, the Princess knew there was a message for her from the Emperor. She lost no time in
notifying the Dean of her readiness to receive him. The interview took place in the reception room.

The Dean was a venerable man who, having served acceptably through the preceding reign, was
immensely discreet, and thoroughly indurate with formalism and ceremony; wherefore, passing
his speech and manner, it is better worth the while to give, briefly as may be, the substance
of the communication he brought to the Princess.

He was sure she remembered all the circumstances of the coronation of His Majesty, the Emperor,
and of His Majesty's entry into Constantinople; he was not so certain, however, of her information
touching some matters distinguishable as domestic rather than administrative. Or she might
know of them, but not reliably. Thus she might not have heard authentically that, immediately
upon his becoming settled in the imperial seat, His Majesty decided it of first importance
to proceed to the selection of a spouse.

The Dean then expatiated on the difficulty of finding in all the world a woman suitable for
the incomparable honor. So many points entered into the consideration--age, appearance, rank,
education, religion, dowry, politics--upon each of which he dwelt with the gravity of a philosopher,
the assurance of a favorite, and the garrulity of age. Having at length presented the problem,
and, he thought, sufficiently impressed the Princess with its unexampled intricacies and perils,
he next unfolded the several things resolved upon and attempted in the way of solution.

Every royal house in the West had been searched for its marriageable females. At one time a
daughter of the Doge of Venice was nearly chosen. Unfortunately there were influential Greeks
of greater pride than judgment to object to the Doge. He was merely an elective chief. He might
die the very day after celebrating the espousals, and then--not even the ducal robes were inheritable.
No, the flower to deck the Byzantine throne was not in the West.

Thereupon the East was explored. For a time the election trembled between a Princess of Trebizond
and a Princess of Georgia. As usual the court divided on the question, when, to quiet the factions,
His Majesty ordered Phranza, the Grand Chamberlain, a courtier of learning and diplomatic experience,
who held the Emperor's confidence in greater degree than any other court official, unless it
might be the Dean himself, to go see the rivals personally, and report with recommendation.
The ambassador had been gone two years. From Georgia he had travelled to Trebizond; still nothing
definite. The embassy, having been outfitted in a style to adequately impress the semi-barbarians,
was proving vastly expensive. His Majesty, with characteristic wisdom, had determined to take
the business in his own keeping. There were many noble families in Constantinople. Why not
seek a consort among them?

The scheme had advantages; not least, if a Byzantine could be found, the Emperor would have
the happiness of making the discovery and conducting the negotiations himself--in common parlance,
of doing his own courting. There might be persons, the Dean facetiously remarked, who preferred
trusting the great affair of wife-choosing to ambassadors, but he had never seen one of them.

The ground covered by the ancient in his statement is poorly represented by these paragraphs,
ample as they may seem to the reader. Indeed, the sun was falling swiftly into the lap of night
when he thought of concluding. Meantime the Princess listened silently, her patience sustained
by wonder at what it all meant. The enlightenment at last came.

"Now, my dear Princess," he said, lowering his voice, "you must know "--he arose, and, as became
one so endued with palace habits, peered cautiously around.

"Be seated, my Lord," she said; "there are no eyes in my doors nor ears in my walls."

"Oh, the matter is of importance--a state secret!" He drew the stool nearer her.

"You must know, dear Princess, that the Grand Chamberlain, Phranza, has been negligent and
remiss in the time he has consumed, saying nothing of his lavishment of treasure so badly needed
at home. Notaras, the Admiral, and the Grand Domestic, are both pursuing His Majesty vigorously
for funds and supplies; worse still, the Patriarch lets slip no opportunity to bid him look
at the furniture of the churches going to ruin. The imperial conscience being tender in whatever
pertains to God and religion, he has little peace left for prayers. Wherefore, there are of
us who think it would be loyalty to help secure a bride for His Majesty at home, and thus make
an end to the wasteful and inconclusive touring of Phranza."

The Dean drew yet nearer the Princess, and reduced his voice to a tone slightly above a whisper.

"Now you must know further--I am the author and suggestor of the idea of His Majesty's choosing
an Empress from the many noble and beautiful dames and maidens of this our ancient city of
Byzantium, in every respect the equals, and in many points mentionable the superiors of the
best foreigner possible of finding."

The Dean pursed his white-bearded mouth, and posed himself proudly; but his auditor still holding
her peace, he leaned forward further, and whispered, "My dear Princess, I did more. I mentioned
you to His Majesty"--

The Princess started to her feet, whiter than whitest marble in the Pentelic panelling of the
room; yet in total misapprehension of her feeling, the venerable intriguant went on without
pause: "Yes, I mentioned you to His Majesty, and to-morrow, Princess--to-morrow--he will come
here in person to see you, and urge his suit."

He dropped on his knees, and catching her hand, kissed it.

"O Princess, fairest and most worthy, suffer me first of all the court to congratulate you
on the superlative honor to which you will he invited. And when you are in the exalted position,
may I hope to he remembered"--

He was not permitted to finish the petition. Withdrawing her hand with decisive action, she
bade him be silent or speak to her questions. And he was silent through surprise.

In such manner she gained an interval for thought. The predicament, as she saw it, was troublesome
and unfortunate. Honor was intended her, the highest in the imperial gift, and the offer was
coming with never a doubt of its instantaneous and grateful acceptance. Remembering her obligations
to the Emperor, her eyes filled with tears. She respected and venerated him, yet could not
be his Empress. The great title was not a sufficient inducement. But how manage the rejection?
She called on the Virgin for help. Directly there was a way exposed. First, she must save her
benefactor from rejection; second, the Dean and the court must never know of the course of
the affair or its conclusion.

"Rise, my Lord," she said, kindly though with firmness. "The receiver of great news, I thank
you, and promise, if ever I attain the throne to hold you in recollection. But now, so am I
overwhelmed by the prospect, I am not myself. Indeed, my Lord, would you increase my indebtedness
to its utmost limit, take every acknowledgment as said, and leave me--leave me for preparation
for the morrow's event. God, his Son and angels only know the awfulness of my need of right
direction and good judgment."

He had the wit to see her agitation, and that it was wisest for him to depart.

"I will go, Princess," he said, "and may the Holy Mother give you of her wisdom also." She
detained him at the door to ask: "Only tell me, my Lord, did His Majesty send you with this
notice?"

"His Majesty honored me with the message."

"At what hour will he come?"

"In the forenoon."

"Report, I pray you then, that my house will be at his service."

CHAPTER XVII

THE EMPEROR'S WOOING

About ten o'clock the day following the extraordinary announcement given, a galley of three
banks of oars, classed a trireme, rounded the seaward jut of the promontory overhanging the
property of the Princess Irene at Therapia.

The hull of the vessel was highly ornate with gilding and carving. At the how, for figure-head,
there was an image of the Madonna of the Panagia, or Holy Banner of Constantinople. The broad
square sail was of cherry-red color, and in excellent correspondence, the oars, sixty to a
side, were painted a flaming scarlet. When filled, the sail displayed a Greek cross in golden
filament. The deck aft was covered with a purple awning, in the shade of which, around a throne,
sat a grave and decorous company in gorgeous garments; and among them moved a number of boys,
white-shirted and bare of head, dispensing perfume from swinging censers. Forward, a body guard,
chosen from the household troops and full armed, were standing at ease, and they, with a corps
of trumpeters and heralds in such splendor of golden horns and tabards of gold as to pour enrichment
over the whole ship, filled the space from bulwark to bulwark. The Emperor occupied the throne.

This galley, to which the harmonious movement of the oars gave a semblance of life, in the
distance reminding one of a great bird fantastically feathered and in slow majestic motion,
was no sooner hove in sight than the townspeople were thrown into ferment. A flotilla of small
boats, hastily launched, put out in racing order to meet and escort it into the bay, and before
anchorage was found, the whole shore was astir and in excited babblement.

A detachment of the guard was first landed on the quay in front of the Princess' gate. Accepting
the indication, thither rushed the populace; for in truth, since the occupation of the Asiatic
shore of the Bosphorus by the Turks, the Emperor seldom extended his voyages far as Therapia.
Then, descending the sides by carpeted stairs, the suite disembarked, and after them, amidst
a tremendous flourish from the trumpet corps, Constantine followed.

The Emperor, in his light boat, remained standing during the passage to the shore that he might
be seen by the people; and as he then appeared, helmed and in close-fitting cuirass, his arms
in puffed sleeves of red silk, his legs, below a heavily embroidered narrow skirt, clothed
in pliant chain mail intricately linked, his feet steel-shod, a purple cloak hanging lightly
at the back from neck to heel, and spurred and magnificently sworded, and all agleam with jewels
and gold, it must be conceded he justified his entitlement.

At sight of his noble countenance, visible under the raised visor, the spectators lifted their
voices in hearty acclamations--"God and Constantine! Live the Emperor!"

It really seemed as if the deadly factiousness of the capital had not reached Therapia. In
the lifted head, the brightened eyes, the gracious though stately bows cast right and left,
Constantine published the pleasure the reception was giving him.

A long flourish timed his march through the kiosk of the gate, and along the shell-strewn,
winding road, to the broad steps leading to the portico of the palace; there, ascending first,
he was received by the Princess.

Amid a group of maids in attendance, all young, fair, high-born, she stood, never more tastefully
attired, never more graceful and self-possessed, never more lovely, not even in childhood before
the flitting of its virginal bloom; and though the portico was garden-like in decoration, vines,
roses and flowering shrubs everywhere, the sovereign had eyes for her alone.

Just within the line of fluted pillars he halted, and drew himself up, smiling as became a
suitor, yet majestic as became a king. Then she stepped forward, and knelt, and kissed his
hand, and when he helped her to her feet, and before the flush on her forehead was gone, she said:

"Thou art my sovereign and benefactor; nor less for the goodnesses thou hast done to thy people,
and art constantly doing, welcome, O my Lord, to the house thou didst give me."

"Speak not so," he replied. "Or if it please thee to give me credit, be it for the things which
in some way tried me, not those I did for reward."

"Reward!"

"Ay, for such are pleasure and peace of mind."

Then one by one, she naming them as they advanced, her attendants knelt, and kissed the floor
in front of him, and had each a pleasant word, for he permitted none to excel him in decorous
gallantry to good women.

In return, he called the officers of his company according to their rank; his brother, who
had afterward the grace to die with him; the Grand Domestic, general of the army; the Grand
Duke Notaras, admiral of the navy; the Grand Equerry (Protostrator); the Grand Chancellor of
the Empire (Logothete); the Superintendent of Finance; the Governor of the Palace (Curopalate);
the Keeper of the Purple Ink; the Keeper of the Secret Seal; the First Valet; the Chief of
the Night Guard (Grand Drumgaire); the Chief of the Huntsmen (Protocynege); the Commander of
the Body Guard of Foreigners (Acolyte); the Professor of Philosophy; the Professor of Elocution
and Rhetoric; the Attorney General (Nornophylex); the Chief Falconer (Protojeracaire) and others--these
he called one by one, and formally presented to the Princess, not minding that with many of
them she was already acquainted.

They were for the most part men advanced in years, and right well skilled in the arts of courtiership.
The empressement of manner with which they saluted her was not lost upon her woman's instinct;
infinitely quick and receptive, she knew without a word spoken, that each left his salute on
her hand believing it the hand of his future Empress. Last of those presented was the Dean
of the Court. He was noticeably formal and distant; besides being under the eye of his master,
the wily diplomat was more doubtful of the outcome of the day's visit than most of his colleagues.

"Now," the Princess said, when the presentation was finished, "will my most noble sovereign
suffer me to conduct him to the reception room?"

The Emperor stepped to her side, and offered his hand. "Pardon, Sire," she added, taking the
hand. "It is necessary that I speak to the Dean."

And when the worthy came to her, she said to him: "Beyond this, under the portico, are refreshments
for His Majesty's suite. Serve me, I pray, by leading thy colleagues thither, and representing
me at the tables. Command the servants whom thou wilt find there."

Now the reader must not suppose he is having in the foregoing descriptions examples of the
style of ceremonials most in fashion at the Greek court. Had formality been intended, the affair
would have been the subject of painstaking consideration at a meeting of officials in the imperial
residence, and every point within foresight arranged; after which the revolution of the earth
might have quickened, and darkness been unnaturally precipitated, without inducing the slightest
deviation from the programme.

When resolving upon the visit, Constantine considerately thought of the Princess' abhorrence
of formality, and not to surprise her, despatched the Dean with notice of the honor intended.
Whereupon she arranged the reception to suit herself; that is, so as to remain directress of
the occasion. Hence the tables under the portico for the entertainment of the great lords,
with the garden open to them afterward. This management, it will be perceived, left Constantine
in her separate charge.

So, while the other guests went with the Dean, she conducted the Emperor to the reception room,
where there were no flowers, and but one armless chair. When he was seated, the two alone,
she knelt before him, and without giving him time to speak, said, her hands crossed upon her
bosom: "I thank my Lord for sending me notice of his coming, and of his purpose to invite me
to share his throne. All night I have kept the honor he intended me in mind, believing the
Blessed Mother would listen to my prayers for wisdom and right direction; and the peace and
confidence I feel, now that I am at my Lord's feet, must be from her.... Oh, my Lord, the trial
has not been what I should do with the honor, but how to defend you from humiliation in the
eyes of your court. I wish to be at the same time womanly and allegiant. How gentle and merciful
you have been to me! How like a benignant God to my poor father! If I am in error, may Heaven
forgive me; but I have led you here to say, without waiting for the formal proposal, that while
you have my love as a kinswoman and subject, I cannot give you the love you should have from
a wife."

Constantine was astonished.

"What!" he said.

Before he could get further, she continued, sinking lower at his feet:

"Ah me, my Lord, if now thou art thinking me bold and forward, and outcast from natural pride,
what can I but plead the greater love I bear you as my benefactor and sovereign? ... It may
be immodest to thus forestall my Lord's honorable intent, and decline being his wife before
he has himself proposed it; yet I pray him to consider that with this avowal from me, he may
go hence and affirm, God approving the truth, that he thought better of his design, and did
not make me any overture of marriage, and there will be no one to suffer but me.... The evil-minded
will talk, and judge me punished for my presumption. Against them I shall always have a pure
conscience, and the knowledge of having rescued my Lord from an associate on his throne who
does not love him with wifely devotion."

Pausing there, the Princess looked into his face, her own suffused. His head drooped; insomuch
that the tall helmet with its glitter, and the cuirass, and fine mail reenforced by the golden
spurs and jewelled sword and sword-harness, but deepened the impression of pain bewrayed on
his countenance.

"Then it is as I have heard," he said, dejectedly. "The rustic hind may have the mate of his
choice, and there is preference allowed the bird and wild wolf. The eye of faith beholds marriages
of love in meeting waters and in clouds brought together from diverse parts. Only Kings are
forbidden to select mates as their hearts declare. I, a master of life and death, cannot woo,
like other men."

The Princess moved nearer him.

"My Lord," she said, earnestly, "is it not better to be denied choice than to be denied after
choosing?"

"Speakest thou from experience?" he asked.

"No," she answered, "I have never known love except of all God's creatures alike."

"Whence thy wisdom then?"

"Perhaps it is only a whisper of pride."

"Perhaps, perhaps! I only know the pain it was intended to relieve goes on." Then, regarding
her moodily, not angrily, nor even impatiently, he continued: "Did I not know thee true as
thou art fair, O Princess, and good and sincere as thou art brave, I might suspect thee."

"Of what, my Lord?"

"Of an intent to compass my misery. Thou dost stop my mouth. I may not declare the purpose
with which I came--I to whom it was of most interest --or if I do, I am forestopped saying,
'I thought better of it, and told her nothing.' Yet it was an honorable purpose nursed by sweet
dreams, and by hopes such as souls feed upon, strengthening themselves for trials of life;
I must carry it back with me, not for burial in my own breast, but for gossips to rend and
tear, and make laughter of--the wonder and amusement of an unfeeling city. How many modes of
punishment God keeps in store for the chastening of those who love Him!"

"It is beggarly saying I sympathize"--

"No, no--wait!" he cried, passionately. "Now it breaks upon me. I may not offer thee a seat
on my throne, or give a hand to help thee up to it; for the present I will not declare I love
thee; yet harm cannot come of telling thee what has been. Thou hadst my love at our first meeting.
I loved thee then. As a man I loved thee, nor less as an Emperor because a man. Thou wast lovely
with the loveliness of the angels. I saw thee in a light not of earth, and thou wert transparent
as the light. I descended from the throne to thee thinking thou hadst collected all the radiance
of the sun wasting in the void between stars, and clothed thyself in it."

"Oh, my Lord"--

"Not yet, not yet"--

"Blasphemy and madness!"

"Be it so!" he answered, with greater intensity. "This once I speak as a lover who was--a lover
making last memories of the holy passion, to be henceforth accounted dead. Dead? Ah, yes!--to
me--dead to me!"

She timidly took the hand he dropped upon his knee at the close of a long sigh.

"It may rest my Lord to hear me," she said, tearfully. "I never doubted his fitness to be Emperor,
or if ever I had such a doubt, it is no more. He has conquered himself! Indeed, indeed, it
is sweet to hear him tell his love, for I am woman; and if I cannot give it back measure for
measure, this much may be accepted by him--I have never loved a man, and if the future holds
such a condition in store for me, I will think of my Lord, and his strength and triumph, and
in my humbler lot do as he has so nobly done. He has his Empire to engage him, and fill his
hours with duties; I have God to serve and obey with singleness. Out of the prison where my
mother died, and in which my father grew old counting his years as they slowly wore away, a
shadow issued, and is always at hand to ask me, 'Who art thou? What right hast thou to happiness?'
And if ever I fall into the thought so pleasant to woman, of loving and being loved, and of
marriage, the shadow intervenes, and abides with me until I behold myself again bounden to
religion, a servant vowed to my fellow creatures sick, suffering, or in sorrow."

Then the gentle Emperor fell to pitying her, and asked, forgetful of himself, and thinking
of things to lighten her lot, "Wilt thou never marry?"

"I will not say no, my Lord," she answered. "Who can foresee the turns of life? Take thou this
in reply--never will I surrender myself to wedlock under urgency of love alone. But comes there
some great emergency, when, by such sacrifice, I may save my country, or my countrymen in multitude,
or restore our holy religion overthrown or in danger, then, for the direct God-service there
may be in it, I could give myself in contract, and would."

"Without love?" he asked.

"Yes, without loving or being loved. This body is not mine, but God's, and He may demand it
of me for the good of my fellow-men; and, so there be no tarnishment of the spirit, my Lord,
why haggle about the husk in which the spirit is hidden?"

She spoke with enthusiasm. Doubt of her sincerity would have been blasphemous. That such fate
should be for her, so bright, pure and heroic! Not while he had authority! And in the instant
he vowed himself to care of her by resolution strong as an oath. In thought of the uncertainties
lowering over his own future, he saw it was better she should remain vowed to Heaven than to
himself; thereupon he arose, and standing at her side, laid a hand lightly upon her head, and
said solemnly:

"Thou hast chosen wisely. May the Blessed Mother, and all the ministering angels, in most holy
company, keep guard lest thou be overtaken by calamity, sorrow and disappointment. And, for
me, O Irene!"--his voice shook with emotion--"I shall be content if now thou wilt accept me
for thy father."

She raised her eyes, as to Heaven, and said, smiling: "Dear God! How Thou dost multiply goodnesses,
and shower them upon me!"

He stooped, and kissed her forehead.

"Amen, sweet daughter!"

Then he helped her to her feet.

"Now, while thou wert speaking, Irene, it was given me to see how the betrothal I was determined
upon would have been a crime aside from wresting thee from the service of thy choice. Phranza
is a true and faithful servant. How know I but, within his powers, and as he lawfully might,
he has contracted me by treaty to acceptance of the Georgian? Thou hast saved me, and my ancient
Chamberlain. Those under the portico are conspirators. But come, let us join them."

CHAPTER XVIII

THE SINGING SHEIK

IT was about ten o'clock when the Emperor and Princess Irene appeared on the portico, and,
moving toward the northern side, wended slowly through the labyrinth of flowers, palms, and
shrubs. The courtiers and dignitaries, upon their approach, received them in respectful silence,
standing in groups about the tables.

A chair, with arms, high back, and a canopy, looking not unlike a sedilium, had been set in
an open space. The reservation was further marked by a table in front of the chair, and two
broad-branched palm trees, one on each side. Thither the Princess conducted the sovereign;
and when he was seated, at a signal from her, some chosen attendants came bearing refreshments,
cold meats, bread, fruits, and wines in crystal flagons, which they placed on the table, and
retiring a little way, remained in waiting, while their mistress, on a stool at the left of
the board, did the honors.

The introduction of a queen into a palace is usually the signal for a change of the existing
domestic regime. Old placeholders go out; new favorites come in; and not seldom the revolution
reaches the highest official circles of the government. The veterans of the suite, to some
of whom this bit of knowledge had come severely home, were very watchful of the two superior
personages. Had His Majesty really exposed his intent to the Princess? Had he declared himself
to her? Had she accepted? The effect was to trebly sharpen the eyes past which the two were
required to go on their way to the reserved table.

Mention has been made of Phranza, the Grand Chamberlain, at the moment absent on a diplomatic
search for an imperial consort. Of all attaches of the court, he was first in his master's
regard; and the distinction, it is but just to say, was due to his higher qualities and superior
character. The term favorite, as a definition of relationship between a despot and a dependent,
is historically cloudy; wherefore it is in this instance of unfair application. Intimate or
confidante is much more exactly descriptive. But be that as it may, the good understanding
between the Emperor and his Grand Chamberlain was amply sufficient to provoke the jealousy
of many of the latter's colleagues, of whom Duke Notaras, Grand Admiral, and the most powerful
noble of the Empire, was head and front. The scheme for the elevation of the Princess to the
throne originated with him, and was aimed malevolently at Phranza, of whom he was envious,
and Constantine, whom he hated on religious grounds. Interest in the plot brought him to Therapia;
yet he held himself aloof, preferring the attitude of a spectator coldly polite to that of
an active partisan in the affair. He declined sitting at a table, but took position between
two of the columns whence the view of the bay was best. There were numbers of the suite, however,
who discredited the motive with which he chose the place.

"See Notaras," said one of a group, whispering to friends drinking wine a little way off. "The
scene before him is charming, but is he charmed with it as he appears?"

"There was an old demi-god with an eye in his forehead. Notaras' best orb just now is in the
back of his head. He may be looking at the bay; he is really watching the portico"--such was
the reply.

"Out! He cares nothing for us."

"Very true--we are not the Emperor."

"My Lord Duke is not happy to-day," was remarked in another coterie.

"Wait, my dear friend. The day is young."

"If this match should not be made after all"--

"He will know it first."

"Yes, nothing from the lovers, neither smile nor sigh, can escape him."

The Professor of Philosophy and his brother the Professor of Rhetoric ate and drank together,
illustrating the affinity of learning.

"Our Phranza is in danger," said the latter, nervously. "As thou art a subscriber to the doctrine
of the Phaedon, I wish we could disembody our souls, if only for an hour."

"Oh, a singular wish! What wouldst thou?"

"Tell it not; but"--the voice dropped into a whisper--"I would despatch mine in search of the
wise Chamberlain to warn him of what is here in practice."

"Ah, my brother, thou didst me the honor to read and approve my treatise on the Philosophy
of Conspiracy. Dost thou remember the confounding elements given in the thesis?"

"Yes--Goodness is one."

"Under condition; that is, when the result is dependent upon a party of virtuous disposition."

"I remember now."

"Well, we have the condition here."

"The Princess!"

"And therefore the Duke, not our Phranza, is in danger. She will discomfit him."

"May Heaven dispose so!" And the Rhetorician almost immediately added, "Observe thou. Notaras
has established himself within easy hearing of the two. He has actually invaded the space reserved
for them."

"As if to confirm my forecast!"

Then the Philosopher raised a cup.

"To Phranza!"

"To Phranza!" the Rhetorician responded.

This episode hardly concluded when the Emperor's brother sauntered to the Duke's side; and
on the appearance of the Emperor and the Princess, he exclaimed, enthusiastically:

"Come of it what may, my Lord, the damsel is comely, and I fear not to compare her with the
best of Trebizond or Georgia."

The Duke did not answer. Indeed, the lords were all intent upon exactly the same subject. Whether
there had been an overture and an acceptance, or an overture and a declination, they believed
the principals could not conceal the result; a look, a gesture, or something in the manner
of one or both of them, would tell the tale to eyes of such practical discernment. By the greater
number the information would be treated as news for discussion merely; a few had hopes or fears
at stake; none of them was so perilously involved as Notaras; in his view, failure meant the
promotion of Phranza, of all consequences, not excepting his own loss of favor and prestige,
the most intolerable.

On the other part, Constantine was not less concerned in misleading his court. At the proper
time he would give out that he had changed his mind at the last moment; before engaging himself
to the Princess, he had concluded it best to wait and hear from Phranza. Accordingly, in passing
along the portico, he endeavored to look and behave like a guest; he conversed in an ordinary
tone; he suffered his hostess to precede him; and, well seconded by her, he was installed in
the state chair, without an argument yes or no for the sharp reviewers. At the table he appeared
chiefly solicitous to appease an unusual hunger, which he charged to the early morning air
on the Bosphorus.

Notaras, whom nothing of incident, demeanor or remark escaped, began very early to be apprehensive.
Upon beholding his master's unlover-like concession to appetite, he remarked sullenly, "Verily,
either his courage failed, and he did not submit a proposal, or she has rejected him."

"My Lord Duke," the Emperor's brother replied, somewhat stung, "dost thou believe it in woman
to refuse such an honor?"

"Sir," the Duke retorted, "women who go about unveiled are above or below judgment."

The Princess, in her place at the table, began there to recount her adventure at the White
Castle, but when far enough in the recital to indicate its course the Emperor interrupted her.

"Stay, daughter," he said, gently. "The incident may prove of international interest. If not
objectionable to you, I should be pleased to have some of my friends hear it." Then raising
his voice, he called out: "Notaras, and thou, my brother, come, stand here. Our fair hostess
had yesterday an astonishing experience with the Turks on the other shore, and I have prevailed
on her to narrate it." The two responded to the invitation by drawing nearer the Emperor at
his right hand.

"Proceed now, daughter," the latter said.

"Daughter, daughter, indeed!" the Duke repeated to himself, and so bitterly it may be doubted
if his master's diplomacy availed to put him at rest. The paternalism of the address was decisive--Phranza
had won.

Then, presently overcoming her confusion, the Princess succeeded in giving a simple but clear
account of how she was driven to the Castle, and of what befell her while there. When she finished,
the entire suite were standing about the table listening.

Twice she had been interrupted by the Emperor.

"A moment!" he said to her, while she was speaking of the Turkish soldiery whose arrival at
the ancient stronghold had been so nearly simultaneous with her own. Then he addressed himself
to the Grand Domestic and the Admiral. "My Lords, in passing the Castle, on our way up, you
remember I bade the pilot take our ship near the shore there. It seemed to me the garrison
was showing unusually large, while the flags on the donjon were strange, and the tents and
horses around the walls implied an army present. You remember?"

"And we have now, Sire, the justification of your superior wisdom," the Grand Domestic replied,
rising from a low salutation.

"I recall the circumstance, my Lords, to enjoin you not to suffer the affair to slip attention
when next we meet in council--I pray pardon, daughter, for breaking the thread of your most
interesting and important narrative. I am prepared to listen further."

Then, after description of the Governor, and his reception of the fugitives on the landing,
His Majesty, with apologies, asked permission to offer another inquiry.

"Of a truth, daughter, the picture thou hast given us under the title of Governor beareth no
likeness to him who hath heretofore responded to that dignity. At various times I have had
occasion to despatch messengers to the commandant, and returning, they have reported him a
coarse, unrefined, brutish-looking person, of middle age and low rank; and much I marvel to
hear the freedom with which this person doth pledge my august friend and ally, Sultan Amurath.
My Lords, this will furnish us an additional point of investigation. Obviously the Castle is
of military importance, requiring an old head full of experience to keep it regardful of peace
and clear understanding between the powers plying the Bosphorus. We are always to be apprehensive
of the fire there is in young blood."

"With humility, Your Majesty," said the Grand Domestic, "I should like to hear from the Princess,
whose loveliness is now not more remarkable than her courage and discretion, the evidence she
has for the opinion that the young man is really the Governor."

She was about to reply when Lysander, the old servant, elbowed himself through the brilliant
circle, and dropped his javelin noisily by her chair.

"A stranger calling himself an Arab is at the gate," he said to her, with the semblance of
a salutation.

The simplicity of the ancient, his zeal in the performance of his office, his obliviousness
to the imperial presence, caused a ripple of amusement.

"An Arab!" the Princess exclaimed, in momentary forgetfulness. "How does the man appear?"

Lysander was in turn distraught; after a short delay, however, he managed to answer: "His face
is dark, almost black; his head is covered with a great cloth of silk and gold; a gown hides
him from neck to heels; in his girdle there is a dagger. He has a lordly air, and does not
seem in the least afraid. In brief, my mistress, he looks as if he might be king of all the
camel drivers in the world."

The description was unexpectedly graphic; even the Emperor smiled, while many of the train,
presuming license from his amusement, laughed aloud. In the midst of the merriment, the Princess,
calmly, and with scarce a change from her ordinary tone, proceeded to an explanation.

"Your Majesty," she said, "I am reminded of an invitation left with the person whose identity
was in discussion the instant of this announcement. In the afternoon, while I was sojourning
in the White Castle, an Arab story-teller was presented to me under recommendation of my courteous
host. He was said to be of great professional renown in the East, a Sheik travelling to Adrianople
for the divertisement of the Hanoum of the Sultan. In the desert they call him endearingly
the Singing Sheik. I was glad to have the hours assisted in their going, and he did not disappoint
me. So charmed was I by his tales and manner of telling them, by his genius, that in taking
my departure from what proved a most agreeable retreat, and in acknowledging the hospitable
entertainment given me, I referred to the singer, and requested the Governor to prevail on
him to extend his journey here, in order to favor me with another opportunity to hear him.
Had I then known it was in my Lord's purposes to visit me with such a company of most noble
gentlemen, or could I have even anticipated the honor, I should not have appointed to-day for
the audience with him. But he is in attendance; and now, with full understanding of the circumstances,
it is for Your Majesty to pronounce upon his admission. Perhaps"--she paused with a look of
deprecation fairly divisible share and share alike between the Emperor and the Lords around
her--"perhaps time may hang heavy with my guests this morning; if so, I shall hold myself obliged
to the Singing Sheik if he can help me entertain them."

Now, was there one present to attach a criticism to the favor extended the Arab, he dismissed
it summarily, wondering at her easy grace. The Emperor no doubt shared the admiration with
his suite; but concealing it, he said, with an air of uncertainty, "Thy recommendation, daughter,
is high; and if I remain, verily, it will be with expectation wrought up to a dangerous degree;
yet having often heard of the power of the strolling poets of whom this one is in probability
an excellent example, I confess I should be pleased to have thee admit him."

Of the Admiral, he then asked, "We were to set out in return about noon, were we not?"

"About noon, Your Majesty."

"Well, the hour is hardly upon us. Let the man appear, daughter; only, as thou lovest us, contrive
that he keep to short recitals, which, without holding us unwillingly, will yet suffice to
give an idea of his mind and methods. And keep thyself prepared for an announcement of our
departure, and when received, mistake it not for discontent with thyself. Admit the Arab."

CHAPTER XIX

TWO TURKISH TALES

The situation now offered the reader is worth a pause, if only to fix it in mind.

Constantine and Mahommed, soon to be contestants in war, are coming face to face, lovers both
of the same woman. The romance is obvious; yet it is heightened by another circumstance. One
of them is in danger.

We of course know Aboo-Obeidah, the Singing Sheik, is Prince Mahommed in disguise; we know
the Prince also as heir of Amurath the Sultan, a very old man liable to vacate place and life
at any moment. Suppose now the rash adventurer--the term fits the youth truly as if he were
without rank--should be discovered and denounced to the Emperor. The consequences can only
be treated conjecturally.

In the first place, to what extremities the Prince would be put in explaining his presence
there. He could plead the invitation of the Princess Irene. But his rival would be his judge,
and the judge might find it convenient to laugh at the truth, and rest his decision on the
prisoner's disguise, in connection with his own presence--two facts sufficiently important
to serve the most extreme accusation.

Constantine, next, was a knightly monarch who knew to live nobly, and dared die as he lived;
yet, thinking of what he might do with Mahommed fallen into his hands under circumstances so
peculiar, there was never a Caesar not the slave of policy. In the audience to Manuel the sailor,
we have seen how keenly sensitive he was to the contraction the empire had suffered. Since
that day, to be sure, he had managed to keep the territory he came to; none the less, he felt
the Turk to whom the stolen provinces invariably fell was his enemy, and that truce or treaty
with him did not avail to loosen the compression steadily growing around his capital. Over
and over, daytime and night, the unhappy Emperor pondered the story of the daughter of Tantalus;
and often, starting from dreams in which the Ottoman power was a serpent slowly crawling to
its victim, he would cry in real agony--"O Constantinople--Niobe! Who can save thee but God?
And if He will not--alas, alas!" The feeling thus engendered was not of a kind to yield readily
to generosity. Mahommed once securely his, everything might be let go--truth, honor, glory--everything
but the terms of advantage purchasable with such an hostage.

The invitation to the imaginary Sheik had been a last act of grace by Irene, about to embark
for the city. Mahommed, when he accepted, knew Therapia by report a village very ancient historically,
but decaying, and now little more than a summer resort and depot of supplies for fishermen.
That its proverbial quietude would be disturbed, and the sleepy blood of its inhabitants aroused,
by a royal galley anchoring in the bay to discharge the personnel of the empire itself, could
have had no place in his anticipations. So when he stepped into a boat, the Aboo-Obeidah of
his eulogy, and suffered himself, without an attendant, to be ferried across to Roumeli-Hissar;
when he there took an humble wherry of two oars, and bade the unliveried Greeks who served
them pull for Therapia, it was to see again the woman who was taking his fancy into possession,
not Constantine and his court bizarre in splendor and habitude. In other words, Mahommed on
setting out had no idea of danger. Love, or something very like it, was his sole inspiration.

The trireme, with the white cross on its red sail, its deck a martial and courtly spectacle,
had been reported to him as the hundred and twenty flashing scarlet blades, in their operation
a miracle of unity, whisked it by the old Castle, and he had come forth to see it. Where are
they going? he asked those around him; and they, familiar with the Bosphorus, its shipping
and navigation, answered unanimously, To exercise her crew up in the Black Sea; and thinking
of the breadth of the dark blue fields there, the reply commended itself, and he dismissed
the subject.

The course chosen by his boatmen when they put off from Roumeli-Hissar kept him close to the
European shore, which he had leisure to study. Then, as now, it was more favored than its Asiatic
opposite. The winds from the sea, southward blowing, unloaded their mists to vivify its ivy
and myrtle. The sunlight, tarrying longest over its pine-clad summits, coaxed habitations along
the shore; here, a palace; there, under an overhanging cliff, a hamlet; yonder, a long extended
village complaisantly adapting itself to the curvatures of the brief margin left it for occupancy.
Wherever along the front of the heights and on the top there was room for a field the advantage
had been seized. So the Prince had offered him the sight of all others most significant of
peace among men--sight of farmers tilling the soil. With the lucid sky above him summer-laden,
the water under and about him a liquid atmosphere, the broken mountain-face changing from lovely
to lovelier, and occasionally awakening him with a superlative splendor, the abodes so near,
and the orchards and strawberry and melon patches overhead, symbolizing goodwill and fraternity
and happiness amongst the poor and humble--with these, and the rhythmic beating of the oars
to soothe his spirit, fierce and mandatory even in youth, he went, the time divided between
views fair enough for the most rapturous dreams, and the Greek, of whom, with all their brightness,
they were but dim suggestions. Past the stream-riven gorge of Balta-Liman he went; past Emirghian;
past the haven of Stenia, and the long shore-town of Yenikeui; then, half turning the Keuibachi
bend, lo! Therapia, draggling down the stony steep, like a heap of bangles on a brown-red cheek.
And there, in the soft embracement of the bay, a bird with folded wings asleep--the trireme!

The sight startled the Prince. He spoke to the rowers, and they ceased fighting the current,
and with their chins over their shoulders, looked whither he pointed. From ship to shore he
looked; then, pursuing the curve inland to the bridge at the upper end; thence down what may
be called the western side, he beheld people crowding between a quay and a red kiosk over which
pended a wooded promontory.

"There is a Princess living in this vicinity," said he to one of the rowers, slightly lifting
the handkerchief from his face. "Where is her palace?"

"In the garden yonder. You see the gate over the heads of the men and women."

"What is her name?"

"Princess Irene. She is known on this shore as the Good Princess."

"Irene--a sound pleasant to the ear"--Mahommed muttered. "Why is she called good?"

"Because she is an angel of mercy to the poor."

"That is not usual with the great and rich," he said next, yielding to a charm in the encomiums.

"Yes," the boatman responded, "she is great, being akin to the Emperor, and rich, too, though"--

Here the man broke off to assist in bringing the boat back from its recession with the current,
at this point boisterously swift.

"You were saying the Princess is rich," Mahommed said, when the oars were again at rest.

"Oh, yes! But I cannot tell you, my friend, how many are partners in her wealth. Every widow
and orphan who can get to her comes away with a portion. Isn't it so?"

His companion grunted affirmatively, adding: "Down yonder a man with a crooked back lives in
an arched cell opening on the water. Perhaps the stranger saw it as he came up."

"Yes," Mahommed answered.

"Well, in the back part of the cell he has an altar with a crucifix and a picture of the Blessed
Mother on it, and he keeps a candle burning before them day and night--something he could not
do if we did not help him, for candles of wax are costly. He has named the altar after the
Princess, Sta. Irene. We often stop and go in there to pray; and I have heard the blessings
in the light of that candle are rich and many as the Patriarch has for sale in Sta. Sophia."

These praises touched Mahommed; for, exalted as he was in station, he was aware of the proneness
of the poor to berate the rich and grumble at the great, and that such had been a habit with
them from the commencement of the world. Again the boat slipped down the current; when it was
brought back, he asked: "When did the ship yonder come up?"

"This morning."

"Oh, yes! I saw it then, but thought the crew were being taken to the sea for practice."

"No," the boatman replied, "it is the state galley of His Majesty the Emperor. Did you not
see him? He sat on the throne with all his ministers and court around him."

Mahommed was startled.

"Where is the Emperor now?" he inquired.

"I should say, seeing the crowd yonder, that His Majesty is in the palace with the Princess."

"Yes," said the second rower, "they are waiting to see him come out."

"Row out into the bay. I should like to have the view from that quarter."

While making the detour, Mahommed reflected. Naturally he remembered himself the son of Amurath;
after which it was easy to marshal the consequences of exposure, if he persisted in his venture.
He saw distinctly how his capture would be a basis of vast bargaining with his father, or,
if the sturdy old warrior preferred revenge to payment of a ruinous ransom, how the succession
and throne might slip to another, leaving him a prisoner for life.

Yet another matter presented itself to him which the reader may decide worthy a separate paragraph.
Its mention has been waiting this opportunity. The Prince from Magnesia, his seat of government,
was on the way to Adrianople, called thither by his father, who had chosen a bride for him,
daughter of a renowned Emir. Regularly he would have crossed the Hellespont at Gallipoli; a
whim, however, took him to the White Castle--whim or destiny, one being about as satisfactory
as the other. Pondering silently whether it were not best to return, he thought, apropos the
Princess Irene, of the nuptials to be celebrated, and of his bride expectant; and a Christian,
pausing over the suggestion, may be disposed to condemn him for inconstancy.

In countries where many wives are allowed the same husband he is not required to love any of
them. Indeed, his fourth spouse may be the first to command him; hers the eyes for his enslavement;
hers the voice of the charmer charming both wisely and forever. Mahommed did now think of the
Emir's daughter, but not with compunction, nor even in comparison. He had never seen her face,
and would not until after the wedding days. He thought of her but to put her aside; she could
not be as this Christian was, neither so accomplished nor courtly; besides which, it was dawning
upon him that there were graces of mind and soul as well as of person, while perfection was
a combination of all the graces in equal degree. Gleams of the latter had visited him while
gazing into the radiant face of the Emperor's kinswoman; and how, at such favoring times, his
fancy had gone out to her and come back warmed, enlivened, glorified! There is a passion of
the mind and a passion of the blood; and though one and one make two, two is still a multiple
of one.

Looking thus at the galley, Mahommed thought of the tales in the East not less common than
in the West, and believed in them faithfully, for chivalry was merely on the wane--tales of
beauteous damsels shut up in caves or adamantine castles, with guardian lions couchant at the
gates, and of well-sworded heroes who marched boldly up to the brutes, and slew them, and delivered
the captives always with reward. Of course, in making the application, the Princess was the
prisoner, the ship the lion, and himself--well, in want of a sword, he laid hand upon his dagger,
precisely as a liberating knight up to the ideal would do.

Nor was this all. The revelations of the Prince of India were still fresh to him. He wished
to see his competitor. How did he look? Was there enough of him to make battle? He smiled thinking
of the pleasure there would be in slyly studying the Princess and the Emperor at the same time.
He drew the handkerchief down, looked at his brown-stained hands, and adjusted the folds of
his burnoose. The disguise was perfect.

"Take me to the landing--there before the gate of the Good Princess," he said, with the air
of a traveller above suspicion.

His resolution was taken. Challenging all chances, he would respond to the invitation of the
Princess. And so completely were doubt and hesitation dismissed with our adventurer, that it
was not Mahommed who stepped from the boat where the populace was in densest assemblage, but
Aboo-Obeidah, the Singing Sheik, and as such we will speak of him.

The guard at the gate, viewing him askance, detained him until he could be reported.

A fair conception of the scene presented when the Sheik stood on the floor of the portico is
probably in the reader's mind; yet a glance at it may be pardoned. It was at first like a sudden
introduction to an oriental garden. There were the vines, flowering shrubs, fruiting trees,
many-fronded palms, and the effect of outdoors derived from the shadows of the pillars, and
the sunshine streaming brilliantly through the open intervals. The tables bore proofs of the
collation served upon them. Overhead was the soft creaminess of pure marble in protected state
mellowed by friendly touches of time. At the end of the vista, the company was indistinctly
visible through the verdure of obtruding branches. Voices came to him from that part, and gleams
of bright garments; and to get to them it seemed he must pass through a viridescent atmosphere
flecked with blooms, and faintly sweet with odors. For in losing the masculinity of their race
the Greeks devoted themselves more and more to refined effeminacies.

Moving slowly forward under the guidance of Lysander, whose javelin beating the floor accentuated
the rasping shuffle of his sandals, the Sheik came presently to a full view of the concourse.

He stopped, partly in obedience to a fine instinct of propriety teaching him he was now subject
to the pleasure of his hostess, and partly to single out the royal enemy against whom he believed
he was about to be pitted by destiny.

Constantine was sitting at ease, his left elbow resting on an arm of the sedilium, his forefinger
supporting his cheek, his cloak across his lap. The attitude was reflective; the countenance
exposed under the lifted visor of the helmet, was calm and benignant; except there was no suggestion
of an evil revery holding the current of his thought, or casting a shade of uncertainty over
his soul, he looked not unlike the famous Il Penseroso familiar to art-seekers in the Medici
Chapel of Florence. Then the eyes of the rivals met. The Greek was in no wise moved. How it
would have been with him could he have seen through the disguise of the Sheik may never be
said. On the other part, the Sheik lifted his head, and seemed taking on increase of stature.
A projecting fold of the head-kerchief overhung his face, permitting nothing to be seen but
red-hued cheeks, a thin beard, and eyes black and glittering. The review he felt himself undergoing
did not daunt him; it only sent his pride mounting, like a leap of flame. "By the Virgin!"
said one of the courtiers to another, in a louder tone than the occasion demanded. "We may
indeed congratulate ourselves upon having seen the king of camel drivers." There was a disposition
to laugh amongst the lighter-minded of the guests, but the Princess checked it by rising. "Bid
the Sheik approach," she said, to the old domestic; and, at a sign from her, the waiting-women
drew closer about her chair. The figure of the Princess clad all in white, a bracelet of plain
gold upon her left arm, fillets in her hair, one red, the other blue, a double strand of pearls
about her neck--this figure, with the small head, perfect in turn, set matchlessly upon the
sloping shoulders, the humid eyes full of violet light, the cheeks flushed with feeling--this
figure so bright in its surroundings, admitted no rivalry in attention, none in admiration;
the courtiers, old and young, turned from the Sheik, and the Sheik from the Emperor. In a word,
every eye centred upon the Princess, every tongue bade hush lest what she said might be lost.
Etiquette required the Sheik's presentation to the Emperor first, but seeing her about to comply
with the rule, he prostrated himself at her feet. As he arose, she said: "When I invited you
to come and give me more of the cheer there is in your art, O Sheik, I did not know my gracious
kinsman, to whom every Greek is proud and happy to be allegiant, designed visiting me to-day.
I pray you will not suffer too much from his presence, but regard him a royal auditor who delights
in a tale well told, and in verses when the theme and measure go lovingly together. His Majesty,
the Emperor!"

"Hist! Didst hear?" whispered the Professor of Philosophy to the Professor of Rhetoric. "Thyself
couldst not have spoken better."

"Ay, truly," the other answered. "Save a trifle of stiffness, the speech might have served
Longinus."

With her last word, the Princess stepped aside, leaving Mahommed and Constantine front to front.

Had the Sheik been observant of the monarch's dues, he would have promptly prostrated himself;
but the moment for the salutation passed, and he remained standing, answering the look he received
calmly as it was given. The reader and the writer know the reason governing him; the suite,
however, were not so well informed, and they began to murmur. The Princess herself appeared
embarrassed.

"Lord of Constantinople," the Sheik said, seeing speech was his, "were I a Greek, or a Roman,
or an Ottoman, I should make haste to kiss the floor before you, happy of the privilege; for--be
the concession well noted"--he glanced deferentially around him as he spoke--"the report which
the world has of you is of a kind to make it your lover. After a few days--Allah willing--I
shall stand before Amurath the Sultan. Though in reverencing him I yield not to any one simply
his friend, he will waive prostration from me, knowing what Your Majesty may not. In my country
we cleanse the ground with our beards before no one but God. Not that we are unwilling to conform
to the rules of the courts in which we find ourselves; with us it is a law--To kiss a man's
hand maketh him the master; prostrate thyself to him, and without other act, thou becomest
his subject. I am an Arab!"

The Sheik was not in the least defiant; on the contrary, his manner was straightforward, simple,
sincere, as became one interposing conscience against an observance in itself rightful enough.
Only in the last exclamation was there a perceptible emphasis, a little marked by a lift of
the head and a kindling of the eyes.

"I see Your Majesty comprehends me," he said, continuing; "yet to further persuade your court,
and especially the fair and high-born lady, whose guest, with all my unworthiness, I am, from
believing me moved in this matter by disrespect for their sovereign, I say next, if by prostration
I made myself a Roman, the act would be binding on the tribe whose Sheik I am by lawful election.
And did I that, O thou whose bounties serve thy people in lieu of rain! though my hand were
white, like the first Prophet's, when, to assure the Egyptian, he drew it from his bosom, it
would char blacker than dust of burned willow--then, O thou, lovelier than the queen the lost
lapwing reported to Solomon! though my breath were as the odor of musk, it would poison, like
an exhalation from a leper's grave--then, O my lords! like Karoon in his wickedness, I should
hear Allah say of me, O Earth, swallow him! For as there are crimes and crimes, verily the
chief who betrays his brethren born to the practice of freedom, shall wander between tents
all his days, crying, Oh, alas! oh, alas! Who now will defend me against God?"

When the Sheik paused, as if for judgment, he was not only acquitted of intentional disrespect;
the last grumbler was anxious to hear him further.

"What astonishing figures!" the Philosopher whispered to the Rhetorician. "I begin to think
it true that the East hath a style of its own."

"I commend thy sagacity, my brother," the other replied. "His peroration was redolent of the
Koran--A wonderful fellow nevertheless!"

Presently the whole concourse was looking at the Emperor, with whom it rested whether the Sheik
should be dismissed or called on for entertainment.

"Daughter," said Constantine to the Princess, "I know not enough of the tribal law of thy guest
to have an opinion of the effect upon him and his of the observance of our ancient ceremony;
wherefore we are bound to accept his statement. Moreover it does not become our dignity to
acquire subjects and dominion, were they ever so desirable, in a method justly liable to impeachment
for treachery and coercion. Besides which--and quite as important, situated as we are--thy
hospitality is to be defended."

Here the Sheik, who had been listening to the Emperor, and closely observing him, thrice lightly
clapped his hands.

"It remains for us, therefore, to waive the salutation in this instance."

A ripple of assent proceeded from the suite.

"And now, daughter," Constantine pursued, "thy guest being present to give thee of his lore,
it may be he will be pleased to have us of his audience as well. Having heard much of such
performances, and remembering their popularity when we were in our childhood, we will esteem
ourselves fortunate if now favored by one highly commended as a master in his guild." When
my brethren under the black tents are told of my having won the willing ear of their Majesties
of Byzantium and Adrianople, they will think of me as one who has been permitted to walk in
the light of two suns simultaneous in shining."

So saying, he bowed very low.

"My only unhappiness now is in not knowing the direction in which my Lord's preferences run;
for as a stream goes here and there, but all the time keeps one general course, seeking the
sea, so with taste; though it yield a nod now, and then a smile, it hath always a deeper delight
for the singer's finding. I have the gay and serious--history, traditions--the heroics of men
and nations, their heart-throbs in verse and prose--all or any for the Lord of Constantinople
and his kinswoman, my hostess,--may her life never end until the song of the dove ceases to
be heard in the land!"

"What say you, my friends?" asked Constantine, glancing graciously at those around him.

Then they looked from him to the Princess, and in thought of the betrothal, replied, "Love--something
of love!"

"No," he returned, unflinchingly. "We are youths no longer. There is enlightenment in the traditions
of nations. Our neighbors, the Turks-- what hast thou of them, Sheik?"

"Didst thou hear?" said Notaras to one at his elbow. "He hath recanted; the Empress will not
be a Greek."

There was no answer; for the Sheik, baring his head, hung the kerchief and cord upon his arm,
preliminaries which gave him perfectly to view. A swarthy face; hair black, profuse, closely
cut along the temples; features delicate but manly--these the bystanders saw in a general way,
being more attracted by the repressed fire in the man's eyes, and his air high and severely noble.

When the Princess caught sight of the countenance, she fell into a confusion. She had seen
it, but where and when? The instant he was beginning he gazed at her, and in the exchange of
glances she was reminded of the Governor bidding her adieu on the shore of the Sweet Waters.
But he was youthful, while this one--could it be he was old? The feeling was a repetition of
that she had in the Castle when the storyteller appeared the first time.

"I will tell how the Turks became a Nation."

Then, in Greek but a little broken, the Sheik began a recital.

  ALAEDDIN AND ERTOGHRUL

  I

  A tale of Ertoghrul!--
                        How when the Chief
  Lay one day nooning with his stolen herds,
  A sound of drumming smote him from the East,
  And while he stood to see what came of it,
  The West with like notes fainter, echo-like,
  Made answer; then two armies rode in view,
  Horses and men in steel, the sheen of war
  About them and above, and wheeling quick
  From column into line, drew all their blades,
  Shook all their flags, and charged and lost themselves
  In depths of dusty clouds, which yet they tore
  With blinding gleams of light, and yells of rage,
  And cheers so high and hoarse they well might seem
  The rolling thunder of a mountain storm.
  Long time the hosts contended; but at last
  The lesser one began to yield the ground,
  Oppressed in front, and on its flanks o'erwhelmed:
  And hasted then the end, a piteous sight,
  Most piteous to the very brave who know
  From lessons of their lives, how seldom 'tis
  Despair can save where valor fails to win.
  Then Ertoghrul aroused him, touched to heart.

  "My children, mount, and out with cimeter!
  I know not who these are, nor whence they come;
  Nor need we care. 'Twas Allah led them here,
  And we will honor Him--and this our law;
  What though the weak may not be always right,
  We'll make it always right to help the weak.
  Deep take the stirrups now, and ride with me,
  Allah-il-Allah!"

                     Thus spake Ertoghrul;
  And at the words, with flying reins, and all
  His eager tribe, four hundred sworded men,
  Headlong he rode against the winning host.

  II

  Beneath the captured flags, the spoils in heaps
  Around him laid, the rescued warrior stood,
  A man of kingly mien, while to him strode
  His unexpected friend.

                         "Now who art thou?"
  The first was first to ask.

                              "Sheik Ertoghrul
  Am I."

         "The herds I see--who calls them his?"

  Laughed Ertoghrul, and showed his cimeter.
  "The sword obeys my hand, the hand my will,
  And given will and hand and sword, I pray
  Thee tell me, why should any man be poor?"

  "And whose the plain?"

                         "Comes this way one a friend
  Of mine, and leaves his slippers at my door,
  Why then, 'tis his."
                       "And whose the hills that look
  Upon the plain?"

                   "My flocks go there at morn,
  And thence they come at night--I take my right
  Of Allah."

             "No," the stranger mildly said,
  "'Twas Allah made them mine."

                                Frowned Ertoghrul,
  While darkened all the air; but from his side
  Full pleasantly the stranger took a sword,
  Its carven hilt one royal emerald,
  Its blade both sides with legends overwrought,
  Some from the Koran, some from Solomon,
  All by the cunning Eastern maker burned
  Into the azure steel-his sword he took,
  And held it, belt, and scabbard too, in sign
  Of gift.

           "The herds, the plain, the hills were mine;
  But take thou them, and with them this in proof
  Of title."

             Lifted Ertoghrul his brows,
  And opened wide his eyes.

                            "Now who art thou?"
  He asked in turn.

                    "Oh, I am Alaeddin--
  Sometimes they call me Alaeddin the Great."

  "I take thy gifts--the herds, the plain, the hills,"
  Said Ertoghrul; "and so I take the sword;
  But none the less, if comes a need, 'tis thine.
  Let others call thee Alaeddin the Great;
  To me and mine thou'rt Alaeddin the Good
  And Great."

              With that, he kissed the good King's hand;
  And making merry, to the Sheik's dowar
  They rode. And thus from nothing came the small;
  And now the lonely vale which erst ye knew,
  And scorned, because it nursed the mountain's feet,
  Doth cradle mornings on the mountain's top.

                                   Mishallah!

The quiet which held the company through the recitation endured a space afterwards, and--if
the expression be allowed--was in itself a commentary upon the performance.

"Where is our worthy Professor of Rhetoric?" asked Constantine.

"Here, Your Majesty," answered the man of learning, rising.

"Canst thou not give us a lecture upon the story with which thy Arabian brother hath favored us?"

"Nay, sire, criticism, to deal justly, waiteth until the blood is cool. If the Sheik will honor
me with a copy of his lines, I will scan and measure them by the rules descended to us from
Homer, and his Attic successors."

The eyes of the Emperor fell next upon the moody, discontented face of Duke Notaras.

"My lord Admiral, what sayest thou of the tale?"

"Of the tale, nothing; of the story-teller--I think him an insolent, and had I my way, Your
Majesty, he should have a plunge in the Bosphorus."

Presuming the Sheik unfamiliar with Latin, the Duke couched his reply in that tongue; yet the
former raised his head, and looked at the speaker, his eyes glittering with intelligence--and
the day came, and soon, when the utterance was relentlessly punished.

"I do not agree with you, my Lord," Constantine said, in a melancholy tone. "Our fathers, whether
we look for them on the Roman or the Greek side, might have played the part of Ertoghrul. His
was the spirit of conquest. Would we had enough of it left to get back our own!--Sheik," he
added, "what else hast thou in the same strain? I have yet a little time to spare--though it
shall be as our hostess saith."

"Nay," she answered, with deference, "there is but one will here."

And taking assent from her, the Sheik began anew.

  EL JANN AND HIS PARABLE

  Bismillah!

                           Ertoghrul pursued a wolf,
  And slew it on the range's tallest peak,
  Above the plain so high there was nor grass
  Nor even mosses more. And there he sat
  Him down awhile to rest; when from the sky,
  Or the blue ambiency cold and pure,
  Or maybe from the caverns of the earth
  Where Solomon the King is wont to keep
  The monster Genii hearkening his call,
  El Jann, vast as a cloud, and thrice as black,
  Appeared and spoke--

                      "Art thou Sheik Ertoghrul?"

  And he undaunted answered: "Even so."

  "Well, I would like to come and sit with thee."

  "Thou seest there is not room for both of us."

  "Then rise, I say, and get thee part way down
  The peak."

             "'Twere easier," laughed Ertoghrul,
  "Madest thou thyself like me as thin and small;
  And I am tired."

                   A rushing sound ran round and up
  And down the height, most like the whir of wings
  Through tangled trees of forests old and dim.
  A moment thus--the time a crisped leaf,
  Held, armlength overhead, will take to fall--
  And then a man was sitting face to face
  With Ertoghrul.

                  "This is the realm of snow,"
  He said, and smiled--"a place from men secure,
  Where only eagles fearless come to nest,
  And summer with their young."

                                The Sheik replied,
  "It was a wolf--a gaunt gray wolf, which long
  Had fattened on my flocks--that lured me here.
  I killed it."

                "On thy spear I see no blood;
  And where, O Sheik, the carcass of the slain?
  I see it not."

                 Around looked Ertoghrul--
  There was no wolf; and at his spear--
  Upon its blade no blood. Then rose his wrath,
  A mighty pulse.

                  "The spear hath failed its trust--
  I'll try the cimeter."

                         A gleam of light--
  A flitting, wind-borne spark in murk of night--
  Then fell the sword, the gift of Alaeddin;
  Edge-first it smote the man upon his crown--
  Between his eyes it shore, nor staying there,
  It cut his smile in two--and not yet spent,
  But rather gaining force, through chin and chine,
  And to the very stone on which he sat
  It clove, and finished with a bell-like clang
  Of silvern steel 'gainst steel.

                                  "Aha! Aha!"--
  But brief the shout; for lo! there was no stain
  Upon the blade withdrawn, nor moved the man,
  Nor changed he look or smile.

                                "I was the wolf
  That ran before thee up the mountain side;
  'Twas I received thy spear as now thy sword;
  And know thou further, Sheik, nor wolf nor man
  Am I, nor mortal thing of any kind;
  Only a thought of Allah's. Canst thou kill
  A thought divine? Not Solomon himself
  Could that, except with thought yet more divine.
  Yield thee thy rage; and when thou think'st of me
  Hereafter, be it as of one, a friend,
  Who brought a parable, and made display
  Before thee, saying--
                       "Lo! what Allah wills."

  Therewith he dropped a seed scarce visible
  Into a little heap of sand and loam
  Between them drawn.

                     "Lo! Allah wills."

                                        And straight
  The dust began to stir as holding life.
  Again El Jann--

                 "Behold what Allah wills!"

  A tiny shoot appeared; a waxen point
  Close shawled in many folds of wax as white,
  It might have been a vine to humbly creep--
  A lily soon to sunward flare its stars--
  A shrub to briefly coquette with the winds.
  Again the cabalism--

                      "Lo! Allah's will."

  The apparition budded, leafed, and branched,
  And with a flame of living green lit all
  The barrenness about. And still it grew--
  Until it touched the pillars of the earth,
  And lapped its boundaries, the far and near,
  And under it, as brethren in a tent,
  The nations made their home, and dwelt in peace
  Forever.

           "Lo!"--

                  And Ertoghrul awoke.

                                      Mishallah!

This recitation commanded closer attention than the first one. Each listener had a feeling
that the parable at the end, like all true parables, was of continuous application, while its
moral was in some way aimed at him.

The looks the Sheik received were by no means loving. The spell was becoming unpleasant. Then
the Emperor arose, as did the Princess, to whom, as hostess, the privilege of sitting had been
alone conceded.

"Our playtime is up--indeed, I fear, it has been exceeded," he said, glancing at the Dean,
who was acting master of ceremonies.

The Dean responded with a bow low as his surroundings admitted; whereupon the Emperor went
to the Princess, and said, "We will take leave now, daughter, and for myself and my lords of
the court, I acknowledge a most agreeable visit, and thank you for it."

She respectfully saluted the hand he extended to her.

"Our gate and doors at Blacherne are always open to you."

The adieu was specially observed by the courtiers, and they subsequently pronounced it decorous
for a sovereign, cordial as became a relative, but most un-loverlike. Indeed, it was a strong
point in the decision subsequently of general acceptance, by which His Majesty was relieved
of the proposal of marriage to the Princess.

The latter took his offered arm, and accompanied him to the steps of the portico, where, when
he had descended, the lords one by one left a kiss on her hand.

Nor should it be forgotten, that as Constantine was passing the Sheik, he paused to say to
him in his habitually kind and princely manner: "The tree Sheik Ertoghrul saw in his dream
has spread, and is yet spreading, but its shadow has not compassed all the nations; and while
God keeps me, it will not. Had not I myself invited the parable, it might have been offensive.
For the instruction and entertainment given me, accept thou this--and go in peace."

The Sheik took the ring offered him, and the gaze with which he followed the imperial giver
was suggestive of respect and pity.

CHAPTER XX

MAHOMMED DREAMS

It was a trifle after noon. The trireme and the assemblage of admiring townspeople had disappeared,
leaving the bay and its shores to their wonted quiet. The palace, however, nestling in the
garden under the promontory, must be permitted to hold our interest longer.

Aboo-Obeidah had eaten and drunk, for being on a journey, he was within the license of the
law as respects wine; and now he sat with the Princess alone at the end of the portico lately
occupied by the Emperor and his suite. A number of her attendants amused themselves out of
hearing of the two, though still within call. She occupied the sedilium; he a seat by the table
near her. Save a fine white veil on an arm and a fan which she seldom used, her appearance
was as in the morning.

It is to be admitted now that the Princess was finding a pleasure in the society of the Sheik.
If aware of the fact, which was doubtful, it is still more doubtful if she could have explained
it. We are inclined to think the mystery attaching to the man had as much to do with the circumstance
as the man himself. He was polite, engaging, and handsome; the objection to his complexion,
if such there were, was at least offset by a very positive faculty of entertaining; besides
which, the unspeakable something in manner, always baffling disguises, always whispering of
other conditions, always exciting suggestions and expectations, was present here.

If she thought him the Bedouin he assumed to be, directly a word changed the opinion; did she
see the Governor of the old Castle in his face, an allusion or a bit of information dropped
by him unaware spoke of association far beyond such a subordinate; most perplexing, however,
where got the man his intelligence? Did learning like his, avoiding cloisters, academies, and
teachers of classical taste, comport with camel-driving and tent-life in deserts harried by
winds and sand?

The mystery, together with the effort to disentangle it, resolved the Princess into an attentive
auditor. The advantages in the conversation were consequently with the Sheik; and he availed
himself of them to lead as he chose.

"You have heard, O Princess, of the sacred fig-tree of the Hindus?"

"No."

"In one of their poems--the Bhagavad Gita, I think--it is described as having its roots above
and its branches downward; thus drawing life from the sky and offering its fruit most conveniently,
it is to me the symbol of a good and just king. It rose to my mind when thy kinsman--may Allah
be thrice merciful to him!--passed me with his speech of forgiveness, and this gift "--he raised
his hand, and looked at the ring on one of the fingers-"in place of which I was more deserving
burial in the Bosphorus, as the black-browed Admiral said."

A frown dark as the Admiral's roughened his smooth brow.

"Why so?" she inquired.

"The tales I told were of a kind to be spared a Greek, even one who may not cover his instep
with the embroidered buskin of an Emperor."

"Nay, Sheik, they did not ruffle him. On the tongue of a Turk, I admit, the traditions had
been boastful, but you are not a Turk."

The remark might have been interrogative; wherefore with admirable address, he replied: "An
Ottoman would see in me an Arab wholly unrelated to him, except as I am a Moslem. Let it pass,
O Princess--he forgave me. The really great are always generous. When I took the ring, I thought,
Now would the young Mahommed have so lightly pardoned the provocation?"

"Mahommed!" she said.

"Not the Prophet," he answered; "but the son of Amurath."

"Ah, you know him?"

"I have sat with him, O Princess, and at table often helped him to meat and bread. I have been
his cupbearer and taster, and as frequently shared his outdoor sports; now hunting with hawk,
and now with hound. Oh, it were worth a year of common days to gallop at his right hand, and
exult with him when the falcon, from its poise right under the sun, drops itself like an arrow
upon its enemy! I have discoursed with him also on themes holy and profane, and given and taken
views, and telling him tales in prose and verse, have seen the day go out, then come again.
In knightly practice I have tilted with him, and more than once, by his side in battle, loosened
rein at the same cry and charged. His Sultana mother knows him well; but, by the lions and
the eagles who served Solomon, I know him, beginning where her knowledge left off--that is,
where the horizon of manhood stretched itself to make room for his enlarging soul."

The awakening curiosity of his listener was not lost upon the Sheik.

"You are surprised to hear a kindly speech of the son of Amurath," he said.

She flushed slightly.

"I am not a person, Sheik, whose opinions are dangerous to the peace of States, and of whom
diplomacy is required; yet it would grieve me to give offence to you or your friend, the Prince
Mahommed. If now I concede a wish to have some further knowledge of one who is shortly to inherit
the most powerful of the Eastern Kingdoms, the circumstance ought not to subject me to harsh
judgment."

"Princess," the Sheik said, "nothing so becomes a woman as care where words may be the occasion
of mischief. As a flower in a garden, such a woman would rank as the sovereign rose; as a bird,
she would be the bulbul, the sweetest of singers, and in beauty, a heron with throat of snow,
and wings of pink and scarlet; as a star, she would be the first of the evening, and the last
to pale in the morning--nay, she would be a perpetual morning. Of all fates what more nearly
justifies reproach of Allah than to have one's name and glory at the mercy of a rival or an
enemy? I am indeed Mahommed's friend--I know him--I will defend him, where sacred truth permits
defence. And then"--his glance fell, and he hesitated.

"And what then?" she asked.

He gave her a grateful look, and answered: "I am going to Adrianople. The Prince will be there,
and can I tell him of this audience, and that the Princess Irene regrets the evil reported
of him in Constantinople, and is not his enemy, straightway he will number himself of those
the most happy and divinely remembered, whose books are to be given them in their right hands."

The Princess looked at the singer, her countenance clear, serene, fair as a child's, and said:

"I am the enemy of no one living. Report me so to him. The Master I follow left a law by which
all men and women are neighbors whom I am to love and pray for as I love and pray for myself.
Deliver him the very words, O Sheik, and he will not misunderstand me."

A moment after she asked:

"But tell me more of him. He is making the world very anxious."

"Princess," the Sheik began, "Ebn Hanife was a father amongst Dervishes, and he had a saying,
'Ye shall know a plant by its flower, a vine by its fruit, and a man by his acts; what he does
being to the man as the flower to the plant, and the fruit to the vine; if he have done nothing,
prove him by his tastes and preferences, for what he likes best that he will do when left to
himself.' By these tests let us presume to try the Prince Mahommed.... There is nothing which
enthralls us like the exercise of power--nothing we so nearly carry with us into the tomb to
be a motive there; for who shall say it has not a part in the promise of resurrection? If so,
O Princess, what praise is too great for him who, a young man placed upon a throne by his father,
comes down from it at his father's call?"

"Did Mahommed that?"

"Not once, O Princess, but twice."

"In so much at least his balance should be fair."

"To whom is the pleasant life in a lofty garden, its clusters always near at hand--to whom,
if not to the just judges of their fellow-men?"

The Sheik saluted her twice by carrying his right hand to his beard, then to his forehead.

"Attend again, O Princess," he continued, more warmly than in the outset. "Mahommed is devoted
to learning. At night in the field when the watches are set, the story-tellers, poets, philosophers,
lawyers, preachers, experts in foreign tongues, and especially the inventors of devices, a
class by themselves, supposed generally to live on dreams as others on bread--all these, finding
welcome in his tent, congregate there. His palace in the city is a college, with recitations
and lectures and instructive conversations. The objection his father recognized the times he
requested him to vacate the throne was that he was a student. His ancestors having been verse
makers, poetry is his delight; and if he does not rival them in the gentle art, he surpasses
them in the number of his acquirements. The Arab, the Hebrew, the Greek, the Latin address
him and have answers each in his mother's tongue. Knew you ever a scholar, O Princess, whose
soul had utterly escaped the softening influence of thought and study? It is not learning which
tames the barbarian so much as the diversion of mind from barbaric modes required of him while
in the pursuit of learning."

She interrupted him, saying pleasantly: "I see, O Sheik, if to be at the mercy of an enemy
is sad, how fortunate where one's picture is intended if the artist be a friend. Where had
the Prince his instructors?"

There was a lurking smile in the Sheik's eyes, as he replied: "The sands in my country drink
the clouds dry, and leave few fountains except of knowledge. The Arab professors in Cordova,
whom the Moorish Kaliphs deemed themselves honored in honoring, were not despised by the Bishops
of Rome. Amurath, wanting teachers for Mahommed, invited the best of them to his court. Ah--if
I had the time!"

Observing his sigh had not failed its mark, he continued: "I would speak of some of the books
I have seen on the Prince's table; for as a licensed friend, I have been in his study. Indeed,
but for fear of too greatly recommending myself, I would have told you earlier, O Princess,
how he favoured me as one of his teachers."

"Of poetry and story-telling, I suppose?"

"Why not?" he asked. "Our history is kept and taught in such forms. Have we a hero not himself
a poet, he keeps one.... Upon the Prince's table, in the central place, objects of his reverence,
the sources to which he most frequently addresses himself when in need of words and happy turns
of expression, his standards of comparison for things beautiful in writing and speech, mirrors
of the Most Merciful, whispering galleries wherein the voice of the Most Compassionate is never
silent, are the Koran, with illustrations in gold, and the Bible in Hebrew, copied from torahs
of daily use in the Synagogues."

"The Bible in Hebrew! Does he read it?"

"Like a Jewish elder."

"And the Gospels?"

The Sheik's face became reproachful.

"Art thou--even thou, O Princess--of those who believe a Moslem must reject Christ because
the Prophet of Islam succeeded him with later teachings?"

Dropping then into the passionless manner, he continued:

"The Koran does not deny Christ or his Gospels. Hear what it says of itself: 'And this Koran
is not a forgery of one who is no God, but it hath been sent down as a confirmation of those
books which have been before it, and an explanation of the Scriptures from the Lord of the
Worlds.' [Footnote: The Koran] ... That verse, O Princess, transcribed by the Prince Mahommed
himself, lies between the Bible and the Koran; the two being, as I have said, always together
upon his table."

"What then is his faith?" she asked, undisguisedly interested.

"Would he were here to declare it himself!"

This was said disconsolately; then the Sheik broke out:

"The truth now of the son of Amurath! Listen!--He believes in God. He believes in the Scriptures
and the Koran, holding them separate wings of the divine Truth by which the world is to attain
righteousness. He believes there have been three Prophets specially in the confidence of God:
Moses, the first one; Jesus, who was greater than Moses; Mahomet, the very greatest--not for
speaking better or sublimer things, but because he was last in their order of coming. Above
all, O Princess, he believes worship due to the Most High alone; therefore he prays the prayer
of Islam, God is God, and Mahomet is his Prophet--meaning that the Prophet is not to be mistaken
for God."

The Sheik raised his dark eyes, and upon meeting them the Princess looked out over the bay.
That she was not displeased was the most he could read in her face, the youthful light of which
was a little shaded by thinking. He waited for her to speak.

"There were other books upon the Prince's table?" she presently asked.

"There were others, O Princess."

"Canst thou name some of them?"

The Sheik bowed profoundly.

"I see the pearls of Ebn Hanife's saying were not wasted. Mahommed is now to be tried by his
tastes and preferences. Let it be so.... I saw there, besides dictionaries Greek, Latin, and
Hebrew, the Encyclopaedia of Sciences, a rare and wonderful volume by a Granadian Moor, Ibn
Abdallah. I saw there the Astronomy and Astronomical Tables of Ibn Junis, and with them a silver
globe perfected from the calculations of Almamon the Kaliph, which helps us to the geographical
principle not yet acknowledged in Rome, that the earth is round. I saw there the Book of the
Balance of Wisdom by Alhazan, who delved into the laws of nature until there is nothing phenomenal
left. I saw there the Philosophy of Azazzali the Arab, for which both Christian and Moslem
should be grateful, since it has given Philosophy its true place by exalting it into a handmaiden
of Religion. I saw there books treating of trade and commerce, of arms and armor, and machines
for the assault and defence of cities, of military engineering, and the conduct of armies in
grand campaigns, of engineering not military, dealing with surveying, and the construction
of highways, aqueducts, and bridges, and the laying out of towns. There, also, because the
soul of the student must have rest and diversion, I saw volumes of songs and music loved by
lovers in every land, and drawings of mosques, churches and palaces, masterpieces of Indian
and Saracenic genius; and of gardens there was the Zebra, created by Abderrahman for the best
loved of his Sultanas. Of poetry, O Princess, I saw many books, the lord of them a copy of
Homer in Arabic, executed on ivory from the translation ordered by Haroun Al-Raschid."

During this recital the Princess scarcely moved. She was hearing a new version of Mahommed;
and the Sheik, like a master satisfied with his premises, proceeded to conclusions.

"My Lord has a habit of dreaming, and he does not deny it--he believes in it. In his student
days, he called it his rest. He used to say, when his brain reeled in overtask dreaming was
a pillow of down and lavender; that in moments of despair, dreaming took his spirit in its
hands softer than air, and, nurse-like, whispered and sung to it, and presently it was strong
again. Not many mornings ago he awoke to find that in a deep sleep some ministrant had come
to him, and opened the doors of his heart, and let out its flock of boyish fantasies. He has
since known but three visions. Would it please you, O Princess, to hear of them? They may be
useful as threads on which to hang the Dervish father's pearls of saying."

She re-settled herself, resting her cheek on her hand, and her elbow on the arm of the chair,
and replied:

"I will hear of them."

"The visions have all of them reference to the throne he is soon to ascend, without which they
would be the mere jingling of a jester's rattle.

"First Vision.... He will be a hero. If his soul turned from war, he were not his father's
son. But unlike his father, he holds war the servant of peace, and peace the condition essential
to his other visions.

"Second Vision.... He believes his people have the genius of the Moors, and he will cultivate
it in rivalry of that marvellous race."

"Of the Moors, O Sheik?" the Princess said, interrupting him. "Of the Moors? I have always
heard of them as pillagers of sacred cities-- infidels sunk in ignorance, who stole the name
of God to excuse invasions and the spilling of rivers of blood."

The Sheik lifted his head haughtily.

"I am an Arab, and the Moors are Arabs translated from the East to the West."

"I crave thy pardon," she said, gently.

And calming himself, he rejoined: "If I weary you, O Princess, there are other subjects to
which I can turn. My memory is like the box of sandal-wood a lady keeps for her jewelry. I
can open it at will, and always find something to please--better probably because I have it
from another."

"No," she returned, artlessly, "a hero in actual life transcends the best of fancies--and besides,
Sheik, you spoke of a third vision of your friend, the Prince Mahommed."

He dropped his eyes lest she should see the brightness with which they filled.

"War, my Lord says, is a necessity which, as Sultan, he cannot avoid. Were he disposed to content
himself with the empire descending from his great father, envious neighbors would challenge
him to the field. He must prove his capacity in defence. That done, he vows to tread the path
made white and smooth by Abderrahman, the noblest and best of the Western Kaliphs. He will
set out by founding a capital somewhere on the Bosphorus. Such, O Princess, is my Lord Mahommed's
Third Vision."

"Nay, Sheik--on the Marmora--at Broussa, perhaps."

"I am giving the Vision as he gave it to me, Princess. For where else, he asks, has the spreading
earth diviner features than on the Bosphorus? Where bends a softer sky above a friendlier channel
by Nature moulded for nobler uses? Where are there seas so bridled and reduced? Does not the
rose bloom here all the year? Yonder the East, here the West--must they be strangers and enemies
forever? His capital, he declares, shall be for their entertainment as elder and younger brother.
Within its walls, which he will build strong as a mountain's base, with gates of brass invulnerable,
and towers to descry the clouds below the horizon, he will collect unselfishly whatever is
good and beautiful, remembering he serves Allah best who serves his fellow-men."

"All his fellow-men, Sheik?"

"All of them."

Then she glanced over the bay, and said very softly:

"It is well; for 'if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others?'"

The Sheik smiled, saying:

"And thus the latest Prophet, O Princess. 'Turn away evil by that which is better; and lo,
he between whom and thyself was enmity, shall become as though he were a warm friend.'" [Footnote:
Koran]

She answered, "A goodly echo."

"Shall I proceed?" he then asked.

"Yes."

"I was speaking of the Third Vision.... To make his capital the centre of the earth, he will
have a harbor where ships from every country, and all at once, can come and lie, oars slung
and sails furled: and near by for trade, a bazaar with streets of marble, and roofed with glass,
and broad and long enough for a city unto itself; and in the midst a khan for lodging the merchants
and travellers who have not other houses. And as did Abderrahman, he will build a University
of vast enclosure; here temples, there groves; nor may a study be named without its teacher,
and he the most famous; so the votaries of Music and Poetry, Philosophy, Science, and the Arts,
and the hundred-handed Mechanics shall dwell together like soldiers in a holy league. And comes
that way one religious, of him but a question, Believest thou in God? and if he answer yes,
then for him a ready welcome. For of what moment is it, my Lord asks, whether God bear this
name or that? Or be worshipped with or without form? Or on foot or knee? Or whether the devout
be called together by voice or bell? Is not Faith everything?"

The picture wrought upon the Princess. Her countenance was radiant, and she said half to herself,
but so the Sheik heard her:

"It is a noble Vision."

Then the Sheik lowered his voice:

"If, with such schemes, excluding races and religions--hear me again, O Princess!--if with
such schemes or visions, as thou wilt, the Lord Mahommed allows himself one selfish dream,
wouldst thou condemn him?"

"What is the selfish dream?" she asked.

"He has an open saying, Princess, 'Light is the life of the world, while Love is the light
of life.' Didst thou ever hear how Othman wooed and won his Malkatoon?"

"No."

"It is a Turkish tale of love. Mahommed had it from his mother when he was a lad, and he has
been haunted ever since with a belief which, to his dreaming, is like the high window in the
eastern front of a palace, outwardly the expression-giver, within the principal source of light.
The idea is strongest what times the moon is in the full; and then he mounts a horse, and hies
him, as did Othman, to some solitary place where, with imagination for cup-bearer, he drinks
himself into happy drunkenness." The Sheik, bending forward, caught her eyes with his, and
held them so not a glance escaped him.

"He thinks--and not all the Genii, the winged and the unwinged, of the wisest of Kings could
win him from the thought--that he will sometime meet a woman who will have the mind, the soul
of souls, and the beauty of the most beautiful. When she will cross his vision is one of the
undelivered scriptories which Time is bringing him; yet he is looking for her, and the more
constantly because the first sight of her will be his first lesson in the mystery called love.
He will know her, for at seeing her a lamp will light itself in his heart, and by it, not the
glare of the sun, his spirit will make sure of her spirit. Therefore in his absoluteness of
faith, O Princess, there is a place already provided for her in his promised capital, and even
now he calls it this House of Love. Ah, what hours he has spent planning that abode! He will
seat it in the Garden of Perfection, for the glorifying which, trees, birds, flowers, summer-houses,
water, hill-tops and shaded vales shall be conquered. Has he not studied the Zehra of Abderrahman?
And divided it as it was into halls, courts and chambers, and formed and proportioned each,
and set and reset its thousand and more columns, and restored the pearls and gold on its walls,
and over the wide Alhambran arches hung silken doors sheened like Paradisean birds? And all
that when he shall have found her, his Queen, his Malkatoon, his Spirit of Song, his Breath
of Flowers, his Lily of Summer, his Pearl of Oman, his Moon of Radjeb, monotony shall never
come where she dwells nor shall she sigh except for him absent. Such, O Princess Irene, is
the one dream the Prince has builded with the world shut out. Does it seem to you a vanity
of wickedness?"

"No," she returned, and covered her face, for the Sheik's look was eager and burning bright.

He knelt then, and kissed the marble at her feet.

"I am Prince Mahommed's ambassador, O Princess," he said, rising to his knees. "Forgive me,
if I have dared delay the announcement."

"His ambassador! To what end?"

"I am afraid and trembling."

He kissed the floor again.

"Assure me of pardon--if only to win me back my courage. It is miserable to be shaken with fear."

"Thou hast done nothing, Sheik, unless drawing thy master's portrait too partially be an offence.
Speak out."

"It is not three days, Princess, since you were Mahommed's guest."

"I his guest--Mahommed's!"

She arose from her chair.

"He received you at the White Castle."

"And the Governor?"

"He was the Governor."

She sunk back overcome with astonishment. The Sheik recalled her directly.

"Prince Mahommed," he said, "arrived at the Castle when the boats were discovered, and hastened
to the landing to render assistance if the peril required it.... And now, O Princess, my tongue
falters. How can I without offending tell of the excitement into which seeing you plunged him?
Suffer me to be direct. His first impression was supported by the coincidences--your coming
and his, so nearly at the same instant--the place of the meeting so out of the way and strange--the
storm seemingly an urgency of Heaven. Beholding and hearing you, 'This is she! This is she!
My Queen, my Malkatoon!' he cried in his heart. And yesterday"--

"Nay, Sheik, allow the explanation to wait. Bearest thou a message from him to me?"

"He bade me salute thee, Princess Irene, as if thou wert now the Lady of his House of Love
in his Garden of Perfection, and to pray if he might come and in person kiss thy hand, and
tell thee his hopes, and pour out at thy feet his love in heartfuls larger than ever woman
had from man."

While speaking, the Sheik would have given his birthright to have seen her face.

Then, in a low voice, she asked:

"Does he doubt I am a Christian?"

The tone was not of anger; with beatings of heart trebly quickened, he hastened to reply:

"'That she is a Christian'--may God abandon my mouth, if I quote him unfaithfully!--'That she
is a Christian, I love her the more. For see you, Sheik'--by the faith of an Arab, Princess,
I quote him yet, word for word--'my mother was a Christian.'"

In the morning of this very day we have seen her put to like question by Constantine, and she
did not hesitate; now the reply took a time.

"Say to Prince Mahommed," she at length returned, "that his message presents itself honorably,
for which it is deserving a soft answer. His fancy has played him false. I cannot be the woman
of his dream. She is young; I am old, though not with years. She is gay; I am serious. She
is in love with life, hopeful, joyous; I was born to sorrow, and in sorrow brought up, and
the religion which absorbed my youth is now life's hold on me. She will be delighted with the
splendors he has in store for her; so might I, had not the wise man long since caught my ear
and judgment by the awful text, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. While her charms endure
she will keep him charmed with the world; I could not so much, for the world to come has possession
of me, and the days here are but so many of a journey thither. Tell him, O Sheik, while he
has been dreaming of palaces and gardens in rivalry of Abderrahman the Kaliph, I have been
dreaming of a house in splendor beyond the conception of architects; and asks he more about
it, tell him I know it only as a house not made with hands. Tell him I speak not in denial
of possibilities; for by the love I have never failed to accord the good and noble, I might
bend my soul to his; to this hour, however, God and His Son the Christ, and the Holy Mother,
and the Angels and deserving men and women have taken up my heart and imagination, and in serving
them I have not aspired to other happiness. Then, if I brought him love, the sacrifice would
rescue it from every taint. Canst thou remember all this? And wilt thou deliver it truly?"

The Sheik's demeanor when she ended was greatly changed; his head was quite upon his breast;
his attitude and whole appearance were disconsolate to the last degree.

"Alas, Princess! How can I carry such speech to him, whose soul is consuming with hunger and
thirst for thy favor?"

"Sheik," she said in pity, "no master, I think, had ever a more faithful servant than thou
hast proved thyself. Thy delivery of his message, could it be preserved, would be a model for
heralds in the future."

Thereupon she arose, extended her hand to him, and he kissed it; and as she remained standing,
he arose also.

"Be seated," she then said, and immediately that they were both in their chairs again, she
took direction of the interview.

"You asked me, Sheik, if I had heard how Othman wooed and won his Malkatoon, and said it was
a Turkish romance. The Othman, I take it, was founder of Prince Mahommed's house. Now, if thou
art not too weary, tell me the story."

As the recital afforded him the opportunities to give poetic expression to his present feeling,
he accepted the suggestion gladly, and, being in the right mood, was singularly effective.
Half the time listening she was in tears. It was past three o'clock when he finished. The audience
then terminated. In no part of it had her manner been more gracious than when she conducted
him along the portico, or her loveliness so overwhelming as when she bade him adieu at the
head of the steps.

Standing between columns near the sedilium, she saw him gain his boat, take something from
the sitting-box, step ashore again, and return to her gate, where he remained awhile pounding
with a stone. The action was curious, and when he was out of sight rounding the water front
of the promontory, she sent Lysander to investigate.

"The infidel has fixed a brass plate to the right-hand post of the kiosk," the ancient reported,
in bad humor. "It may be a curse." The Princess then called her attendants, and went with them
to see the brass plate. There it was, an arm's reach overhead, and affixed firmly to the post,
the corners turned down to serve the tacking. Graven on its polished surface was the following:

Wholly unable to decipher it, she sent for a Dervish, long resident in the town, and returned
to the portico.

"Princess," the old man said, having viewed the mysterious plate, "he who did the posting was
a Turk; and if he were aged, I should say thou hast entertained unaware the great Amurath,
Sultan of Sultans."

"But the man was young."

"Then was he the son of Amurath, Prince Mahommed."

The Princess turned pale.

"How canst thou speak so positively?" she asked.

"It is a teukra; in the whole world, O Princess, there are but two persons with authority to
make use of it."

"And who are they?"

"The Sultan, and Mahommed, next him in the succession."

In the silence which ensued, Lysander officiously proposed to remove the sign. The Dervish
interposed.

"Wilt thou hear me, O Princess," he said, with a low reverence, "whether the plate proceeded
from Amurath or Mahommed, or by the order of either of them, the leaving it behind signifies
more than friendship or favor--it is a safeguard--a proclamation that thou and thy people and
property here are under protection of the master of all the Turks. Were war to break out to-morrow,
thou mightest continue in thy palace and garden with none to make thee afraid save thine own
countrymen. Wherefore consider well before acceding to the rancor of this ancient madman."

Thus the truth came to the Princess Irene. The Singing Sheik was Prince Mahommed!

Twice he had appeared before her; in the White Castle once, and now in her palace; and having
announced himself her lover, and proposed marriage, he intended her to know him, and also that
he was not departing in despair. Hence the plate on the gate! The circumstance was novel and
surprising. Her present feelings were too vague and uncertain for definition: but she was not
angry.

Meantime Mahommed, returning to the old Castle, debated with himself. He loved the Princess
Irene with the passion of a soul unused to denial or disappointment, and before he reached
the Roumelian Hissar he swore a Moslem oath to conquer Constantinople, less for Islam and glory,
than for her. And from that hour the great accomplishment took hold of him to the exclusion
of all else.

At Hissar he ascended the mountain, and, standing on the terreplein of the precipice in front
of what is now Robert College, he marked the narrowness of the Bosphorus below, and thinking
of the military necessity for a crossing defended on both shores, he selected a site for a
castle on the European side opposite the White Castle in Asia. In due time we will have occasion
to notice the creation of the walls and towers of the stupendous fortification yet standing
between Bebek and Hissar, a monument to his energy and sagacity more imposing than anything
left by him in Constantinople.

BOOK IV

THE PALACE OF BLACHERNE

CHAPTER I

THE PALACE OF BLACHERNE

The Prince of India was not given to idle expectations. He might deceive others, but he seldom
deceived himself. His experience served him prophetically in matters largely dependent on motives
ordinarily influential with men. He was confident the Emperor would communicate with him, and soon.

The third day after the adventure at the White Castle, a stranger, mounted, armed, and showily
caparisoned, appeared at the Prince's door under guidance of Uel. In the study, to which he
was hidden, he announced himself the bearer of a complimentary message from His Majesty, concluding
with an invitation to the palace of Blacherne. If agreeable, His Majesty would be pleased to
receive the Indian dignitary in the afternoon at three o'clock. An officer of the guard would
be at the Grand Gate for his escort. The honor, needless to say, was accepted in becoming terms.

When the Prince descended to the hall of entry on the ground floor to take the sedan there,
the unusual care given his attire was apparent. His beard was immaculately white. His turban
of white silk, balloon in shape, and with a dazzle of precious stones in front, was a study.
Over a shirt of finest linen, with ruffles of lace at the throat and breast, there was a plain
gown of heavy black velvet, buttoned at the neck, but open down to a yellow sash around the
waist. The sash was complemented by a belt which was a mass of pearls in relief on a ground
of gold embroidery. The belt-plate and crescented sword scabbard were aflame with brilliants
on blue enamelling. His trousers, ample as a skirt, were of white satin overflowing at the
ankles. Pointed red slippers, sparkling with embroidery of small golden beads, completed the
costume.

The procession in the street was most striking. First Nilo, as became a king of Kash-Cush,
barbarously magnificent; the sedan next, on the shoulders of four carriers in white livery;
at the rear, two domestics arrayed a la Cipango, their strange blue garments fitting them so
close as to impede their walking; yet as one of them bore his master's paper sunshade and ample
cloak, and the other a cushion bloated into the proportions of a huge pillow, they were by
no means wanting in self-importance. Syama, similarly attired, though in richer material, walked
at the side of the sedan, ready to open the door or answer such signal as he might receive
from within.

The appearance of this retinue in the streets was a show to the idle and curious, who came
together as if rendered out of the earth, and in such numbers that before fairly reaching the
thoroughfare by which the Grand Gate of Blacherne was usually approached from the city side,
the gilded box on the shoulders of its bearers looked, off a little way, not unlike a boat
rocking in waves.

Fortunately the people started in good humor, and meeting nothing to break the mood, they permitted
the Prince to accomplish his journey without interruption. The companionship of the crowd was
really agreeable to him; he hardly knew whether it were pleasanter to be able to excite such
respectful curiosity than to gratify it successfully. It might have been otherwise had Lael
been with him.

The Very High Residence, as the Palace of Blacherne was generally spoken of by Greeks, was
well known to the Prince of India. The exclamation with which he settled himself in the sedan
at setting out from his house--"Again, again, O Blacherne!"--disclosed a previous personal
acquaintance with the royal property. And over and over again on the way he kept repeating,
"O Blacherne! Beautiful Blacherne! Bloom the roses as of old in thy gardens? Do the rivulets
in thy alabaster courts still run singing to the mosaic angels on the walls?"

As to the date of these recollections, if, as the poets tell us, time is like a flowing river,
and memory a bridge for the conveniency of the soul returning to its experiences, how far had
this man to travel the structure before reaching the Blacherne he formerly knew? Over what
tremendous spaces between piers did it carry him!

The street traversed by the Prince carried him first to the Grate of St. Peter on the Golden
Horn, and thence, almost parallel with the city wall, to Balat, a private landing belonging
to the Emperor, at present known as the gate of Blacherne.

At the edge of an area marble paved, the people stopped, it being the limit of their privilege.
Crossing the pavement, the visitor was set down in front of the Grand Gate of the Very High
Residence. History, always abominating lapses, is yet more tender of some places than others.
There, between flanking towers, an iron-plated valve strong enough to defy attack by any of
the ancient methods was swung wide open, ready nevertheless to be rolled to at set of sun.
The guard halted the Prince, and an officer took his name, and apologizing for a brief delay,
disappeared with it. Alighting from his sedan, the worthy proceeded to take observation and
muse while waiting.

The paved area on which he stood was really the bottom of a well-defined valley which ran off
and up irregularly toward the southeast, leaving an ascent on its right memorable as the seventh
hill of Constantinople. A stone wall marked here and there by sentinel boxes, each with a red
pennon on its top, straggled down along the foot of the ascent to the Grand Gate. There between
octangular towers loopholed and finished battlement style was a covered passage suggestive
of Egypt. Two Victories in high relief blew trumpets at each other across the entrance front.
Ponderous benches of porphyry, polished smooth by ages of usage, sat one on each side for the
guards; fellows in helmets of shining brass, cuirasses of the same material inlaid with silver,
greaves, and shoes stoutly buckled. Those of them sitting sprawled their bulky limbs broadly
over the benches. The few standing seemed like selected giants, with blond beards and blue
eyes, and axes at least three spans in length along their whetted edges. The Prince recognized
the imperial guards--Danes, Saxons, Germans, and Swiss--their nationalities merged into the
corps entitled Varangians.

Conscious, but unmindful of their stare, he kept his stand, and swept the hill from bottom
to top, giving free rein to memory.

In 449 A. D.--he remembered the year and the circumstance well--an earthquake threw down the
wall then enclosing the city. Theodosius restored it, leaving the whole height outside of this
northwestern part a preserve wooded, rocky, but with one possession which had become so infinitely
sanctified in Byzantine estimation as to impart the quality to all its appurtenances, that
was the primitive but Very Holy Church of Blacherne, dedicated to the Virgin.

Near the church there was a pleasure house to which the Emperors, vainly struggling to escape
the ceremonies the clergy had fastened upon them to the imbitterment of life, occasionally
resorted, and down on the shore of the Golden Horn a zoological garden termed the Cynegion
had been established. The latter afterwhile came to have a gallery in which the public was
sometimes treated to games and combats between lions, tigers, and elephants. There also criminals
and heretics were frequently carried and flung to the beasts.

Nor did the Prince fail to recall that in those cycles the sovereigns resided preferably in
the Bucoleon, eastwardly by the sea of Marmora. He remembered some of them as acquaintances
with whom he had been on close terms--Justinian, Heraclius, Irene, and the Porphyrogentes.

The iconoclastic masters of that cluster of magnificent tenements, the Bucoleon, had especial
claims upon his recollection. Had he not incited them to many of their savageries? They were
incidents, it is true, sadly out of harmony with his present dream; still their return now
was with a certain fluttering of the spirit akin to satisfaction, for the victims in nearly
every case had been Christians, and his business of life then was vengeance for the indignities
and sufferings inflicted on his countrymen.

With a more decided flutter, he remembered a scheme he put into effect just twenty years after
the restoration of the wall by Theodosius. In the character of a pious Christianized Israelite
resident in Jerusalem, he pretended to have found the vestments of the Holy Mother of Christ.
The discovery was of course miraculous, and he reported it circumstantially to the Patriarchs
Galvius and Candidus. For the glory of God and the exaltation of the Faith, they brought the
relics to Constantinople. There, amidst most solemn pomp, the Emperor assisting, they were
deposited in the Church of Saints Peter and Mark, to be transferred a little later to their
final resting-place in the holier Church of the Virgin of Blacherne. There was a world of pious
propriety in the idea that as the vestments belonged to the Mother of God they would better
become her own house. The Himation or Maphorion, as the robe of the Virgin was called, brought
the primitive edifice in the woods above the Cynegion a boundless increase of sanctity, while
the discoverer received the freedom of the city, the reverence of the clergy, and the confidence
of the Basileus.

Nor did the prodigious memory stay there. The hill facing the city was of three terraces. On
the second one, half hidden among cypress and plane trees, he beheld a building, low, strong,
and, from his direction, showing but one window. Some sixteen years previous, during his absence
in Cipango, a fire had destroyed the Church of the Virgin, and owing to the poverty of the
people and empire, the edifice had not been rebuilt. This lesser unpretentious structure was
the Chapel of Blacherne which the flames had considerately spared. He recognized it instantly,
and remembered it as full of inestimable relics--amongst them the Himation, considered indestructible;
the Holy Cross which Heraclius, in the year 635, had brought from Jerusalem, and delivered
to Sergius; and the Panagia Blachernitissa, or All Holy Banner of the Image of the Virgin.
Then rose another reminiscence, and though to reach him it had to fly across a chasm of hundreds
of years, it presented itself with the distinctness of an affair of yesterday. In 626, Heraclius
being Emperor, a legion of Avars and Persians sacked Scutari, on the Asiatic side of the Bosphorus,
and laid siege to Constantinople. The Byzantines were in awful panic; and they would have yielded
themselves had not Sergius the Patriarch been in control. With a presence of mind equal to
the occasion, he brought the Panagia forth, and supported by an army of clerics and monks,
traversed the walls, waving the All Holy Banner. A volley of arrows from invisible archers
fell upon the audacious infidels, and the havoc was dreadful; they fled, and their prince,
the Khagan, fled with them, declaring he had seen a woman in shining garments but of awful
presence on the walls. The woman was the Holy Mother; and with a conceit easily mistaken for
gratitude, the Byzantines declared their capital thenceforward guarded by God. When they went
out to the Church in the Woods and found it unharmed by the enemy, they were persuaded the
Mother had adopted them; in return, what could they else than adopt her? Pisides, the poet,
composed a hymn, to glorify her. The Church consecrated the day of the miraculous deliverance
a fete day observable by Greeks forever. The Emperor removed the old building, and on its site
raised another of a beauty more expressive of devotion. To secure it from ravage and profanation,
he threw a strong wall around the whole venerated hill, and by demolishing the ancient work
of Theodosius, made Blacherne a part of the city.

By and by the Church required enlargement, and it was then cruci-formed by the addition of
transepts right and left. Still later, a Chapel was erected specially for the relics and the
All Holy Banner. This was contiguous to the Church, and besides being fireproof, it covered
a spring of pure water, afterwards essential in many splendid ceremonies civil as well as religious.
The Chamber of Relics was prohibited to all but the Basileus. He alone could enter it. By great
favor, the Prince of India was once permitted to look into the room, and he remembered it large
and dimly lighted, its shadows alive, however, with the glitter of silver and gold in every
conceivable form, offered there as the Wise Men laid their gifts before the Child in the Cave
of the Nativity.

Again and again the Church was burned, yet the Chapel escaped. It seemed an object of divine
protection. The sea might deliver tempests against the Seven Hills, earthquakes shake the walls
down and crack the hanging dome of St. Sophia, cinders whiten paths from the porphyry column
over by the Hippodrome to the upper terrace of Blacherne; yet the Chapel escaped--yet the holy
fountain in its crypt flowed on purer growing as the centuries passed.

The Prince, whose memories we are but weaving into words, did not wonder at the increase of
veneration attaching to the Chapel and its precious deposits--manuscripts, books, bones, flags,
things personal to the Apostles, the Saints, the Son and His Mother, parings of their nails,
locks of their hair, spikes and splinters of the Cross itself--he did not wonder at it, or
smile, for he knew there is a devotional side to every man which wickedness may blur but cannot
obliterate. He himself was going about the world convinced that the temple of Solomon was the
House of God.

The guards sprawling on the benches kept staring at him; one of them let his axe fall without
so much as attracting the Prince's attention. His memory, with a hold on him too firm to be
disturbed by such trifles, insisted on its resurrectionary work, and returned him to the year
865. Constantinople was again besieged, this time by a horde from the Russian wilderness under
the chiefs Dir and Askold. They had passed the upper sea in hundreds of boats, and disembarking
on the European shore, marched down the Bosphorus, leaving all behind them desolate. Photius
was then Patriarch. When the fleet was descried from the walls, he prevailed on the Emperor
to ask the intervention of the Virgin. The Maphorion or Sacred Eobe was brought out, and in
presence of the people on their knees, the clergy singing the hymn of Pisides, the holy man
plunged it into the waves.

A wind arose under which the water in its rocky trough was as water in a shaken bowl. The ships
of the invaders sunk each other. Not one survived. Of the men, those who lived came up out
of the vortexes praying to be taken to the Church of Blacherne for baptism. This was two hundred
years and more after the first deliverance of the city, and yet the Mother was faithful to
her chosen!--Constantinople was still the guarded of God!-- The Penagia was still the All Holy!
Having repulsed the Muscovite invasion, what excuse for his blasphemy would there be left the
next to challenge its terrors?

The Prince of India saw the blackened walls of the burned Church, an appealing spectacle which
the surrounding trees tried to cover with their foliage, but could not; then he lifted his
eyes to the Palace upon the third terrace.

To the hour decay sets in the touches of Time are usually those of an artist who loves his
subject, and wishes merely to soften or ennoble its expression. So had he dealt with the Very
High Residence.

It began in the low ground down by the Cynegion, and arose with the city wall, which was in
fact its southwestern front. Though always spoken of in the singular, like the Bucoleon, it
was a collection of palaces, vast, irregular, and declarative of the taste of the different
eras they severally memorialized. The spaces between them formed courts and places under cover;
yet as the architects had adhered to the idea of a main front toward the northeast, there appeared
a certain unity of design in the structures.

This main front, now under the Prince's view, was frequently broken, advancing here, retreating
there; one section severely plain and sombre; another relieved by porticos with figured friezes
resting on tall columns. The irregularities were pleasing; some of them were stately; and they
were all helped not a little by domes and pavilions without which the roof lines would have
been monotonous.

Lifting his gaze up the ascent from the low ground, it rested presently on a Tower built boldly
upon the Heraclian wall. This was the highest pinnacle of the Palace, first to attract the
observer, longest to hold his attention. No courier was required to tell its history to him
through whose eyes we are now looking--it was the tower of Isaac Angelus. How clearly its outlines
cut the cloudless sky! How strong it seemed up there, as if built by giants! Yet with windows
behind balconies, how airy and graceful withal! The other hills of the city, and the populated
valleys between the hills, spread out below it, like an unrolled map. The warders of the Bucoleon,
or what is now Point Serail, the home-returning mariner shipping oars off Scutari, the captain
of the helmeted column entering the Golden Gate down by the Seven Towers, the insolent Genoese
on the wharves of Galata, had only to look up, and lo! the perch of Isaac. And when, as often
must have happened, the privileged lord himself sat midafternoons on the uppermost balcony
of the Tower, how the prospect soothed the fever of his spirit! If he were weary of the city,
there was the Marmora, always ready to reiterate the hues of the sky, and in it the Isles of
the Princes, their verdurous shades permeated with dreamful welcome to the pleasure-seeker
as well as the monk; or if he longed for a further flight, old Asia made haste with enticing
invitation to some of the villas strewing its littoral behind the Isles; and yonder, to the
eye fainting in the distance, scarce more than a pale blue boundary cloud, the mountain beloved
by the gods, whither they were wont to assemble at such times as they wished to learn how it
fared with Ilium and the sons of Priam, or to enliven their immortality with loud symposia.
A prospect so composed would seem sufficient, if once seen, to make a blind man's darkness
perpetually luminous.

Sometimes, however, the superlative magnate preferred the balcony on the western side of the
Tower. There he could sit in the shade, cooled by waftures from a wide campania southward,
or, peering over the balustrade, watch the peasantry flitting through the breaks of the Kosmidion,
now the purlieus of Eyoub.

Again the Prince was carried back through centuries. It had been determined to build at Blacherne;
but the hill was steep. How could spaces be gained for foundations, for courts and gardens?
The architects pondered the problem. At last one of bolder genius came forward. We will accept
the city wall for a western front, he said, and build from it; and for levels, allow us to
commence at the foot of the height, and rear arches upon arches. The proposal was accepted;
and thereafter for years the quarter was cumbered with brick and skeleton frames, and workingmen
were numerous and incessantly busy as colonized ants. Thus the ancient pleasure house disappeared,
and the first formal High Residence took its place; at the same time the Bucoleon, for so many
ages the glory of Constantinople, was abandoned by its masters.

Who was the first permanent occupant of the Palace of Blacherne? The memory, theretofore so
prompt, had now no reply. No matter--the Prince recalled sessions had with Angelus on the upper
balcony yonder. He remembered them on account of his host one day saying: "Here I am safe."
The next heard of him he was a captive and blind.

Passing on rapidly, he remembered the appearance of Peter the Hermit in the gorgeous reception
room of the Palace in 1096. Quite as distinctly, he also remembered the audience Alexis I.
tendered Godfrey of Bouillon and his Barons in the same High Residence.

What a contrast the host and his guests presented that day! The latter were steel clad from
head to foot and armed for battle, while Alexis was a spectacle of splendor unheard of in the
barbarous West. How the preachers and eunuchs in the silk-gowned train of the one trembled
as the redoubtables of the West mangled the velvet carpets with their cruel spurs! How peculiarly
the same redoubtables studied the pearls on the yellow stole of the wily Comnene and the big
jewels in his Basilean mitre--as if they were counting and weighing them mentally, preliminary
to casting up at leisure a total of value! And the table ware--this plate and yon bowl--were
they really gold or some cunning deception? The Greeks were so treacherous! And when the guests
were gone, the Greeks, on their part, were not in the least surprised at the list of spoons
and cups subtly disappeared--gifts, they supposed, intended by the noble "Crosses" for the
most Holy Altar in Jerusalem!

Still other remembrances of the Prince revived at sight of the Palace--many others--amongst
them, how the Varangians beat the boastful Montferrat and the burly Count of Flanders in the
assault of 1203, specially famous for the gallantry of old Dandolo, operating with his galleys
on the side of the Golden Horn. Brave fellows, those Varangians! Was the corps well composed
now as then? He glanced at the lusty examples before him on the stone benches, thinking they
might shortly have to answer the question.

These reminiscences, it must not be forgotten, were of brief passage with the Prince, much
briefer than the time taken in writing them. They were interrupted by the appearance of a military
official whose uniform and easy manner bespoke palace life. He begged to be informed if he
had the honor of addressing the Prince of India; and being affirmatively assured, he announced
himself sent to conduct him to His Majesty. The hill was steep, and the way somewhat circuitous;
did the Prince need assistance? The detention, he added, was owing to delay in getting intelligence
of the Prince's arrival to His Majesty, who had been closely engaged, arranging for certain
ceremonies which were to occur in the evening. Perhaps His Majesty had appointed the audience
imagining the ceremonies might prove entertaining to the Prince. These civilities, and others,
were properly responded to, and presently the cortege was in motion.

The lower terrace was a garden of singular perfection.

On the second terrace, the party came to the ruined Church where, during a halt, the officer
told of the fire. His Majesty had registered a vow, he said, at the end of the story, to rebuild
the edifice in a style superior to any former restoration.

The Prince, while listening, observed the place. Excepting the Church, it was as of old. There
the grove of cypresses, very ancient, and tall and dark. There, too, the Chapel of purplish
stone, and at one side of it the sentry box and bench, and what seemed the identical detail
of Varangians on duty. There the enclosed space between the edifices, and the road across the
pavement to the next terrace only a little deeper worn. There the arched gateway of massive
masonry through which the road conducted, the carving about it handsome as ever; and there,
finally, from the base of the Chapel, the brook, undiminished in volume and song, ran off out
of sight into the grove, an old acquaintance of the Prince's.

Moving on through the arched way, the guide led up to the third and last terrace. Near the
top there was a cut, and on its right embankment a party of workmen spreading and securing
a canopy of red cloth.

"Observe, O Prince," the officer said. "From this position, if I mistake not, you will witness
the ceremony I mentioned as in preparation."

The guest had time to express his gratification, when the Palace of Blacherne, the Very High
Residence, burst upon him in long extended view, a marvel of imperial prodigality and Byzantine
genius.

CHAPTER II

THE AUDIENCE

The sedan was set down before a marble gate on the third terrace.

"My duty is hardly complete. Suffer me to conduct you farther," the officer said, politely,
as the Prince stepped from the box.

"And my servants?"

"They will await you."

The speakers were near the left corner of a building which projected considerably from the
general front line of the Palace. The wall, the gateway, and the building were of white marble
smoothly dressed.

After a few words with Syama, the Prince followed his guide into a narrow enclosure on the
right of which there was a flight of steps, and on the left a guard house. Ascending the steps,
the two traversed a passage until they came to a door.

"The waiting-room. Enter," said the conductor.

Four heavily curtained windows lighted the apartment. In the centre there were a massive table,
and, slightly removed from it, a burnished copper brazier. Bright-hued rugs covered the floor,
and here and there stools carven and upholstered were drawn against the painted walls. The
officer, having seen his charge comfortably seated, excused himself and disappeared.

Hardly was he gone when two servants handsomely attired came in with refreshments--fruits in
natural state, fruits candied, sweetened bread, sherbet, wine and water. A chief followed them,
and, with much humility of manner, led the Prince to a seat at the table, and invited him to
help himself. The guest was then left alone; and while he ate and drank he wondered at the
stillness prevalent; the very house seemed in awe.

Ere long another official entered, and after apologizing for introducing himself, said: "I
am Dean of the Court. In the absence of my lord Phranza, it has fallen to me to discharge,
well as I can, the duties of Grand Chamberlain."

The Prince, observant of the scrutinizing glance the Dean gave his person, acknowledged the
honor done him, and the pleasure he derived from the acquaintance. The Dean ought to be happy;
he had great fame in the city and abroad as a most courteous, intelligent, and faithful servant;
there was no doubt he deserved preeminently the confidence his royal master reposed in him.

"I am come, O Prince," the old functionary said, after thanks for the friendly words, "to ascertain
if you are refreshed, and ready for the audience."

"I am ready."

"Let us to His Majesty then. If I precede you, I pray pardon."

Drawing the portiere aside, the Dean held it for the other's passage.

They entered an extensive inner court, surrounded on three sides by a gallery resting on pillars.
On the fourth side, a magnificent staircase ascended to a main landing, whence, parting right
and left, it terminated in the gallery. Floor, stairs, balustrading, pillars, everything here
was red marble flooded with light from a circular aperture in the roof open to the sky.

Along the stairs, at intervals, officers armed and in armor were stationed, and keeping their
positions faced inwardly, they seemed like statues. Other armed men were in the galleries.
The silence was impressive. Coming presently to an arched door, the Prince glanced into a deep
chamber, and at the further end of it beheld the Emperor seated in a chair of state on a dais
curtained and canopied with purple velvet.

"Take heed now, O Prince," said the Dean, in a low voice. "Yonder is His Majesty. Do thou imitate
me in all things. Come."

With this kindly caution the Dean led into the chamber of public audience. Just within the
door, he halter, crossed hands upon his breast, and dropped to his knees, his eyes downcast;
rising, he kept on about halfway to the dais, and again knelt; when near his person's length
from the dais, he knelt and fully prostrated himself. The Prince punctiliously executed every
motion, except that at the instant of halting the last time he threw both hands up after the
manner of Orientals. A velvet carpet of the accepted imperial color stretched from door to
dais greatly facilitated the observances.

A statuesque soldier, with lance and shield, stood at the left of the dais, a guard against
treachery; by the chair, bare-headed, bare-legged, otherwise a figure in a yellow tunic lightly
breastplated, appeared the sword-bearer, his slippers stayed with bands of gold, a blade clasped
to his body by the left forearm, the hilt above his shoulder; and spacious as the chamber was,
a row of dignitaries civil, military, and ecclesiastical lined the walls each in prescribed
regalia. The hush already noticed was observable here, indicative of rigid decorum and awful
reverence. "Rise, Prince of India," the Emperor said, without movement.

The visitor obeyed.

The last of the Palaeologae was in Basilean costume; a golden circlet on his head brilliantly
jewelled and holding a purple velvet cap in place; an overgown of the material of the cap but
darker in tint, and belted at the waist; a mantle stiff with embroidery of pearls hanging by
narrow bands so as to drop from the shoulder over the breast and back, leaving the neck bare;
an ample lap-robe of dark purple cloth sparkling with precious stones covering his nether limbs.
The chair was square in form without back or arms; its front posts twined and intricately inlaid
with ivory and silver, and topped each with a golden cone for hand-rest. The bareness of the
neck was relieved by four strings of pearls dropped from the circlet two on a side, and drawn
from behind the ears forward so as to lightly tip the upper edge of the mantle. The right hand
rested at the moment on the right cone of the chair; the left was free. The attitude of the
figure thus presented was easy and unconstrained, the countenance high and noble, and altogether
the guest admitted to himself that he had seldom been introduced to royalty more really imposing.

There was hardly an instant allowed for these observations. To set his guest at ease, Constantine
continued: "The way to our door is devious and upward. I hope it has not too severely tried you."

"Your Majesty, were the road many times more trying I would willingly brave it to be the recipient
of honors and attentions which have made the Emperor of Constantinople famous in many far countries,
and not least in mine."

The courtierly turn of the reply did not escape the Emperor. It had been strange if he had
not put the character of his guest to question; indeed, an investigation had proceeded by his
order, with the invitation to audience as a result; and now the self-possession of the stranger,
together with his answer, swept the last doubt from, the imperial mind. An attendant, responding
to a sign, came forward.

"Bring me wine," and as the servant disappeared with the order, Constantine again addressed
his visitor. "You maybe a Brahman or an Islamite," he said, with a pleasant look to cover any
possible mistake: "in either case, O Prince, I take it for granted that the offer of a draught
of Chian will not be resented."

"I am neither a Mohammedan, nor a devotee of the gentle son of Maya. I am not even a Hindoo
in religion. My faith leads me to be thankful for all God's gifts to his creatures. I will
take the cup Your Majesty deigns to propose."

The words were spoken with childlike simplicity of manner; yet nowhere in these pages have
we had a finer example of the subtlety which, characteristic of the speaker, seemed inspiration
rather than study. He knew from general report how religion dominated his host, and on the
spur of the moment, thought to pique curiosity with respect to his own faith; seeing, as he
fancied, a clear path to another audience, with ampler opportunity to submit and discuss the
idea of Universal Brotherhood in God.

The glance with which he accompanied assent to the cup was taken as a mere accentuation of
gratitude; it was, however, for discovery. Had the Emperor noticed the declaration of what
he was not? Did his intelligence suggest how unusual it was for an Indian to be neither a Mohammedan,
nor a Brahman, nor even a Buddhist in religion? He saw a sudden lifting of the brows, generally
the preliminary of a question; he even made an answer ready; but the other's impulse seemed
to spend itself in an inquiring look, which, lingering slightly, might mean much or nothing.
The Prince resolved to wait.

Constantine, as will be seen presently, did observe the negations, and was moved to make them
the subject of remark at the moment; but inordinately sensitive respecting his own religious
convictions, he imagined others like himself in that respect, and upon the scruple, for which
the reader will not fail to duly credit him, deferred inquiry until the visitor was somewhat
better understood.

Just then the cupbearer appeared with the wine; a girlish lad he was, with long blond curls.
Kneeling before the dais, he rested a silver platter and the liquor sparkling on it in a crystal
decanter upon his right knee, waiting the imperial pleasure.

Taking the sign given him, the Dean stepped forward and filled the two cups of chased gold
also on the platter, and delivered them. Then the Emperor held his cup up while he said in
a voice sufficiently raised for general hearing:

"Prince of India, I desired your presence to-day the rather to discharge myself of obligations
for important assistance rendered my kinswoman, the Princess Irene of Therapia, during her
detention at the White Castle; a circumstance of such late occurrence it must be still fresh
in your memory. By her account the Governor was most courteous and hospitable, and exerted
himself to make her stay in his stronghold agreeable as possible. Something truly extraordinary,
considering the forbidding exterior of the house, and the limited means of entertainment it
must have to offer, she declared he succeeded in converting what threatened to be a serious
situation into an adventure replete with pleasant surprises. A delegate is now at the Castle
assuring the Governor of my appreciation of his friendly conduct. By her account, also, I am
bounden to you, Prince, scarcely less than to him."

The gravity of the visitor at hearing this was severely attacked. Great as was his self-control,
he smiled at thought of the dilemma the Governor was in, listening to a speech of royal thanks
and receiving rich presents in lieu of his young master Mahommed. When the envoy returned and
reported, if perchance he should describe the Turk whom he found in actual keeping of the Castle,
the discrepancy between his picture of the man and that of the Princess would be both mysterious
and remarkable.

"Your Majesty," the Prince returned, with a deprecating gesture, "the storm menaced me quite
as much as the Princess, and calls for confession of my inability to see wherein I rendered
her service free of regard for myself. Indeed, it is my duty to inform Your Majesty, all these
noble witnesses hearing me, that I am more beholden to your noble kinswoman for help and deliverance
in the affair than she can be to me. But for the courage and address, not to mention the dignity
and force with which she availed herself of her royal relationship, resolving what was at first
a simple invitation to refuge into a high treaty between the heads of two great powers, I and
my daughter"--

"Daughter, said you?"

"Yes, Your Majesty--Heaven has so favored me--I, my daughter, and my frightened boatmen would
have been committed to the river near the Castle, without recourse except in prayer to Heaven.
Nay, Your Majesty, have I permission to say on, Charity had never a sweeter flowering than
when the Princess remembered to take the stranger under her protection. I am past the age of
enthusiasm and extravagance--my beard and dimming eyes prove the admission--yet I declare,
weighing each word, she has the wit, the spirit, the goodness, the loveliness to be the noblest
of queens to the best of kings; and fails she such choice, it will be because destiny has been
struck by some unaccountable forgetfulness."

By this time the courtiers, drawn in from the walls, composed a very brilliant circle around
the throne, each one curious to hear the stranger as he had been to see him; and they were
quick to point his last sentence; for most of them had been with the Emperor in the voyage
to Therapia, which was still a theme of wager and wrangle scarcely less interesting than in
its first hour. By one impulse they ventured a glance at the royal face, seeking a revelation;
but the countenance was steady as a mask.

"The encomium is well bestowed, and approves thy experience, Prince, as a reader of women,"
Constantine said, with just enough fervor. "Henceforth I shall know the degree of trust to
repose in thy judgment, other problems as difficult being in controversy. Nevertheless, is
the lady to be believed, then, O Prince, I repeat my acknowledgment of indebtedness. It pleases
me to greatly estimate thy influence and good judgment happily exerted. Mayst thou live long,
Prince of India, and always find thyself as now among friends who charge themselves to be watchful
for opportunities to befriend thee."

He raised the cup.

"It is Your Majesty's pleasure," the guest replied, and they drank together.

"A seat for the Prince of India," the Emperor next directed.

The chair, when brought, was declined.

"In my palace--for at home I exercise the functions of a king--it often falls to me to give
audiences; if public, we call them durbars; and then an inferior may not sit in my presence.
The rule, like all governing the session, is of my own enactment. I see plainly how greatly
Your Majesty designs to heap me with honors; and if I dare decline this one, it is not from
disposition to do a teacher's part, but from habit which has the sanction of heredity, and
the argument self addressed: Shall I despise my own ordinances? God forbid!"

A murmur from the concourse was distinctly audible, which the Dean interpreted by repeated
affirmative nods. In other words, by this stroke the able visitor won the court as he had already
won its head; insomuch that the most doubting of the doubters would not have refused to certify
him on belief the very Prince of India he claimed to be. The Emperor, on his part, could not
but defer to scruples so cogently and solemnly put; at the same time, out of his very certainty
respecting the guest, he passed to a question which in probability the reader has been for
some time entertaining.

"The makers of a law should be first to observe it; for having done so, they then have God's
license to exert themselves in its enforcement; and when one is found observant of a principle
which has root so perceptibly in conscience, to deny him his pleasure were inexcusable. Have
thy will, Prince."

The applause which greeted the decision of His Majesty was hardly out of ear when he proceeded:

"Again I pray you, Sir Guest--I greatly misapprehend the travellers who tell of India, if the
people of that venerable country are not given to ceremonials religious as well as secular.
Many of our own observances of a sacred nature are traceable to study and discernment of the
good effects of form in worship, and since some of them are unquestionably borrowed from temples
of the Pagan gods, yet others may be of Hindoo origin. Who shall say? Wherefore, speaking generally,
I should fear to ask you to any of our Church mysteries which I did not know were purely Greek.
One such we have this evening. We call it Pannychides. Its principal feature is a procession
of monastic brethren from the holy houses of the city and Islands--all within the jurisdiction
of our Eastern Church, which, please God, is of broader lines than our State. The fathers have
been assembling for the celebration several days. They will form in the city at set of sun,
throwing the march into the night. Here, within our grounds, more particularly at the door
of the Chapel of our Holy Virgin of Blacherne, I will meet them. They will pass the night in
prayer, an army on bended knees, sorrowing for the pains of our Saviour in Gethsemane. I was
uncertain what faith you profess; yet, Prince, I thought--forgive me, if it was an error--a
sight of the spirit of our Churchmen as it will be manifested on this occasion might prove
interesting to you; so I have taken the liberty of ordering a stand erected for your accommodation
at a position favorable to witnessing the procession in movement up the terraces. No one has
seen the spectacle without realizing as never before the firmness of the hold Christ has taken
upon the souls of men." The last words startled the Prince. Christ's hold upon the souls of
men! The very thing he wanted to learn, and, if possible, measure. A cloud of thoughts fell
about him; yet he kept clear head, and answered quietly:

"Your Majesty has done me great kindness. I am already interested in the Mystery. Since we
cannot hope ever to behold God with these mortal eyes, the nearest amend for the deprivation
is the privilege of seeing men in multitudes demonstrating their love of Him."

Constantine's eyes lingered on the Prince's face. The utterances attracted him. The manner
was so artfully reverential as not to leave a suspicion of the guile behind it. Going down
great galleries, every one has had his attention suddenly arrested; he pauses, looks, and looks
again, then wakes to find the attraction was not a picture, but only a flash within his own
mind. So, with the guest before him, the Emperor was thinking of the man rather than seeing
him--thinking of him with curiosity fully awakened, and a desire to know him better. And had
he followed up the desire, he would have found its source in the idea that India was a region
in which reflection and psychological experiment had been exhausted--where if one appeared
with a thought it turned old ere it could be explained--where wisdom had fructified until there
was no knowledge more--where the teaching capacity was all there was remaining. That is to
say, in the day of the last Byzantine Emperor, centuries ago, humanity in India was, as now,
a clock stopped, but stopped in the act of striking, leaving a glory in the air imaginable
like the continuing sound of hushed cathedral bells.

"Prince," he at length said, "you will remain here until the procession is announced at the
Grand Gate. I will then give you a guide and a guard. Our steward has orders to look after
your comfort." Turning then to the acting Chamberlain, he added: "Good Dean, have we not a
little time in which to hear our guest further?"

"Your Majesty, an hour at least."

"You hear, O Prince? Provided always that it be not to your displeasure, tell me what I am
to understand by the disclaimer which, broadly interpreted, leaves you either a Jew or a Christian?"

CHAPTER III

THE NEW FAITH PROCLAIMED

The question came earlier than the Prince expected, and in different form. Those in position
to observe his face saw it turn a trifle pale, and he hesitated, and glanced around uneasily,
as though not altogether assured of his footing. This might have been by-play; if so, it was
successful; every countenance not sympathetic was serious.

"Your Majesty's inquiry must be for information. I am too humble for an unfriendly design on
the part of one so exalted as the Emperor of Constantinople. It might be otherwise if I represented
a church, a denomination, or a recognized religion; as it is, my faith is my own."

"But bethink thee, Prince, thou mayst have the truth--the very God's truth," Constantine interposed,
with kindly intent. "We all know thy country hath been the cradle of divine ideas. So, speak,
and fear not."

The glance the Emperor received was winsomely grateful.

"Indeed, Your Majesty, indeed I have need of good countenance. The question put me has lured
more men to bloody graves than fire, sword and wave together. And then why I believe as I believe
demands time in excess of what we have; and I am the bolder in this because in limiting me
Your Majesty limits yourself. So I will now no more than define my Faith. But first, it does
not follow from my disclaimer that I can only be a Jew or a Christian; for as air is a vehicle
for a multitude of subtleties in light, faith in like manner accommodates a multitude of opinions."

While speaking, the Prince's voice gradually gained strength; his color returned, and his eyes
enlarged and shone with strange light. Now his right hand arose, the fingers all closed except
the first one, and it was long and thin, and he waved it overhead, like a conjuring wand. If
the concourse had been unwilling to hear him, they could not have turned away.

"I am not a Hindoo, my Lord; because I cannot believe men can make their own gods."

The Father Confessor to the Emperor, at the left of the dais in a stole of gold and crimson
cloth, smiled broadly.

"I am not a Buddhist," the Prince continued; "because I cannot believe the soul goes to nothingness
after death."

The Father Confessor clapped his hands.

"I am not a Confucian; because I cannot reduce religion to philosophy or elevate philosophy
into religion."

The blood of the audience began to warm.

"I am not a Jew; because I believe God loves all peoples alike, or if he makes distinctions,
it is for righteousness' sake."

Here the chamber rang with clapping.

"I am not an Islamite; because when I raise my eyes to Heaven, I cannot tolerate sight of a
man standing between me and God--no, my Lord, not though he be a Prophet."

The hit was palpable, and from hate of the old enemy, the whole assemblage broke into an uproar
of acclamation. Only the Emperor kept his gravity. Leaning heavily on the golden cone at the
right of his chair, his chin depressed, his eyes staring, scarcely breathing, he waited, knowing,
that having gone so far, there was before the speaker an unavoidable climax; and seeing it
in his face, and coming, he presently aroused, and motioned for silence.

"I am not"--

The Prince stopped, but when the hush was deepest went on--"I am not a Christian; because--because
I believe--God is God."

The Father Confessor's hands were ready to clap, but they stayed so; the same spell took hold
of the bystanders, except that they looked at the Emperor, and he alone seemed to comprehend
the concluding phrase. He settled back easily in his seat, saying, "Thy Faith then is--"

"God!"

The monosyllable was the Prince's.

And with clear sight of the many things reprobated--Images, Saints, the Canonized, even the
worship of Christ and the Holy Mother--with clear sight also of the wisdom which in that presence
bade the guest stop with the mighty name--at the same time more curious than ever to hear in
full discourse the man who could reduce religion to a single word and leave it comprehensible,
Constantine drew a breath of relief, and said, smiling, "Of a surety, O Prince, there was never
a Faith which, with such appearance of simplicity in definition, is capable of such infinity
of meaning. I am full of questions; and these listening, my lords of the court, are doubtless
in a similar mood. What sayest thou, O my most orthodox Confessor?" The Father bowed until
the hem of his blazing stole overlaid the floor.

"Your Majesty, we too are believers in God; but we also believe in much beside; so, if but
for comparison of creeds, which is never unprofitable while in good nature, I should like to
hear the noble and fair speaking guest further."

"And you, my Lords?"

The throng around answered, "Yes, yes!"

"We will have it so then. Look, good Logothete, for the nearest day unoccupied."

A handsome man of middle age approached the dais, and opening a broad-backed book, evidently
the record of the royal appointments, turned a number of leaves, and replied: "Your Majesty,
two weeks from tomorrow."

"Note the same set aside for the Prince of India.-Dost hear, Prince?"

The latter lowered his face the better to conceal his pleasure.

"All days are alike to me," he answered.

"In this our palace, then--two weeks from to-morrow at the hour of noon. And now"--the rustle
and general movement of the courtiers was instantly stayed--"and now, Prince, didst thou not
speak of exercising the functions of a king at home? Thy capital must be in India, but where,
pray? And how callest thou thyself? And why is this city so fortunate as to have attracted
thy wandering feet? It is not every king so his own master as to turn traveller, and go about
making study of the world; although, I admit, it would be better could every king do so."

These questions were rapidly put, but as the Prince was prepared for them, he responded pleasantly:

"In answering the questions Your Majesty now honors me with. I am aware how serious the mistake
would be did I think of your curiosity alone. A most excellent quality in a great man is patience.
Alas, that it should be one of the most abused! ... Among the oldest of Hindoo titles is Rajah.
It means King rather than Prince, and I was born to it. Your Majesty may have heard of Oodeypoor,
the bosom jewel of Rajpootana, the white rose just bloomed of Indian cities. At the foot of
a spur of the Arawalli mountains, a river rises, and on its right bank reposes the city; from
which, southeast a little way, a lake lies outspread, like a mirror fallen face upward. And
around the lake are hills, tall and broken as these of the Bosphorus; and seen from the water
the hills are masses of ivy and emerald woods thickly sprinkled with old fortresses and temples,
and seven-roofed red pagodas, each the home of a great gold-decked Buddha, with lesser Buddhas
in family. And in the lake are islands all palaces springing from the water line in open arches,
and sculptured walls, and towered gates; and of still days their wondrous cunning in the air
is renewed afresh in the waveless depths below them. If they are glorious then, what are they
when reconstructed for festal nights in shining lamps? For be it said, my Lord, if a stranger
in the walls of this centre of empire may speak a word which has the faintest savor of criticism,
the Indian genius analyzed beauty before there was a West, and taking suggestions from spark
and dewdrop, applied them to architecture. Smile not, I pray, for you may see the one in the
lamp multiplied for outline traceries, and the other in the fountain, the cascade, and the
limpid margin at the base of walls. Or if still you think me exaggerating, is not the offence
one to be lightly forgiven where the offender is telling of his birthplace? In one of the palaces
of that Lake of Palaces I was born, the oldest son of the Rajah of Meywar, Oodeypoor his capital.
In these words, which I hope may be kindly judged, Your Majesty will find answers to one, if
not two of the questions you were pleased to ask me--Why I am here? And why making study of
the world? Will Your Majesty pardon my boldness, if I suggest that a reply to those inquiries
would be better at the audience set for me next? I fear it is too long for telling now."

"Be it so," said Constantine, "yet a hint of it may not be amiss. It may set us to thinking;
and, Prince, a mind prepared for an idea is like ground broken and harrowed for seed."

The Prince hesitated.

"Your Majesty--my Lord"--he then said firmly, "the most sorrowful of men are those with conceptions
too great for them, and which they must carry about with nothing better to sustain their sinking
spirits than a poor hope of having them one day adopted; for until that day they are like a
porter overladen and going from house to house unknowing the name of the owner of his burden
or where to look for him. I am such an unfortunate.... Oodeypoor, you must understand, is more
than comely to the eye of a native; it is a city where all religions are tolerated. The Taing,
the Brahman, the Hindoo, the Mohammedan, the Buddhist live together there, protected and in
peace, with their worship and houses of worship; nor is there any shutting of mouths, because
controversy long since attained finality amongst them; or perhaps it were better saying, because
opinions there have now their recognized grooves, and run in them from generation to generation--opinions
to which men are born as to their property, only without right of change or modification; neither
can they break away from them. There is no excuse if an intelligent man in such a situation
does not comprehend all the religions thus in daily practice; or if one does comprehend them
he should not flatter himself possessed of any superior intellect.... The Rajah, my father,
died, and I mounted his silver throne, and for ten years administered justice in the Hall of
Durbars to which he had been used, he and his father's father, Children of the Sun, most pure
of blood. By that time I was of mature mind, and having given myself up to study, came to believe
there is but one doctrine--principle--call it what you will, my Lord--but one of heavenly origin--one
primarily comprehensible by all--too simple indeed to satisfy the egotism of men; wherefore,
without rejecting, they converted it into a foundation, and built upon it each according to
his vanity, until, in course of ages, the foundation was overlaid with systems of belief, childish,
unnatural, ridiculous, indecent, or else too complicated for common understanding"--

"This principle--what is it, Prince?" Constantine asked nervously.

"Your Majesty, I have already once named it."

"Mean you God?"

"And now, my Lord, thou hast pronounced it."

The stillness in the chamber was very deep. Every man seemed to be asking, what next?

"One day, Your Majesty--it was in my tenth year of government--a function was held in a tent
erected for the purpose--a shamiana vastly larger than any hall. I went up to it in state,
passing through lines of elephants, an hundred on either hand, covered with cloth of gold and
with houdahs of yellow silk roofed with the glory of peacocks. Behind the mighty brutes soldiery
blotted out the landscape, and the air between them and the sky was a tawny cloud of flaunting
yak-tails; nor had one use for ears, so was he deafened by beat of drums and blowing of brazen
horns twice a tall man's height. I sat on a throne of silver and gold, all my ministers present.
My brother entered, he the next entitled. Halfway down the aisle of chiefs I met him, and then
led him to my seat, and saluted him Rajah of Meywar. Your Majesty, so I parted with crown and
title--laid them down voluntarily to search the world for men in power in love with God enough
to accept him as their sum of faith. Behold why I travel making the earth a study! Behold why
I am in Constantinople!"

Constantine was impressed.

"Where hast thou been?" he at length asked--"where before coming here?"

"It were easier did Your Majesty ask where I have not been. For then I could answer, Everywhere,
except Rome."

"Dost thou impugn our devotion to God?"

"Not so, not so, my Lord! I am seeking to know the degree of your love of Him."

"How, Prince?"

"By a test."

"What test?"

No man listening could have said what mood the Emperor was in; yet the guest replied with an
appearance of rising courage: "A trial, to find all the other things entering into Faith which
Your Majesty and Your Majesty's lords and subjects are willing to lay down for God's sake."

With a peremptory gesture Constantine silenced the stir and rustle in the chamber. "It is right
boldly put," he said.

"But none the less respectfully. My Lord, I am striving to he understood."

"You speak of a trial. To what end?"

"One Article of Faith, the all-essential of Universal Brotherhood in Religion."

"A magnificent conception! But is it practicable?"

Fortunately or unfortunately for the Prince, an officer that moment made way through the courtiers,
and whispered to the Dean, who at once addressed himself to the Emperor.

"I pray pardon, but it pleased Your Majesty to bid me notify you when it is time to make ready
for the Mystery to-night. The hour is come; besides which a messenger from Scholarius waits
for an interview."

Constantine arose.

"Thanks, worthy Dean," he said; "we will not detain the messenger. The audience is dismissed."

Then descending from the dais, he gave his hand to the Prince. "I see the idea you have in
mind, and it is worthy the bravest effort. I shall look forward to the next audience with concern.
Forget not that the guestship continues. My steward will take you in charge. Farewell."

The Prince, sinking to his knees, kissed the offered hand, whereupon the Emperor said as if
just reminded: "Was not your daughter with my kinswoman in the White Castle?"

"Your Majesty, the Princess on that occasion most graciously consented to accept my daughter
as her attendant."

"Were she to continue in the same attendance, Prince, we might hope to have her at court some day."

"I lay many thanks at Your Majesty's feet. She is most honored by the suggestion." Constantine
in lead of his officers then passed out, while, in care of the steward, the Prince was conducted
to the reception room, and served with refreshments. Afterwhile through the windows he beheld
the day expiring, and the first audience finished, and the second appointed, he was free to
think of the approaching Mystery.

Be it said now he was easy in feeling--satisfied with the management of his cause--satisfied
with the impression he had made on the Emperor and the court as well. Had not the latter applauded
and voted to hear him again? When taken with the care habitually observed by leading personages
in audiences formal as that just passed, how broadly sympathetic the expressions of the monarch
had been.

In great cheerfulness the Prince ate and drank, and even occupied the wine-colored leisure
conning an argument for the occasion in prospect--noon, next day two weeks! And more clearly
than ever his scheme seemed good. Could he carry it through--could he succeed--the good would
be recognized--never a doubt of that. If men were sometimes blind, God was always just.

In thought he sped forward of the coming appointment, and saw himself not only the apostle
of the reform, but the chosen agent, the accredited go-between of Constantine and the young
Mahommed. He remembered the points of negotiation between them. He would not require the Turk
to yield the prophetic character of Mahomet; neither should the Byzantine's faith in Christ
suffer curtailment; he would ask them, however, to agree to a new relation between Mahomet
and Christ on the one side and God on the other--that, namely, long conceded, as having existed
between God and Elijah. And then, an article of the utmost materiality, the very soul of the
recast religion, he would insist that they obligate themselves to worship God alone, worship
being His exclusive prerogative, and that this condition of exclusive worship be prescribed
the only test of fraternity in religion; all other worship to be punishable as heresy. Nor
stopped he with Mahommed and Constantine; he doubted not bringing the Rabbis to such a treaty.
How almost identical it was with the Judaism of Moses. The Bishop of Rome might protest. What
matter? Romanism segregated must die. And so the isms of the Brahman and the Hindoo, so the
Buddhist, the Confucian, the Mencian--they would all perish under the hammering of the union.
Then, too, Time would make the work perfect, and gradually wear Christ and Mahomet out of mind--he
and Time together. What if the task did take ages? He had an advantage over other reformers--he
could keep his reform in motion--he could guide and direct it--he could promise himself life
to see it in full acceptance. In the exuberance of triumphant feeling, he actually rejoiced
in his doom, and for the moment imagined it more than a divine mercy.

CHAPTER IV

THE PANNYCHIDES

An invitation from the Emperor to remain and view the procession marching up the heights of
Blacherne had been of itself a compliment; but the erection of a stand for the Prince turned
the compliment into a personal honor. To say truth, however, he really desired to see the Pannychides,
or in plain parlance, the Vigils. He had often heard of them as of prodigious effect upon the
participants. Latterly they had fallen into neglect; and knowing how difficult it is to revive
a dying custom, he imagined the spectacle would be poor and soon over. While reflecting on
it, he looked out of the window and was surprised to see the night falling. He yielded then
to restlessness, until suddenly an idea arose and absorbed him.

Suppose the Emperor won to his scheme; was its success assured? So used was he to thinking
of the power of kings and emperors as the sole essential to the things he proposed that in
this instance he had failed to concede importance to the Church; and probably he would have
gone on in the delusion but for the Mysteries which were now to pass before him. They forced
him to think of the power religious organizations exercise over men.

And this Church--this old Byzantine Church! Ay, truly! The Byzantine conscience was under its
direction; it was the Father Confessor of the Empire; its voice in the common ear was the voice
of God. To cast Christ out of its system would be like wrenching a man's heart out of his body.
It was here and there--everywhere in fact--in signs, trophies, monuments --in crosses and images--in
monasteries, convents, houses to the Saints, houses to the Mother. What could the Emperor do,
if it were obstinate and defiant? The night beheld through the window crept into the Wanderer's
heart, and threatened to put out the light kindled there by the new-born hope with which he
had come from the audience.

"The Church, the Church! It is the enemy I have to fear," he kept muttering in dismal repetition,
realizing, for the first time, the magnitude of the campaign before him. With a wisdom in wickedness
which none of his successors in design have shown, he saw the Christian idea in the bosom of
the Church unassailable except a substitute satisfactory to its professors could be found.
Was God a sufficient substitute? Perhaps--and he turned cold with the reflection--the Pannychides
were bringing him an answer. It was an ecclesiastical affair, literally a meeting of Churchmen
en masse. Where--when--how could the Church present itself to any man more an actuality in
the flesh? Perhaps--and a chill set his very crown to crawling--perhaps the opportunity to
study the spectacle was more a mercy of God than a favor of Constantine.

To his great relief, at length the officer who had escorted him from the Grand Gate came into
the room.

"I am to have the honor," he said, cheerfully, "of conducting you to the stand His Majesty
has prepared that you may at ease behold the Mysteries appointed for the night. The head of
the procession is reported appearing. If it please you, Prince of India, we will set out."

"I am ready."

The position chosen for the Prince was on the right bank of a cut through which the road passed
on its ascent from the arched gateway by the Chapel to the third terrace, and he was borne
thither in his sedan.

Upon alighting, he found himself on a platform covered by a canopy, carpeted and furnished
with one chair comfortably cushioned. At the right of the chair there was a pyramid of coals
glowing in a brazier, and lest that might not be a sufficient provision against the damps of
the hours, a great cloak was near at hand. In front of the platform he observed a pole securely
planted and bearing a basket of inflammables ready for conversion into a torch. In short, everything
needful to his well-being, including wine and water on a small tripod, was within reach.

Before finally seating himself the Prince stepped out to the brow of the terrace, whence he
noticed the Chapel below him in the denser darkness of the trees about it like a pool. The
gleam of armor on the area by the Grand Gate struck him with sinister effect. Flowers saluted
him with perfume, albeit he could not see them. Not less welcome was the low music with which
the brook cheered itself while dancing down to the harbor. Besides a cresset burning on the
landing outside the Port entrance, two other lights were visible; one on the Pharos, the other
on the great Galata tower, looking in the distance like large stars. With these exceptions,
the valley and the hill opposite Blacherne, and the wide-reaching Metropolis beyond them, were
to appearances a blacker cloud dropped from the clouded sky. A curious sound now came to him
from the direction of the city. Was it a rising wind? Or a muffled roll from the sea? While
wondering, some one behind him said:

"They are coming."

The voice was sepulchral and harsh, and the Prince turned quickly to the speaker.

"Ah, Father Theophilus!"

"They are coming," the Father repeated.

The Prince shivered slightly. The noise beyond the valley arose more distinctly.

"Are they singing?" he asked.

"Chanting," the other answered.

"Why do they chant?"

"Knowest thou our Scriptures?"

The Wanderer quieted a disdainful impulse, and answered:

"I have read them."

The Prince was startled. Why was one in speech so like a ghost selected his companion? And
that verse, of all to him most afflicting, and which in hours of despair he had repeated until
his very spirit had become colored with its reproachful plaint--who put it in the man's mouth?

The chant came nearer. Of melody it had nothing; nor did those engaged in it appear in the
slightest attentive to time. Yet it brought relief to the Prince, willing as he was to admit
he had never heard anything similar--anything so sorrowful, so like the wail of the damned
in multitude. And rueful as the strain was, it helped him assign the pageant a near distance,
a middle distance, and then interminability.

"There appear to be a great many of them," he remarked to the Father.

"More than ever before in the observance," was the reply.

"Is there a reason for it?"

"Our dissensions."

The Father did not see the pleased expression of his auditor's face, but proceeded: "Yes, our
dissensions. They multiply. At first the jar was between the Church and the throne; now it
is the Church against the Church--a Roman party and a Greek party. One man among us has concentrated
in himself the learning and devotion of the Christian East. You will see him directly, George
Scholarius. By visions, like those in which the old prophets received the counsel of God, he
was instructed to revive the Pannychides. His messengers have gone hither and thither, to the
monasteries, the convents, and the eremitic colonies wherever accessible. The greater the presence,
he says, the greater the influence."

"Scholarius is a wise man," the Prince said, diplomatically.

"His is the wisdom of the Prophets," the Father answered.

"Is he the Patriarch?"

"No, the Patriarch is of the Roman party--Scholarius of the Greek."

"And Constantine?"

"A good king, truly, but, alas; he is cumbered with care of the State."

"Yes, yes," said the Prince. "And the care leads to neglect of his soul. Kings are sometimes
to be pitied. But there is then a special object in the Vigils?"

"The Vigils to-night are for the restoration of the unities once more, that the Church may
find peace and the State its power and glory again. God is in the habit of taking care of His own."

"Thank you, Father, I see the difference. Scholarius would intrust the State to the Holy Virgin;
but Constantine, with a worldlier inspiration, adheres to the craft held by Kings immemorially.
The object of the Vigils is to bring the Emperor to abandon his policy and defer to Scholarius?"

"The Emperor assists in the Mystery," the Father answered, vaguely.

The procession meantime came on, and when its head appeared in front of the Grand Gate three
trumpeters blew a flourish which called the guards into line. A monk advanced and held parley
with an officer; after which he was given a lighted torch, and passed under the portal in lead
of the multitude. The trumpeters continued plying their horns, marking the slow ascent.

"Were this an army," said Father Theophilus, "it would not be so laborious; but, alas! the
going of youth is nowhere so rapid as in a cloister; nor is age anywhere so feeble. Ten years
kneeling on a stony floor in a damp cell brings the anchorite to forget he ever walked with ease."

The Prince scarcely heard him; he was interested in the little to be seen crossing the area
below--a column four abreast, broken into unequal divisions, each division with a leader, who,
at the gate, received a torch. Occasionally a square banner on a cross-stick appeared-- occasionally
a section in light-colored garments; more frequently a succession of heads without covering
of any kind; otherwise the train was monotonously rueful, and in its slow movement out of the
darkness reminded the spectator on the height of a serpent crawling endlessly from an underground
den. Afterwhile the dim white of the pavement was obscured by masses stationary on the right
and left of the column; these were the people stopping there because for them there was no
further pursuit of the spectral parade.

The horns gave sonorous notice of the progress during the ascent. Now they were passing along
the first terrace; still the divisions were incessant down by the gate--still the chanting
continued, a dismal dissonance in the distance, a horrible discord near by. If it be true that
the human voice is music's aptest instrument, it is also true that nothing vocalized in nature
can excel it in the expression of diabolism.

Suddenly the first torch gleamed on the second terrace scarce an hundred yards from the Chapel.

"See him now there, behind the trumpeters--Scholarius!" said Father Theophilus, with a semblance
of animation.

"He with the torch?"

"Ay!--And he might throw the torch away, and still be the light of the Church."

The remark did not escape the Prince. The man who could so impress himself upon a member of
the court must be a power with his brethren of the gown generally. Reflecting thus, the discerning
visitor watched the figure stalking on under the torch. There are men who are causes in great
events, sometimes by superiority of nature, sometimes by circumstances. What if this were one
of them? And forthwith the observer ceased fancying the mystical looking monk drawing the interminable
train after him by the invisible bonds of a will mightier than theirs in combination--the fancy
became a fact. "The procession will not stop at the Chapel," the Father said; "but keep on
to the palace, where the Emperor will join it. If my Lord cares to see the passage distinctly,
I will fire the basket here."

"Do so," the Prince replied.

The flambeau was fired.

It shed light over the lower terraces right and left, and brought the palace in the upper space
into view from the base of the forward building to the Tower of Isaac; and here, close by,
the Chapel with all its appurtenances, paved enclosure, speeding brook, solemn cypresses, and
the wall and arched gateway at the hither side stood out in almost daytime clearness. The road
in the cut underfoot must bring the frocked host near enough to expose its spirit.

The bellowing of the horns frightened the birds at roost in the melancholy grove, and taking
wing, they flew blindly about.

Then ensued the invasion of the enclosure in front of the Chapel-- Scholarius next the musicians.
The Prince saw him plainly; a tall man, stoop-shouldered, angular as a skeleton; his hood thrown
back; head tonsured; the whiteness of the scalp conspicuous on account of the band of black
hair at the base; the features high and thin, cheeks hollow, temples pinched. The dark brown
cassock, leaving an attenuated neck completely exposed, hung from his frame apparently much
too large for it. His feet disdained sandals. At the brook he halted, and letting the crucifix
fall from his right hand, he stooped and dipped the member thus freed into the water, and rising
flung the drops in air. Resuming the crucifix, he marched on.

It cannot be said there was admiration in the steady gaze with which the Prince kept the monk
in eye; the attraction was stronger--he was looking for a sign from him. He saw the tall, nervous
figure cross the brook with a faltering, uncertain step, pass the remainder of the pavement,
the torch in one hand, the holy symbol in the other; then it disappeared under the arch of
the gate; and when it had come through, the sharp espial was beforehand with it, and waiting.
It commenced ascending the acute grade--now it was in the cut--and now, just below the Prince,
it had but to look up, and its face would be on a level with his feet. At exactly the right
moment, Scholarius did look up, and--stop.

The interchange of glances between the men was brief, and can be likened to nothing so aptly
as sword blades crossing in a red light.

Possibly the monk, trudging on, his mind intent upon something which was part of a scene elsewhere,
or on the objects and results of the solemnities in celebration, as yet purely speculative,
might have been disagreeably surprised at discovering himself the subject of study by a stranger
whose dress proclaimed him a foreigner; possibly the Prince's stare, which we have already
seen was at times powerfully magnetic, filled him with aversion and resentment; certain it
is he raised his head, showing a face full of abhorrence, and at the same time waved the crucifix
as if in exorcism.

The Prince had time to see the image thus presented was of silver on a cross of ivory wrought
to wonderful realism. The face was dying, not dead; there were the spikes in the hands and
feet, the rent in the side, the crown of thorns, and overhead the initials of the inscription:
This is the King of the Jews. There was the worn, buffeted, bloodspent body, and the lips were
parted so it was easy to think the sufferer in mid-utterance of one of the exclamations which
have placed his Divinity forever beyond successful denial. The swift reversion of memory excited
in the beholder might have been succeeded by remorse, but for the cry:

"Thou enemy of Jesus Christ--avaunt!"

It was the voice of Scholarius, shrill and high; and before the Prince could recover from the
shock, before he could make answer, or think of answering, the visionary was moving on; nor
did he again look back.

"What ails thee, Prince?"

The sepulchral tone of Father Theophilus was powerful over the benumbed faculties of His Majesty's
guest; and he answered with a question:

"Is not thy friend Scholarius a great preacher?"

"On his lips the truth is most unctuous."

"It must be so--it must be so! For"--the Prince's manner was as if he were settling a grave
altercation in his own mind--"for never did a man offer me the Presence so vitalized in an
image. I am not yet sure but he gave me to see the Holy Son of the Immaculate Mother in flesh
and blood exactly as when they put Him so cruelly to death. Or can it be, Father, that the
effect upon me was in greater measure due to the night, the celebration, the cloud of ministrants,
the serious objects of the Vigils?"

The answer made Father Theophilus happy as a man of his turn could be--he was furnished additional
evidence of the spiritual force of Scholarius, his ideal.

"No," he answered, "it was God in the man."

All this time the chanting had been coming nearer, and now the grove rang with it. A moment,
and the head of the first division must present itself in front of the Chapel. Could the Wanderer
have elected then whether to depart or stay, the Pannychides would have had no further assistance
from him--so badly had the rencounter with Scholarius shaken him. Not that he was afraid in
the vulgar sense of the term. Before a man can habitually pray for death, he must be long lost
to fear. If we can imagine conscience gone, pride of achievement, without which there can be
no mortification or shame in defeat, may yet remain with him, a source of dread and weakness.
The chill which shook Brutus in his tent the evening before Philippi was not in the least akin
to terror. So with the Prince at this juncture. There to measure the hold of the Christian
idea upon the Church, it seemed Scholarius had brought him an answer which finished his interest
in the passing Vigils. In brief, the Reformer's interest in the Mystery was past, and he wished
with his whole soul to retreat to the sedan, but a fascination held him fast.

"I think it would be pleasanter sitting," he said, and returned to the platform.

"If I presume to take the chair, Father," he added, "it is because I am older than thou."

Hardly was he thus at ease when a precentor, fat, and clad in a long gown, stepped out of the
grove to the clear lighted pavement in front of the Chapel. His shaven head was thrown back,
his mouth open to its fullest stretch, and tossing a white stick energetically up and down
in the air, he intoned with awful distinctness: "The waters wear the stones.

The Prince covered his ears with his hands.

"Thou likest not the singing?" Father Theophilus asked, and continued: "I admit the graces
have little to do with musical practice in the holy houses of the Fathers." But he for whom
the comfort was meant made no reply. He was repeating to himself: "Thou prevailest forever
against him, and he passeth."

And to these words the head of the first division strode forward into the light. The Prince
dropped his hands in time to hear the last verse: "But his flesh upon him shall have pain,
and his soul within him shall mourn."

For whom was this? Did the singers know the significancy of the text to him? The answer was
from God, and they were merely messengers bringing it. He rose to his feet; in his rebellious
passion the world seemed to melt and swim about him. He felt a longing to burn, break, destroy--to
strike out and kill. When he came to himself, Father Theophilus, who thought him merely wonder
struck by the mass of monks in march, was saying in his most rueful tone: "Good order required
a careful arrangement of the procession; for though the participants are pledged to godly life,
yet they sometimes put their vows aside temporarily. The holiest of them have pride in their
establishments, and are often too ready to resort to arms of the flesh to assert their privileges.
The Fathers of the Islands have long been jealous of the Fathers of the city, and to put them
together would be a signal for riot. Accordingly there are three grand divisions here--the
monks of Constantinople, those of the Islands, the shores of the Bosphorus and the three seas,
and finally the recluses and hermits from whatever quarter. Lo! first the Fathers of the Studium--saintly
men as thou wilt see anywhere."

The speech was unusually long for the Father; a fortunate circumstance of which the Prince
availed himself to recover his self-possession. By the time the brethren eulogized were moving
up the rift at his feet, he was able to observe them calmly. They were in long gowns of heavy
gray woollen stuff, with sleeves widening from the shoulders; their cowls, besides covering
head and visage, fell down like capes. Cleanly, decent-looking men, they marched slowly and
in order, their hands united palm to palm below their chins. The precentor failed to inspire
them with his fury of song.

"These now coming," Father Theophilus said of the second fraternity," are conventuals of Petrion,
who have their house looking out on the harbor here. And these," he said of the third, "are
of the Monastery of Anargyres--a very ancient society. The Emperor Michael, surnamed the Paphlegonian,
died in one of their cells in 1041. Brotherhood with them is equivalent to saintship."

Afterwhile a somewhat tumultuous flock appeared in white skirts and loose yellow cloaks, their
hair and beard uncut and flying. The historian apologized.

"Bear with them," he said; "they are mendicants from the retreats of Periblepte, in the quarter
of Psammatica. You may see them on the street corners and quays, and in all public places,
sick, blind, lame and covered with sores. They have St. Lazarus for patron. At night an angel
visits them with healing. They refuse to believe the age of miracles is past."

The city monastics were a great host carrying banners with the name of their Brotherhoods inscribed
in golden letters; and in every instance the Hegumen, or Abbot, preceded his fraternity torch
in hand.

A company in unrelieved black marched across the brook, and their chanting was lugubrious as
their garb.

"Petra sends us these Fathers," said Theophilus--"Petra over on the south side. They sleep
all day and watch at night. The second coming they say will happen in the night, because they
think that time most favorable for the trumpeting herald and the splendor of the manifestations."

Half an hour of marching--men in gray and black and yellow, a few in white--men cowled--men
shorn and unshorn--barefooted men and men in sandals--a river of men in all moods, except jovial
and happy, toiling by the observing stand, seldom an upturned face, spectral, morose, laden
body and mind--young and old looking as if just awakened after ages of entombment;--a half
hour of dismal chanting the one chapter from the book of the man in the land of Uz, of all
utterances the most dismal;--a half hour of waiting by the Prince for one kindly sign, without
discovering it--a half hour, in which, if the comparison be not too strong, he was like a soul
keeping watch over its own abandoned body. Then Father Theophilus said:

"From the cloisters of St. James of Manganese! The richest of the monasteries of Constantinople,
and the most powerful. It furnishes Sancta Sophia with renowned preachers. Its brethren cultivate
learning. Their library is unexcelled, and they boast that in the hundreds of years of their
society life, they had never an heretic. Before their altars the candles are kept burning and
trimmed forever. Their numbers are recruited from the noblest families. Young men to whom the
army is open prefer God-service in the elegant retirement of St. James of Manganese. They will
interest you, Prince; and after them we will have the second grand division."

"Brethren of the Islands?"

"Yes, of the Islands and the sea-shores."

Upon the pavement then appeared a precentor attired like a Greek priest of the present day;
a rimless hat black and high, and turned slightly outward at the top; a veil of the same hue;
the hair gathered into a roll behind, and secured under the hat; a woollen gown very dark,
glossy, and dropping in ample folds unconfined from neck to shoe. The Hegumen followed next,
and because of his age and infirmities a young man carried the torch for him. The chanting
was sweet, pure, and in perfect time. All these evidences of refinement and respectability
were noticed by the Prince, and looking at the torch-bearer again, he recognized the young
monk, his room-mate in the White Castle.

"Knowest thou the youth yonder?" he asked, pointing to Sergius.

"A Russian recently arrived," the Father replied. "Day before yesterday he was brought to the
palace and presented to the Emperor by the Princess Irene. He made a great impression."

The two kept their eyes on the young man until he disappeared ascending the hill.

"He will be heard from;" and with the prediction the Prince gave attention to the body of the
Brotherhood.

"These men have the bearing of soldiers," he said presently.

"Their vows respecting war are liberal. If the panagia were carried to the walls, they would
accompany it in armor."

The Prince smiled. He had not the faith in the Virgin of Blacherne which the Father's answer
implied.

The St. James' were long in passing. The Prince kept them in sight to the last four. They were
the aristocracy of the Church, prim, proud; as their opportunities were more frequent, doubtless
they were more wicked than their associates of the humbler fraternities; yet he could not promise
himself favor from their superior liberality. On the contrary, having a great name for piety
to defend, if a test offered, they were the more certain to be hard and vindictive--to send
a heretic to the stake, and turn a trifling variation from the creed into heresy.

"Who is this?" the Prince exclaimed, as a noble-looking man in full canonicals stepped out
of the cypress shadows, first of the next division.

"Master of Ceremonies for the Church," Father Theophilus replied. "He is the wall between the
Islanders and the Metropolitans."

"And he who walks with him singing?"

"The Protopsolete--leader of the Patriarch's Choir."

Behind this singer the monks of the Isles of the Princes! In movement, order, dress, like their
predecessors in the march--Hegumen with their followers in gray, black and white--hands palm
to palm prayerfully-- chanting sometimes better, sometimes worse--never a look upward but always
down, as if Heaven were a hollow in the earth, an abyss at their feet, and they about to step
into it.

The Prince was beginning to tire. Suddenly he thought of the meeting of pilgrims at El Zaribah.
How unlike was the action there and here! That had been a rush, an inundation, as it were,
by the sea, fierce, mad, a passion of Faith fostered by freedom; this, slow, solemn, sombre,
oppressive--what was it like? Death in Life, and burial by programme so rigid there must not
be a groan more or a tear less. He saw Law in it all--or was it imposition, force, choice smothered
by custom, fashion masquerading in the guise of Faith? The hold of Christ upon the Church began
to look possible of measurement.

"Roti first!" said the Father. "Rocky and bare, scarce a bush for a bird or grass for a cricket.
Ah, verily he shall love God dearly or hate the world mortally who of free will chooses a cloister
for life at Roti!"

The brethren of the three convents of the Island marched past clad in short brown frocks, bareheaded,
barefooted. The comments of the historian were few and brief.

"Poor they look," he said of the first one, "and poor they are, yet Michael Rhangabe and Romain
Lacapene were glad to live and die with them." Of the second: "When Romain Diogenes built the
house these inhabit, he little dreamed it would shelter him, a refugee from the throne." Of
the third: "Dardanes was a great general. In his fortunate days he built a tower on Roti with
one cell in it; in an evil hour he aspired to the throne--failed--lost his eyes, retired to
his lonesome tower--by his sanctity there drew a fraternity to him, and died. That was hundreds
of years ago. The brethren still pray for his soul. Be it that evil comes of good; not less
does good come of evil--and so God keeps the balances."

In the same manner he descanted on the several contingents from Antigone as they strode by;
then of those from God's houses at Halki, the pearl of the Marmora; amongst them the monastery
of John the Precursor, and the Convents of St. George, Hagia Trias, and lastly the Very Holy
House of the All Holy Mother of God, founded by John VIII. Palaeologus. After them, in turn,
the consecrated from Prinkipo, especially those from the Kamares of the Basilissa, Irene, and
the Convent of the Transfiguration.

The faithful few from the solitary Convent on the Island of Oxia, and the drab-gowned abstinents
of the monastery of Plati, miserables given to the abnormity of mixing prayer and penance with
the cultivation of snails for the market in Constantinople, were the last of the Islanders.

Then in a kind of orderly disorganization the claustral inculpables from holy houses on Olympus
down by the Dardanelles, the Bosphorus, and the Bithynian shore behind the Isles of the Princes,
and some from retreats in the Egean and along the Peloponnesus, their walls now dust, their
names forgotten.

"Where is the procession going?" the Prince now asked.

"Look behind you--up along the front of the palace."

And casting his eyes thither, the questioner beheld the ground covered with a mass of men not
there before.

"What are they doing?"

"Awaiting the Emperor. Only the third grand division is wanting now; when it is up His Majesty
will appear."

"And descend to the Chapel?"

"Yes."

For a time a noise more like the continuous, steady monotone of falling water than a chant
had been approaching from the valley, making its darkness vocal. It threatened the gates awhile;
now it was at the gates. The Prince's wonder was great, and to appease it Father Theophilus
explained:

"The last division is at hand."

In the dim red light over the area by the gate below, the visitor beheld figures hurriedly
issuing from the night--figures in the distance so wild and fantastic they did not at first
seem human. They left no doubt, however, whence the sound proceeded. The white sand of the
road up the terraces was beaten to dust under the friction and pressure of the thousands of
feet gone before; this third division raised it into an attending cloud, and the cloud and
the noise were incessant.

Once more the Prince went out to the brink of the terrace. The monotony of the pageant was
broken; something new was announcing itself. Spectres--devils--gnomes and jinn of the Islamitic
Solomon--rakshakas and hanumen of the Eastern Iliads--surely this miscellany was a composition
of them all. They danced along the way and swung themselves and each other, howling like dervishes
in frenzy. Again the birds took wing and flew blindly above the cypresses, and the end of things
seemed about to burst when a yell articulate yet unintelligible shook the guarded door of the
venerable Chapel.

Then the demoniacs--the Prince could not make else of them--leaping the brook, crowding the
pent enclosure, hasting to the arched exit, were plainly in view. Men almost naked, burned
to hue of brick-dust; men in untanned sheepskin coats and mantles; men with every kind of headgear,
turbans, handkerchiefs, cowls; men with hair and beard matted and flying; now one helped himself
to a louder yell by tossing in air the dirty garment he had torn from his body, hirsute as
a goat's; now one leaped up agile as a panther; now one turned topsy-turvy; now groups of them
swirled together like whimsical eddies in a pool. Some went slowly, their arms outspread in
silent ecstasy; some stalked on with parted lips and staring eyes, trance-like or in dead drunkenness
of soul; nevertheless the great majority of them, too weary and far spent for violent exertion,
marched with their faces raised, and clapping their hands or beating their breasts, now barking
short and sharp, like old hounds dreaming, then finishing with long-drawn cries not unlike
the ending of a sorrowful chorus. Through the gate they crowded, and at sight of their faces
full of joy unto madness, the Prince quit pitying them, and, reminded of the Wahabbees at El
Zaribah, turned to Father Theophilus.

"In God's name," he said, "who are these?"

"A son of India thou, and not know them at sight?"

There was surprise in the question, and a degree of unwarranted familiarity, yet the Father
immediately corrected himself, by solemnly adding: "Look there at that one whirling his mantle
of unshorn skin over his head. He has a cave on Mt. Olympus furnished with a stool, a crucifix,
and a copy of the Holy Scriptures; he sleeps on the stone; the mantle is his bedding by night,
his clothing by day. He raises vegetables, and they and snow-water seeping through a crevice
in his cavern subsist him.... And the next him--the large man with the great coat of camel's
hair which keeps him scratched as with thorns--he is from the Monastery of St. Auxentius, the
abode of a powerful fraternity of ascetics. A large proportion of this wing of the celebrants
is of the same austere house. You will know them by the penitential, dun-colored garment--they
wear no other.... Yonder is a brother carrying his right arm at a direct angle above his shoulder,
stiff and straight as a stick of seasoned oak. He is of a colony of Stylites settled on this
shore of the upper Bosphorus overlooking the Black Sea. He could not lower the arm if he wished
to; but since it is his certificate of devoutness, the treasures of the earth laid at his feet
in a heap would be insufficient to induce him to drop it though for an instant. His colony
is one of many like it. Spare him thy pity. He believes the clinch of that hand holds fast
the latch of Heaven.... The shouters who have just entered the arch in a body have hermitaries
in close grouping around the one failing monastery on Plati, and live on lentils and snails;
aside from which they commit themselves to Christ, and so abound in faith that the Basileus
in his purple would be very happy were he true master of a tithe of their happiness.... Hast
thou not enough, O Prince? Those crossing the brook now?--Ah, yes! They are anchorites from
Anderovithos, the island. Pitiable creatures looked at from the curtained windows of a palace--pitiable,
and abandoned by men and angels! Be not sure. Everything is as we happen to see it--a bit of
philosophy, which, as they despise the best things secularly considered of this life, steels
them to indifference for what you and I, and others not of their caste, may think. They have
arrived at a summit above the corrupting atmosphere of the earth, where every one of them has
already the mansion promised him by our Blessed Lord, and where the angels abide and delight
to serve him.... For the rest, O Prince, call them indifferently recluses, hermits, anticenobites,
mystics, martyrs, these from Europe, those from isolations deep somewhere in Asia. Who feeds
them? Did not ravens feed Elijah? Offer them white bread and robes of silk, yesterday's wear
of a king. 'What!' they will ask. Thou seest them, thou knowest them."

Yes, the Prince knew them. Like the horde which stood by the Black Stone envious of Mirza's
dying, these were just as ready to die for Christ. He smiled grimly, and thought of Mahommed,
and how easy the Church had made the conquest of which he was dreaming.

It was with a sense of relief he beheld the tail of the division follow its body up to the palace.

Then, last of all, came the dignitaries of the Church, the Cartulaire, least in rank, with
many intermediates, up to the Cyncelle, who, next to the absent Patriarch, represented him.
If what had preceded in the procession was poor and unpretentious, this part was splendid to
excess. They were not more than eighteen or twenty in number, but they walked singly with considerable
intervals between them; while on the right and left of each, a liveried servant carried a torch
which gave him to be distinctly seen. And the flashing of gold on their persons was wonderful
to the spectator. Why not? This rare and anointed body was the Church going in solemnity to
assist the Basileus in a high ceremony.

Afterwhile the Emperor appeared descending to the Chapel.

To the Prince's amazement, he was in a plain, priestly black frock, without crown, sword, sceptre
or guard; and so did his guise compare with the magnificence of the ecclesiastics surrounding
him, he actually seemed in their midst a prisoner or a penitent. He passed his visitor like
one going from the world forgetting and forgot.

"An explanation, Father," said the Prince. "The Church is in its robes, but my august friend,
the Emperor, looks as if he had suffered dethronement."

"Thou wilt presently see His Majesty enter the Chapel alone. The legend supposes him there
in presence directly of God; if so, what merit would there be in regalia? Would his sword or
sceptre make his supplication more impressive?"

The Prince bowed.

And while he watched, the gold-clad escort halted before the Holy House, the door opened, and
Constantine went in unattended. Then, the door being shut behind him, the clergy knelt, and
remained kneeling. The light from the torches was plenteous there, making the scene beautiful.

And yet further, while he stood watching, the trumpeting and chanting on the level in front
of the palace behind him ceased, and a few minutes afterwards, he was aware of the noise of
many feet rushing in a scramble from all directions to the Chapel. Here and there flambeaux
streamed out, with hundreds of dark-gowned excited figures speeding after them as best they could.

The bank the Prince occupied was overrun, like other contiguous spaces. The object of the invaders
was to secure a position near the revered building as possible; for immediately on attaining
it they dropped to their knees, and began counting their rosaries and mumbling prayers. At
length it befell that the terraces far and near were densely crowded by monks in low recitation.

"My Lord," said Father Theophilus, in a tone of reserved depth, "the Mystery is begun. There
is no more to be seen. Good-night!" And without ado, he too knelt where he stood, beads in
hand, eyes fixed upon the one point of devotional interest.

When the sedan was brought, the Prince gave one last glance at the scene, feeling it was to
be thenceforward and forever a burden on his memory. He took in and put away the weather-stained
Chapel, centre of so much travail; the narrow court in front of it brilliantly lighted and
covered with priests high and low in glittering vestments; the cypresses looming skyward, stately
and stiff, like conical monuments: the torches scattered over the grounds, revealing patches
of men kneeling, their faces turned toward the Chapel: the mumbling and muttering from parts
unlighted telling of other thousands in like engagement. He had seen battle-fields fresh in
their horrors; decks of ships still bloody; shores strewn with wreckage and drowned sailors,
and the storm not spent; populous cities shaken down by earthquakes, the helpless under the
ruins pleading for help; but withal never had he seen anything which affected him as did that
royal park at mid of night, given up to that spectral multitude!

It seemed he could not get away from the spectacle soon enough; for after issuing from the
Grand Gate, he kept calling to his carriers, impatiently: "Faster, my men, faster!"

CHAPTER V

A PLAGUE OF CRIME

Sergius' life in Constantinople had been almost void of incident. His introduction to the Patriarch
by the Princess Irene started him well with that reverend official, whose confidence and love
she commanded to a singular degree. His personal qualities, however, were very helpful. The
gentleness of his nature, his youth, his simplicity, respectfulness, intelligence and obvious
piety were all in his favor; at the same time the strongest attraction he possessed with the
strangers amongst whom he found himself was his likeness according to the received Byzantine
ideal to Christ. He had a habit, moreover, of walking slowly, and with a quiet tread, his head
lowered, his hands clasped before him. Coming in this mood suddenly upon persons, he often
startled them; at such times, indeed, the disturbed parties were constrained to both observe
and forgive him--he reminded them so strikingly of the Nazarene as He must have looked while
in solitary walks by the sea or along the highways of Galilee. Whatever the cause, it is very
certain His Serenity, the Patriarch, from mere attention to the young Russian, passed speedily
to interest in him, and manifested it in modes pleasant and noticeable. By his advice, Sergius
attached himself to the Brotherhood of the Monastery of St. James of Manganese. This was the
first incident in his city life out of the usual. The second was his presentation at court,
where he was not less successful with the Emperor than he had been with the Patriarch. Yet
Sergius was not happy. His was the old case of a spirit willing, even anxious, to do, but held
in restraint. He saw about him such strong need of saving action; and the Christian plan, as
he understood it, was so simple and efficacious. There was no difference in the value of souls.
Taking Christ's own words, everything was from the Father, and He held the gates of Heaven
open for the beggar and the emperor alike. Why not return to the plan devised, practised, and
exemplified by the Saviour Himself? The idea bore heavily upon his mind, and accounted for
the bent head and slow step fast becoming habitudes. At times the insurgent impulses seemed
beyond control. This was particularly when he walked in crowded places; for then the people
appeared an audience summoned and ready to hear him; he had only to go into their midst, call
to them, and begin speaking; but often as he beheld the calm, patient, pleading face of the
Princess Irene, and heard her say ever so gently: "Wait, wait! I know the situation--you do
not. Our object is the most good. God will send the opportunity. Then martyrdom, if it come,
is going to Heaven. Wait--I will give you the signal. You are to speak for me as well as yourself.
You are to be my voice"--so often he grew reconciled.

There was another trouble more difficult of comprehension and description. Under its influence
the sky did not look so blue as formerly; the breeze was less refreshing; the sun where it
scattered its golden largesse over the sea failed to relieve it of dulness; and in all things,
himself included, there was something wanting--exactly what he could not tell. However, as
he had been indulging comparisons of life in Constantinople with life in Bielo-Osero, and longing
for the holy quiet of the latter, he concluded he was homesick, and was ashamed. It was childishness!
The Great Example had no home! And with that thought he struggled manfully to be a man forever
done with such weaknesses.

It became his wont of afternoons when the weather was tolerable to seek the city wall opposite
the old Chalcedonian point. In going thither, he sometimes passed through the Hippodrome and
Sta. Sophia, both in such contact to the collection of palaces known as the Bucoleon that each
might have been fairly considered an appurtenance of the other. The exercises in the spacious
palaestrae had small interest for him; there was always such evident rancor between the factions
Blue and Green. The dome of the great Church he regarded man's best effort at construction,
beyond which there was nothing more attainable; but how it dwindled and faded when from the
wall he looked at the sky, the sea, and the land, the handiworks of God!

On the wall, at a point marked by a shallow angle, there was a cracked stone bench, offering
seawardly a view of the Isles of the Princes, and the Asian domain beyond Broussa to the Olympian
heights; westwardly, the Bucoleon and its terraced gardens were near by, and above them in
the distance the Tower of Isaac Angelus arose over Blacherne, like a sentinel on guard against
the opposing summits of Galata and Pera. From the bench, the walk, besides being wide and smooth,
extended, with a slight curvature northward to the Acropolis, now Point Serail, and on the
south to the Port of Julian. The airy promenade thus formed was reached by several stairs intermediate
the landmarks mentioned; yet the main ascent was near the Imperial stables, and it consisted
of a flight of stone steps built against the inner face of the wall, like a broad buttress.
This latter was for the public, and of sunny days it was used incessantly. Everybody in the
category of invalids affected it in especial, since litters and sedans were not inhibited there.
In short, the popularity of this mural saunter can be easily imagined.

The afternoon of the day the Prince of India was in audience by the Emperor's invitation, Sergius
was the sole occupant of the stone bench. The hour was pleasant; the distant effects were perfect;
birds and boats enlivened the air and water; and in listening to the swish of waves amongst
the rocks and pebbles below, so like whisperings, he forgot where he was, and his impatience
and melancholy, and the people strolling negligently past. One of his arms lay along the edge
of the bulwark before him, and he was not thinking so much as simply enjoying existence. To
such as noticed him he appeared a man in the drowsy stage next to sleep.

Afterwhile a voice aroused him, and, without moving, he became aware of two men stopped and
talking. He could not avoid hearing them.

"She is coming," said one.

"How do you know?" the other asked.

"Have I not told you I keep a spy on the old Prince's house? A messenger from him has just
reported the chair arrived for her; and this being her favorite stroll, she will be here presently."

"Have you considered the risks of your project?"

"Risks? Pah!"

The exclamation was with a contemptuous laugh.

"But they have grown since last night," the other persisted. "The Indian is now at the Palace,
His Majesty's guest."

"Yes, I had report of that also; but I have studied the game, and if you fear to join me, I
will see it through alone. As an offence against law, it is abduction, not murder; and the
penalty, imprisonment, can be easily changed to banishment, which with me means at the utmost
a short absence to give friends an opportunity to prepare for my return. Consider, moreover,
the subject of the offence will be a woman. Can you name an instance in which the kidnapper
of a woman has been punished?--I mean in our time?"

"True, women are the cheapest commodity in the market; therefore"--

"I understand," the first speaker interposed, a little impatiently, "but Princes of India are
not common in Constantinople, while their daughters are less so. See the temptation! Besides,
in the decadence of our Byzantine empire, the criminal laws fail worse and worse of execution.
Only last night my father, delivering a lecture, said neglect in this respect was one of the
reasons of the Empire's going. Only the poor and degraded suffer penalties now. And I--pah!
What have I to fear? Or thou? And from whom? When the girl's loss is discovered--you observe
I am viewing the affair in its most malignant aspect--I know the course the Prince will take.
He will run to the palace; there he will fall at the Emperor's feet, tell his tale of woe, and"--

"And if thou art denounced?"

The conspirator laughed again. "The worse for the Prince," he at length replied. "The Hegumen,
my honored father, will follow him to the palace, and--but let the details go! The relations
between the Basileus and the Church are strained to breaking; and the condition is not sanable
while the quarrel between the Patriarch and Scholarius waxes hotter."

"The Patriarch and Scholarius quarrelling? I had not heard of that."

"Openly, openly! His Majesty and the Patriarch are tenderly sympathetic. What more is wanting
to set the Prophet scolding? The Patriarch, it is now known, will not be at the Pannychides
to-night. His health began failing when, over his objection, it was decided to hold the Mystery,
and last week he betook himself to the Holy Mountain. This morning the Prophet"--

"Thou meanest Scholarius?"

"Scholarius denounced him as an azymite, which is bad, if true; as unfaithful to God and the
Church, which is worse; and as trying to convert the Emperor into an adherent of the Bishop
of Rome, which, considering the Bishop is Satan unchained, will not admit of a further descent
in sin. The Mystery tonight is Scholarius' scheme in contravention of His Serenity's efforts.
Oh, it is a quarrel, and a big one, involving Church and State, and the infallibility of our
newly risen Jeremiah. Thus full-handed, thinkest thou in a suit the Prince of India against
the venerable Hegumen of all the St. James', His Majesty will hesitate? Is thy opinion of him
as a politician so uncomplimentary? Think again, I say--think again!"

"Thy father's Brotherhood are His Majesty's friends!"

"Ah, the very point! They despise Scholarius now, and what an ado, what a political display,
to drive them into his arms! The Princes of India, though they were numerous as the spectre
caravan, could not carry influence that far."

Here there was a rest in the conversation.

"Well, since thou wilt not be persuaded to let the enterprise go," the protesting friend next
said, "at least agree with me that it is indiscreet to speak of it in a place public as this."

The laugh of the conspirator was heartier than before.

"Ah, hadst thou warned me not to speak of it to the"--

"Enough of that! The Prince of India is nothing to me--thou art my friend."

"Agree with me then that thou hast ears, while the public"--

"Have not, thou wouldst say. Still there are things which may not be whispered in a desert
without being overheard."

"The Pagans who went before us had a god of wisdom, and they called him Hermes. I should say
thou hast been to school to him. 'Twas he, doubtless, who taught outlaws to seek safety in
crowded cities. By the same philosophy, where can one talk treason more securely than on this
wall? Afraid of discovery! Not I, unless thou mumblest in thy sleep. We go about our good intents--the
improvement of our fortune for instance-- with awful care, and step by step, fortifying. The
practice is applicable to wickedness. I am no bungler. I will tell thee a tale.... Thou knowest
the Brotherhood of the Monastery of St. James of Manganese is very ancient, and that the house
in which it is quartered is about as old as the Brotherhood. Their archives are the richest
in the empire. They have a special chamber and a librarian. Were he of the mind, he might write
a history of Constantinople by original data without leaving his library. Fortunately the mere
keepers of books seldom write books.... My father's office is in the Monastery, and I frequently
find myself in his company there. He never fails to improve the opportunity to lecture me,
for he is a good man. One day, by invitation, I accompanied the librarian to his place of keeping,
and saw it, and wondered how he could be willing to give his days--he is now an old man--to
such a mass of rot and smells. I spare you mention of the many things he showed me; for there
was but one of real ado with what we are considering, an old document illuminated with an untarnished
chrysobula. 'Here,' said he, 'is something curious.' The text was short--writers in those days
knew the tricks of condensation, and they practised them virtuously. I asked him to give it
to me--he refused--he would sooner have given me the last lock on his head, which is a great
deal, seeing that hair grows precious exactly as it grows scantier. So I made him hold the
lamp while I read.... The document was dated about A.D. 1300--a century and a half gone, and
proved to be a formal report by the Patriarch to a council of Bishops and Hegumen.... Thou
knowest, I am sure, the great cistern; not the Philoxenus, but the larger one, with an entrance
west of Sta. Sophia, sometimes called the Imperial, because built by the first Constantine
and enlarged by Justinian."

"I know it."

"Well, there was a great ceremony there one day; the same with which the report was concerned.
The clergy attended in force and panoply led by His Serenity in person--monks, nuns, deacons
and deaconesses--in a word, the Church was present. The cistern had been profaned. A son of
Satan, moved by a most diabolical ingenuity, had converted it into a den of wickedness surpassing
sinful belief; and the procession and awful conclave were to assist His Serenity in restoring
the water to wholesomeness, impossible, in the belief of consumers, except by solemn exorcism....
Heed now, my friend--I am about to tap the heart of my story. A plague struck the city--a plague
of crime. A woman disappeared. There was search for her, but without success. The affair would
have been dismissed within the three days usually allotted wonders of the kind, had not another
like it occurred--and then another. The victims, it was noticed, were young and beautiful,
and as the last one was of noble family the sensation was universal. The whole capital organized
for rescue. While the hunt was at its height, a fourth unfortunate went the way of the others.
Sympathy and curiosity had been succeeded by anxiety; now the public was aroused to anger,
and the parents of handsome girls were sore with fear. Schemes for discovery multiplied; ingenuity
was exhausted; the government took part in the chase--all in vain. And there being then a remission
in the disappearance, the theory of suicide was generally accepted. Quiet and confidence were
returning, when, lo! the plague broke out afresh! Five times in five weeks Sta. Sophia was
given to funeral services. The ugly women, and the halt, and those long hopeless of husbands
shared the common terror. The theory of suicide was discarded. It was the doing of the Turks,
everybody said. The Turks were systematically foraging Constantinople to supply their harems
with Christian beauty; or if the Turks were innocent, the devil was the guilty party. On the
latter presumption, the Church authorities invented a prayer of special application. Could
anything better signify the despair of the community? A year passed--two years--three--and
though every one resolved himself into a watchman and hunter; though heralds cried rewards
in the Emperor's name three times each day on the street corners, and in every place of common
resort; though the fame of the havoc, rapine, spoliation, or whatsoever it may please thee
to call the visitation, was carried abroad until everybody here and there knew every particular
come to light concerning it, with the pursuit, and the dragging and fishing in the sea, never
a clew was found. One--two--three years, during which at intervals, some long, some short,
the ancient Christian centre kept on sealing its doors, and praying. Finally the disappearances
were about to be accepted as incidents liable to happen at any time to any young and pretty
woman. They were placed in the category with death. There was mourning by friends--that was
about all. How much longer the mystery would have continued may not be said.... Now accidents
may not have brought the world about, yet the world could not get along without accidents.
To illustrate. A woman one day, wanting water for her household, let a bucket down one of the
wells of the cistern, and drew up a sandal slippery and decaying. A sliver buckle adhered to
it. Upon inspecting the prize, a name was observed graven on its underside. The curious came
to see--there was discussion--at length an examiner blessed with a good memory coupled the
inscription with one of the lost women. It was indeed her name! A clew to the great mystery
was at last obtained. The city was thrown into tumult, and an exploration of the cistern demanded.
The authorities at first laughed. 'What!' they said. 'The Royal reservoir turned into a den
of murder and crime unutterable by Christians!' But they yielded. A boat was launched on the
darkened waters--But hold!"

The voice of the speaker changed. Something was occurring to stop the story. Sergius had succumbed
to interest in it; he was listening with excited sense, yet kept his semblance of sleep.

"Hold!" the narrator repeated, in an emphatic undertone. "See what there is in knowing to choose
faithful allies! My watchman was right. She comes--she is here!"

"Who is here?"

"She--the daughter of the old Indian. In the sedan to my left--look!"

Sergius, catching the reply, longed to take the direction to himself, and look, for he was
comprehending vaguely. A blindfolded man can understand quite well, if he is first informed
of the business in progress, or if it be something with which he is familiar; imagination seems
then to take the place of eyes. A detective, having overheard the conversation between the
two men, had not required sight of them; but the young monk was too recently from the cloisters
of Bielo-Osero to be quick in the discernment of villanies. He knew the world abounded in crime,
but he had never dealt with it personally; as yet it was a destroying wolf howling in the distance.
He yearned to see if what he dimly surmised were true--if the object at the moment so attractive
to his dangerous neighbors were indeed the daughter of the strange Indian he had met at the
White Castle. His recollection of her was wonderfully distinct. Her face and demeanor when
he assisted her from the boat had often reverted to his thought. They spoke to him so plainly
of simplicity and dependence, and she seemed so pure and beautiful! And making the acknowledgment
to himself, his heart took to beating quick and drum-like. He heard the shuffle and slide of
the chairmen going; when they ceased a new and strange feeling came and possessed itself of
his spirit, and led it out after her. Still he managed to keep his head upon his arm.

"By the saintly patron of thy father's Brotherhood, she is more than lovely! I am almost persuaded."

"Ah, I am not so mad as I was!" the conspirator replied, laughing; then he changed to seriousness,
and added, like one speaking between clinched teeth--"I am resolved to go on. I will have her--come
what may, I will have her! I am neither a coward nor a bungler. Thou mayst stay behind, but
I have gone too far to retreat. Let us follow, and see her again--my pretty Princess!"

"Stay--a moment."

Perception was breaking in on Sergius. He scarcely breathed.

"Well?" was the answer.

"You were saying that a boat was launched in the cistern. Then what?"

"Of discovery? Oh, yes--the very point of my argument! A raft was found moored between four
of the great pillars in the cistern, and there was a structure on it with furnished rooms.
A small boat was used for going and coming."

"Wonderful!"

"Come--or we will lose the sight of her."

"But what else?"

"Hooks, such as fishermen use in hunting lobsters were brought, and by dragging and fishing
the missing women were brought to light--that is, their bones were brought to light. More I
will tell as we go. I will not stay longer."

Sergius heard them depart, and presently he raised his head. His blood was cold with horror.
He was having the awful revelation which sooner or later bursts upon every man who pursues
a walk far in life.

CHAPTER VI

A BYZANTINE GENTLEMAN OF THE PERIOD

Sergius kept his seat on the bench; but the charm of the glorious prospect spread out before
it was gone.

Two points were swimming in his consciousness, like motes in a mist: first, there was a conspiracy
afoot; next, the conspiracy was against the daughter of the Prince of India.

When at the door of the old Lavra upon the snow-bound shore of the White Lake, he bade Father
Hilarion farewell and received his blessing, and the commission of an Evangel, the idea furthest
from him was to signalize his arrival in Constantinople by dropping first thing into love.
And to be just, the idea was now as distant from him as ever; yet he had a vision of the child-faced
girl he met on the landing at the White Castle in the hands of enemies, and to almost any other
person the shrinking it occasioned would have been strange, if not suspicious. His most definite
feeling was that something ought to be done in her behalf.

Besides this the young monk had another incentive to action. In the colloquy overheard by him
the chief speaker described himself a son of the Hegumen of the St. James'. The St. James'!
His own Brotherhood! His own Hegumen! Could a wicked son have been born to that excellent man?
Much easier to disbelieve the conspirator; still there were traditions of the appearance of
monsters permitted for reasons clear at least to Providence. This might be an instance of the
kind. Doubtless the creature carried on its countenance or person evidences of a miracle of
evil. In any event there could be no harm in looking at him.

Sergius accordingly arose, and set out in pursuit of the conspirators. Could he overtake the
sedan, they were quite certain to be in the vicinity, and he doubted not discovering them.

The steps of the sedan-carriers, peculiarly quick and sliding, seemed in passing the bench
to have been going northwardly toward Point Demetrius. Thither he first betook himself.

In the distance, over the heads of persons going and coming, he shortly beheld the top of a
chair in motion, and he followed it rapidly, fearing its occupant might quit the wall by the
stairs near the stables of the Bucoleon. But when it was borne past that descent he went more
leisurely, knowing it must meet him on the return.

Without making the Point, however, the chair was put about toward him. Unable to discover any
one so much as suggestive of the plotters, and fearing a mistake, he peered into the front
window of the painted box. A woman past the noon of life gave him back in no amiable mood the
stare with which he saluted her.

There was but one explanation: he should have gone down the wall southwardly. What was to be
done? Give up the chase? No, that would be to desert his little friend. And besides he had
not put himself within hearing of the design against her--it was a doing of Providence. He
started back on his trace.

The error but deepened his solicitude. What if the victim was then being hurried away?

At the head of the stairway by the stables he paused; as it was deserted, he continued on almost
running--on past the cracked bench--past the Cleft Gate. Now, in front, he beheld the towers
of the imperial residence bearing the name Julian, and he was upbraiding himself for indecision,
and loading his conscience with whatever grief might happen the poor girl, when he beheld a
sedan coming toward him. It was very ornate, and in the distance shone with burnishments--it
was the chair--hers. By it, on the right hand, strode the gigantic negro who had so astonished
him at the White Castle. He drew a long breath, and stopped. They would be bold who in daylight
assailed that king of men!

And he was taking note of the fellow's barbaric finery, the solemn stateliness of his air,
and the superb indifference he manifested to the stare of passers-by, when a man approached
the chair on the opposite side. The curtain of the front window was raised, and through it,
Sergius observed the inmate draw hastily away from the stranger, and drop a veil over her face.

Here was one of the parties for whom he was looking. Where was the other? Then the man by the
left window looked back over his shoulder as if speaking, and out of the train of persons following
the sedan, one stepped briskly forward, joined the intruder, and walked with him long enough
to be spoken to, and reply briefly; after which he fell back and disappeared. This answered
the inquiry.

Assured now of one of the conspirators in sight, the monk resolved to await the coming up.
Through the front window of the carriage, which was truly a marvel of polish and glitter, the
girl might recognize him; perhaps she would speak; or possibly the negro might recall him;
in either event he would have an excuse for intervention.

Meantime, calmly as he could--for he was young, and warm blooded, and in all respects a good
instrument to be carried away by righteous indignation--he took careful note of the stranger,
who kept his place as if by warrant, occasionally addressing the shrinking maiden.

Sergius was now more curious than angry; and he cared less to know who the conspirator was
than how he looked. His surprise may be imagined when, the subject of investigation having
approached near enough to be perfectly observed, instead of a monster marked, like Cain, he
appeared a graceful, though undersized person, with an agreeable countenance. The most unfavorable
criticism he provoked was the loudness--if the word can be excused--of his dress.

A bright red cloak, hanging in ample folds from an exaggerated buckle of purple enamel on his
left shoulder, draped his left side; falling open on the right, it was caught by another buckle
just outside the right knee. The arrangement loosed the right arm, but was a serious hamper
to walking, and made it inconvenient to get out the rapier, the handle of which was protrusively
suggested through the cloak. A tunic of bright orange color, short in sleeve and skirt, covered
his body. Where undraped, tight-fitting hose terminating in red shoes, flashed their elongated
black and yellow stripes with stunning effect. A red cap, pointed at top, and rolled up behind,
but with a long visor-like peak shading the eyes, and a white heron feather slanted in the
band, brought the head into negligent harmony with the rest of the costume. The throat and
left arm were bare, the latter from halfway above the elbow.

This was the monk's first view of a Byzantine gentleman of the period abroad in full dress
to dazzle such of the gentler sex as he might chance to meet.

If Sergius' anticipation had been fulfilled; if, in place of the elegant, rakish-looking chevalier
in florid garb, he had been confronted by an individual awry in body or hideous in feature,
he would not have been confused, or stood repeating to himself, "My God, can this be a son
of the Hegumen?"

That one so holy could have offspring so vicious stupefied him. The young man's sins would
find him out--thus it was written--and then, what humiliation, what shame, what misery for
the poor father!

Speeding his sympathy thus in advance, Sergius waited until the foremost of the sedan carriers
gave him the customary cry of warning. As he stepped aside, two things occurred. The occupant
of the box lifted her veil and held out a hand to him. He had barely time to observe the gesture
and the countenance more childlike because of the distress it was showing, when the negro appeared
on the left side of the carriage. Staying a moment to swing the javelin with which he was armed
across the top of the buckler at his back, he leaped forward with the cry of an animal, and
caught the gallant, one hand at the shoulder, the other at the knee. The cry and the seizure
were parts of the same act. Resistance had been useless had there been no surprise. The Greek
had the briefest instant to see the assailant--an instant to look up into the face blacker
of the transport of rage back of it, and to cry for help. The mighty hands raised him bodily,
and bore him swiftly toward the sea-front of the wall.

There were spectators near by; amongst them some men; but they were held fast by terror. No
one moved but Sergius. Having seen the provocation, he alone comprehended the punishment intended.

The few steps to the wall were taken almost on the run. There, in keeping with his savage nature,
the negro wished to see his victim fall, but a puff of wind blew the red cloak over his eyes,
and he stopped to shake it aside. The Greek in the interval seeing the jagged rocks below,
and the waves rolling in and churning themselves into foam, caught at his enemy's head, and
the teeth of the gold-gilt iron crown cut his palms, bringing the blood. He writhed, and into
Nilo's ears--pitiless if they had not been dead--poured screams for mercy. Then Sergius reached
out, and caught him.

Nilo made no resistance. When he could free his eyes from the cloak he looked at the rescuer,
who, unaware of his infirmity, was imploring him:

"As thou lovest God, and hopest mercy for thyself, do no murder!"

Now, if not so powerful as Nilo, Sergius was quite as tall; and while they stood looking at
each other, their faces a little apart, the contrast between them was many sided. And one might
have seen the ferocity of the black visage change first with pleased wonder; then brighten
with recognition.

The Byzantine gained his feet quickly, and in his turn taken with a murderous impulse, drew
his sword. Nilo, however, was quickest; the point of his javelin was magically promotive of
Sergius' renewed efforts to terminate the affair. A great many persons were now present. To
bring a multitude in hot assemblage, strife is generally more potential than peace, assume
what voice the latter may. These rallied to Sergius' assistance; one brought the defeated youth
his hat, fallen in the struggle; others helped him rearrange his dress; and congratulating
him that he was alive, they took him in their midst, and carried him away. To have drawn upon
such a giant! What a brave spirit the lad must possess!

It pleased Sergius to think he had saved the Byzantine. His next duty was to go to the relief
of the little Princess. A dull fancy would have taught how trying the situation must have been
to her; but with him the case was of a quick understanding quickened by solicitude. Taking
Nilo with him, he made haste to the sedan.

If we pause here, venturing on the briefest break in the narrative, it is for the reader's
sake exclusively. He will be sure to see how fair the conditions are for a romantic passage
between Lael and Sergius, and we fear lest he fly his imagination too high. It is true the
period was still roseate with knighterrantry; men wore armor, and did battle behind shields;
women were objects of devotion; conversation between lovers was in the style of high-flown
courtesy, chary on one side, energized on the other by calls on the Saints to witness vows
and declarations which no Saint, however dubious his reputation, could have listened to, much
less excused; yet it were not well to overlook one or two qualifications. The usages referred
to were by no means prevalent amongst Christians in the East; in Constantinople they had no
footing at all. The two Comneni, Isaac and Alexis, approached more nearly the Western ideal
of Chivalry than any of the Byzantine warriors; if not the only genuine Knights of Byzantium,
they were certainly the last of them; yet even they stood aghast at the fantastic manners of
the Frankish armigerents who camped before their gates en route to the Holy Land. As a consequence,
the language of ordinary address and intercourse amongst natives in the Orient was simple and
less discolored by what may be called pious profanity. Their discourse was often dull and prolix,
but never a composite of sacrilege and exaggeration. Only in their writings were they pedantic.
From this the reader can anticipate somewhat of the meeting between Sergius and Lael. It is
to be borne in mind additionally that they were both young; she a child in years; he a child
in lack of worldly experience. Children cannot be other than natural.

Approaching the sedan anxiously, he found the occupant pale and faint. Nilo being close at
his side, she saw them both in the same glance, and reached her hand impulsively through the
window. It was a question to which the member was offered. Sergius hesitated. Then she brought
her face up unveiled.

"I know you, I know you," she said, to Sergius. "Oh, I am so glad you are come! I was so scared--so
scared--I will never go from home again. You will stay with me--say you will--it will be so
kind of you.... I did not want Nilo to kill the man. I only wanted him driven off and made
let me alone. He has followed and persecuted me day after day, often as I came out. I could
not set foot in the street without his appearing. My father would have me bring Nilo along.
He did not kill him, did he?"

The hand remained held out during the speech, as if asking to be taken. Meanwhile the words
flowed like a torrent. The eyes were full of beseechment, and irresistibly lovely. If her speech
was innocent, so was her appearance; and just as innocently, he took the hand, and held it
while answering:

"He was not hurt. Friends have taken him away. Do not be afraid."

"You saved him. I saw you--my heart was standing still in my throat. Oh, I am glad he is safe!
I am no longer afraid. My father will be grateful; and he is generous--he loves me nearly as
much as I love him. I will go home now. Is not that best for me?"

Sergius had grown the tall man he was without having been so entreated--nay, without an adventure
in the least akin to this. The hand lay in his folded lightly. He remembered once a dove flew
into his cell. The window was so small it no doubt suggested to the poor creature a door to
a nesting place. He remembered how he thought it a messenger from the Heaven which he never
gave over thinking of and longing for, and he wanted to keep it, for afterwhile he was sure
it would find a way to tell him wherewith it was charged. And he took the gentle stray in his
hand, and nursed it with exceeding tenderness. There are times when it seems such a blessing
that memories lie shallow and easy to stir; and now he recalled how the winged nuncio felt
like the hand he was holding--it was almost as soft, and had the same magnetism of life--ay,
and the same scarce perceptible tremble. To be sure it was merely for the bird's sake he kept
hold of the hand, while he answered:

"Yes, I think it best, and I will go with you to your father's door."

To the carriers he said: "You will quit the wall at the grand stairs. The Princess wishes to
be taken home."

The sensation of manliness incident to caring for the weak was refreshingly delightful. While
the chair was passing he took place at the window. The fingers of the little hand still rested
on the silken lining, like pinkish pearls. He beheld them longingly, but a restraint fell upon
him. The pinkish pearls became sacred. He would have had them covered from the dust which the
whisking breezes now blew up. The breezes were insolent. The sun, sinking in gold over the
Marmora, ought to temper the rays it let fall on them. Long as the orb had shone, how curious
that it never acquired art enough to know the things which too much of its splendor might spoil.
Then too he desired to speak with Lael--to ask if she was any longer afraid--he could not.
Where had his courage gone? When he caught the young Greek from Nilo, the shortest while ago,
he was wholly unconscious of timidity. The change was wonderful. Nor was the awkwardness beginning
to hamper his hands and feet less incomprehensible. And why the embarrassment when people paused
to observe him?

Thus the party pursued on until the descent from the wall; he on the right side of the chair,
and Nilo on the left. Down in the garden where they were following a walk across the terrace
toward Sta. Sophia, Lael put her face to the window, and spoke to him. His eagerness lest a
word were lost was remarkable. He did not mind the stooping--and from his height that was a
great deal--nor care much if it subjected him to remark.

"Have you seen the Princess lately--she who lives at Therapia?" Lael asked.

"Oh, yes," he answered. "She is my little mother. I go up there often. She advises me in everything."

"It must be sweet to have such a mother," Lael said, with a smile.

"It is sweet," he returned.

"And how lovely she is, and brave and assuring," Lael added. "Why, I forgot when with her to
be afraid. I forgot we were in the hands of those dreadful Turks. I kept thinking of her, and
not of myself."

Sergius waited for what more she had to say.

"This afternoon a messenger came from her to my father, asking him to let me visit her."

The heart of the monk gave a jump of pleasure.

"And you will go?"

A little older and wiser, and she would have detected a certain urgency there was in the tone
with which he directed the inquiry.

"I cannot say yet. I have not seen my father since the invitation was received; he has been
with the Emperor; but I know how greatly he admires the Princess. I think he will consent;
if so, I will go up to Therapia to-morrow."

Sergius, silently resolving to betake himself thither early next morning, replied with enthusiasm:
"Have you seen the garden behind her palace?"

"No."

"Well, of course I do not know what Paradise is, but if it be according to my fancy, I should
believe that garden is a piece of it."

"Oh, I know I shall be pleased with the Princess, her garden--with everything hers."

Thereupon Lael settled back in her chair, and nothing more was said till the sedan halted in
front of the Prince's door. Appearing at the window there, she extended a hand to her escort.
The pinkish pearls did not seem so far away as before, and they were now offered directly.
He could not resist taking them.

"I want you to know how very, very grateful I am to you," she said, allowing the hand to stay
in his. "My father will speak to you about the day's adventure. He will make the opportunity
and early.--But--but"--

She hesitated, and a blush overspread her face.

"But what?" he said, encouragingly.

"I do not know your name, or where you reside."

"Sergius is my name."

"Sergius?"

"Yes. And being a monk, I have a cell in the Monastery of St. James of Manganese. I belong
to that Brotherhood, and humbly pray God to keep me in good standing. Now having told you who
I am, may I ask"--

He failed to finish the sentence. Happily she divined his wish.

"Oh," she said, "I am called Gul-Bahar by those who love me dearest, though my real name is Lael."

"By which am I to call you?"

"Good-by," she continued, passing his question, and the look of doubt which accompanied it.
"Good-by--the Princess will send for me to-morrow."

When the chair was borne into the house, it seemed to Sergius the sun had rushed suddenly down,
leaving a twilight over the sky. He turned homeward with more worldly matter to think of than
ever before. For the first time in his life the cloister whither he was wending seemed lonesome
and uncomfortable. He was accustomed to imagine it lighted and warmed by a presence out of
Heaven--that presence was in danger of supersession. Occasionally, however, the girlish Princess
whom he was thus taking home with him gave place to wonder if the Greek he had saved from Nilo
could be a son of the saintly Hegumen; and the reflection often as it returned brought a misgiving
with it; for he saw to what intrigues he might be subjected, if the claim were true, and the
claimant malicious in disposition. When at last he fell asleep on his pillow of straw the vision
which tarried with him was of walking with Gul-Bahar in the garden behind the Homeric palace
at Therapia, and it was exceedingly pleasant.

CHAPTER VII

A BYZANTINE HERETIC

While the venerable Chapel on the way up the heights of Blacherne was surrounded by the host
of kneeling monastics, and the murmur of their prayers swept it round about like the sound
of moaning breezes, a messenger found the Hegumen of the St. James' with the compliments of
the Basileus, and a request that he come forward to a place in front of the door of the holy
house. The good man obeyed; so the night long, maugre his age and infirmities, he stayed there
stooped and bent, invoking blessings upon the Emperor and Empire; for he loved them both; and
by his side Sergius lingered dutifully torch in hand. Twelve hours before he had engaged in
the service worshipfully as his superior, nor would his thoughts have once flown from the Mystery
enacting; but now--alas, for the inconstancy of youth!--now there were intervals when his mind
wandered. The round white face of the Princess came again and again looking at him plainly
as when in the window of the sedan on the promenade between the Bucoleon and the sea. He tried
to shut it out; but often as he opened the book of prayers which he carried in common with
his brethren, trying to read them away; often as he shook the torch thinking to hide them in
the resinous smoke, the pretty, melting, importunate eyes reappeared, their fascination renewed
and unavoidable. They seemed actually to take his efforts to get away for encouragement to
return. Never on any holy occasion had he been so negligent--never had negligence on his part
been so obstinate and nearly like sin.

Fortunately the night came to an end. A timid thing when first it peeped over the hills of
Scutari, the day emboldened, and at length filled the East, and left of the torches alive on
the opposing face of Blacherne only the sticks, the cups, and the streaming smoke. Then the
great host stirred, arose, and in a time incredibly brief, silently gave itself back to the
city; while the Basileus issued from his solitary vigils in the Chapel, and, in a chastened
spirit doubtless, sought his couch in one of the gilded interiors up somewhere under the Tower
of Isaac.

The Hegumen of the St. James', overcome by the unwonted draughts upon his scanty store of strength,
not to mention the exhaustion of spirit he had undergone, was carried home in a chair. Sergius
was faithful throughout. At the gate of the monastery he asked the elder's blessing.

"Depart not, my son; stay with me a little longer. Thy presence is comforting to me."

The adjuration prevailed. Truth was, Sergius wished to set out for Therapia; but banishing
the face of the little Princess once more, he helped the holy man out of the chair, through
the dark-stained gate, down along the passages, to his apartment, bare and penitential as that
of the humblest neophyte of the Brotherhood. Having divested the superior of his robes, and,
gently as he could, assisted him to lay his spent body on the narrow cot serving for couch,
he then received the blessing.

"Thou art a good son, Sergius," the Hegumen said, with some cheer. "Thou dost strengthen me.
I feel thou art wholly given up to the Master and His religion--nay, so dost thou look like
the Master that when thou art by I fancy it is He caring for me. Thou art at liberty now. I
give thee the blessing."

Sergius knelt, received the trembling hands on his bowed head, and kissed them with undissembled
veneration.

"Father," he said, "I beg permission to be gone a few days."

"Whither?"

"Thou knowest I regard the Princess Irene as my little mother. I wish to go and see her."

"At Therapia?"

"Yes, Father."

The Hegumen averted his eyes, and by the twitching of the fingers clasped upon his breast exposed
a trouble at work in the depths of his mind.

