1852.

CONTENTS OF VOLUME 2.

CHAPTER 2.1.

Distribution of Aboriginal tribes of Cape York and Torres Strait. Mode of warfare illustrated.
Their social condition. Treatment of the women. Prevalence of infanticide. Education of a child.
Mode of scarifying the body. Initiation to manhood. Their canoes, weapons, and huts. Dress
of the women. Food of the natives. Mode of fishing. Capture of the turtle and dugong described.
Yams and mode of culture. Edible roots, fruits, etc. No recognised chieftainship. Laws regarding
property in land. Belief in transmigration of souls. Their traditions. Diseases and modes of
treatment. Burial Ceremonies.

CHAPTER 2.2.

Sail from Cape York. Mount Ernest described. Find Kalkalega tribe on Sue Island. Friendly reception
at Darnley Island, and proceedings there. Bramble Cay and its turtle. Stay at Redscar Bay.
Further description of the natives, their canoes, etc. Pass along the South-east coast of New
Guinea. Call at Duchateau Islands. Passage to Sydney. Observations on Geology and Ethnology.
Origin of the Australians considered.

CHAPTER 2.3.

Death of Captain Stanley. Sail for England. Arrive at the Bay of Islands. Kororareka. Falls
of the Keri-Keri. Passage across the South Pacific. Oceanic birds. Stay at the Falkland Islands.
Settlement of Stanley. Call at Berkeley Sound. Lassoing cattle. Resume our homeward voyage.
Call at Horta in the Azores. The caldeira of Fayal. Arrive in England.

ACCOUNT OF MR. E.B. KENNEDY'S EXPEDITION.

Narrative of Mr. W. Carron. Statement of Jackey-Jackey. Dr. Vallack's statement. Extracts from
Mr. T.B. Simpson's Log.

APPENDIX.

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF TWO OF THE LANGUAGES OF THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF CAPE YORK.

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF THREE OF THE LANGUAGES OF THE SOUTH-EAST COAST OF NEW GUINEA AND
THE LOUISIADE ARCHIPELAGO.

REMARKS ON THE VOCABULARIES OF THE VOYAGE OF THE RATTLESNAKE, BY R.G. LATHAM, M.D.

CATALOGUE OF THE BIRDS OF THE NORTH-EAST COAST OF AUSTRALIA AND TORRES STRAIT.

ON THE MOLLUSCA COLLECTED BY MR. MACGILLIVRAY DURING THE VOYAGE OF THE RATTLESNAKE, BY PROFESSOR
EDWARD FORBES, F.R.S.

DESCRIPTIONS OF SOME NEW SPECIES OF ANNULOSA COLLECTED BY MR. MACGILLIVRAY DURING THE VOYAGE
OF H.M.S. RATTLESNAKE, BY ADAM WHITE, ESQUIRE, F.L.S.

LIST OF PLATES. VOLUME 2.

NATIVES OF REDSCAR BAY, NEW GUINEA.

FUNERAL SCREEN, MOUNT ERNEST.

INTERIOR OF DARNLEY ISLAND HUT.

NEW SHELLS. Tab. 2. Fig. 1. Helix brumeriensis. Fig. 2. Helix franklandiensis. Fig. 3. Helix
inconspicua. Fig. 4. Helix iuloides. Fig. 5. Helix divisa. Fig. 6. Helix yulei. Fig. 7. Helix
dunkiensis. Fig. 8. Helix louisiadensis. Fig. 9. Balea australis. Fig. 10. Pupina grandis.

NEW SHELLS. Tab. 3. Fig. 1. Helix macgillivrayi. Fig. 2. Pupina Thomsoni. Fig. 3. Helicina
gouldiana. Fig. 4. Helicina stanleyi. Fig. 5. Helicina louisiadensis. Fig. 6. Ranella pulchra.
Fig. 7. Scalaria jukesiana. Fig. 8. Macgillivrayia pelagica. Fig. 9. Cheletropis huxleyi.

NEW INSECTS. Tab. 4. Fig. 1, 2. Pachyrhynchus stanleyanus, White. Fig. 3, 4. Drusilla myloecha,
Westwood. Fig. 5. Eusemia mariana, White.

NEW CRABS. Fig. 1. Ommatocarcinus macgillivrayi, White. Fig. 2. Porcellanella triloba, White.

CHART OF TORRES STRAIT, NEW GUINEA, AND LOUISIADE ARCHIPELAGO.

...

VOYAGE OF H.M.S. RATTLESNAKE.

DISTRIBUTION OF TRIBES OF CAPE YORK AND TORRES STRAIT.

There are at least five distinct tribes of natives inhabiting the neighbourhood of Cape York.
The Gudang people possess the immediate vicinity of the Cape: the Yagulles* stretch along the
coast to the southward and eastward beyond Escape River: the Katchialaigas and Induyamos (or
Yarudolaigas as the latter are sometimes called) inhabit the country behind Cape York, but
I am not acquainted with the precise localities: lastly, the Gomokudins are located on the
South-West shores of Endeavour Strait, and extend a short distance down the Gulf of Carpentaria.
These all belong to the Australian race as unquestionably as the aborigines of Western or South
Australia, or the South-East coast of New South Wales; they exhibit precisely the same physical
characteristics which have been elsewhere so often described as to render further repetition
unnecessary.

(*Footnote. This is the tribe concerned in the murder of the unfortunate Kennedy. The circumstances
were related by some of the Yagulles to an old woman at Cape York of the name of Baki, who,
when questioned upon the subject through Giaom, partially corroborated the statement of Jackey-Jackey.
She further stated that a few years ago a Yagulle woman and child had been shot by some white
men in a small vessel near Albany Island, and that the tribe were anxious to revenge their
death. Whether this was a story got up as a palliative for the murder, or not, I cannot say.)

On the other hand, the tribes inhabiting the islands of Torres Strait differ from those of
the mainland in belonging (with the exception of the first) to the Papuan or frizzled-haired
race. Besides, probably, a few others of which I cannot speak with certainty, these tribes
are distributed in the following manner. The Kowraregas inhabit the Prince of Wales group:
the Muralegas and Italegas divide between them Banks Island: the Badulegas possess Mulgrave
Island, and the Gumulegas the islands between the last and New Guinea: the Kulkalegas have
Mount Ernest and the Three Sisters: The Massilegas* reside on the York Isles and others adjacent:
and the Miriam** tribe hold the north-easternmost islands of Torres Strait, including Murray
and Darnley Islands.

(*Footnote. I do not know what name is given to the tribe or tribes inhabiting the space between
the Miriam and the Kulkalaig. Dzum (a Darnley islander) told me of a tribe called Gamle inhabiting
Owrid, Uta, Zogarid, Sirreb, Mekek, and Wurber; at all events the natives of Massid belong
to a distinct tribe, judging from their language, and are known as the Massilegas by the Kowraregas.
They occasionally (as in 1848) come down to Cape York on a visit to the Australians there,
often extending their voyage far to the southward, visiting the various sandy islets in search
of turtle and remaining away for a month or more.)

(**Footnote. Is so named from a place in Murray Island. The possessions of this tribe are Mer,
Dowar, Wayer, Errub, Ugar, Zapker, and Edugor, all, except the two last, permanently inhabited.

The junction between the two races, or the Papuan from the north and the Australian from the
south, is effected at Cape York by the Kowraregas, whom I believe to be a Papuanized colony
of Australians, as will elsewhere be shown. In fact, one might hesitate whether to consider
the Kowraregas* as Papuans or Australians, so complete is the fusion of the two races. Still
the natives of the Prince of Wales Islands rank themselves with the islanders and exhibit a
degree of conscious superiority over their neighbours on the mainland and with some show of
reason; although themselves inferior to all the other islanders, they have at least made with
them the great advance in civilisation of having learned to cultivate the ground, a process
which is practised by none of the Australian aborigines.

(*Footnote. Dr. Latham informs me that the Kowrarega language is undeniably Australian, and
has clearly shown such to be the case: and although the Miriam language does not show any obvious
affinity with the continental Australian dialects, yet the number of words common to it and
the Kowrarega, I find by comparison of my vocabularies to be very considerable, and possibly,
were we at all acquainted with the grammar of the former, other and stronger affinities would
appear.)

THE KOWRAREGAS.

The Kowraregas speak of New Guinea under the name of Muggi (little) Dowdai, while to New Holland
they apply the term of Kei (large) Dowdai. Their knowledge of the former island has been acquired
indirectly through the medium of intervening tribes. The New Guinea people are said to live
chiefly on pigs and sago; from them are obtained the cassowary feathers used in their dances,
and stone-headed clubs. They trade with the Gumulegas, who exchange commodities with the Badulegas,
from whom the Kowrarega people receive them. These last barter away to their northern neighbours
spears, throwing-sticks, and mother-of-pearl shells for bows, arrows, bamboo pipes, and knives,
and small shell ornaments called dibi-dibi. They have friendly relations with the other islanders
of Torres Strait, but are at enmity with all the mainland tribes except the Gudang.

MODE OF WARFARE ILLUSTRATED.

Occasionally hostilities, frequently caused by the most trivial circumstances, arise between
two neighbouring tribes, when incursions are made into each other's territories, and reprisals
follow. Although timely notice is usually given prior to an aggression being made by one tribe
upon another, yet the most profound secrecy is afterwards practised by the invaders. As an
illustration of their mode of warfare, in which treachery is considered meritorious in proportion
to its success, and no prisoners are made, except occasionally, when a woman is carried off--consisting
chiefly in a sudden and unexpected attack, a short encounter, the flight of one party and the
triumphant rejoicings of the other on their return--I may state the following on the authority
of Giaom.

About the end of 1848, an old Kowrarega man went by himself in a small canoe to the neighbourhood
of Cape Cornwall, while the men of the tribe were absent turtling at the eastern end of Endeavour
Strait. He was watched by a party of Gomokudin blacks or Yigeiles, who, guided by his fire,
surprised and speared him. Immediately returning to the mainland, the perpetrators of this
savage deed made a great fire by way of exultation. Meanwhile the turtling party returned,
and when it became known that the old man had been missing for several days, they were induced
by his two sons to search for him, and found the body horribly mutilated, with many spears
stuck into it to show who had been the murderers. This explained the fire, so another was lit
in reply to the challenge, and at night a party of Kowraregas in six canoes, containing all
the men and lads of the tribe, crossed over to the main. They came upon a small camp of Yigeiles
who had not been at all concerned in the murder, and enticed one of them to come out of the
thicket where he had concealed himself by the offer of a fillet of cassowary feathers for information
regarding the real murderers. As soon as the man stepped out, he was shot down with an arrow,
his head cut off, and pursuit made after the rest. Towards morning their second camping-place
was discovered and surrounded, when three men, one woman, and a girl were butchered. The heads
of the victims were cut off with the hupi, or bamboo knife, and secured by the sringi, or cane
loop, both of which are carried slung on the back by the Torres Strait islanders and the New
Guinea men of the adjacent shores, when on a marauding excursion;* these Papuans preserve the
skulls of their enemies as trophies, while the Australian tribes merely mutilate the bodies
of the slain, and leave them where they fall.

(*Footnote. See Jukes' Voyage of the Fly Volume 1 page 277.)

CANNIBALISM.

The Kowraregas returned to their island with much exultation, announcing their approach by
great shouting and blowing on conchs. The heads were placed on an oven and partially cooked,
when the eyes were scooped out and eaten with portions of flesh cut from the cheek;* only those,
however, who had been present at the murder were allowed to partake of this; the morsel was
supposed to make them more brave. A dance was then commenced, during which the heads were kicked
along the ground, and the savage excitement of the dancers almost amounted to frenzy. The skulls
were ultimately hung up on two cross sticks near the camp, and allowed to remain there undisturbed.

(*Footnote. The eyes and cheeks of the survivors from the wreck of a Charles Eaton (in August
1834) were eaten by their murderers--a party consisting of different tribes from the eastern
part of Torres Strait. See Nautical Magazine 1837 page 799.)

In the beginning of 1849 a party of Badulegas who had spent two months on a friendly visit
to the natives of Muralug treacherously killed an old Italega woman, married to one of their
hosts. Two of her brothers from Banks Island were staying with her at the time, and one was
killed, but the other managed to escape. The heads were carried off to Badu as trophies. This
treacherous violation of the laws of hospitality was in revenge for some petty injury which
one of the Badu men received from an Ita black several years before.

SIGNALS BY SMOKE.

When a large fire is made by one tribe it is often intended as a signal of defiance to some
neighbouring one--an invitation to fight--and may be continued daily for weeks before hostilities
commence; it is answered by a similar one. Many other signals by smoke are in use: for example,
the presence of an enemy upon the coast--a wish to communicate with another party at a distance--or
the want of assistance--may be denoted by making a small fire, which, as soon as it has given
out a little column of smoke, is suddenly extinguished by heaping sand upon it. If not answered
immediately it is repeated; if still unanswered, a large fire is got up and allowed to burn
until an answer is returned.

POLYGAMY.

Polygamy is practised both on the mainland and throughout the islands of Torres Strait. Five
is the greatest number of wives which I was credibly informed had been possessed by one man--but
this was an extraordinary instance, one, two, or three, being the usual complement, leaving
of course many men who are never provided with wives. The possession of several wives ensures
to the husband a certain amount of influence in his tribe as the owner of so much valuable
property, also from the nature and extent of his connections by marriage. In most cases females
are betrothed in infancy, according to the will of the father, and without regard to disparity
of age, thus the future husband may be and often is an old man with several wives.

According to Giaom puberty in girls takes place from the tenth to the twelfth year, but few
become mothers at a very early age. When parturition is about to take place the woman retires
to a little distance in the bush, and is attended by an experienced matron. Delivery is usually
very easy, and the mother is almost always able on the following day to attend to her usual
occupations. The infant is laid upon a small soft mat which the mother has taken care to prepare
beforehand, and which is used for no other purpose.

CONDITION OF THE WOMEN.

The life of a married woman among the Kowrarega and Gudang blacks is a hard one. She has to
procure nearly all the food for herself and husband, except during the turtling season, and
on other occasions when the men are astir. If she fails to return with a sufficiency of food,
she is probably severely beaten--indeed the most savage acts of cruelty are often inflicted
upon the women for the most trivial offence.

THEIR TREATMENT BY THE MEN.

Considering the degraded position assigned by the Australian savages to their women, it is
not surprising that the Prince of Wales Islanders should, by imitating their neighbours in
this respect, afford a strong contrast to the inhabitants of Darnley and other islands of the
North-East part of Torres Strait, who always appeared to me to treat their females with much
consideration and kindness. Several instances of this kind of barbarity came under my own notice.
Piaquai (before-mentioned) when spoken to about his wife whom he had killed a fortnight before
in a fit of passion, seemed much amused at the idea of having got rid of her unborn child at
the same time. One morning at Cape York, Paida did not keep his appointment with me as usual;
on making inquiry, I found that he had been squabbling with one of his wives a few minutes
before, about some trifle, and had speared her through the hip and groin. On expressing my
disapproval of what he had done, adding that white men never acted in that manner, he turned
it off by jocularly observing that although I had only one wife, HE had two, and could easily
spare one of them. As a further proof of the low condition of the women, I may state that it
is upon them that the only restrictions in eating particular sorts of food are imposed. Many
kinds of fish, including some of the best, are forbidden on the pretence of their causing disease
in women, although not injurious to the men. The hawksbill turtle and its eggs are forbidden
to women suckling, and no female, until beyond child bearing, is permitted to eat of the Torres
Strait pigeon.

Among other pieces of etiquette to be practised after marriage among both the Kowraregas and
Gudangs, a man must carefully avoid speaking to or even mentioning the name of his mother-in-law,
and his wife acts similarly with regard to her father-in-law. Thus the mother of a person called
Nuki--which means water--is obliged to call water by another name; in like manner as the names
of the dead are never mentioned without great reluctance so, after the death of a man named
Us, or quartz, that stone had its name changed into nattam ure, or the thing which is a namesake,
although the original will gradually return to common use.

The population of Muralug is kept always about the same numerical standard by the small number
of births, and the occasional practice of infanticide. Few women rear more than three children,
and besides, most of those born before marriage are doomed to be killed immediately after birth,
unless the father--which is seldom the case--is desirous of saving the child--if not, he gives
the order marama teio (throw it into the hole) and it is buried alive accordingly. Even of
other infants some, especially females, are made away with in a similar manner when the mother
is disinclined to support it.

NAMING OF CHILDREN.

An infant is named immediately after birth: and, on Muralug, these names for the last few years
have been chosen by a very old man named Guigwi. Many of these names have a meaning attached
to them: thus, two people are named respectively Wapada and Passei, signifying particular trees,
one woman is called Kuki, or the rainy season, and her son Ras, or the driving cloud. Most
people have several names, for instance, old Guigwi was also called Salgai, or the firesticks,
and Mrs. Thomson was addressed as Kesagu, or Taomai, by her (adopted) relatives, but as Giaom
by all others. Children are usually suckled for about two years, but are soon able, in a great
measure, to procure their own food, especially shellfish, and when strong enough to use the
stick employed in digging up roots, they are supposed to be able to shift for themselves.

COMPRESSION OF THE SKULL.

A peculiar form of head, which both the Kowrarega and Gudang blacks consider as the beau ideal
of beauty, is produced by artificial compression during infancy. Pressure is made by the mother
with her hands--as I have seen practised on more than one occasion at Cape York--one being
applied to the forehead and the other to the occiput, both of which are thereby flattened,
while the skull is rendered proportionally broader and longer than it would naturally have been.*

(*Footnote. Precisely the same form of skull as that alluded to in volume 1: hence it is not
unreasonable to suppose that the latter might have been artificially produced.)

When the child is about a fortnight old the perforation in the septum of the nose is made by
drilling it with a sharp-pointed piece of tortoise-shell, but the raised artificial scars,
regarded as personal ornaments by the Australians and Torres Strait Islanders, are not made
until long afterwards. According to Giaom, who states that among the Kowraregas this scarification
is purely voluntary, the patient is laid upon the ground and held there, while the incisions
are made with a piece of glass by some old man famous for his skill in performing the operation.
The chewed leaf of a certain plant (which, however, I could not identify) is introduced into
the wound to prevent the edges from uniting, and a daub of wet clay is then placed over all,
and kept there until the necessary effect has been produced. The principal scarifications among
women at Cape York and Muralug are in the form of long lines across the hips. Among the men,
however, there is considerable variety.

The characteristic mode of dressing the hair among the Torres Strait Islanders is to have it
twisted up into long pipe-like ringlets, and wigs in imitation of this are also worn. Sometimes
the head is shaved, leaving a transverse crest--a practice seldom seen among the men but not
uncommon among women and children, from Darnley Island down to Cape York. At the last place
and Muralug the hair is almost always kept short--still caprice and fashion have their sway,
for at Cape York I have at times for a week together seen all the men and lads with the hair
twisted into little strands well daubed over with red ochre and turtle fat.

RAISED CICATRICES ON THE BODY.

The Torres Strait Islanders are distinguished by a large complicated oval scar, only slightly
raised, and of neat construction. This, which I have been told has some connection with a turtle,
occupies the right shoulder, and is occasionally repeated on the left. At Cape York, however,
the cicatrices were so varied, that I could not connect any particular style with an individual
tribe--at the same time something like uniformity was noticed among the Katchialaigas, nearly
all of whom had, in addition to the horned breast-mark, two or three long transverse scars
on the chest, which the other tribes did not possess. In the remaining people the variety of
marking was such that it appeared fair to consider it as being regulated more by individual
caprice than by any fixed custom. Many had a simple two-horned mark on each breast, and we
sometimes saw among them a clumsy imitation of the elaborate shoulder mark of the islanders.

INITIATION TO RIGHTS OF MANHOOD.

The custom of undergoing a certain mysterious ceremony prior to being admitted to the privileges
of manhood, supposed to be an institution peculiar to the Australians, is found among the Kowraregas,
but whether it extends throughout Torres Strait is uncertain. This initiation is not at Cape
York and Muralug accompanied by the performance either of circumcision or the knocking out
of a tooth, as in many parts of Australia. The boys, usually three or four in number, are chased
about in the bush during the day by some of the men decked out with feathers and other ornaments,
and at night retire to the men's camp, for, during the whole time of their novitiate--or about
a month--they must on no account be seen by a woman; in fact, as Giaom informed me, a woman
coming upon these kernele--as they are called--no matter how accidentally, would be immediately
put to death. When all is over the lads return to their parents, decorated with a profusion
of ornaments which are worn until they drop off, and wearing in front a small triangular piece
of shell as a distinguishing mark.

CANOES OF TORRES STRAIT.

The same kind of canoe which is found throughout Torres Strait has been seen to extend from
Cape York along the eastern coast as far south as Fitzroy Island,* a distance of 500 miles.
It essentially consists of a hollowed-out log, a central platform, and an outrigger on each
side. The largest canoes which I have seen are those of the Murray and Darnley Islanders, occasionally
as much as sixty feet long; those of the Australians are small, varying at Cape York between
fifteen and thirty feet in length. Even the Kowraregas have much finer canoes than their neighbours
on the mainland; one which I measured alongside the ship was forty-five feet long and three
and a half in greatest width, and could carry with ease twenty-five people.

(*Footnote. At the latter place we found a small canoe with two outriggers concealed on shore
among some bushes. The bark canoes of Rockingham Bay have already been described. About Whitsunday
Passage the canoes, also of bark, are larger and of neater construction: one which I examined
at the Cumberland Isles was made of three pieces of bark neatly sewn together; it was six feet
long and two and a half feet wide, sharp at each end, with a wooden thwart near the stem and
stern, and a cord amidships to keep the sides from stretching. In the creeks and bays of the
now settled districts of New South Wales another kind of canoe was once in general use. At
Broken Bay, in August 1847, a singular couple of aborigines whom I met upon a fishing excursion
had a small canoe formed of a single sheet of bark tied up at each end; on the floor of this
they were squatted, with the gunwale not more than six inches above the water's edge. Yet this
frail bark contained a fire, numbers of spears, fishing lines and other gear. The woman was
a character well known in Sydney--Old Gooseberry--said to be old enough to have remembered
Cook's first visit to these shores.)

MODE OF CONSTRUCTING AND MANAGING THEM.

The construction of a canoe in the neighbourhood of Cape York is still looked upon as a great
undertaking, although the labour has been much lessened by the introduction of iron axes, which
have completely superseded those of stone formerly in use. A tree of sufficient size free from
limbs--usually a species of Bombax (silk-cotton tree) or Erythrina--is selected in the scrub,
cut down, hollowed out where it falls, and dragged to the beach by means of long climbers used
as ropes. About the
origin of music, their development, their relation with the other phenomena on artistic fields
they have never thought - enough for them, that invented the piano is, thus, their curiosity satisfied
sufficiently. I Virtuosi concert-giving have occurred, who had the name = = never heard Handel. One,
which was under the impression that it was a new Composer, said that when he first heard one
of his compositions: this young man will good luck in the world.

If everyone who needed every day a few hours on the musical art, of which only a Half the study
of the history of his art turns, so would the little loss of Speed ​​finger ample reward. Our
amateurs but should realize how ridiculous is to imitate the virtuoso, and prefer their ambition on
the part of scientific directed the music.

But who wants nothing more to play than a few piano pieces to learn, which should be at least all judgments
and take part, to avoid to issue an unspeakably ridiculous.

VII

A historical study of music would not each and every theoretical knowledge probably be impossible.
Even the mere pianist can do without the heavy-bass, and no Teachers should practice an advanced
student a piece about the internal structure that is would be in complete ignorance. Who knows
no chord theory, which usually plays the notes like a child who has learned a Latin poem by heart,
without knowing its meaning. Another well-known parable you precisely what I mean: a painter,
not the anatomy has studied, will never paint the human body as expressive as any other, which
know exactly what muscle moves under the skin. Even the folds you look at it, whether the painter
has only seen the surface of his subject.

Quite as you hear from the presentation of the player out if he is aware of the skeleton of
the composition or not.

Although there are great talents, their musical prescience them without
any knowledge another goal leads, achieve than others less gifted
in spite of their knowledge, but this raises I claimed not to, because
what would those = with = can reach the knowledge of what would this
= without = it be gone?

An amateur who has just brought so far as to lighten the difficulty of the music can tackle
Mozart's sonatas, one would understand as much thorough-that he was a prelude or could improvise
an accompaniment to a song, and transponiren in any key.

Such is such a small request, and yet how much more value for everyone would have such a Can,
as the final game of a heavy Clavierconcerts?

The Generalbaßstudien, as I think they for the needs of young girls as to the can offer music as
only one part of their general education little time may indeed not be set up so that they remain only
on paper, and after endless paperwork finally the result of a very dry Compositionsversuches is achieved.
No, once on the piano, each newly acquired chord apply and where he worked in foreign compositions
appears to be recognized. This, inspires the urge to know more, and with each newly conquered
Inch of grows the joy and interest in music. As the venerable look Students in the area containing
the enigma who trespass against us works of art to their size, it begins to suspect since his
Ariadne thread is no longer sufficient to penetrate into its labyrinthine depths - and how everything
falls into his eyes and merely external Shallow when the poor material sees through the illusion
that was held up! And that's a profit if the Student realizes: a performance here is beyond me that
I can with my opinion do not touch, or: I like that though because it is pleasing to the ear,
but I still see one, that it is a worthless work. Is he aware that he liked something stupid and a sublime
could remain alien, he tortures the artist no longer with silly art talk, for that is and will
remain, as the creators may also ignore the fact a constant Hindrance
to the progress of music.

Mathematical Everything is linked to the female nature with a particular difficulty; about the
paralysis of most students when they first figured bass in the reverse
Contra points out, conceives the principle of man's play.

It must be extremely small Make steps and be patient, as a child first speech tests.

Let me describe to you that leash I've devised to make the system of related Keys young girl
quickly and easily memorize.

A rigorist will probably scoff; but since it has shown me in many cases more convenient than
in the previous Books, so I have at least the experience for me.

First, a table on manuscript paper is linirt of twelve systems, and the circle of fifths below,
written into any scale, so that C major, the top starts on the seventh Line F-sharp major with
G flat major, is confused and F major, decide the bottom line.

Now put on the prime and the fifth of the triad, made previously pointed out that the intervals
of the same were already included in the scale, and the names above tonic and dominant written. So
they have the whole sheet down the overview of the important Dominant chord at the fifth level of each
key. Now they have small pieces To invent alternate in which only these two chords: herein
is not a madman possible, for when they begin and end with the tonic, so it is always true.
They may for a change wide and narrow arpeggios make of it, and nothing is forbidden, as the
upper and lower parts progressed in fifths and octaves. Rather, they
may not take a step further until it is tight.

The Allerunachtsamste himself has noticed easily that the simplest way this is access down with
your right hand, if the left is rising, and vice versa, or that a hand must make a small step
if the other has a large does.

Thus, for soon the student may still reveal a third chord, namely the triad on the sub-dominant
(fourth degree of the scale), which is again easy to find: Tonica in the middle of five notes
up there with his left hand to the dominant, or the first base five tones back to sub-dominant.
In general should the left, to the related keys The table of all the occurred, no recourse, as
the Grundbaßton.

All inversions confuse beginners, before they all triads in their first natural shape with the
various layers = = have been impressed. If they do not form a new more to build from those three
chords, one little sentence, so the teacher must help out to them
and them any new character in the same show.

All but the most popular songs be accompanied with these three chords, and do you do a minor chord
is added, is indeed almost the stuff available to an entire Italian opera to make.

The next chord is drawn into the circle, is the best, the triad the sixth degree of the scale,
where one of the headline: gives parallel key, because under the
name the students already know him from the first learning the scales
on the piano ago.

This piece fits back everywhere, and between each of the previous hard, strict Triads, it
forms a soft, feminine-switching element. If you want to fast forward come, so we let the students the old figures
refit, which in any case yes by the addition of the minor key is now a fresh variety is overgrown.

In
this way you drive quietly away, each newly added chord in all keys to be affixed, wherein, as mentioned
above, anything but a fifth and octave progressions can tolerate between the upper and lower
parts. After the dual-key can be most easily the soft triad on the
second stage of the scale weave, most recently, as the most difficult,
the third on the stage (mediant).

You make the students aware that this most most natural for the dominant, with which he is most
closely related, can be fixed.

If this transition complete, and that goes for a student who just any musical ear has plenty
in a month, so it has of itself no fifth and octave progressions more.

You teach them now or put the Hauptseptimen chord correctly and resolve, it may to help all Dilettantenbedürfnisse
itself. She got the urge to go further, add the table in the inversions of the chords, and teach them
the same, just as the previous, deal by and by, with you, but not without the written tasks at
the same time deal will. Then the matter also leads all the way into the basso continuo, in the
knowledge of all the Chords, suspensions, modulations, etc what a dilettirendes woman has
no time and, if they also learned, if you lack the creativity to
make do with it know.

Very thoughtful natures can be different than the diatonic chords of the seventh still teach.

Great
talent is after that precedes the full theory is an indispensable be necessity. But the teacher
must not lose sight of what section in all learning of women's marriage makes. This consideration
alone makes it necessary for amateurs to order specific steps by which it is possible to determine
such a way that in the course of life have learned not to lose.

VIII

In a great piece of music the keys appear in their struggle with each other equal to developing
forces of nature to the light to penetrate up to finally take shape
and its Piece of world history to live with.

But delight us even in miniature the humorous Intrigue, the changing in the most ordinary sonata
by the family of the keys always Scene is listed.

Because at the entrance of the triad of the tonic occurs equal to the Small and in the full
sense of his Dignity and begins a conversation with his wife dominant, subdominant and admonished
his son and the two media assistants, his beautiful daughters, to
all good.

He goes on tour and I like Women dominated in his absence once to tighten the trousers, or,
in other Words, = is = to vindicate the Subsemitonium, which at the end of the first section
of the Deception is so complete that everyone thinks, now the dominant feature of the Lord be in
the house.

But the supposed tonic, it goes bad, to compete in their rule. The children rebellious Irishmen
at the beginning of the second part: the subdominant cheekily invites his friendly neighbors and
reverses with them in the great feasts of the house. Allerhand verbuhlte Chords of the seventh
to come from near and far and swarm around the mediant. The dominant aim vain to establish order,
and finally with long-enduring reputation, she forces her father to return home. Did you mean
sentence does not know who was still lord who servant, all doubts
vanish, if the genuine triad of the tonic in his ancestral legitimacy
enters the house again.

                   All the other triads seem just excuses because of what has gone before
the lay feet of their ruler, who forgives them friendly, and on their
due Levels and rejection in a final accord, which includes the malicious
Nothing can prevent set, has ended his career that rich gloss.

* * * * *

A few decades behind us an era of piano compositions, that their representatives best power wasted on private
matters. The core of a song, often of considerable Beauty was wrapped in a tangled mass of arabesque
Flitterpassagen, like a hoop skirt the natural shape distorted. A normal piano-concert that lasts
about three quarters of an hour; it contains, if you add up the usual Cantilene job in the first
part, the Adagio and Rondo, five melodies, each about sixteen bars long, all the rest are
runs and jumps, the Implementation of the few tools left to the accompanying
melodies remain.

The largest Werth was placed on the variety of difficult tricks for the fingers, which had
to be listed in the most rapid pace, and these were always of the audience with thunderous applause
rewarded.

The virtuoso now formed the finger at the expense of the spirit, sacrifice their vanity the artistic
conscience, and were related to only those pieces, the rehearsing
even the most experienced took many months to live.

The art lover, though he is instantaneous Pleasure in listening to such a grace and skill
felt the performed pieces, could not conceal from himself that nothing truly beautiful achieved
by the difficulties was that they were only there but to put the audience in a silly surprise.

In
contrast, it has become now that the severity of at least a higher artistic purpose to seeks
to serve, although the old abuse is not necessarily done away. The majority the latest piano compositions
requires above all a fine and soulful presentation; the mechanical
difficulties have been pretty much relegated to the background, and
also the prevailing thought is not weakened by perpetual repetition
and variations: rather we should make them too crowded soon criticized
for.

                   

* * * * *

The first impetus to this, Felix Mendelssohn songs without words by his allbeliebten given;
they are related to the former Clavierconcert how the simple song to prätenziösen bravura aria.
Its content is like that of Seelenerguß that produces a happy or melancholy mood, the landscape, hunting
and water transport and so on. Some specific genera found one, albeit in thought and execution very different,
but similar in features in Each issue again. Thus, for example, no. I always carried a tune
in a very gentle modulations, hovering above a somewhat turbulent arpeggirten accompaniment, which
the silent unspoken longing Love, or the sweet calm in the most blissful fulfillment expressed.
A song of painful Action follows, roar or a wild cavalry song, where we in the dark forest the
storm and the rain To hear the hoofs of the horse accompanied and the defiant song of the lonely
fellow. The dispassionate melody religious fervor or silent resignation to a higher sway is no
less unmistakably expressed in several of these songs.

It is not just Choral Kirchenstyl or traditional, but the sanctity and dignity of the chords
and rhythms is surrounded by and by the breath of prayer.

The Venetian gondola song is represented several times in the same
successful manner. Very fine Mendelssohn has the choice of keys and
the position of the chords the magic of the starry night evoked. Who
observed only the first two bars, can doubt no longer, that there
is no picture of the colors bright day is rolled up.

Among the edible fruits of Cape York I may mention the leara, a species of Anacardium or cashew
nut (the lurgala of Port Essington) which, after being well roasted to destroy its acridity
has somewhat the taste of a filbert--the elari (a species of Wallrothia) the size of an apricot,
soft and mealy, with a nearly insipid but slightly mawkish taste--wobar, the small, red, mealy
fruit of Mimusops kaukii--and the apiga (a species of Eugenia) a red, apple-like fruit, the
pericarp of which has a pleasantly acid taste. The fruit of two species of pandanus yields
a sweet mucilage when sucked, and imparts it to water in which it has been soaked, after which
it is broken up between two stones, and the kernels are extracted and eaten.

NO RECOGNISED CHIEFTAINSHIP.

Throughout Australia and Torres Strait, the existence of chieftainship, either hereditary or
acquired, has in no instance of which I am aware been clearly proved: yet in each community
there are certain individuals who exercise an influence over the others which Europeans are
apt to mistake for real authority. These so-called chiefs, are generally elderly men, who from
prowess in war, force of character, or acknowledged sagacity, are allowed to take the lead
in everything relating to the tribe. In Torres Strait such people are generally the owners
of large canoes, and several wives; and in the northern islands, of groves of coconut-trees,
yam grounds, and other wealth. Among the Kowraregas, there are, according to Giaom, three principal
people, Manu, Piaquai, and Baki, all old men, but among the Gudangs, a young man of twenty-five
of the name of Tumagugo appeared to have the greatest influence, and next to him Paida, not
more than six or eight years older.

LAWS REGARDING PROPERTY IN LAND.

It seems curious to find at Cape York and the Prince of Wales Islands a recognised division
and ownership of land, seeing that none of it by cultivation has been rendered fit for the
permanent support of man. According to Giaom, there are laws regulating the ownership of every
inch of ground on Muralug and the neighbouring possessions of the Kowraregas, and I am led
to believe such is likewise the case at Cape York. Among these laws are the following: A person
has a claim upon the ground where both himself and his parents were born, although situated
in different localities. On the death of parents their land is divided among the children,
when both sexes share alike, with this exception, that the youngest of the family receives
the largest share. Marriage does not affect the permanency of the right of a woman to any landed
property which may have come into her possession. Lastly, an old man occasionally so disposes
of his property that a favourite child may obtain a larger proportion than he could afterwards
claim as his inheritance.

Neither at Cape York, nor in any of the Islands of Torres Strait, so far as I am aware, do
the aborigines appear to have formed an idea of the existence of a Supreme Being; the absence
of this belief may appear questionable, but my informant, Giaom, spoke quite decidedly on this
point, having frequently made it the subject of conversation with the Kowrarega blacks.

TRANSMIGRATION OF SOULS.

The singular belief in the transmigration of souls, which is general among the whole of the
Australian tribes, so far as known, also extends to the islands of Torres Strait. The people
holding it imagine that, immediately after death, they are changed into white people or Europeans,
and as such pass the second and final period of their existence; nor is it any part of this
creed that future rewards and punishments are awarded. It may readily be imagined that when
ignorant and superstitious savage tribes, such as those under consideration, were first visited
by Europeans, it was natural for them to look with wonder upon beings so strangely different
from themselves, and so infinitely superior in the powers conferred by civilisation, and to
associate so much that was wonderful with the idea of supernatural agency. At Darnley Island,
the Prince of Wales Islands, and Cape York, the word used at each place to signify a white
man, also means a ghost.* The Cape York people even went so far as to recognise in several
of our officers and others in the ship, the ghosts of departed friends to whom they might have
borne some fancied resemblance, and, in consequence, under the new names of Tamu, Tarka, etc.
they were claimed as relations, and entitled to all the privileges of such.

(*Footnote. Frequently when the children were teasing Giaom, they would be gravely reproved
by some elderly person telling them to leave her, as "poor thing! she is nothing, only a ghost!"
(igur! uri longa, mata markai.))

SUPERSTITIONS.

Among many superstitions held by the Prince of Wales islanders, they are much afraid of shooting-stars,
believing them to be ghosts which in breaking up produce young ones of their own kind. After
sneezing, they make violent gestures with the hands and arms; if a joint cracks, they imagine
that someone is speaking of them or wishing them well in the direction in which the arm is
pointing.

The only tradition which I heard of occurs among the Kowraregas, and is worth mentioning for
its singularity. The first man created was a great giant named Adi, who, while fishing off
Hammond Island, was caught by the rising tide and drowned, Hammond Rock springing up immediately
after to mark the spot. His wives, who were watching him at the time, resolved to drown themselves,
and were changed into some dry rocks upon an adjacent reef named after them Ipile, or the wives.

DISEASES AND MODE OF TREATMENT.

According to Giaom ague is prevalent in Muralug during the rainy season, but is not much dreaded,
as it is supposed to remove former complaints, such as the sores prevalent among children.
At Cape York I have seen people affected with this complaint, but to what extent it occurs
in that neighbourhood I cannot state. One day some people from the ship saw our friend Tumagugo
under treatment for ague. He was laid upon the ground while several men in succession took
his head between their knees and kneaded it with their hands. After this they placed him close
to a fire and sprinkled water over him until a copious perspiration broke out, denoting the
third and last stage of the attack. Boils on various parts of the body, even on the head, are
prevalent, especially during the rainy season, when the food is of a poorer description than
at other times. Children are most subject to them, and I have more than once seen them so covered
with offensive sores as to be rendered most disgusting objects. In old people callosities frequently
form on the hip and elbows, the effect, probably, of sleeping on the ground. Scarification
of the affected part is a common mode of treating local inflammatory complaints. Ligatures
are also used, as for example, one across the forehead to remove headache. A singular mode
of treating various complaints consists in attaching one end of a string to the patient, while
the other is held in the mouth of a second person, who scarifies his own gums at the same time
until they bleed, which is supposed to indicate that the bad blood has passed from the sick
to the sound person.

FUNERAL CEREMONIES.

With regard to the curious burial ceremonies of the Kowraregas, I regret that I cannot be so
explicit as might otherwise have been the case, as Giaom's information on this subject, and
on this only, was not written down at the time. When the head of a family dies at Muralug,
the body is laid out upon a framework of sticks raised a foot from the ground, and is there
allowed to rot. A small hut is raised close by, and the nearest relative of the deceased lives
there, supplied with food by his friends, until the head of the corpse becomes nearly detached
by the process of putrefaction, when it is removed and handed over to the custody of the eldest
wife. She carries it about with her in a bag during her widowhood, accompanying the party of
the tribe to which she belongs from place to place. The body, or rather the headless skeleton,
is then interred in a shallow grave over which a mound is raised ornamented by wooden posts
at the corners painted red, with sometimes shells, and other decorations attached to them,
precisely such a one as that figured in the Voyage of the Fly, volume 1 page 149. On the occasion
of our visiting the grave in question (at Port Lihou, on Muralug) Giaom told me that we were
closely watched by a party of natives who were greatly pleased that we did not attempt to deface
the tomb; had we done so--and the temptation was great to some of us, for several fine nautilus
shells were hanging up, and some good dugong skulls were lying upon the top--one or more of
the party would probably have been speared.

SAIL FROM CAPE YORK.

December 3rd.

At length we have bade a final adieu to Cape York, after a stay of upwards of two months, which
have passed away very pleasantly to such of us as were in the habit of making excursions in
the bush, or who spent much of their time on shore. We are now on our way to Sydney, by way
of Torres Strait, New Guinea and the Louisiade, chiefly for the purpose of running another
set of meridian distances, the position of Cape York being now sufficiently well determined
to serve as a secondary meridian, one of the starting points of the survey. The natives learned
at daylight that we were to leave them in a few hours, so in order to make the most of their
last opportunity of getting bisiker and choka, they hauled a large canoe across the dry sands
after much trouble, and under the direction of Baki, who affected great grief at the prospect
of parting with us, went off to the ship.

MOUNT ERNEST.

We sailed at 8 A.M. for Mount Ernest--at which place a round of theodolite angles was required--and
in the afternoon anchored off its south-western side in nine fathoms, one mile off shore. A
solitary native was seen at work upon a canoe near the beach, but when a boat approached the
shore he withdrew. The canoe was about half finished, and close by was a small shed of bamboo
thatched with grass. After crossing a small sandy plain covered with short grass growing in
tufts, we met the native on the edge of a brush to which he had slowly retired in order to
pick up his spears and throwing-stick, both of which were precisely similar to those of Cape
York, from which place they had probably been procured. He was a quiet, sedate, good-natured
old man, and although at first rather shy he soon laid aside his fears on receiving assurances
in the Kowrarega language, which he understood, that markai poud Kulkalaig Nagir (the white
men are friends of the Kulkalega tribe of Mount Ernest) backed by a present of some biscuit
and a knife. On subsequent occasions, when accompanying us from place to place, the quiet listless
apathy of the old fellow was a source of some amusement. He did what was told him, and exhibited
little curiosity, and scarcely any surprise at the many wonderful things we showed him--such
as shooting birds with a gun, and procuring a light from a lucifer match.

MOUNT ERNEST DESCRIBED.

On the following day I had an opportunity of examining the whole of the northern or inhabited
side of the island. Mount Ernest is little more than a mile in greatest length, of a somewhat
triangular shape, its eastern and larger portion hilly, rising gradually to an elevation of
751 feet, and its western part low and sandy. The rock is grey sienite, and from the striking
similarity of aspect, it appeared to me pretty certain that Pole, Burke, and Banks Islands
are of the same formation; they agree in exhibiting massive peaks, respectively 409, 490, and
1,246 feet in height.

Mount Ernest is the headquarters of the Kulkalega tribe of Torres Strait Islanders who are
now absent on one of their periodical migrations, leaving in possession only the old man whom
we met yesterday, and his family, among whom is a daughter of rather prepossessing appearance
for a female of her race. The village consists of a single line of huts, which would furnish
accommodation for, probably, 150 people. It is situated on the north-west, or leeward side
of the island, immediately behind the beach, and in front of a belt of jungle. The huts are
long and low, with an arched roof, and vary in length from ten to twenty feet, with an average
height of five feet, and a width of six. They consist of a neat framework of strips of bamboo,
thatched with long coarse grass. Each hut is usually situated in a small well-fenced enclosure,
and opposite to it on the beach is the cooking place, consisting of a small shed, under which
the fire is made. We saw indications of many turtle having lately been cooked here upon a framework
of sticks over a small fire, precisely as is practised by the natives of New Guinea and the
Louisiade Archipelago.

SIGNS OF CULTIVATION.

The strip of forest behind the village is traversed in every direction by well beaten paths,
chiefly leading to the back part of the island, where, on the slope of a hill in good soil,
we found many patches of rude cultivation. The chief plant is a broad-leaved species of yam,
trained upon tall poles kept in position by cross bamboos, forming a framework divided into
little squares, each of which contains a plant. A species of Calladium with an esculent root
is also much cultivated; it is planted in regular rows with the earth heaped up in ridges,
as in a potato or turnip field at home. I noticed some small plots of ground prepared with
more than usual care for the growth of what Giaom told me was a herb used as tobacco; the young
plants were protected from the sun with pieces of matting.

COLLECTION OF HUMAN SKULLS.

Not far from the village, under the shade of an aged mimusops tree on the outskirts of the
wood, we observed a cleared oval space where ten human skulls--of former members of the tribe,
as we were informed--were arranged upon a plank raised on stones a foot or so from the ground.
The skulls were mostly old and weather-worn, and some of them had pandanus seeds stuck in the
orbits by way of eyes. In front was a large smooth stone painted red and black, and partially
embedded in the earth, and beside it were some painted human leg and arm bones, shells and
other ornaments. Behind, some thirty or forty skulls of turtle were arranged on the ground
in several rows forming a triangle.

CURIOUS SCREEN.

In a beautiful opening among the trees behind the village we saw an extraordinary screen--named
wows--the purpose of which, so far as we could understand, had some connection with the memory
of the dead. 

Make sure that your students (especially full-grip chords) the left hand is always slightly
sideways to look for the bass, so that the pressure increased in all its severity is conveyed
to the two weakest finger. Against the ascendency of a finger on another, which is a common
bad habit, gives it a very simple method. You put a little ring with a pointed projecting stone,
or binds only one thread with a coarse node to the agency, then the side fingers soon become
accustomed to to remain true to its proper places.

III.

It is understood that one beginners only the observation of the = grammar = Accents for Making it
obligatory, and the oratorical = = postpone for a few years. The former, though one should assume
that every musician knows it is incomprehensible manner by most Teachers passed over in silence.
One need only play one provincial city orchestra to hear and feel the lack of grammatical Accents
highly sensitive. No internal Band keeps the harmony of the instruments, all grow thin, as
if in a moment intended to upset. This feeling of insecurity that plagues the listener, the vagueness
of Chords even where no wrong decision prevails handle stems solely
from ignorance or failure to accent her.

Wherefore it goes through means not that a teacher his pupil surface once and for all this
rule imparts, but its failure to comply has always criticized as a severe error will: you have
to stop, just as both would be used if a wrong note, and a forgotten
or wrong attached Accent korrigiren repeated so long and leave until
He is correct.

Most easily understand the accent children, if given its agreement with the metrical makes clear.
The cumbersome or confusing names: good and bad beat, heavy and light-time, low blow and brush, Thesis
and Arsis under which this simple Rule will be dealt with in the Clavierschulen it confused with others
or exaggerate with forced Stiffness of the emphasis on the accented beat. But do you manage
to locate a familiar song, the same rhythm with her piece has, so you have them, this only emphasizes
wrong , Vorzudeklamiren them inside of the obnoxious effect poorly-marked parts of the measure convincing.
I will assume for a moment, a child playing his first piece in a four-four time; You tell him,
one and three quarters are good = =, two and four but = bad = clock parts, the former must
be well marked by a degree more than the other two, it is the Cause and can not see with great embarrassment
and a stiff Forte Piano alternate. The above-mentioned manner shall be immediately established,
however feel it. For example, = one = two = three = four are emphasized as the words, Lie
= = be, = Gu = te. You do not say Lie Beeh = = = Gu = Teeh that the expression on the short
syllable is, any more than you posit two syllables with a broad, sleepy sound like long drawn
next to each other. Just so you involuntarily as in speech a syllabic stress and the other will let
fall, so you have to get used to, the accented beat his quiet emphasis to give. This pressure
is excessive, then the presentation and raw ugly, that sounds like bad actors declaim, with
a cry to the a syllable fall and the others whisper inaudible. If we made it, it sounds every
melody as the babbling of a child or scatting the language of a foreigner.

The ignorant, it almost always happens that the sound of them just not on the accented beat clearly
responsive, and the following on the bad hervorstolpert so violent. Turnoff this bad habit again are
the first and easiest etudes Handstückchen appropriate operate. Students who already bring the wrong
accentuation as a rusted habit However, you can heal in that it compels a while, the accented
beat to Mark and very exaggerated, and afterwards the excess patient ausschleift again. Her
other We prefer to treat mistakes as long with some leniency, but they always tease mercilessly, when
her fingers declaim wrong.

The six-eight time stamps itself as children by the words an "friendly,
lovely" which they held: "= a = = = four two three five six" can declaim
a few times.

We were taught to print a story which tells how the famous philosopher Moses Mendelssohn wanted
to learn from Kirnberger the theory of music, and it struggled in vain, he to make them realize
that three-quarter and six-eight time, are different. He could have used to say: "Three quarters
three and six-eighths trochees two dactyls," so would have taught
his students certainly made sense better than his name, "triple time
and a straight bar.

"

Whose sense of the right musical declamation was impressed early on, which has the advantage that the
good time-part in his game as a slight pulse in a living organism perceived to be, without ever
disturbing, the grace of the presentation to impose. In the game of those who has nachgelernt
later this rule, the Accent picked more like a movement, and gives us the impression of something automatically.
However, I would still rather tasteless Diess intense accentuation tolerate than do without
entirely. How easily can be found in the Prima Vista Games greater in four-hand pieces, or the combination
correct those that the good Time-part in flesh and blood sense, while
each, in the absence of signposts, at the least Accidentally get stuck
once.

When you hear players at important skill have a totally unprincipled attack so you can be sure
that they have the distinction of parts of the measure never heard of. Power they point out,
so they do not admit their ignorance to push the matter as a matter of indifference away and
say it's the main thing that we play "with feeling."

As if a man can play with feeling that the wrong accent once firmly in the fingers sits;

An infinite confusion in the musical education through the ignorance of the first Authorities arrived,
which discovered the theory of clock parts. If you pound the Generalbaßbücher on, we find mentioned
the accented beat Thesis, while the metric in the corresponding verse Body called the arsis. Although
have to meet in vocal music the accents, allowed to apply this concept musically or verbally
conflicting. Old theorists this will be a give erstaunungswürdig naive statement, they say that
is "Arsis and Thesis mean elevation and depression. "Since the accented beat of the baton is lowered
(which is also mean spreading and low-blow), it is understood that
the accented notes of the Thesis should read.

It would be highly desirable that a musician of general fame at last, by a public Declaration
of this ridiculous word and Begriffsconfusion would abolish.

Finally, I remember you still a delicacy in the note of the grammatical accents, namely, that
each beat, he was a good or bad, once again into smaller Particles split, again at the show more
or less weight. Passages of sixteenth notes or triplets, for example, gain a lot when a imperceptible
pressure of their finger small breakdowns in three-or four-speed
is only just guessed.

But to such super subtleties of the attack until the final consequences is carried out, is
already a fairly practiced hand, and the beginner, one spare love with this claim.

About stop is made in the musical world much unnecessary talk, and I wanted to Wherefore remember
only to the above shortcomings of it, because to me with a few exceptions recurred in all new students.
People who adhere to the Rococo period of the pianist, mean by nice stop just a kind of half Stackato
in the legs, which she to compare with a string of beads as desired. One might at this stop but
just both are reminiscent of a basket of distributed dry peas. Aside from the tastelessness In
this manner, when it is applied consistently, it is wrong that account already on it, shall be used
as the fundamental principle of the attack, a value, because the
runs and ornaments, to which it fits at best, a minor matter, while
all Deeper: grandeur, intimacy of feeling that is brought by the player
just through correct accentuation of presentation.

IV

Playing with feeling! How can one find the significant words to the students that vague Expression
to make it intelligible. A voice teacher, it has easy, as the text of the songs best commentary for
the melody gives off.

In contrast, instrumental music, we can only gleichnißweise use poetry to bring it closer to the
person who is not music as = = Music understands, but she only interested right when they have
fed anything else means.

It is now the duty of the educated music teacher, adult students compared to that of to divine name,
for which their subjectivity is most receptive. The music is Commenting in the form of piano
playing, we hold in our days almost indispensable to the formation a young lady of the middle
and upper classes. Whether by law, is what I want you another time express my creed. Enough,
talented and talent-free for years to learn the piano, and they of course expect that the teacher
take it to a workmanship conscientious, of bringing them so great a sacrifice. All want to
"with feeling" to play, and yet it is already in the word "feeling" that you can learn it if it is not
a given. Substituting However, the word play "with understanding" in place, it is apparent that
the teacher Diess the student may be transferred. There are resources available to a particular sensation
in musical performance show. Legato, staccato, forte, piano, and above all the oratorical Accent
serve. Where they stand prescribed by the composer, it is sufficient, the student to remember
that he observed such signs faithful. But it is impossible that a composer each note the degree of
Sforzando append to without completely from the mass of our eye signs
confused would.

So we come back on but the "feeling back," which inspires us, how much we may emphasize = =,
without the grace will hurt how much we need to emphasize bring the piece of music to the inherent
passion for illustration.

Often come in one stroke in front of several oratorical accents to each other, each one must
obtain another degree of emphasis.

While the nature of the grammatical regular Accents is return, and the student understands Wherefore
it soon gives the unexpectedly, random in the character of the oratorio the teachers had no
clue as to call him to the students so Next time that he himself finds out. Most likely he is
to him by an analogy familiar with the declamation of course.

By the teacher, I assume that his musical language must be open-minded. But if he is a even the
inner musical nature that thinks very sound and feel, so it is nothing good to his students if he
does not know to communicate his inner beliefs.

He must, therefore, in addition to a musical education, especially his speech lecture the utmost
clarity and appropriate security. He must have presence of mind enough for each song immediately
to find an analogy that makes it comprehensible to the student. He must in his memory matching
willing poet words have to compare it to a music site he is in having
the accents oratory.

For very talented students this fuss and are hardly necessary, for talentless they even bounce
off most. But between talent and talent full = = = = go there is a long Series of gradations,
which is not sufficient for one and the same method. Take only one Difference as example.

A student who heard and admirable tact, a light hand and it only makes sense for the most superficial
waltz compositions has, and another, the nature of the rigid finger and has been almost no
actual musical talent, but the noblest and greatest understand and enjoy the music, if you are
often formed their minds on other things Ways bring near. You will see it is that you with
these two, a very different language need to talk.

The former you can on a purely musical way of the futility of their previous direction convince you by
their repeated the requirements of a good melody, Harmony and a beautiful rhythm with examples
at the piano practical explanation, and the genuine music compare with those who lack these
three basic conditions. The other You will the relationship of this piece of music at the Fair
from a foreign Area must have in order to gain their interest in it.

For all students of the latter class must be eavesdropping, which
their otherwise natural systems, Hobbies and skills are needed such
as the fantasy of the music input to To establish if it will not be
able to sentimental way, or by about a comparison to borrow from the
painting, if formed in them the sense of color and form more should
be, than the feeling for sound and rhythm.

Shall encourage each teacher's knowledge of other Education subjects the student if he uses it
in the right place, often far more as if he were still buried as deep in the musical grammar.

Some
students have only one half of musical talent, namely the view without
the presentation delivery, or vice versa.

The first benefit you by audition at the most, the latter, by oral declaration.

A superficial young girl appears an isolated melody more beautiful, because the Poverty, a rhythm-less,
perhaps only two chords built monitoring their thoughts does not avail. In general, the melody
is all you, and the bass is for them a quite unnecessary addition. Strangely enough, they claim
to a composition, in all Share wealth and abundance, has, for example, by a joint such as: they have = no
= melody.

This means right now the forest for the trees to see that on the joint, each individual an
equal voice Melody, but to hear four tunes at once, due to missing their ears, so to speak,
of the survey.

You must from time to time a very excellent composition analyze before such students and compel them
to turn their attention to their internal structure. Then run out the Awareness of the power
of a harmonic moving bass and middle parts of independent on. Just as they were dry before any
composition in which the magic of melody believed to be missing, they will be soon no sound harmonically
impoverished work so seductive because it has about the cheap advantage of a pretty upper part.
Finally do not miss that Rhythm sample make, by becoming a topic of all melodic and harmonic
additions stripped, reducible to a single tone.

Rhythm is a truly original and animated it interested us when we do drumming his fingers on the
table. Just both come the weaknesses of the invention undeniably revealed when its monotony
no longer hidden by brightly colored melody.

In this way, the student wins a starting point from which he may consider
himself that the Music, do not they like, or remain valid.

It has gained much, if he realizes that he has not dropped a music
question, because it was too high, and that he must confess in the
opposite case, ashamed that he is more delighted at the Commons.

Self-knowledge is also in this particular case, the first step in training.

V.

At a mention at the beginning of my previous letter Following up again, I speak it as My own opinion
from that all is not better organized person by nature musical the singing and playing were
to remain, as us poor piano teacher to martyrs of patience . Make Why just turned the music
so exclusive menswear, I do not understand. Formed a house where the piano would not would apply
for an impossibility. Girls who can read a poem correctly, learn to sing anyway. Hardly, in
that a Society can visit without having to endure listening, and what terrible music! Music
and Music = friends = = = enemies are equally sensitive by the sight of an open Claviers with
two lights touched it when they walk into a salon to relax. This, Ireland Music Entertainment is a
resolution between the acid for the interview.

Is it possible to Found a fortune-understand man by talking to the one the highest interests ,
can force a cut in the thoughts of abundance, contrary to mutual exchange, so us the most stimulating
communication suddenly the cry of terror from: "From the Alps to the horn sounds."

You'll be able your impatience to hear the song one hundred times with suppressed rage to an
end, and take the previous theme again. Before you answer your friends a question of life flush
could, issued forth to you already the other from the Clavier, "My
heart, I want to ask you, what is love? say!

"

You lose at last all desire in such a fragmented conversation the least attention to contact, indolent,
and let everything get at you, strumming and chatter, tea, and Cake, as it falls.

A major cause of the mindlessness of our most German companies is
this insufferable Music Ireland, which one aufdringt the people, without
asking whether they will taste it.

If Someone wants to hear music, so he go to the concert, and if he seeks Conversation in society.
How tricky it is to guarantee a lure with the prospect of conversation in a society and then to
force him to listen to music. The least would be it a previously honest to say that it is making
music, so that one can escape his ears far enough.

The musician, who is caught up in daily life the dream of sounds necessary to his recovery stepping
out of a total sphere of mental twilight in the sunlit regions of the mind where the thought
suggests the idea of ​​the electric spark. What a pleasure is a well-ordered, like a work of
art developed Conversation! In virtuosity probably result in only the French understand it,
and so we also need the name itself borrow their language. That our "entertainment = =" means
the matter is not exactly proof to sit out the abuse already, musical evening entertainment in
their place. As necessarily require a lot of women of this noble art of conversation, the clear
view sharpens all the states! Instead, they sit silently with their knitting in the Society, and
let the music do but just in their minds to the thought of lifted be.

Those who still want a level deeper talk, between the music pranks, and consider it only in incomprehensible
brutality as a means to conceal the breaks that might arise about the conversation. Society
and music are now as Church and State; with two it can only be better if they stay sharp separately.

Society must certainly look at some of the alliance of art to be above
the common uplift, they would rather choose the analog of the conversation
poetry than the music. As our greatest lyrical poets remain unknown
in relation to the lowest Liedercomponisten! Pure reason that the
custom of our ladies only permitted but not singing, speaking in front
Circles greater production went to. These crabs even carried off
a plover which I had shot, not allowing more than ten minutes to elapse before one of them
had it safely (as it thought) stowed away in its burrow.

The golden plover was plentiful on the island during our visit, and one afternoon I killed
fifteen in about an hour. Two days after the terns' eggs had been broken we found a small colony
of laying birds, and picked up some dozens of eggs; and had we remained a few days longer,
doubtless a very great number might have been procured. The weed which in the Fly we used to
call spinach (a species of Boerhaavia, apparently B. diffusa) being abundant here, was at my
suggestion collected in large quantity for the use of the ship's company as a vegetable, but
it did not seem to be generally liked.

December 21st.

Two days ago we left Bramble Cay for Cape Possession in New Guinea, with a fine breeze from
the North-West, and next morning at daylight saw the land about the Cape on the weather-beam.
The wind, however, died away in the afternoon, but this morning a light north-westerly breeze
sprang up, before which we bore up and were brought in the afternoon to an anchorage in 11
fathoms, mud, half a mile to leeward of the Pariwara Islands.

ARRIVE AT REDSCAR BAY.

Meanwhile Lieutenant Yule, upon our destination being changed, was ordered by signal to proceed
to Cape Direction and survey the intermediate space between that and Redscar Bay, in order
to connect his former continuation of the Fly's work with ours, and thus complete the coastline
of the whole of the south-east part of New Guinea.

We remained at this anchorage for upwards of a week, during which a rate for the chronometers
was obtained, and the Bramble returned.

WEATHER DURING WESTERLY MONSOON.

The weather during our stay was very variable and unsettled; rain fell on several occasions.
The wind was usually from the westward, varying between North-West and South-West, and on one
occasion during the night we had a sudden and very violent squall from the westward, which
for a time was thought to be the beginning of a hurricane, but the gale moderated very gradually
next day. When the wind during the day was light and from seaward, a land breeze generally
came off at night, occasionally with rain. The cause of this last seems to be the influence
exerted upon the winds here by Mount Owen Stanley and the ranges connected with it, from which
the clouds accumulated during the prevalence of the seabreeze, are reflected after its subsidence.
The low and well wooded district between the mountains and the sea receives the passing influence
of these clouds surcharged with moisture, and the climate there and in all the low maritime
districts of the south-east part of New Guinea backed by high land, is probably always a moist
one, little affected by the prevalence of either the North-West or South-East monsoon. The
observations made during our last visit to determine the height of Mount Owen Stanley and not
considered very satisfactory, were repeated under more favourable conditions, but with nearly
the same result. This mountain, the highest of the range of the same name, is somewhat flat-topped
(as viewed from our anchorage) about six miles in length, and the mean of five observations
from different stations gave 13,205 feet as the height of the highest part above the level
of the sea.

PARIWARA ISLAND.

On the largest Pariwara Island, although abundance of rain had fallen lately, there was no
water left in any pool or hole in the rock. Nor although the soil, from the additional moisture,
looked darker and richer than during my former visit in September, was there any perceptible
improvement in the vegetation. A few fork-tailed red-fronted swallows (Hirundo neoxena) were
hawking about, and a large yellow and black butterfly (Papilio epius, common in collections
from India and China) was abundant. Many Torres Strait pigeons were observed from the ship
to resort nightly to the second largest of the group, which is covered with trees and seems
quite inaccessible from the steepness of its low cliffs. On several successive evenings about
sunset, and until it became too dark to distinguish them, immense numbers of frigate-birds
were observed flying over Redscar Head, and going out to the North-North-East. This being a
gregarious bird only when associated at a breeding place, and there being no known sandbank
or islet in the direction which they were pursuing, rendered their object a subject for much
conjecture.

MANY NATIVES VISIT US.

We were occasionally visited by parties of natives, chiefly coming from the northward, probably
from some of the large rivermouths known to exist there. Although in bringing their women and
children off to see the ship they indicated little suspicion or fear, yet on one occasion only
could we induce any of the men to come on board, and the two who did so would not be persuaded
to go below, and made their stay very short. As I had better opportunities of making observations
upon these natives than during our former visit, some additional information regarding them
may be given here. The inhabitants of Redscar Bay, judging from what was seen alongside the
ship, are rather smaller in stature than those seen at Dufaure and Brumer Islands and the Louisiade,
but perhaps more frequently show handsome features and good expression. Neither were there
any men exceeding the rest in height by even three inches, as had often been the case in other
places. They are usually of a very light copper colour, but one man was of a very pale yellow
and much resembled a Chinaman in hue; although it may at first appear strange, yet this pale-skinned
individual by his very colour excited feelings of disgust in the minds of some of us, such
as would be created by the sight of a person whose body was covered with a loathsome eruption
and who still publicly exposed it. And why should not our pale faces be regarded by these savages
in a similar light? Some had perfect Malayan features, but none seen on this occasion appeared
to practice betel-chewing--a remarkable circumstance, since the men who on our former visit
came off to the ship, then only about fifteen miles to the north-west, had their teeth discoloured.

PIGTAILS AND TATTOOING.

None of the natives had any hair upon the face; various ways of dressing that of the head were
practised, the most singular of which has already been described in Volume 1. The hair was
usually of its natural dark colour at the base, with the remainder dyed reddish brown and frizzled
out into a mop with long-toothed combs of wood or tortoise-shell. One child had the head so
shaved as to leave a long tuft on the forehead, and another on the back of the head--precisely
in the same manner as is sometimes practised in Java. Nor must I omit noticing a singular appendage
formerly alluded to--analogous to the pigtail once in vogue--worn by many of these people;
it is formed of human hair wrapped round with twine, and ends in one or more bunches of shells,
dogs' teeth, and tails of pigs--the longest one which I saw measured twenty-one inches in length.
Among numerous ornaments the most common is a large round concave portion of melon shell, sometimes
beautifully inlaid with filagree work of tortoise-shell, worn on the breast. Fillets of cassowary
feathers, fur of the spotted bare-tailed opossum, or woven stuff studded with shells, were
often seen.

Painting the face or body does not seem to be practised here, but the men are usually tattooed
on the breast, cheeks, forehead, and arms, also occasionally on other places. Their tattooing,
however, is much fainter and less profuse than among the women, every visible part of whose
skin is generally marked with a great variety of patterns, the most usual style among them
consisting in series of double parallel or converging lines an inch or more apart, the intervals
being occupied by small figures, or irregular lines, with detached rectilinear figures fancifully
filled up.

DRESS AND ARMS.

The women wear a petticoat of shreds of pandanus leaf, plaited above into a waistband and below
reaching nearly to the knee.

They brought off little with them for barter besides bows and arrows, and as before appeared
perfectly ignorant of the use of iron. A few coconuts, plantains, and mangos were obtained
from them, but they had no yams. Nearly every canoe which came alongside contained several
large baked earthen pots of good construction, some with wide, others with narrow mouths, and
a third sort shaped like a saucer. Besides bows and arrows, we saw many spears, mostly of small
size and usually finely jagged or barbed towards the end, but of very inferior workmanship,
also some shields, one of which may be described.* It measures 33 inches in length by 14 in
width, and in shape resembles a fiddle, being rounded at the ends and slightly contracted in
the middle; it is made of wood, three-fourths of an inch thick, neatly covered with fine cane
matting, fitting very tightly.

(*Footnote. Figured in volume 1.)

SINGLE OR DOUBLE CANOES.

The canoes seen here are either single or double, in the latter case consisting merely of two
lashed together, usually without an outrigger. The single canoes vary in length from 20 to
30 feet, and carry from five to a dozen people. Each end tapers to a sharp projecting point
longer at the bow. The outrigger frame consists of five poles laid across the gunwale in grooves,
and the float, which is rather less than half the length of the body of the canoe, is secured
to the ends of each by three pegs, a foot in length. The opposite ends of the outrigger poles
project beyond the side only a few inches, and are secured by lashing of cane to a piece crossing
them; the gunwale is further strengthened by slender poles running along it from end to end.
A small portion only of the outrigger frame is converted into a platform by a few loose poles
or a plank or two: some of the latter were as much as two feet in width, and only an inch in
thickness, and must have been cut with stone axes out of a log of wood. The largest canoe seen
was judged to be thirty-five feet in length, with a width at the bow of four and a half feet,
but this far exceeded in bulk any of the other single ones. Like the rest it essentially consisted
of the hollowed-out trunk of a tree. All the heavy canoes are pulled with oars, working in
cane grommets, the others are propelled with paddles. Both oars and paddles have lanceolate
blades and thick handles, without any attempt at ornament or even neatness of design.

The sail (of pandanus matting) is a long parallelogram, twelve feet by three, its sides secured
by two tough slender poles, between which it is stretched, and which serve both as masts and
yards. In making sail one of the poles is shipped, two stays from the centre leading fore and
aft are then set up, after which the second pole is fixed and secured by stays, so as to give
the sail the requisite inclination. We frequently saw a second smaller sail set before the
first, at the distance of eight or ten feet, and managed precisely in the same way, but, even
with both sails set, owing to the disproportion between the spread of canvas and the bulk of
the canoe, the latter moves slowly at all times, and on a wind makes much leeway.

SAIL FROM REDSCAR BAY.

December 31st.

We sailed yesterday from our anchorage in Redscar Bay, but did not clear the sunken ridge of
coral in the offing--a submarine extension of the Barrier Reef, stretching between Low Island
and the vicinity of South-west Cape--until this forenoon, when we got out of soundings. The
Bramble is to remain behind for three or four weeks upon the coast, to fill up various blanks
in the chart between this and Rossel Island, while we are to make the best of our way to the
Duchateau Islands, to obtain a meridian distance, and thence proceed direct to Sydney.

January 6th, 1850.

Our passage to the Duchateau Isles, a distance of less than 400 miles, has been protracted
by the prevalence of light winds, although these were generally favourable, or from the westward.
Occasional calms, squalls, and rain occurred, but the weather generally was finer than during
the South-East monsoon.

CLEARNESS OF THE ATMOSPHERE.

As an instance of the clearness of the atmosphere, so different from what we had usually experienced
during our former visit to these shores, it may be mentioned, that on one occasion during a
light breeze from the north-west we clearly saw Mount Yule (10,046 feet high) and the summit
of Mount Owen Stanley, distant respectively, one hundred and twenty, and eighty miles from
the ship. On this occasion also we had a full view of the whole of Mount Astrolabe, which although
3,824 feet in greatest height, and appearing to D'Urville as he ran past to be the highest
land on this portion of the coast, is rendered quite insignificant by the lofty though distant
range behind. Mount Astrolabe differs in character from any other of the New Guinea mountains
seen by us, indicating a different geological formation. The summit extends thirteen miles,
running parallel with the coastline and distant from it about eight miles. Viewed from the
south-westward the outline is regular, exhibiting a series of nearly flat tops with slight
interruptions, but from the southward it appears as a succession of terraces or projecting
cliffs, precipitous in front near the summit, with a long steep slope below, probably of debris,
while the flat top slopes backwards with a very gentle declivity. Owen Stanley Range again
presented quite a different aspect as seen on the occasion alluded to, when nearly one half
of its whole length (300 miles) from Mount Yule to Heath Bay was in full view: the outline
was irregular but never suddenly so, and no peaks or other remarkable points were seen.

I may mention here in relation to this part of New Guinea, though not in continuance of the
narrative, that the Barrier Reef, beginning (or ending) at Low Island, is continued to the
southward and eastward for 150 miles, as far as Cape Colombier, generally following the trend
of the coast, at a distance off it from three to fifteen miles. A long strip of apparently
navigable water is thus enclosed between the reef and the shore, with numerous passages, many
of which appeared to be clear to Lieutenant Yule as he passed along close to the outer margin
of the reef.

HARBOURS INSIDE THE BARRIER REEF.

Some good harbours doubtless exist here; the Bramble passed through Roundhead Entrance and
found good anchorage in fifteen fathoms immediately inside. The whole of this extent of coast
appeared to be well peopled. On the western side of Mount Astrolabe, for instance, numerous
villages and patches of cultivated land were seen from the Bramble.

THE SAGO PALM.

Both in Redscar Bay and for the first two or three days after leaving it numbers of sago palms,
some quite recent, were observed on the water, occasionally with boobies and noddies perched
upon them. These trees had probably grown upon the banks of the rivers of the bay, and been
washed away by the undermining of the low alluvial banks on which they grow, and carried out
to sea by the current. Along several of the freshwater channels on the western side of the
Great Bight examined by the Fly's boats in 1844, I had seen this palm growing on the margin
of the stream in great profusion, and according to Giaom, the bisi tree (as she called it)
is occasionally carried by the winds and currents as far south as the Prince of Wales Islands,
when the natives scoop out the soft spongy inner wood, wash it well with fresh water, beat
it up into a pulp, separate the farinaceous substance which falls to the bottom of the vessel,
and bake it as bread. On no part of the coast of New Guinea, however, did we ever see any of
this sago bread, which is known to constitute the principal food of the inhabitants of the
north-west coast of that great island.*

(*Footnote. Forrest endeavours to show that an acre of ground planted with 300 sago palms will
maintain fourteen men, as each tree produces 300 pounds of sago flour, when arrived at full
maturity in its seventh year. Voyage to New Guinea and the Moluccas in 1774 to 1776 by Captain
Thomas Forrest second edition page 44.)

On one occasion lately the water was discoloured by a conferva resembling the sea-sawdust of
Captain Cook, with which it was found to agree generically in consisting of long filaments
joined together by a softer gelatinous-looking substance. The present species, however, is
six times larger than the more common sort, some of which was mixed up with it, their diameters
as ascertained by Mr. Huxley, being respectively 8 1/2 over 5000 and 1 1/8 over 5000 of an inch.

Today we stood in for the Duchateau Isles, and, rounding them to the westward, anchored in
the afternoon in seventeen fathoms, with the central island bearing south, distant one mile.

SHOOTING PARTY ON DUCHATEAU ISLES.

January 7th.

Along with a shooting party I landed soon after daylight on the westernmost Duchateau Island.
Numbers of Nicobar pigeons left the island as we approached, having apparently used it merely
as a roosting-place.

HABITS OF DUPERREY'S MEGAPODIUS.

Heavy showers and thunderclouds passed over at intervals during the whole morning, rendering
our shooting not quite so successful as it might have been; still we procured about fifty pigeons
and a few of Duperrey's megapodius. In habits this last bird resembles the Australian species,
especially in constructing enormous mounds for the reception of its eggs. Those which I saw
averaged five feet in height and fifteen in diameter, and were composed of the sandy soil of
the neighbourhood, mixed up with rotten sticks and leaves, but without any shells or coral.
Some were placed on the outer margin of the thickets close to the beach, and others were scattered
about more inland. As several of these mounds showed indications of having lately been opened
by the birds, I entertained hopes of being able to procure an egg, but after digging several
pits three feet in depth, with no more efficient implements than my hands, I had to give up
the work from sheer exhaustion. This bird is apparently very pugnacious at times, as I frequently
saw them chasing each other along the ground, running with great swiftness, and uttering their
cry more loudly than usual, stopping short suddenly and again starting off in pursuit. The
cry consists of one or two shrill notes, uttered at intervals and ending in a hurried tremulous
cry repeated five or six times. The noise made by this megapodius while scratching among the
dead leaves for food may sometimes be imitated with such success as to bring the bird running
up within gunshot. When suddenly forced to rise from the ground it flies up into a tree, and
remains there motionless, but exceedingly vigilant, ready to start on the approach of anyone,
but on other occasions it trusts to its legs to escape. Its food is entirely procured on the
ground, and consists of insects and their larvae (especially the pupae of ants) small snails,
and various fallen seeds and fruits. Although a great number of the Nicobar pigeons had left,
many yet remained, and the whole island resounded with their cry mixed up with the cooing of
the Nutmeg pigeon. Little skill is required in shooting these birds, for they generally admit
of very close approach, as if trusting to the chance of being overlooked among the dense foliage.

ARE VISITED BY NATIVES.

January 8th.

During the night a party of natives in five canoes came over from the Calvados Group, and first
attracted our attention by making several fires on the middle and easternmost islands. Soon
after daybreak they came alongside in their usual boisterous manner. A few words of their language
which were procured proved to be of great interest by agreeing generally with those formerly
obtained at Brierly Island, while the numerals were quite different and corresponded somewhat
with those of my Brumer Island vocabulary. Two of the canoes--one of which carried sixteen
people--were large and heavy and came off under sail, tacking outside of us and fetching under
the ship's stern. In these large canoes the paddles are of proportionate size and very clumsy--they
are worked as oars with the aid of cane grommets--the sail is of the large oblong shape formerly
described. One of the canoes was furnished with a small stage above the platform for the reception
of a large bundle of coarse mats, six feet long and two and a half broad, made by interlacing
the leaflets of the cocoa-palm; these mats are probably used in the construction of temporary
huts when upon a cruise.

Although rather a better sample of the Papuan race than that which we had lately seen at Redscar
Bay, there was no marked physical distinction between these inhabitants of the Louisiade and
the New Guinea men. The canoes, however, are as different as the language; here, as throughout
the Archipelago, the canoes have the semblance of a narrow coffin-like box, resting upon a
hollowed-out log, the bow having the two characteristic ornaments of the tabura, or head-board,
and the crest-like carved woodwork running out along the beak. Some of the natives were recognised
as former visitors to the ship. Nearly all were painted, chiefly on the face, the favourite
pattern being series of white bars and spots on a black ground. Except their ornaments and
weapons, they had little to give us for the iron hoop so much in request with them; only a
few coconuts, and scarcely any yams were obtained, and to the latter they attached a much higher
value than formerly.

SAIL FOR SYDNEY.

At length the natives left us, three canoes making to the northward, and two returning to the
Duchateau Isles. Morning observations for rating the chronometers having been obtained, we
got underweigh soon afterwards, and, bidding farewell to the Louisiade Archipelago, commenced
our voyage to Sydney.

Our daily average progress during the passage to Sydney (which occupied a period of twenty-eight
days) was less than fifty miles. The winds for the first few days, or until beyond the influence
of the land, were light and variable, shifting between South-West and North-East by the northward,
and accompanied by occasional squalls and rain. It became a matter of difficulty to determine
when we got into the south-east trade; it was not until we had reached latitude 20 degrees
South that the wind--light on the preceding day, but on this strong, with squalls and rain--appeared
steady between East-South-East and South-South-East and this carried us down to Sandy Cape.

REEFS OF THE CORAL SEA.

In traversing the Coral Sea, the numerous detached reefs were so carefully avoided that we
saw none of them--thus in one sense it is to be regretted that the passage through them of
a surveying vessel, with seventeen chronometers on board, was productive of no beneficial result
by determining the exact position of any one of these dangerous reefs, most of which are only
approximately laid down upon the charts.*

(*Footnote. About this time a new reef was discovered during the passage from Cape Deliverance
to Sydney of H.M.S. Meander, Captain the Honourable H. Keppel. While this sheet was passing
through the press, I saw an announcement of the total wreck upon Kenn Reef--one of those the
position of which is uncertain--of a large merchant ship, the passengers and crew of which,
33 in number, fortunately however, succeeded in reaching Moreton Bay in their boat--a distance
of 400 miles.)

PRACTICAL RESULTS OF THE SURVEY.

The most important practical result of Captain Stanley's survey of the Louisiade Archipelago
and the south coast of New Guinea, was the ascertaining the existence of a clear channel of
at least 30 miles in width along the southern shores of these islands, stretching east and
west between Cape Deliverance and the north-east entrance to Torres Strait--a distance of about
600 miles. This space was so traversed by the two vessels of the expedition without any detached
reefs being discovered, that it does not seem probable that any such exist there, with the
exception of the Eastern Fields of Flinders, the position and extent of which may be regarded
as determined with sufficient accuracy for the purposes of navigation, and the reefs alluded
to in Volume 1, which, if they exist at all, and are not merely the Eastern Fields laid down
far to the eastward of their true position, must be sought for further to the southward. The
shores in question may now be approached with safety, and vessels may run along them either
by day or night under the guidance of the chart--without incurring the risk of coming upon
unknown reefs, such as doubtless exist in other parts of the Coral Sea further to the southward--judging
from the occasional discovery of a new one by some vessel which had got out of the beaten track.
Whalers will no doubt find it worth their while--with the characteristic enterprise of their
class--to push into those parts of the Coral Sea now first thrown open to them, and, although
we have not as yet sufficient grounds to warrant the probability of success in the fishery,
yet I may mention that whales were seen on several occasions from both of our vessels.

USEFUL PRODUCTIONS OF NEW GUINEA.

This naturally originates the question--to what extent do the Louisiade Archipelago and the
south-east coast of New Guinea afford a field for commercial enterprise? What description of
trade can be established there by bartering European goods for the productions of these countries?
Unfortunately at present most of the evidence on this point is of a negative kind. Besides
articles of food, such as pigs, yams, and coconuts, and weapons and ornaments of no marketable
value--tortoise-shell, flax, arrowroot, massoy bark, and feathers of the birds of paradise
were seen by us, it is true, but in such small quantities as to hold out at present no inducement
for traders to resort to these coasts for the purpose of procuring them. That gold exists in
the western and northern portions of New Guinea has long been known, that it exists also on
the south-eastern shores of that great island is equally true, as a specimen of pottery procured
at Redscar Bay contained a few small laminar grains of this precious metal. The clay in which
the gold is embedded was probably part of the great alluvial deposit on the banks of the rivers,
the mouths of which we saw in that neighbourhood, doubtless originating in the high mountains
behind, part of the Owen Stanley Range.

It is evident, however, that our acquaintance with the productions of a great extent of coastline
upon which we never once landed must be very slight, but with that little we must be content
until some more complete exploration of the shores, which were only cursorily examined, and
especially of the rivers of the Great Bight--which seem to offer a ready means of penetrating
far into the interior of New Guinea--shall have been effected. That an expedition with this
end in view will soon be undertaken is, however, highly improbable, the survey of the Rattlesnake
having completed all that was requisite for the immediate purposes of navigation in those parts.

GEOLOGICAL REMARKS.

The fact of the existence of several active volcanoes on islands immediately adjacent to the
north coast of New Guinea (first made known by Dampier) and the circumstance of volcanic bands
traversing the length of many of the great islands of the Malayan Archipelago, and others as
far to the southward as New Caledonia and New Zealand, rendered it extremely probable that
we should have found indisputable signs of comparatively recent volcanic action in the south-east
part of New Guinea. We saw no volcanoes, however, and the great central mountain chain appeared
to me to be probably granitic. The large Brumer Island is composed of igneous rocks as formerly
mentioned; and at Dufaure Island I obtained from some canoes which came off to us a few smooth
water-worn pieces of hornblendic porphyry. Some specimens of obsidian, or volcanic glass, were
also procured from the natives at the latter place, where sharp-edged fragments are used for
shaving with; one variety is black, another of a light reddish-brown, with dark streaks. Mount
Astrolabe is apparently of trap formation, as I have already stated. Some conical hills scattered
along the coast may possibly be of volcanic origin, especially one of that form rising to the
height of 645 feet from the lowland behind Redscar Head. It is in this neighbourhood also that
we find the upraised calcareous rocks of modern date exhibited by the Pariwara Islands and
the neighbouring headland, with which they were probably once continuous; near this, too, the
barrier reef of the coast ceases at Low Island, which it encloses, although its line is continued
under water, as a ridge of coral, as far as the South-west Cape, where the coral ends, unless
the shoals apparently blocking up the channel south of Yule Island are of the same formation.

LOUISIADE ARCHIPELAGO.

Reference to the outline chart will enable the reader to follow me in some general remarks
which did not properly enter into the narrative. The Louisiade Archipelago, reduced to what
I conceive to be its natural limits, includes that extensive group of islands comprised between
the parallels of 10 degrees 40 minutes and 11 degrees 40 minutes South latitude, and the meridians
of 151 degrees and 154 degrees 30 minutes East longitude. About eighty are already known, and
probably many others remain yet to be discovered in the north-west, a large space there being
as yet a blank upon the chart. All the islands of the group, with the exception of the low
ones of coral formation to the westward, appear to be inhabited, but probably nowhere very
densely, judging from the comparatively small number of natives which we saw, and the circumstance
of the patches of cultivation being small and scattered, while the greater part of the large
islands is either covered with dense forest, or exhibits extensive grassy tracts with lines
and clumps of trees. Such of the islands as were examined consisted of mica slate, the line
of direction of the beds of which is nearly the same as that of the Archipelago itself, and
the physical appearance of the other islands leads me to believe that the same rock prevails
there also.

CORAL REEFS OF THE LOUISIADE ARCHIPELAGO DESCRIBED.

One of the most remarkable features connected with the Louisiade Archipelago is the manner
in which its shores are protected by the coral reefs which have frequently been alluded to
above. The principal of these are good examples of that kind distinguished by the name of barrier
reefs. Rossel Reef has already been described, and the only other large one of this description
which we saw more than a portion of, is that partially encircling South-east Island at a variable
distance from the land, then passing to the westward as far as longitude 152 degrees 40 minutes,
where it ceases to show itself above water; thence, however, the edge of a bank of soundings
(represented on the chart by a dotted line) which is suddenly met with in coming from the deep
blue unfathomed water to the southward, can be traced in a continued line to the westward as
far as the Jomard Isles, whence it turns round to the northward for ten miles further, where
our examination ended. This last may be considered as a submarine extension of the barrier,
which probably reappears again above water, and passing to the northward of the Calvados Group,
reaches as far as the northern entrance to Coral Haven, enclosing nearly all the high islands
of the Archipelago. The expanse of water inside when not occupied by land usually exhibits
a depth of from 15 to 30 fathoms, with numerous sunken patches of coral, and several reefs
which partially dry at low-water. The shores of the islands also are generally protected by
fringing coral reefs, the largest of which is that extending off the west and south side of
Piron Island to a distance of seven or eight miles, with a well defined border towards Coral Haven.

At the western portion of the Louisiade Archipelago the reefs seen by us exhibit great irregularity
of outline, continuity, and width. Some are linear reefs, others atolls* more or less distinct
in character, and the remainder are usually round or oval. Viewed as a whole they form an interrupted
chain, with numerous deepwater channels, which terminates in the West Barrier Reef of the chart
but is connected with the coast of New Guinea by a bank of soundings, with, probably, a well-defined
margin. Many low, wooded islands are scattered along this line. I know of no distinguishing
feature presented by the coral reefs of the Louisiade compared with those which I have seen
elsewhere. One remarkable occurrence, however, connected with them, may be mentioned. While
passing in the ship the most northern point of Rossel Island, I observed upon the reef, about
a hundred yards inside its outer border, a series of enormous insulated masses of dead coral
rising like rocks from the shallow water. The largest of these, examined through a good telescope
from the distance of half a mile, was about twenty feet in length and twelve in height, with
a well-defined high-water mark. It formed quite a miniature island, with tufts of herbage growing
in the clefts of its rugged sides, and a little colony of black-naped terns perched upon the
top as if incubating.

(*Footnote. The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs by Charles Darwin page 146.)

THEORY OF THEIR FORMATION.

I had only once before seen a similar exhibition of such great and permanently elevated masses
of dead coral upon a living reef--a phenomenon of much interest in connection with Mr. Darwin's
theory of the mode of formation of coral reefs. This was on a portion of the Great Barrier
Reef of Australia, visited in company with Mr. Jukes, who has published a detailed account
of it.* In both cases the only obvious explanation is that these huge blocks--too massive to
have been hove up from deep water into their present position by any storm--reached their present
level by the elevation of the sea bottom on which they were formed.

(*Footnote. Voyage of H.M.S. Fly by J.B. Jukes volume 1 page 340.)

Before quitting the subject of the coral reefs of the Louisiade I may be permitted to express
my conviction of the perfect manner in which many, perhaps all of the appearances which they
present may be satisfactorily accounted for by the application of Mr. Darwin's theory. We have
only to presume the whole of the Archipelago to have once formed part of New Guinea--a supposition
highly probable in itself (suggested even by a careful examination of the large charts) and
strengthened by the total absence of signs of volcanic agency in what the theory in question
would require to be an area of subsidence as opposed to those of elevation, such as are known
to exist in parts of New Guinea.

ETHNOLOGY OF NEW GUINEA.

The ethnology of New Guinea is involved in so much confusion and obscurity for the want of
sufficient data, that even with the aid of some additional recently acquired information bearing
upon the subject, I wish the following brief remarks to be regarded more as probable assumptions
than as views the correctness of which admits of demonstration. Besides, to give all the proofs,
such as they are, would cause much repetition of what has been already stated above.

I must premise that most of our previous definite information regarding the inhabitants of
New Guinea applies only to a small portion of the north-west coast of that great island in
the neighbourhood of Port Dorey, which is known to be peopled by several distinct varieties
of mankind, of which one (with which, as occupying the coast, we are best acquainted) is designated
the Papuan, or Papua, as generally understood by that appellation when used in its restricted
signification. These Papuans, according to Dumont D'Urville,* compose the principal part of
the population of Port Dorey, and, judging from his description, I have no hesitation in referring
to them also the inhabitants of the Louisiade Archipelago and the South-East coast of New Guinea,
and agree with Prichard (in opposition to the views of others) that they "constitute a genuine
and peculiar tribe."**

(*Footnote. Voyage de l'Astrolabe tome 4 page 603.)

(**Footnote. Researches into the Physical History of Mankind volume 5 page 227.)

NATIVES OF NORTH-WEST COAST.

Another variety among the inhabitants of Port Dorey, spoken of by M. d'Urville as the Harfours,
is supposed by him to include, along with another race of which little is known--named Arfaki--the
indigenous inhabitants of the north-west part of New Guinea. The Harfours, Haraforas, or Alforas,
for they have been thus variously named, have often been described as inhabiting the interior
of many of the large islands of the Malayan Archipelago, but, as Prichard remarks, "nothing
can be more puzzling than the contradictory accounts which are given of their physical characters
and manners. The only point of agreement between different writers respecting them is the circumstance
that all represent them as very low in civilisation and of fierce and sanguinary habits."*
Their distinctness as a race has been denied with much apparent reason by Mr. Earl, and they
are considered by Prichard to be merely various tribes of the Malayo-Polynesian race retaining
their uncivilised and primitive state. Be this as it may, of these Harfours D'Urville states,
that they reminded him of the ordinary type of the Australians, New Caledonians, and the black
race of Oceania, from their sooty colour, coarse but not woolly hair, thick beards, and habit
of scarifying the body. I mention these Harfours for the purpose of stating that no people
answering to the description of them given above were seen by us in New Guinea or the Louisiade
Archipelago.

(*Footnote. Ibid page 255.)

VARIETIES OF THE PAPUAN RACE AND THEIR DISTRIBUTION.

It appears to me that there are two distinct varieties of the Papuan race inhabiting the south-east
portion of New Guinea. The first occupies the western shores of the Great Bight, and probably
extends over the whole of the adjacent country, along the banks of Aird River, and the other
great freshwater channels. Judging from the little that was seen of them during the voyage
of the Fly, these people appear to agree with the Torres Strait Islanders--an offshoot, there
is reason to believe, of the same stock--in being a dark and savage race, the males of which
go entirely naked.

The second variety occupies the remainder of the south-east coast of New Guinea and the Louisiade
Archipelago. Their characteristics have already been given in this work, as seen at intermediate
points between Cape Possession and Coral Haven; they agree in being a lighter-coloured people
than the preceding, and more advanced in civilisation: mop-headed, practising betel-chewing,
and wearing the breech-cloth. Without entering into the question of their supposed origin,
I may state that, in some of their physical, intellectual, and moral characters, and also partially
in their language, they seem to me to show indications of a Malayo-Polynesian influence, probably
acquired before their arrival in New Guinea, along the shores of which they seem to have extended,
colonising the Louisiade during their progress, which at Cape Possession was finally arrested
by their meeting with the other section of the race alluded to in the preceding paragraph.

It would be curious to see the effects produced at the point of junction of these two sections
of the same race, probably somewhere between Aird River and Cape Possession. It is not unlikely
that the Papuans of Redscar Bay and its vicinity derived the use of the bow and arrow from
their neighbours to the westward--and that the kind of canoe in use in Torres Strait was an
introduction from the eastward, is rendered probable--setting aside other considerations--by
a circumstance suggested by the vocabularies, i.e. that the name for the most characteristic
part of the canoe in question--the outrigger float--is essentially the same from the Louisiade
to Cape York.*

(*Footnote. Louisiade: Sama. Darnley Island: Charima. Dufaure Island: Sarima. Prince of Wales
Islands: Sarima. Redscar Bay: Darima. Cape York: Charima.)

I have alluded in a preceding part of this work (Volume 1) to the circumstance that the small
vocabulary obtained at the Louisiade may, along with others, throw some light upon the question:
whence has Australia been peopled?

ORIGIN OF THE AUSTRALIAN RACE.

It may safely be assumed that the aborigines of the whole of Australia (exclusive of Van Diemen's
Land) have had one common origin; in physical character the natives of Cape York seem to me
to differ in no material respect from those of New South Wales, South or Western Australia,
or Port Essington,* and, I believe I am borne out by facts in stating that an examination of
vocabularies and grammars (more or less complete) from widely remote localities, still further
tends to prove the unity of the Australian tribes as a race.

(*Footnote. M. Hombron (attached to D'Urville's last expedition as surgeon and naturalist)
considers--as the result of personal observation--that the aborigines of New South Wales exhibit
certain points of physical difference from those of the North Coast of Australia, meaning,
I suppose, by the latter, those natives seen by him at Raffles Bay and Port Essington. I may
also mention that M. Hombron considers the Northern Australians to be a distinct subdivision
of the Australian race, in which he also classes the inhabitants of the smaller islands of
Torres Strait (as Warrior Island for instance) attributing the physical amelioration of the
latter people to the fact of their possessing abundant means of subsistence afforded by the
reefs among which they live, and the necessity of possessing well constructed canoes as their
only means of procuring fish and dugong, stated by him to constitute the chief food of the
Torres Strait islanders. Voyage au Pole Sud, etc. Zoologie tome 1 par M. Hombron pages 313,
314 et 317.)

The two places from one of which the Australian population may be supposed to have been more
IMMEDIATELY derived, are Timor on the one hand and New Guinea on the other: in the former case
the first settlers would probably have landed somewhere on the north-west coast, in the latter,
at Cape York. Dr. Prichard, when alluding to the probable mode of dispersion of the black tribes
of the Indian Archipelago, conjectures that one of the branches during the migratory march
probably passed from Java to Timor, and from thence to Australia.** Dr. Latham also inclines
to the belief that Australia was peopled from Timor and not from New Guinea, judging, in the
absence of positive proof, from the probability that "occupancy had begun in Australia before
migration across Torres Strait had commenced in New Guinea," inferred "from the physical differences
between the Australian and the Papuan, taken with the fact that it is scarcely likely that
the Papuans of Torres Strait would have failed in extending themselves in Australia had that
island been unoccupied." Researches into the Physical History of Mankind Volume 5 page 214.)

(***Footnote. Natural History of the Varieties of Man by R.G. Latham, M.D. pages 257 and 253.)

The unity of the Australian race being admitted implies one common origin, and that such was
not derived from New Guinea, can scarcely, I think, be doubted. Upon examining the neighbourhood
of the point of contact between the New Guinea-men and the Australians, we find Cape York and
the neighbouring shores of the mainland occupied by genuine and unmixed Australians, and the
islands of Torres Strait with the adjacent coast of New Guinea by equally genuine Papuans;
intermediate in position between the two races, and occupying the point of junction at the
Prince of Wales Islands we find the Kowrarega tribe of blacks. At first I was inclined to regard
the last more as degraded Papuans than as improved Australians: I am now, however, fully convinced
that they afford an example of an Australian tribe so altered by contact with the Papuan tribes
of the adjacent islands as at length to resemble the latter in most of their physical, intellectual
and moral characteristics. Thus the Kowraregas have acquired from their island neighbours the
art of cultivating the ground, and their superior dexterity in constructing and navigating
large canoes, together with some customs--such as that of preserving the skulls of their enemies
as trophies: while they retain the use of the spear and throwing-stick, practise certain mysterious
ceremonies connected with the initiation of boys to the rights of manhood--supposed to be peculiar
to the Australian race--and hold the females in the same low and degraded position which they
occupy throughout Australia.

That the Kowraregas settled the Prince of Wales Islands either prior to or nearly simultaneously,
with the spreading downwards from New Guinea of the Papuans of the islands, scarcely admits
of absolute proof: but that the former have existed as a tribe for a long period of years is
shown by the changes which I presume to have taken place in their language. While this last
unquestionably belongs to the Australian class, as clearly indicated by Dr. Latham's analysis
of the pronouns,* one of the characteristic parts of the language, and, therefore, least liable
to change, yet the occurrence in the Kowrarega of a considerable number of words resembling
and often identical with those of the known Papuan languages of Torres Strait,** and which
I believe to have been derived from the latter, seems to indicate a degree of long-continued
intercourse between the two races: for changes in language to so great an extent are not effected
in a short space of time any more than the nearly complete fusion of two different races which
has evidently taken place at the Prince of Wales Islands. Scarcely opposible to this supposition
is the extreme improbability that the Papuans, who had nothing to gain from so comparatively
inferior a race as the Australian, should be indebted to the latter for the words common to
both found to exist in the Kowrarega and Miriam languages.

(*Footnote. See the Appendix.)

(**Footnote. As means of comparison I used the Darnley and Murray Island vocabulary given in
Jukes' Voyage of the Fly, also a manuscript one of my own, which furnishes some additional
particulars; some words from Massid given by Jukes; and a few from Mount Ernest procured by
myself.)

Another mode of procedure suggests itself to one endeavouring to trace the proximate origin
of the Australians--and that is, to search the records of voyagers and others for any traces
of such customs, the use of certain implements, etc., as are supposed to be most characteristic
of these people. Yet, taking, for example, the boomerang* and throwing-stick,** we find nothing
approaching to either of these instruments in any part of New Guinea yet visited by Europeans:
in the absence of any evidence to the contrary from Timor, they may be considered as true Australian
inventions; and assuming the Australians to be the descendants of a colony from Timor, the
circumstance of the natives of Melville Island--a part of Australia distant only 200 miles
from their presumed place of origin--being ignorant of the use of the throwing-stick, is in
favour of part of this supposition. But a thorough investigation of the question of the origin
of the Australian race, and their dispersion over the continent, although NOW I believe rendered
quite practicable by the great mass of additional information contributed by voyagers and travellers
since Mr. Eyre wrote upon the subject, is not consistent with the objects of this work.

(*Footnote. Some of the fowling-sticks of the ancient Egyptians closely resemble the boomerang
in form and appear to have been used in a similar manner, but I am not aware that anything
approaching it has been seen elsewhere. A specimen which suggested this remark is exhibited
in the British Museum Egyptian Room Case 36, 37 Number 5646.)

(**Footnote. The throwing-stick is completely represented in the Aleutian Islands (See in Ethnographical
Room of British Museum, a specimen in case 16): in shape it differs from the Australian ones
(which themselves vary in different localities) but the principle of construction and mode
of use are precisely the same.

Soon after our arrival in Sydney we had to lament the loss of our much respected commander,
who died suddenly on March 13th, while apparently convalescent from a severe illness contracted
during our last cruise--induced, I understand, by long continued mental anxiety, and the cares
necessarily devolving upon the leader of an expedition such as ours, of which probably no one
who has not been similarly situated can ever fully comprehend the responsibility. Thus died
at the early age of thirty-nine, but after the successful accomplishment of the chief objects
of his mission, Captain Owen Stanley, who had long before won for himself an honourable name
in that branch of the naval service to which he had devoted himself, and whose reputation as
a surveyor and a man of science stood deservedly high. Although it would ill become me as a
civilian attached to the expedition to enter upon the services* and professional character
of my late captain, yet in common with many others, I cannot refrain from adding my humble
testimony to his worth, by recording my deep sense of many personal favours, and the assistance
which was always liberally rendered me during my natural history investigations throughout
the voyage, whenever the more important objects of the survey permitted.

(*Footnote. See O'Byrne's Naval Biographical Dictionary page 1109.)

By this unfortunate event all previous arrangements regarding our future proceedings were anulled.
It had been intended by Captain Stanley to return to England by way of Singapore and the Cape
of Good Hope, adding to the charts of the Inner Passage as we went along the east coast of
Australia, and making a careful survey of the Strait of Alass, between the islands of Lombock
and Sumbawa. Captain the Honourable Henry Keppel of H.M.S. Meander, as senior naval officer
present, having appointed Lieutenant Yule to the vacancy in the command of the Rattlesnake,
with orders to proceed direct to England, we left Sydney for that purpose on May 2nd. The Bramble
was left behind in the colony, and in addition to her former crew, the limited accommodations
of our ship were still further crowded with the greater number of the Port Essington marines,
some invalids, and other passengers, making up the number on board to upwards of 230 persons.

A course was steered to pass to the northward of New Zealand without calling there, but shortly
after leaving Sydney some defects in the ship were found out, which rendered it necessary to
put into the nearest port, as the principal one, causing a leak in the after gunroom, could
not be repaired at sea. It was also considered expedient to get rid of the Asp in order to
lessen the straining of the ship during the prospective passage round Cape Horn, which so much
top weight was considered materially to increase. On May 14th the land about Cape Maria Van
Diemen and the North Cape of New Zealand was in sight at daylight, appearing high and mountainous,
with steep maritime cliffs. On our passage across from Australia we had seen few seabirds,
but now albatrosses of three or four species were very numerous, together with a few petrels,
chiefly Procellaria cookii. Next morning we found ourselves to leeward of Cape Brett, having
experienced a southerly current during the night of two knots an hour; it took us the whole
day to work up into the Bay of Islands, and after dark we anchored in 28 fathoms, about six
miles from the entrance of the Kawa-Kawa.

May 16th.

The view from our anchorage, although under the favourable conditions of fine weather, struck
me as being dull and cheerless. The surface of the country is hilly and undulating, showing
patches of wood more or less extensive, and large tracts of fern of a dull greenish hue. The
shores of the mainland and the numerous islands exhibit every here and there argillaceous cliffs,
and banks of a brown, reddish, or yellow colour, from their steepness almost devoid of vegetation.
In the morning it was a dead calm, but at length a light air sprang up and carried us into
the bay of Kororareka, when we anchored in 4 1/2 fathoms, mud and sand, off the village of
the same name, also known as the township of Russell.

May 17th.

On landing at Kororareka, one finds that what from a distance appear neat and comfortable cottages
lose much by close inspection. The township consists of about thirty small wooden houses, mixed
up with many native hovels. It extends along the shore of a small bay, with a shingly beach
in front and a swamp behind. The number of houses was formerly much greater, most of those
now existing having been built since May 1845, when the greater part of the town was burnt
down by the natives. Even now it supports two public houses, and several general stores, where
necessaries may be procured at double the Sydney prices. At one time much trade was done here,
before the duties imposed on the occasion of New Zealand becoming a British colony drove away
the whalers which used to resort in great numbers to the Bay of Islands to refit; at present,
besides the Rattlesnake, the only vessel here is a brig from Hobart, bound to California, which
put in to this place to get a new rudder. Livestock is plentiful and the prices are moderate.

There are many natives living in the settlement. They afford a striking contrast to the wretched
specimens of Australian aborigines one occasionally sees in the streets of Sydney. Many of
the men are athletic and well made, and in their gait and expression exhibit much manliness
of character. The faces of some of the principal people present good specimens of elaborate
tattooing. The women appear strange figures from their ungainly modern dress, consisting merely
of a loose smock of calico, fastened at the neck and wrists. Some were tolerably handsome (according
to our notions of female beauty) and among them were several halfcastes. Their fashion of dressing
the hair is curious--in front it is cut short in a line across the forehead, but is allowed
to grow long behind. We met Waka Nene, a Maori chief, possessing considerable influence, especially
in the neighbouring district of Hokianga, who, by siding with the English during the war, rendered
such important services that the Government rewarded him with a pension of 100 pounds per annum,
and a house in Kororareka. Besides this he owns a small vessel or two employed in the coasting
trade. I peeped into the hut of one of his people. A small entrance served the combined purposes
of door, window, and chimney, the roof was so low as to preclude one from standing upright
inside, a small fire was burning in the centre of the earthen floor, and a heap of mats and
blankets in one corner pointed out a sleeping-place.

Behind Kororareka one of a series of hills overlooking the town is memorable as the site of
the flagstaff, the cutting down of which by Heke was one of the first incidents of the Maori
war. On March 11th, 1845, an attack was made upon the place before daylight, by three of the
disaffected chiefs. Kawiti with one division entered the town from the southward by a pass
between two hills, and after a short conflict forced a party of marines and seaman from H.M.S.
Hazard to retire with the loss of seven killed and many wounded. While this work was going
on, a small detachment of soldiers occupying a blockhouse on the flagstaff hill was surprised
by Heke and his party, who killed four men, and drove away the remainder, and levelled the
flagstaff to the ground. The English residents took refuge on board the shipping, and two days
afterwards the Maoris sacked and burned the town with the exception of the two churches, and
a few houses contiguous to the property of the Roman Catholic Mission.

The greater part of the country about the town is covered with fern and the manuka bush (Leptospermum
scoparium) the latter a low shrub with handsome white or pinkish flowers. In some of the ravines
two species of tree-ferns of the genus Cyathea grow luxuriantly in the moist clayey soil. Everywhere
one sees common English weeds scattered about, especially the sow-thistle and common dock,
and a British landshell (Helix cellaria) has even found its way to New Zealand and is to be
met with in some of the gardens.

Much rain had lately fallen, and many of the paths were partially converted into watercourses.
I walked across to a neighbouring bay, and employed myself in searching for shells in the mud
at low-water. Some bivalves, common there--various Cythereae and Mesodesma chemnitzii--constitute
an important article of food to the natives, who knew them by the name of pipi. A marshy place,
at the mouth of a small stream, was tenanted by a curious wrinkled univalve, with a notch on
the outer lip, Amphibola avellana of conchologists.

May 18th.

I joined a party made up to visit the falls of the Keri-Keri river, and we started, after an
early breakfast, in one of the ship's boats. The morning was dull and rainy, and we had occasional
showers during the forenoon. In an hour after leaving the ship we entered the estuary of the
river, a large arm of the sea, which we followed for several miles. The scenery reminded me
of that of some of the sea lochs on the west coast of Scotland, and although fern was here
substituted for heath, the Scotch mist was perfectly represented at the antipodes. The country
is scantily wooded, and the muddy shores are occasionally fringed with a small mangrove (Avicennia
tomentosa). Here and there were a few settlers' houses, with the accompanying signs of cultivation.
One of the small islands, and also a hilltop on the northern shore, had an artificial appearance,
their summits being leveled and the sides scarped--they were the remains of former fortified
villages or pahs. At length the estuary narrowed, and assumed the appearance of a winding river,
with low hilly banks covered with fern and bushes. One and a half miles from this brought us
to a rocky ledge across the stream, preventing further progress in the boat, and marking the
junction of the fresh and salt water.

Here Mr. Kemp, a schoolmaster of the Church Mission Society, has been located for upwards of
thirty years. A well built store, a neat cottage and garden, and residences for a few Maoris,
complete the establishment. From this place a dray-road leads to the extensive Missionary establishment
at Waimate, distant about ten miles. Crossing the river, we started for the falls, in charge
of a sharp little urchin who acted as guide. After leaving the narrow valley which the river
has cut for itself through a superstratum of yellowish clay, the country becomes nearly level--a
dreary plain, covered with fern and the manuka bush. The extensive tract of country now in
sight is said to have once been a great kauri forest--a few of these noble trees (Dammara australis)
were pointed out to me from a distance. When about halfway we left the road, and within the
distance of a mile our guide contrived to lead us into five or six bogs, where we were up to
our knees in water, besides entangling us in several thickets nearly as bad to penetrate as
an Australian scrub. At length we arrived in sight of the waterfall, then in full force from
the quantity of rain which had lately fallen.

The Keri-Keri, after a long course through a country composed chiefly of upland moors and gently
undulating hills, here suddenly precipitates itself over a rocky wall into a large circular
pool eighty feet below, then continues its course for a while between steep and densely wooded
banks. Behind the fall the rock is hollowed out into a wide and deeply arched cave, formed
by the falling out of masses of columnar rock. A winding path leads to the foot of the fall,
whence the view is very grand. Some of the party crept over the slippery rocks, and reached
the cave behind the fall, where they were much gratified with the novelty of the scene. The
luxuriant and varied vegetation in the ravine affords a fine field for the botanist. The variety
of cryptogamic plants is very great--every rock, and the trunk of each tree, being covered
with ferns, lichens, and mosses. Among the trees I noticed the pale scarlet flowers of the
puriri or New Zealand Teak (Vitex littoralis) the hardest* and most durable of all the woods
of the country. A short search among the damp stones and moss brought to light some small but
interesting landshells, consisting of a pupiform Cyclostoma, a Carocolla, and five species
of Helix. This leads me to mention, that although the number of New Zealand landshells hitherto
described scarcely exceeds a dozen, this does not imply any scarcity of such objects in the
country, as an industrious collector from Sydney, who spent nine months on the northern and
middle islands, obtained nearly a hundred species of terrestrial and fluviatile mollusca. The
scarcity of birds during our walk surprised me, for the only one which I saw on shore was a
solitary kingfisher (Halcyon vagans): during our ascent of the Keri-Keri, however, many ducks
(Anas superciliosa) flew past the boat, and gulls, terns, and two kinds of cormorants were
numerous.

(*Footnote. This wood was much used in the construction of the pahs which, in 1845, under the
Maori chiefs Heke and Kawiti, long resisted the attacks of disciplined forces, aided by artillery.
In reference to the puriri wood used in the palisading of one of these, it was officially stated,
that "many of our six-pound shot were picked out of the posts, not having actually entered
far enough to hide themselves.")

Returning to the road by a path which avoided the swamps our guide had taken us through, in
little more than half an hour we reached Mr. Kemp's house, and after partaking of that gentleman's
hospitality returned to the ship. On our way we landed at sunset for an hour upon a small island,
which will probably long be remembered by some of the party as having furnished us with a supper
of very excellent rock-oysters.

Having effected the necessary repairs, and disposed of the decked boat, we left New Zealand
on May 22nd on our homeward passage. On July 5th having passed to the eastward of Cape Horn
we bore up for the Falkland Islands, having taken forty-three days to traverse a direct distance
of a little more than 5000 miles. During this period the wind was usually strong from the south-west,
but on various occasions we experienced calms and easterly winds, the latter varying between
North-East and South-South-East and at times blowing very hard with snow squalls. The lowest
temperature experienced by us off Cape Horn was on the day when we doubled the Cape in latitude
57 degrees South when the minimum temperature of the day was 21 and the maximum 26 degrees.
This reminded some of us that we had now passed through not less than 75 degrees of temperature
in the ship, the thermometer in the shade having indicated 96 degrees during a hot wind in
Sydney harbour.

A passage such as ours, during which at one time we were further from land than if placed in
any other portion on the globe, must almost of necessity be a monotonous one. We saw no land,
not even an iceberg, and very few vessels. For five or six successive evenings when in the
parallels of 40 and 41 degrees South between the meridians of 133 and 113 degrees West we enjoyed
the fine sight of thousands of large Pyrosomae in the water, each producing a greater body
of light than I ever saw given out by any other of the pelagic-luciferous mollusca or medusae.
The towing net was put over on several occasions but produced little or nothing to repay Mr.
Huxley for his trouble: so that even a naturalist would here find his occupation gone were
it not for the numbers of oceanic birds daily met with, the observation of whose habits and
succession of occurrence served to fill up many a leisure hour. It being the winter of the
southern hemisphere, the members of the petrel family, at other times so abundant in the South
Pacific, were by no means so numerous as I had expected to find them, and in the higher southern
latitudes which we attained before rounding Cape Horn, albatrosses had altogether disappeared,
although they had been abundant as far to the southward as 41 degrees South. The most widely
dispersed were Daption capensis--the pintado or Cape-pigeon of voyagers--Procellaria hasitata,
P. coerulea, P. lessonii, and P. gigantea, of which the first and second were the most numerous
and readily took a bait towing astern. It is probable that all these species make the circuit
of the globe, as they are equally distributed over the South Indian Ocean. Hardly responds
to a participating question. Why do not talk with him, sir ... "

"Yes, I want, sister ... Strange, especially the educated among the
wounded is it often so very hard to come to terms with their fate.

One would think ... "

"You have just increased the ability to think, to all the difficulties
of the inhibited future clearly present, "replied the nurse.

"Have you ever worked out on the front Dark our attention? "

"What you have all noticed in your work load, sister ... Na, me our man time to make. "

The young doctor opened the glass door. Of long rows of white iron beds greeted him the eyes of
bearded and beardless, young and old men's heads. Fine foolish as blunt as wise faces turned
toward him expectantly. All of them, these warriors who lives ruthless death had thrown against
were now in agonizing days and sleepless Nights so mellow now that, in a cheerful-looking young
blond white man Kittel longingly some relief from their suffering,
some consolation for unbearable pain body and soul expected.

The doctor went from bed to bed, joked cheered on, interested in a skate, was in a corner under
way for such letters arrived at the head table for the fever the wounded and to their associations.
A young little lad with a pale baby face, which, awakening from a
deep sleep, he looked confused, he stressed tender as a young brother
the close-cropped head.

»More Sleep - continue to sleep!"

The "darkness" of which spoke the sister was already a man of mature years. The forehead bare
and high, a gaunt, sharp distinctive face with large hooked nose
and dark beard Gest Oppel to the strong chin.

The stump of the right arm, encircled by thick bodies hung in a levitation device.

"So we can stop now," said the doctor. He solved with the help of
sister bonding and hangers.

"It has no purpose anymore. The cure progresses so well advanced. The pain is probably bearable,
since we have decided on the last step? - - What "

A bitter train, which was to imagine a wry smile, the man's mouth. He muttered something incomprehensible.

"Now
it is only to lift and the general condition," said the young doctor. "This may They themselves
contribute a good deal, sir!

Indulge no worries about the future - - is it all again! The state provides its defenders
- - so what a man like It will not be so hard if it must be, to incorporate
into another profession ... They live it - - get well ... "

A view from the pale face came the Comforter, sharp, penetrating,
a look of such mighty scorn, that he lay silent.

»Let the future," said the maimed bossy. "Would not it be possible for me to give a single room?
The sister said, was a top become free ... If you set up the could,
I would be grateful.

"

"Certainly, certainly - - that can do it!

Only, I do not know if you now avails the loneliness. Here you have but distraction, distraction
... They are among comrades of all the same idea is inspired! Perseverance! not hold out! "When the
other replied, drove He continued slowly: "Could not someone from
your family to visit you?"

"I have no family," the man said gruffly.

"Please, just a single room. If special to pay costs, so I can pay for that. "

The young blonde's nodded eagerly.

       

"I'll get it," he said in a tone that suddenly modest and almost shy had become. "Sister, -
- here, the patient is to be reburied at number thirty-six. They could not take in hand, right?
"He went out, the nurse followed him.

"What the man really is, - - I mean, his middle position after he asked out?.

"I think artists, painters, or something. He never speaks about himself.

He was not coming closer. But still, I often think he's who! "

"My God," murmured the doctor anxiously, "if we knew more - - it is so hard ..."

He sighed, nodded to the nurse and walked hurriedly through the garden,
the different Surrounding buildings, to complete his round.

* * * * *

Rolfers Franz was back with his eyes closed. He suffered the strange pain in his Stump, these
exciting feelings when doing yet every nerve of the remote link to hurt his finger tips. With
morbid curiosity, he followed the attacks on his Körperpein, just to be thought not to depend
on the dark hole that he meant the future. Around him were shattered legs, intestines torn, punctured
lungs, broken skull been ... all he had suffered with courage and
joy. - - Not only the eyes, - - not hand and arm.

But just that - - the hardest thing was required of him.

In fact was so little, if not in this shattered world some pictures painted were ... In theory,
it was clear the - - of course clear.

When he was about to to register as a volunteer, he was the possibility in the imagination has gone up
- - he was strangled with violence, in the deepest pit of consciousness
cast down, they held there captive iron.

Thereafter, all experience an unlikely, flash thunderous dream.

- - The newspaper with the news of the mobilization ... - He saw before him at times when He awoke in
the night. Again felt exactly how everything had happened for him. - The Norwegian fishing boat
of the boys, which at the isolated island in the archipelago, where he painted every evening
was created to bring him his correspondence. The days before, only a sensation of Impatience,
anger: Disgusting, "these people gang that can not keep quiet ..." And: They will tolerate in
the end somehow. It is always so. Above all, do not can interfere in the work ... Now it the
fisherman shouted in a foreign language, the monstrous counter and waved wildly printed matter into
the air.

... First, a silence - a failure of any emotion. Suddenly this terrible Granted the most incomprehensible.
In the raging vortex of thousandfold lightning Mental images as a core in the center of his ego,
the dark confused feeling: you go but not at all ...

Rolf had never served. Military nature was entirely outside his sphere of life. Far behind
the sea erzgrauen liked the horror rage - if he wanted, he could tomorrow continue to work
every day like yesterday and before. No one would him here in his
loneliness Nordland .

       Prevent

On the black sun-warmed granite rock he was sitting in the evening, looked out over the surging waters,
the bottle-green stripes of purple and fades in and were covered by a milky white. Leisurely,
the water splashed against the stone on a regular basis, the upheavals of the prehistoric world
had lifted up from the depths.

Since it came suddenly ...: From the slow closer roles of big waves, a distant pre-waves endless masses
of enemies ... From the treacherous voices of the depth came the angry murmur their hatred in his
consciousness. He watched the teeming amount cheeky faces scorn, as he looked on the boulevards of Paris
... And a woman surrounded by them ... enormous - Larger than life to take shape and form ...
But on the face of fear and distress ... He saw her Arms stretched desperately to heaven,
saw their robes blowing in the hurry of flight ... From the bloody red of the evening sky pushed
droves of new enemies against them: Kalmückengesichter, distorted from a dull animal rage ...
Cossack whips were swung against them, whizzed clapping their noble
brow, and that blood herniedertroff them from collapsing Pain ...
And the horrible mob figures raced through it as meaning more diabolical,
more horrible to look and sign ... Black smoke rolled across the sky,
ghosts, Sheaves of fire shooting at ... Kind of laughter that he never
heard it ... Was it to make it happen?

The fear of suffocating him, he gasped for air, the heart was beating with powerful strokes,
breast was filled with the pounding and hammering ... God - God - she got up - bleeding, shredded,
reeling, covered with mud and sweat - you saw him - on him, Franz
Rolfers - Of unfathomable eyes ... As his mother looked at him as
she had to die ...

* * * * *

A few minutes later his painting equipment
were packed together, the old fishermen, where he lived, bribed with
the splendor of a gold piece and the power of his domineering person
hinüberzurudern him to the mainland.

The boat glided through the clear northern night, in which all Spell divine beauty peace rested
upon the waters. Rolfers they no longer saw. About barren heathland, through gorse and juniper
scrub, through birch forests and rocky wilderness walked for miles to the next station. Taken in breathless
haste to express - stormed into the home in the pouring forth barrage of travelers. Citizens
of all European People pressed together in confined spaces against traveling to a new separation
of the tribes, a Divorce, which had to be done with the edge of cruelty and chemical distinctions
... Luggage they were all, nothing lie on, which were transported, were, more managed, were without
any regard for human needs like food, sleep, clothes to frost and Moisture, protection against
summer gluten.

Go on, continue between women sobbing, screaming Children, dark, taken or excited speaking men
- until one in an incomprehensible As the goal came and crossed the German border.

Of military authority to military authority. Here rejected, put off there - but finally set. A
volunteer, like thousands of other men and young boys. Classified in the vast, admirably well-working
machine of the German military system.

It was followed by the drill time as a common soldier, heavy and awkward for him and yet for
some the clean, sophisticated, no longer young men. The forming Sergeant reveled in the power
of consciousness of their power over the wealth of strength, spirit and relaxed elegance, Their request
was made so suddenly available. Tasks for which in ordinary times Years have been provided had to be
dealt with in weeks. Without brutality, even cruelty in Treatment was to create little. Rolfers
was his physical resilience, his agility, the adventurous one hundred study visits was acquired
benefit.

By the way, was all thinking under dark in the wild desire: at the
approaching enemy ... Just take him at last may ... Out - out into
the field to the front ...!

- - The noise of the goodbye, flowers
and tears, singing, cheering, fluttering scarves, waving Hands, thunderous
music ... Rolfers marched, accompanied by some students to the same
Los contrary feverish with impatience to the stream of deeply moved
the station.

A feeling in all of them ... The personal at this time completely extinguished - sky high jamb
rebate the flame of a will in millions ... The experience of tremendous force for him, the hermit
in the struggle for his art on internal human community had long since dispensed with. Today
felt submerging it in the sense of all as something precious, as a noble and volatile property.

He
knew. Soon enough, would critique and skepticism and the inward retreat ahead of the crowd again be
his lot. This began during the long train journeys under all the sweaty, smelly men with their
clumsy jokes, their foolish conversations, with the continued repetitive
singing, shouting, Welcome to the stations.

But there was an unknown in it. It was the conviction of the utter nullity of all that Himself
as Franz Rolfers felt and thought. These were only scraps left over from a life taken away,
and died. He himself was as indifferent as the others.

Only forward, forward to the longed-for, ertrotzten goal! -

Marches of frantic hurry to break in which the members threatened with pain, which the sweat
on the body niedertroff and wrapped him in disgusting fumes, where one infected with Lids
in the hot sun, under thick layers of white dust, dust in the dry Throat, which burned like
fire, endless blinding trotted along country roads. Then again in dark rainy nights of fathomless
mud tough lurching forward, hardly the leading man to distinguish wealthy and yet sharing with him
the last dull animal greed: the stretch - sleep - eat ...

Many delicate-looking
boy walked the tears stream down their cheeks in over-stimulation,
in exerting the last effort to hand over the body could.

No one paid attention, it was all the same - only forward - forward - forward!

The hunger dug and tore into the guts, the exhausted imagination tormented
by strange Images.

The plight of the country sank into a murky fog. Persistently increased silly ideas on. Rolfes'
desire revolved around a soothing linen sheets, he dealt with a down
comforter of violet silk, to feel cool and tender, in which he once
after a strenuous mountain climb in the country house of a friend
had the link may wrap.

       He saw the monogram, which he Once drawn into the flap, the baron
crown above the letters ... Heavy glowed red Burgundy in large crystal
goblets - he had always had a preference for fine crystal and old
lace on the table witnesses - he could feel the taste of wine on the
tongue - pheasant pate handed the servant ... He could smell the delicate
scent of truffles - disgusting that one of the memories are not stupid
could get away ...

"Damn fine dumplings could cook my old lady,"
he heard a voice behind him grumpy ... "Ick say already, if I like
this' would have a bowl here - with bacon ... Dunnerschlag yes ...!«

-
- Franz Rolfers had to laugh - loudly and redemptive.

Had he ever been so strong in the human recognized his power?

* * * * *

It was no big battle for them, none of the mighty acts
of prostration, clutches, Destruction of the enemy - with blaring
horns and roaring cheers victory on the corpse-strewn Fields.

That was allotted other comrades, not just his regiment. Long as they did not get Enemy to face.
But over their heads they heard the little birds so strange finely
and sharply sang, when she heard flying over the ear ... Here - there
stretched a the arm in the air staggered a few steps forward - fell
to the ground.

       

* * * * *

The first time in the trenches ... Strict prohibition to fire after some of those in the trenches
been taken before their comrades were lying. Idle chairs. - Wait. - Day and nights. The shells
crashed, bursting, vibrant people down into a lump together by blood, flesh, quivering limbs. Rattling,
buzzing, roaring, roaring, Thunder - the air for miles around full of bluster. A Howling in the
last agony - Angstgekreisch from raging pain - obscene jokes - sided convulsive laughter - prayerful
cries for help, replaced by a rigid silence behind clenched teeth, while the grenades in the Rows
raged in the stock jet black darkness. Rolfers was how the neighbors, the face in the wet clay is pressed,
moved to protect his knapsack on his neck. Suddenly felt he wake up, after he fell under such
a deep abyss - realized that he slept had, in the roar and crash of exploding shells. At his side,
to the right, on the left a heavy snoring toderschöpfter other men. He - Franz Rolf, his to
write names in eternity intended - only one of many - from the horror of death in Lead fell
sleep - as the metal lathe there, the shoemaker's boy, here, the
boy's head sleepily pressed against his shoulder.

When morning dawned, the order to attack came at her, he pushed the hoarse wild Hurrah from withered
throat like the others, jumped, slipped, fell, jumped again in large Rates, as they could afford
only the tendons, the slippery Lehmschollen, the decaying Leaves of the beet fields. Jump to bow down,
jump back with a heavy knapsack swinging on his back, his rifle with fixed bayonet, - yes, as they
roared screamed blew - blue-red faces - eyes swollen from the caves, no human expression everything -
from the bloodlust took an army of demons, of destroyers ... And in the mist emerging the blood-red
spots of the French pants - the enemy characters, who, screaming, shrieking like themselves, rushed
toward them - in the gray rain slapping ... In the melee is packed with fists and rifle butts
whistled and knives, and the steel of the bayonets in soft human flesh and blood fountains
sprayed into the air, the bones cracked, the Eyes jumped out of their sockets - the nose was
filled with the stench of death ... None - no friend nor foe - more human with human fates and suffering
- only a tremendous Authorities, in mad lust and gruesome embrace each other wrestling - in every
drop of blood only the life of the country spürend ...

- - Destroyed,
they had crushed the enemy of God, such as brain tissue and scalp
were crushed in the cruel battle ... Rolfers raged, raged, shot, beat
haute to is shouted and choked in the madness of greed fight like
the others.

Destroy them had to be the French culture that he studied, dissected, where he learned that he loved
was how little things on earth. Necessary complement to his own property he was France been
in times that seemed unthinkable a distance ... What a crazy dream ...

- - Many nights in basements or shot-peasant huts, where the next second could be enveloped in flames,
with fumes and vermin, among a hostile population, from which one
of all atrocities and any treachery had endorsed.

He came to know the Languages, with all provincial and national expressions benefit - he had
once painted a lot in these areas. Now he could settle Handel between the people and the friends who to
degenerate, and often show mutual frenzy only grew from misunderstandings. The Residents, especially
women and children conceived in spite of his being a little curt Confidence in him, he looked
into the endless misery that the war on all these families brought. And could not complain
with the heart-relieving comrades: dirty, wicked Beasts! With rigid pain he felt was: yes, they
also kill for a divine word: Fatherland - home!

Are among the country people he took the same position as anywhere between people: he enjoyed respect,
and sometimes worship without being loved. Despite all the basic common link is which bound him
to his comrades, was a cool distance between Rolf and the teams.

That did not change through the sharing of brotherly love gifts, through the grief to dead, passing
through the shoulder to shoulder risks. Rolf was not a natural, which was able to develop warm,
or to give the opening of other heart could. Earlier He had complained that lack painfully, and
he later took it as part of his unalterable Being. Thirsted after it brought, he turned to
nature. She spoke to him as only to elect, he was her lover, she opened up the most intimate
charms, which they drank could do with a spell, the other was denied. While watching Rolfers that
also some officers and soldiers during the campaign to return to the state of the wild prehistoric
people with a deep desire enjoyed. - If such amazing change Bear fruit in a peace that seemed
highly unlikely distant, unreachable? ... Would she be a valuable simplification of customs and
sentiments a redesign-refined Culture can make? Or they would with any experiences of this most
gruesome in the Death districts vertrotzten time in the dark grounds, the guards under the dormant
consciousness thrown back and be handed over to oblivion?

Such thoughts Rolfers hung like cocoons after in idle hours. He could not answer To give even more
because everything was in flowing movement, fearful of stirring up impossible opposites, in which
every hour relapses into barbarism and animality with the brightest evidence highest humanity collided.


Five days after leaving the Falkland Islands, we encountered a very heavy gale, commencing
at south-east, and blowing hardest at east, when the barometer was down to 29.264--next day
the wind went round to the south-west and moderated. From the latitude of the entrance of the
River Plate up to latitude 15 degrees South, we experienced northerly winds between East-North-East
and West-North-West, after which we got winds commencing at South-West and merging into the
South-East trade, which we may be said to have fairly got in 13 1/2 degrees South latitude
and 23 1/2 degrees West longitude, and lost in 6 degrees North latitude, and 22 degrees West
longitude. We picked up the North-East trade in latitude 13 degrees North and longitude 24
degrees West and carried it up to latitude 29 degrees North and longitude 37 1/2 degrees West.
I mention these particulars as the limits of the trade-winds as experienced by us were considered
to differ considerably from what was to be expected at this season of the year. Gulf weed made
its first appearance in latitude 24 degrees North and longitude 35 1/2 degrees West but in
small quantity, and was last seen in latitude 38 degrees North and longitude 33 1/2 degrees
West in detached pieces, mostly dead. About 31 1/2 degrees North and 37 3/4 degrees West it
was very plentiful, occurring in long lines from one to fifty yards in width, extending in
the direction of the wind. Some pieces which were hooked up furnished on being shaken numbers
of a minute univalve shell (Litiopa) many small fish--especially pipe-fish (Syngnathus) and
numerous crustacea (of which Planes minuta was the most plentiful) while several delicate zoophytes
were encrusted or attached to the weed. In short each little patch of gulf weed seemed a world
in itself, affording the shelter of a home to hundreds of minute and wonderful animals.*

(*Footnote. The gulf weed is still regarded as of questionable origin. Has it--unlike all other
seaweeds--always existed as a floating plant, or has it been detached by storms from the bottom
of the sea and carried by the currents of the ocean into the well defined region it now occupies
and out of which it is never met with in any great quantity? Without entering into proofs,
the principal of which are its not yet having been found attached to the shore, and the invariable
absence of fructification--it seems probable that those botanists are in the right who consider
the gulf weed (Sargassum bacciferum) to be merely an abnormal condition, propagating itself
by shoots, of S. vulgare, which in its normal state grows upon the shores of the Atlantic and
its islands. See note by Dr. J.D. Hooker in Memoirs of Geological Survey of Great Britain volume
1 page 349.)

September 29th.

With only another day's supply of fresh water on board, we were glad this morning to have the
islands of Pico and Fayal in sight. The view, as we closed the land, standing in from the south-westward
for the roadstead of Horta, was very fine--on our left we had the beautiful island of Fayal
rising to the height of 3000 feet, its sides gradually sloping towards a range of maritime
cliffs, while the lower grounds, in full cultivation, indicated--along with numbers of neat
white-washed cottages and occasional villages--a well peopled and fertile country, contrasting
strongly with those from which we had lately returned. To the right was Pico--with the summit
of its peak (stated to be 7,613 feet in height) peeping out from a mass of snowy clouds descending
almost to the shore--and the centre was occupied by the more distant island of St. Jorge with
a portion of Graciosa dimly seen projecting beyond its western end.

After having been for two months cooped up on board ship, I was glad to have a quiet walk on
shore. In a ravine at one end of the town it was pleasing to see numbers of old acquaintances
among the birds, bringing vividly to my recollection that home which we had now approached
so closely. Martins were hawking about, the whitethroat warbled his short snatches of song
among the bushes, and blackbirds and starlings flew past. And although engaged in the matter-of-fact
occupation of searching for landshells, by turning over the stones, I could not help being
struck with the beauty of the terraced walks and overhanging gardens; the beautiful belladonna
lily--here run wild in great abundance--made a fine show. At Point Greta the rock pigeons--the
original stock of the domesticated race--were flying about in large flocks or sunning themselves
on the sea cliffs. A heavy shower of rain, by bringing out the landshells, enabled me to pick
up half-a-dozen species of Helix, Bulimus, and Pupa, at the foot of the hedgerows; I was anxious
to procure some to ascertain whether any were non-European forms; one was even quite a new
species. On a white-flowered convolvulus with succulent leaves, I found numbers of the caterpillars
of a large hawk-moth (Sphinx convolvuli) which some ragged urchins who followed me showed great
dread of, running away when I picked one up and shouting to me to throw it away, else I should
die. One was afterwards brought on board by an English resident--as a very venomous reptile,
which had caused three or four deaths during his stay on the island. The recurved horn on the
tail has been regarded as a sting, and the poor harmless creature, having once got a bad name,
is now by the Fayalese, in the absence of snakes or scorpions, made to supply their place.

The town of Horta contains, I was told, upwards of 10,000 inhabitants. It is prettily situated
on the shores of a small bay, extending between two rocky headlands. The landing-place is at
the remains of a mole under the walls of Fort Santa Cruz, the only one of numerous ruinous
fortifications where a few guns are mounted; even these are in so wretched a condition that
the commandant admitted that it would require several hours' preparation before they would
be fit to return our expected salute, and seemed glad when told that as a surveying ship we
were exempted from saluting the flags of other nations. A sea wall runs along the face of the
town; parallel with this is the principal street, with others at rightangles extending up the
hill, the narrow streets are clean and well paved--the houses, generally of one storey, are
built of tough grey trachyte.

Almost every inch of available ground upon the island of Fayal has been turned to good account:
Indian corn is the chief agricultural product. With our usual bad fortune in this respect we
were too late for the grapes and the oranges had not yet come in. The lower grounds are divided
into small enclosures by stone walls, and subdivided by rows of a tall stout reed (Arundo donax)
resembling sugarcane. Although taxes and other burdens are heavy, and wages very low, yet to
a mere visitor like myself there appeared none of those occasional signs of destitution which
strike one in walking through a town at home, nor did I see a single beggar.

In Fayal and Pico the most careless observer from the anchorage of Horta can scarcely fail
to associate the number of smooth conical hills with former volcanic activity; and in looking
over Captain Vidal's beautiful charts of the Azores, nearly all the principal hills throughout
the group are seen to have their craters or caldeiras. Fayal exhibits a fine specimen of one
of these caldeiras in the central and highest part of the island. At an elevation of a little
more than 3000 feet, we reached the ridge forming the margin of a circular crater, rather more
than a mile in diameter, and 700 feet deep. The outer slope is gradual, but the inner walls
are steep, deeply furrowed by small ravines and watercourses, and covered with grass, fern
and heath-like bushes. The bottom contains a considerable extent of swampy meadowland, a shallow
lagoon, and a small hill with a crater also partially filled with water. The view here is magnificent,
enhanced, too, at times by the rolling volumes of mist overhead, at one moment admitting of
a peep at the blue sky above, in the next concealing the rim of the crater and increasing in
idea the height of its wall-like sides. The caldeira, I may add in conclusion, is said to have
been formed during the last eruption of Fayal in 1672, but this statement appears to be very
doubtful.

We resumed our homeward voyage on October 5th, and on November 9th, the Rattlesnake was paid
off at Chatham, after having been in commission upwards of four years.

In addition to the brief account which already forms part of the Narrative of the Voyage of
H.M.S. Rattlesnake, I have thought it would add to the interest of this work and the gratification
of its readers, were I to give under a distinct head a detailed history of the exploring expedition
conducted by the late Mr. Edmund B. Kennedy, derived from a pamphlet printed in Sydney, and
scarcely procurable in this country. It includes the interesting narrative of Mr. W. Carron,
the botanist attached to the expedition in question; also the statements of the aboriginal
black who witnessed the death of his gallant master--of Dr. Vallack who took an active part
in rescuing the survivors--and of Mr. T.B. Simpson who proceeded in search of the remainder
of the party, whose fate was still in a measure uncertain, and succeeded in recovering some
of Mr. Kennedy's papers.

NARRATIVE OF MR. W. CARRON.

We left Sydney on the 29th of April, 1848, in the barque Tam O'Shanter (Captain Merionberg)
in company with H.M.S. Rattlesnake.

Our party consisted of the following persons: Mr. E.B. Kennedy (leader), Mr. W. Carron (botanist),
Mr. T. Wall (naturalist), Mr. C. Niblet (storekeeper), James Luff, Edward Taylor, and William
Costigan (carters), Edward Carpenter (shepherd), William Goddard, Thomas Mitchell, John Douglas,
Dennis Dunn (labourers), and Jackey-Jackey, an aboriginal native of the Patrick's Plains tribe,
of the Hunter River district.

Our supplies and equipment for the journey had been most fully considered, and were estimated
by Mr. Kennedy as amply sufficient for a journey so short as what we then anticipated. Our
livestock consisted of twenty-eight horses, one hundred sheep, three kangaroo dogs, and one
sheep dog. Our dry provisions comprised one ton of flour, ninety pounds of tea, and six hundred
pounds of sugar. Besides these necessary supplies for subsistence on the road, we took with
us twenty-four pack-saddles, one heavy square cart, two spring carts, with harness for nine
horses, four tents, a canvas sheepfold, twenty-two pounds gunpowder, one hundred and thirty
pounds shot, a quarter cask of ammunition, twenty-eight tether ropes (each twenty-one yards
long) forty hobble chains and straps, together with boxes, paper, etc., for preserving specimens,
firearms, cloaks, blankets, tomahawks, and other minor requisites for such an expedition, not
forgetting a supply of fish-hooks and other small articles, as presents for the natives.

After a tedious passage of twenty-two days, we arrived at Rockingham Bay on the 21st May; and
even here, at the very starting point of our journey, those unforeseen difficulties began to
arise, which led us subsequently to hardships so great and calamities so fatal.

On casting anchor, Mr. Kennedy, in company with Captain Merionberg, proceeded in a boat to
examine the shores of the Bay, and to determine on a suitable landing-place for the horses,
but returned in the evening without having been able to discover one.

The attempt was renewed the next morning, and continued during the entire day; and on the morning
of the 23rd of May Mr. Kennedy and Captain Merionberg returned to the ship with the intelligence
that they had discovered a spot where the horses might be landed with tolerable safety, and
where, too, there was plenty of grass and water. This was an important desideratum, as we had
lost one horse and eleven sheep on the voyage.

The water round the shores of the bay was very shallow, in consequence of which the vessel
could not approach close inshore, but was compelled to cast anchor about a quarter of a mile
off, and this distance the horses had to swim.

In the afternoon the vessel was anchored off the landing-place, and early on the following
morning (May 24th) the tents, tether ropes, and sheepfold were taken ashore, with a party to
take care of the horses when landed. At ten o'clock A.M., slings having been prepared, we commenced
hoisting the horses out of the hold, and lowering them into the water alongside a boat, to
the stern of which the head of each horse was secured, as it was pulled ashore. One horse was
drowned in landing, but all the others were safely taken ashore during the day. The weather
this day was very cold, with occasional showers of rain.

During the time occupied by landing the horses, a number of aboriginal natives assembled on
the beach; they evinced no symptom of hostility, but appeared much surprised at our horses
and sheep. White men they had frequently seen before, as parties have landed on the beach from
surveying vessels.

We found no difficulty in making them comprehend that we desired to be friendly with them,
and they advanced towards us with green boughs in their hands, which they displayed as emblems
of peace. We met them with our arms extended and our hands open, indicating that we had no
implements of war with us. We made them a present of two circular tin plates, with Mr. Kennedy's
initials stamped upon them, and chains to hang them round the neck; we also gave them a few
fish-hooks, and they accepted our presents with great demonstrations of pleasure. We made signs
for them to sit down about 200 yards from the spot where the horses and sheep were being landed,
and marking a line upon the sand we made them understand that they were not to cross it to
approach us. One of our party was placed amongst them to enforce this regulation, which he
did with little difficulty, although they expressed great curiosity as to various articles
brought on shore from the ship.

These natives appeared to be very fine strong men, varying much in intelligence and disposition.
I entered into such conversation with them as we were enabled to hold, and I soon found that
while some were eagerly anxious to learn the names of different articles and their uses, others
were perfectly indifferent about them.

We pitched our tents about two hundred yards from the beach, forming a square, with the sheepfold
in the centre. Mr. Kennedy came on shore in the morning to superintend the arrangements, and
after giving the necessary directions and instructions, returned to the ship. The party left
ashore in charge consisted of myself, Wall, Dunn, Carpenter, and Douglas. Our provisions were
supplied from the ship, in order that no time might be lost in getting all our stores and implements
in proper order for starting.

A few yards from our camp was a freshwater creek, from which, although the tide ran into it
about one hundred yards--where it was stopped by a small bank--we could obtain excellent water.
The grass around was very long, and mostly of very coarse descriptions, consisting chiefly
of a species of Uniola growing in tufts, and an Agrostis with creeping roots and broad blades;
the horses seemed to like the Uniola best. A little to the northward of our camp were very
high and almost perpendicular rocks, composed mostly of micaceous schist, covered with various
epiphytal orchides and ferns.

The labour of the day being ended, and most of our stores landed, the greater number of our
party came ashore to pass the night; and after having tethered the horses in fresh places,
we assembled at supper, the materiel of which (beef and biscuit) was sent from the ship. We
then took possession of our tents, one square tent being allotted to Mr. Kennedy; Niblet, Wall,
and myself occupied a small round one; Taylor, Douglas, Carpenter, Mitchell, and Jackey, a
large round tent; and Luff, Dunn, Goddard, and Costigan, the other.

Mr. Kennedy's tent was 8 feet long, by 6 feet, and 8 feet high, and in it were placed a compact
table, constructed with joints so as to fold up, a light camp stool, his books and instruments.
The two larger round tents were pyramidal in shape, seven feet in diameter at the least, and
nine feet high. The small tent was six feet in diameter, and eight feet high.

Every man was then supplied with one pair of blankets, one cloak, a double-barrelled gun or
carbine, a brace of pistols, cartridge box, small percussion-cap pouch, and six rounds of ammunition.
The arrangement for preserving the safety of the camp from attack was, that every man, with
the exception of Mr. Kennedy, should take his turn to watch through the night--two hours being
the duration of each man's watch--the watch extending from 8 P.M. till 6 A.M. During the night
the kangaroo-dogs were kept chained up, but the sheepdog was at large.

The position of this our first encampment was near the northern extremity of Rockingham Bay,
being in latitude 17 degrees 58 minutes 10 seconds south, longitude 146 degrees 8 minutes east.
The soil, where our cattle and sheep were feeding, was sandy and very wet. The land, from the
beach to the scrub in the swamp beyond, was slightly undulating, and very thickly strewed with
shells, principally bivalves.

On the morning of the 25th May, a party commenced landing the remainder of our stores; and
it being a fine morning, I went out to collect specimens and seeds of any new and interesting
plants I might find. On leaving the camp I proceeded through a small belt of scrub to the rocks
on the north; the scrub was composed of the genera Flagellaria, Kennedya, Bambusa (bamboo),
Smilax, Cissus, Mucuna, and various climbing plants unknown to me: the trees consisted principally
of Eugenia, Anacardium, Castanospermum (Moreton Bay chestnut), a fine species of Sarcocephalus,
and a large spreading tree belonging to the natural order Rutaceae, with ternate leaves, axillary
panicles of white flowers, about the size of those of Boronia pinnata. At the edge of the rocks
were some fine treeferns (Dicksonia) with the genera Xiphopteris, and Polypodium; also some
beautiful epiphytal Orchideae; among others a beautiful Dendrobium (rock lily,) with the habit
of D. speciosum, but of stronger growth, bearing long spikes of bright yellow flowers, the
sepals spotted with rich purple. I found also another species with smaller leaves, and more
slender habit, with spikes of dull green flowers, the column and tips of the sepals purple:
and a very fine Cymbidium, much larger than C. suave, with brown blossoms, having a yellow column.

I proceeded along the edge of a mangrove swamp for a short distance, and entered a freshwater
swamp about a mile from the beach, covered with very thick scrub, composed of large trees of
the genus Melaleuca, running for the most part from forty to fifty feet high. Here also I first
found a strong-growing climbing palm (Calamus australis) throwing up a number of shoots from
its roots, many of them 100 feet long, and about the thickness of a man's finger, with long
pinnatifid leaves, covered with sharp spines--and long tendrils growing out of the stem alternately
with the leaves, many of them twenty feet long, covered with strong spines slightly curved
downward, by which the shoots are supported in their rambling growth. They lay hold of the
surrounding bushes and branches of trees, often covering the tops of the tallest, and turning
in all directions. The seed is a small hard nut, with a thin scaly covering, and is produced
in great abundance.

The shoots, which are remarkably tough, I afterwards found were used by the natives in making
their canoes. These canoes are small, and constructed of bark, with a small sapling on each
side to strengthen them, the ends of which are tied together with these shoots.

The growth of this plant forms one of the greatest obstacles to travelling in the bush in this
district. It forms a dense thicket, into which it is impossible to penetrate without first
cutting it away, and a person once entangled in its long tendrils has much difficulty in extricating
himself, as they lay hold of everything they touch. On entering the swamp to examine plants,
I was caught by them, and became so much entangled before I was aware of it, that it took me
nearly an hour to get clear, although I had entered but a few yards. No sooner did I cut one
tendril, than two or three others clung around me at the first attempt to move, and where they
once clasp they are very difficult to unloose. Abundance of the shoots, from fifteen to twenty
feet long, free from leaves or tendrils, could be obtained, and would be useful for all the
purposes to which the common cane is now applied.

At this spot also I met with Dracontium polyphyllum, a beautiful plant, belonging to the natural
order Aroideae, climbing by its rooting stems to the tops of the trees, like the common ivy.
This plant has narrow pointed leaves, four inches long, and produces at the ends of the shoots
a red spatha, enclosing a cylindrical spadix of yellow flowers.

In many parts the swamp was completely covered with a very strong-growing species of Restio
(rope-grass). On the open ground, between the beach and the swamp, were a few large flooded-gums,
and a few Moreton Bay ash trees, and near the beach I found the Exocarpus latifolia.

On the beach, too, just above high-water mark, was a beautiful spreading, lactescent tree,
about twenty feet high, belonging to the natural order Apocyneae, with alternate, exstipulate,
broad, lanceolate leaves, six to eight inches long, and producing terminal spikes of large,
white, sweet-scented flowers, resembling those of the white Nerium oleander, but much larger.
I also met with a tree about twenty feet high belonging to the natural order Dilleniaceae,
with large spreading branches, producing at the axilla of the leaves from three to five large
yellow flowers, with a row of red appendages surrounding the carpels, and a fine species of
Calophyllum, with large dark green leaves, six to eight inches long, two and a half to three
inches broad, beautifully veined, and with axillary racemes of white, sweet-scented flowers;
the seed being a large round nut with a thin rind, of a yellowish-green colour when ripe. There
were many other interesting plants growing about, but the afternoon turning out wet, I left
their examination to stand over till finer weather.

Growing on the beach was a species of Portulaca, a quantity of the young shoots of which I
collected, and we partook of them at our supper, boiled as a vegetable.

In the evening after watering our horses, we took them to the camp and gave each of them a
feed of corn which we had brought with us for the purpose of strengthening them previous to
our starting from Rockingham Bay, on our expedition; but although the grass on which they had
been depasturing was coarse, they were with difficulty induced to eat the corn, many of them
leaving it almost all behind them. The
Count strove not only to rethink the incidents of yesterday nothing He really thought nothing.
For if the pursued ostrich hides his head and imagines are not seeing the danger is also a
non-existence of the same, it does not man different. Instinctively he closes his eyes in
front of a oncoming inevitable, and Each heart has its secrets, hiding it from themselves intentionally

A
few days later Starschensky would occur at his wife.

It was said that she was in Swimming, but he heard the voice of his child in the next chamber,
and he went inside. Since he found the girl sitting on the floor in the middle of a wicked
confusion they caused. Elgas jewelry and gems were scattered around the child, and the open,
overturned Schmuckkaestchen pulled down along with the carpet cleaning the table next to it
was clearly the way it had been procured the precious toy. Starschensky entered GET ON scolding
added, denied the child piece by piece his prey, and then tried to shiny stones put back in their
place. The cover of the Schmuckkaestchens, apparently a double, was by the fall from the table
given way to pieces, and there tried the count, him, pressing his finger zurueckzupressen, again, was
the inner part of double Panel on the floor and was in the hollow space rueckgebliebenen a portrait,
weak inserted more easily by the body and now the count held in his trembling hand.

It was the picture of a man in Polish national costume. The feeling
of a terrible Similarity of the counts fell like a man armed.

There was often discussed the nature of game with the black eyes and blond hair, such as -
in his child .-- He looked at the girl then the image .-- These trains he had seen anything
else, but when? where - Showers ran over him .-- He looked down again. Then his child looked
with black snake eyes on, and the blond hair glowed like flames, and the memory of that disdain
Vetter in Warsaw was horrible in him .-- Oginsky! he cried, and stayed at the table, and the Teeth
chattering, his lips beat each other.

A noise in the next room woke him up.

He fastened the lid in its place, closed the box, the image he had put into his bosom, and
he fled like a murderer.

This day he was in the palace is no longer seen. His seat remained empty at the dinner table.
Towards evening he came into the room, the nurse and asked for the child. He took her by the Hand
and led into the garden, to the solitary Mooshuette. There he found after a Hour of searching
property manager, leaning back in a couch. The child was between his knees, he was even a picture
in his hand, turns to this, then the child Looking like one that
compares, "said the old man

The following morning Starschensky was
away, no one knew where.

But he was in Warsaw; where he conducted research, much too late! Elgas to previous conditions.
He learned that she and Oginsky, educated in the old Star of the East was home, made love early on
that, out of concern from the growing confidentiality, hopeless cousin was removed; that, from his
Exile, returning just before Starschenskys marriage, he renewed a claim for and those who have
significant amount of money allotted in the last will of the old Laschek him , Was partly the
price of his resignation was; Elga that are difficult to separate from him and his poverty and
Starschenskys wealth, combined with the importunities of their relatives, been the main reason
of their consent to connect to the count was.

The flour was put into canvas bags, holding 100 pounds each, made in the shape of saddlebags,
to hold 50 pounds weight on each side. The sugar we put into two large tin canisters, made
to fit into one of the carts, and the tea was packed in quarter-chests. The surplus stores,
comprising horse shoes, clothes, specimen boxes, etc., which would not be required before our
arrival at Cape York, were sent on board H.M.S. Rattlesnake, which it was arranged should meet
us at Port Albany. During the day one of the party shot a wallaby on the beach, which made
very good soup.

During the morning of the next day (May 31st) I was employed in procuring specimens and seeds
of various plants, and in the afternoon we all resumed our preparations for starting, as we
expected Mr. Kennedy back next day. He however did not arrive in the camp, and on the following
afternoon I obtained specimens of a very pretty plant of the natural order Onagrariae, with
opposite, oblong, simple leaves, and large purple flowers.

The following day (June 3rd) Mr. Kennedy and his party returned to the camp, with the intelligence
that it was impossible to proceed in a north or north-westerly direction, in consequence of
the swamps. Mr. Kennedy had penetrated them in some places, where the scrub was not too thick;
but could not get through them in any place, on account of the water, and the dense scrub.
He informed us that he found we should be obliged to cross a river on the beach to the south-west
of the camp before we could hope to make any progress.

The two following days were occupied with completing our arrangements for starting; as it was
determined on the following morning to strike our tents and proceed at once on our expedition.

As I may now consider our expedition as fairly begun, it may, for the sake of clearness and
arrangement, be advisable to continue my narrative in the form of a journal; detailing from
day to day the various occurrences which took place. It must be remembered, however, that in
narrating the particulars of our journey, I am obliged to trust largely to memory, and to very
imperfect memoranda; and to these difficulties must I refer, in excuse for the defects, with
which I am well aware this narrative abounds.

Up to the present time, the whole of the party, and especially its unfortunate leader, had
remained in good spirits, and, buoyed up with sanguine hopes of success, were eager to set
out on their pilgrimage of discovery.

June 5.

We breakfasted at an early hour this morning, and proceeded at once to harness our horses to
the carts, three to each cart. The carts contained about seven hundredweight each. This business
having been completed, and the packhorses saddled and loaded, we started at nine o'clock A.M.,
and proceeded along the beach. Mr. Kennedy and Jackey rode in front, followed by the three
carts. After Wall, riding one horse and leading two packhorses, came Goddard, Douglas, Mitchell,
and Dunn, leading three packhorses, then Niblet in the rear, riding one and leading two horses,
followed by Carpenter driving the sheep, and myself on foot, carrying Mr. Kennedy's mountain
barometer, which he had given into my charge during the journey; and I was also to take the
time for that gentleman, in his observations.

After travelling in this order about two miles, we came to a large river,* emptying itself
into Rockingham Bay. This river was about one hundred and fifty yards wide, and although the
tide ran up it about a mile, fresh water was procurable from it considerably nearer the sea.

(*Footnote. Mackay River of the Admiralty chart of Rockingham Bay.)

At nearly high-water I tasted fresh water on one side of the river, and salt on the other,
and about two hours after high-water, there was no difficulty in obtaining plenty of excellent
water on either side of the river, in different places. There is a great deal of fresh water
running into the sea here, and at the same distance from the sea as the mouth of the river,
it is in some places mixed with salt water, whilst in others it is quite fresh. The banks of
this river are low and sandy, and a short distance above where we joined it, it is skirted
on either side by a thick mangrove swamp, for the distance of about a mile, where it joins
the freshwater swamps, covered with thick scrub. On my proceeding up the river, it became narrower
in its channel as it approached the swamps, from which it appeared to be principally supplied.
It had a tortuous course, and when I left it, was turning to the westward.

A boat was sent to us by Captain Stanley of H.M.S. Rattlesnake to assist us in carrying our
stores across, which we effected with some difficulty by ten o'clock P.M., the horses and some
of the sheep swimming across, while the remainder of the latter were taken in the boat. We
pitched Mr. Kennedy's tent on sand, at the side of the river, and it being dark, and not knowing
where to obtain water on that side of the river, I and five others recrossed it, and went back
about three-quarters of a mile to a small creek running parallel to the beach. We filled our
kegs, and returned to the camp in time to have supper by twelve o'clock, after which we rolled
ourselves in our blankets, and, wearied by the fatigues we had undergone, slept soundly till
daylight.

This was a very harassing day to us, as we were all constantly in the water, loading and unloading
the boat. It is but just to state, that Captain Stanley of the Rattlesnake, both in landing
our horses and stores, and in crossing this river, rendered us every assistance in his power,
and seemed throughout to take a strong interest in the expedition, and its object.

While landing our things at the other side of the river, the natives assembled in great numbers
about our luggage. As they appeared to be friendly, we permitted them to come within about
150 yards of our landing-place; with some few we had a little difficulty, but for the most
part they would sit down quietly as soon as a sign was made for them to do so.

June 6.

Early this morning Lieutenant Simpson of the Rattlesnake left us, he having stayed all night
at the camp, and we were now left entirely to our own resources. We loaded our carts and packhorses,
and proceeded about three miles inland, but again finding it impossible to cross the swamps,
we returned to the beach, and about dusk came to another river, also emptying itself into Rockingham
Bay, about two miles south-west of the first we had to cross. This river was much wider than
the first, being about two hundred yards wide where we crossed it near the mouth. At the mouth
of this river is a sandbank, over which the water is about four feet deep. Inside the bank
the water is ten feet deep. The tide flows up for about a mile; there appears to be a great
quantity of fresh water discharged into the sea from the river, which, I think, is principally
supplied from the swamps. These swamps lie at the foot of a high mountain range, and probably
the rivulets descending from the range spread over the flat ground, and form channels by which
they reach the sea. Fresh water can be obtained on either side the river very near the sea.
I tasted fresh water on one side, salt in the middle, and slightly brackish on the other side,
as we crossed over it. Small boats only can enter this river, on account of the sandbank at
the mouth. Its course turned to the south-west about two miles up. Its banks were sandy and
barren, at least close to the water; on the north side of the river there is a mangrove swamp,
extending some distance up the stream; on the south side the banks are higher, and are covered
with Casuarinas and Acacias, the soil being sandy and pretty well covered with grass, the land
slightly undulating, for about one and a half or two miles up the river. It being too late
to think of crossing the river to-night, we hobbled our horses, and having pitched Mr. Kennedy's
tent, slept on the sand till morning.

June 7.

As soon as we had breakfasted this morning, we prepared to cross, to assist us in which undertaking
we contrived to construct a sort of punt by taking the wheels and axletrees off one of the
carts. We then placed the body of the cart on a large tarpaulin, the shafts passing through
holes cut for them, the tarpaulin tightly nailed round them. The tarpaulin was then turned
up all round, and nailed inside the cart; by this means it was made almost water-tight. We
then fastened our water-bags, filled with air, to the sides of the cart, six on each side,
and a small empty keg to each shaft. We tied our tether ropes together, and made one end fast
on each side of the river, by which means our punt was easily pulled from one side to the other.
By this contrivance we managed to get most of our things over during the day, and at night
a party slept on either side, without pitching the tents.

June 8.

One party continued employed in getting the remainder of the things across the river, whilst
the others went in search of the horses, which had rambled to some distance to seek for better
grass. The grass had hitherto continued plentiful in places all the way. The horses were brought
up to the river by eleven A.M., and were with some difficulty got across; after which they
were hobbled, and we camped for the night near the beach, in good grass.

June 9.

Mr. Kennedy, with Jackey and three others, left the camp this morning for the purpose of ascertaining
the most practicable route for our carts. During the day a great number of natives came around
our camp, but appeared very friendly; they are a finer race of men than those usually seen
in the southern districts of the colony, but their habits and mode of life seem very similar.
They left us before dark, without making any attempt at plunder.

June 10.

Mr. Kennedy returned to the camp this evening; he still found the swamps were impassable, the
water and mud lying on them in many parts, from three to four feet deep; there were patches
of dry land here and there covered with good but coarse grass.

We saw here large flocks of black and white ducks, making a whistling noise similar to some
I have seen near Port Macquarie; Mr. Wall shot three of them, and they proved very good to
eat, but they were not new, belonging to the genus Dendrocygna eytoni.

June 11.

We started early this morning and proceeded along the beach for three or four miles, when we
came to another river, similar in its character to the one we crossed on the 8th, with low
sandy banks, and dry bushy land on each side. We unloaded and hobbled our horses, and prepared
our punt as before.

Near to this spot we came to a native encampment, consisting of eighteen or twenty huts of
an oval form, about seven feet long, and four feet high; and at the southern end of the camp,
was one large hut eighteen feet long, seven feet wide, and fourteen feet high. All of them
were neatly and strongly built with small saplings stuck in the ground, arched over, and tied
together at the top with small shoots of the climbing palm, which I have already described.
They were covered with the bark of the large Melaleucas which grow in the swamps, fastened
to the saplings with palm shoots. A small opening is left at one end, from the ground to the
top, and the floors were covered with long dried grass.

The natives being absent from the camp, I entered the large gunyah, and found in it a large
shield of solid wood, two feet in diameter, convex on one side, and flat on the other. The
convex side was curiously painted red, in circular rings and crosses. On the flat side was
a handle, cut out of the solid wood. In the same hut I found four wooden swords, three and
a half feet long, and four inches broad, sharp at both edges, and thick in the centre, with
a slightly curved, round handle, about six inches long. They were made of very hard wood, and
were much too heavy to wield with one hand. I also found a number of fishing lines, made from
grass, with hooks attached of various sizes, made from mussel shells. 

The dark eyes of the monk stood out in this speech, and clung with a kind of grim Expression on
the speaker.

"The days are over," continued the latter, where the creation of such
works of piety was not uncommon.

How long is the monastery? "

"You know that already?" asked, looking down, the monk, "Do you not know it?"

"If the question is, would I?" replied the stranger.

"As it happens sometimes," murmured the other. "Three years is this monastery. Thirty years!" he
added, improving and did not look up from the ground.

"But what was called the founder?" "inquired the stranger. "What a god-beloved man" - since broke
the monk into a blaring from Hohngelaechter. The back of the chair on which he relied had collapsed,
crashing together under his pressure, a hell seemed to flame in the glances which he addressed
to the stranger, and turning suddenly, he was echoing kick the door out.

Still had not recovered the two from their surprise, as the door opened
again, The same monk entered.

As if nothing had happened, he walked to the fireplace, eased with the Stoereisen on the fire,
rose wood, blew into the flame. This is what Turning around, he said: "I am the least of the servants
of this house, the lowest services. are assigned to me. I must be agreeable to strangers answer, and
if they ask. You have already being asked? What was it? "

"We wanted to catch up on the creation of this monastery information,"
said the older boy two Germans, "but your strange refusal" - "Yes,
yes!" said the monk, "you are strangers, Kennet and place and people
do not yet.

I want to do like your foolish curiosity unsatisfied To leave but
then complains Hers the abbot, and scolds me again, as when the I
Palatine of Plozk grabbed by the throat, because he cursed my fathers
name.

If your from Warsaw, "he continued after a little while.

"We go," answered one of the strangers.

"This is a wicked city," said the monk, as he sat down. "All proceeds from strife there. When the
founder of this monastery did not come to Warsaw, he donated at all a monastery, there were no
monks here, and I also would be none. Since your stuff is not comes, may you be honest people,
and everything considered, I will tell you the story . Tell But I do not interrupt and ask no
further, when I stop. At the end of speaking I even like them once again. If only payments
would be so much fog in between, we see hardly the old ancestral castle shine through - and the moon
seems so sad. "- The last Words were lost in an unintelligible murmur, and finally took a deep silence
Place during which the monk, in the hands of the wide sleeves put the head on the chest down,
sat motionless.

Even thought the two had repented of his promise him and wanted to head shu ettelnd away,
so he sat up suddenly with a reinforced Breath rising and the laid sunken hood fell back, the
eye, no more wild beamed in almost wistful light, this was based, contrary to the moon which
faces the head in his hand and began:

"Starschensky was called the man a count of his tribe, which belonged to the wide neighborhood,
and the place where this is the monastery. At the time, but not a monastery. Here too the plow,
and he himself lived there, where now throwing back cracked walls, the moonlight. The count was not bad,
if not exactly good. In war, was said he was brave, or he still lived and deposited in the
castle of his fathers. Wondered about the people one the most: never had he seen a female with fond
affection, he clearly avoided dealing with women.

It was therefore necessary for a woman-hater, but he was not. A natural timid mind, and - let's
see if I "meet" said the monk, as he sat up - "a Going over all pleasure of owning his own, he had
until then no rapprochement allowed. Absence of pain he felt pleasure .-- Do you have wine left?
Give me a cup! The count was not so bad. "

The monk drank, then he continued: "So lived Starschensky, he thought to die, but It was him otherwise.
A diet called him to Warsaw. Indignant about the perversity the crowd, each of which only wanted
to find out it was the welfare of the whole, he went one evening through the streets of the
city, black rain clouds hung in the sky, ready at any moment, to discharge, thick dark all
around. Then he suddenly heard behind him a female Voice that speaks to trembling and sobbing
him: If you are a man, have pity an unfortunate! Rapidly turned over, saw the count a girl, begging
him to the Hands sticking out. The clothes seemed poor, neck and arms gleaming white through the
night. The count followed by the petitioners. Ten steps left, she enters a hut, Starschensky follows,
and soon he is alone with her in the dark hallway. A warm, soft Hand grasps his own .-- Are you
the Knights? "Is interrupted the monk, to the younger the stranger
turned.

"What does the cross on your coat I ?"--" Maltese am," replied this .-- "You too?" the monk turned
to the second .-- "Not" was the reply .-- "Have their wives and children had both ?"--" I never
."--" How old are your ?"--" Forty-five ."--" So! ! So "the monk muttered, nodding his head
Then he went on.:

"A hitherto unknown feeling the count seized at the touch of warm hands. You tell a fairy tale
of all eastern one, which was suddenly given the gift, to understand
the language of birds and other creatures of nature, and now, lying
in the shade on Bachesrand, with joyful surprise around everywhere
to get heard word and meaning, where he previously only heard noises
and sounds.

This happened to the Count. A new world was before him on, and trembling, he followed his guide,
which opened a little door, and with him in a lower, schwacherleuchtetes room occurred.

The first ray of light fell on the girl. Starschenskys inmost being cheered on, that reality is held, which
promised the idea. The girl was beautiful in every respect. Black hair curled around the forehead
and neck, and charged with the gleichgefaerbten Eyelash, to the strange appeal of the bright
blue eyes shining. The mouth with lush raised, almost too bright red lips, was not disfigured
by a small scar, which, as narrow, whitish colored line running obliquely downward, was lost in the
crimson of the upper lip. Dimple in his chin and cheeks, forehead and nose, like maybe she just thinks
the painter did not, as well but my compatriots, are the perfect expression of the charming little
head and were in beautiful harmony with the forms of both lean and fully built body, the lush
beauty of the poor rose more than Huelle hid .-- Not true, you know
it Do nothing, Maltese?

Yes, yes, got to the old monk once again! Let us another one ! Drink - it, then good.

The count was lost in contemplation of the girl and hardly noticed that in one corner of the
Hut, a bed of rotting straw, a torn saddle instead of under the cushion Head, covered with rags,
the misery as an old man, was now out of hand Hull stretched out his poor, and with extinct voice
asked: Are mode, Elga? Whom do you bring me there - where the unfortunate language, the girl
turned to Starschensky, for I, driven by extreme need, your compassion addressed. He is my father,
a Gentleman of the old master and nobility, brought here by following up .-- So she went and
squatting down on the bearing of the old man, sought by Zurechtruecken
and spreading out, in the rags that covered him to bring a semblance
of decency and order.

The count was closer. He learned the story. Lay before him was the elder of Laschek. He and his
two sons had become involved in political connections to the homeland disapproved. Their attacks
have been discovered.

The two sons along with a few unwary, made common cause with them, met with exile, the father,
deprived of their possessions, was in misery.

In the first moment when Starschensky Laschek heard the name, he knew already that the location of
the fault was not entirely unfortunate. Because if he also a direct Participation in the attacks
of his sons could not be absolutely remitted, so had but it by carelessness in youth and bad
economy at an advanced age his sons the legal ways of the rise of
difficult ventures and made welcome.

All this the count was not hidden. But it was an unhappy man to save, and father Elgas had
the most eloquent advocate of the inflamed for at his daughter.

Laschek was brought in for a decent apartment, he and his daughter with the necessities provided.
Starschensky used his influence, his connections, he made up to Money and gifts down to the
restoration of the horror, the Rueckberufung of the exiles to obtain. Fortunately, the external
conditions long past, which Attacks that had been careless and dangerous. Pardon was granted, the
Exiles were preparing to return home. Several had the Ungluecksgenossen, their frivolity loyal,
put services in a foreign land, only Laschek two sons and a distant
relative of the house, called Oginsky, made use of the hard gained
permission.

Daily they expected their arrival.

Reproduction of Laschek confiscated estates was, however, as bringing little benefit. Daily published
new creditors. Main floor and residues interest devoured far the present value of the immovable.
Starschensky entered the paid agents, debt his or her own property
and could still hardly a small quantity of ordinary possessions, as
a graft saving for the future.

He seemed happier now in its applications for Elgas heart. When the girl is for the first time
next saw in decent clothes, they flew him on entering crying counter, and a long nachgefuehlter
kiss from her burning lips worth his care, be keen!. That first kiss was indeed for the present one,
the last, none the less but was allowed to Starschensky flatter with the hope that her heart
is not indifferent be. She was happy in his company, she saw and felt his absence. Often he surprised
her eye that was fixed in thought and contemplating on it, so a few times he could only prevent
by rapid withdrawal that is not a kiss, he too would have gladly indulged his lips, pressed his
hand. He was full of the most beautiful Hopes. But all at once changed the scene. Elga was
bleak and thoughtful. If otherwise, their inclination for diversions, for clothes and decorative enjoyment
of life is most emphatically pronounced, and sometimes hard on the boundaries of the strip seemed
to be too much, so she avoided now society. Bickering clouds their thoughts raced over the brow
schoengeglaettete; the turbid eyes spoke of tears, and often crowded, a single of the disturbing Quests
in the rapidly lowered lashes. Starschensky noticed that her father then serious, almost threatening
looked at, and affectation of cheerfulness, the desire of the girl referred to suppress a secret
grief. Once, quickly through the anteroom to the Door of the reception room strides, Starschensky
heard the voice of Star East, again seemed angry and even violent operated fairly common expressions.
The Count opens the door and looked around, but saw no third, only the subsidiary that is not crying
and maximum heat, the father turned away, stood in the window. It had been considered abuse,
those have. Since it was firm resolve in the mind of the count to a rapid advertising Elgas Hand,
the torturing uncertainty to make the relationship to an end.

While he took a short deadline for execution of this intent and Elgas Previous serenity returned
gradually arrived at the appointed home from exile relatives. Elga seemed less joy over the
re-possession of the brothers were without for so long to feel, had taken for the count. Most striking,
however, was as harsh cold weather to keep it from to call aggressively against the companions
of her brothers guilt and punishment, the poor cousin Oginsky they praised hardly a glance.
Well built and well-looking, as he was, seemed he earn such a dislike of anything, but rather was
submissive to his almost visible behavior of the search, to apply for the good opinion of everyone.
No hardness could afford him, only he seemed indeed welcome here any occasion, the almost to avoid
real cause UTI Elgas. Most recently, he disappeared entirely, and no one knew where he was gone.

Finally
came out of the Count in his bid, the old bailiff cried Freudentraenen, Elga schamerroetend dropped
and speechless in his arms, and the federal government was shut.

Loud parties announced by the capital Starschenskys lucky, and repeated numerous festivals attended
assured him of the general participation. By operating an honor Tung held at the court, He soon
learned to blend in sound and splendor, surely it can find no pleasure, at least Elga far found
it to their taste for lavish festivities are always certain pronounced. But she was not young,
she was not beautiful? Had not, after many accidents, any desire for them the double stimulation,
as pleasure and as new? The count granted and was happy. Only one thing was missing, to make
him very happy: already had a full year since his marriage passed, and Elga was still no hope
to become a mother.

But suddenly became disturbed, the noise of the lucky ones to a much
more sensitive way.

Starschenskys property manager, as a proven honest man appeared, dark clouds on the furrowed brow.
One locked himself, it was expected, were compared, and it soon became only too clearly that
by what had happened to relatives for Elgas, unfettered by the Effort recently, of Count Vermoegensstand
was shocked and speedy screening demanded. The worst thing about this confusion Elgas brothers had
done. As in general the accident repaired only Besserungsfaehige, so was the all-consuming love
of pleasure frivolous pair by the long privation became only more greedy. At the cash register
Count instruct their subsistence, they had the most extravagant use of Zugestehung this done,
and after floating in bliss count on the first requests his worried business people impatient
the answer was given: it should not be just take and give his brothers what they needed, now
was of demanding and receiving no end.

The count overlooked, with a look of concern the location and orderly as had had for him a swift
reversal from its chosen path wobble not scary.

Just the thought of Elga made him uneasy. Is the cheerful, cheerfulness like to be as impartial
in hinschwebende beings - But she had to, and did the count, what he had to. With a beating Heart he
was in Elgas room. But how comfortable he was surprised when, as he barely Conditions described
and explained the necessity, had to leave the city, on its own soil to the carelessness of
letztverflossenen time to make amends, as at the first hint Elga already crashed to his chest,
and stand ready willing and pleased explained. What he did what he areas, it would only be obedient!
It crashed into tears from their eyes, and she would have fallen to their feet when it does
not prevent them not raised would have to be a long time and the outside world annihilating embrace.

All
preparations for departure were made. Starschensky, who, from his youth in solitude accustomed
to the pleasures of the court and the city only in the joy that was his wife because had enjoyed,
almost blessed the accidents that forced him to the bosom of his
rural Return back home.

Elga seized and made, and in the early morning hours of a Maien warm day was one arrived with
boxes and luggage in the ancient family seat, this, newly furnished, and in the best put in order,
by nightingale and Bluetenduft vying replaced, what a spoiled taste in comparison with the palaces
of the cities, possibly could've missed.

Soon after the arrival seemed to explain himself in part, why the change of the recent Elgan Life
had become so easy. She stood in the first months of concealing up to now Pregnancy, and Starschensky,
ueberschuettet for fulfilling all his wishes, his happiness knew
no bounds.

Spring and summer passed among rural amusements, ordering facilities and joyful expectation.
When the leaves were fallen, and rough storms, the first signs of
winter rattled the windows of the castle, approached the desired and
dreaded Elgan hour she gave birth, and an angel beautiful little girl
was placed in the arms of the count, the the daughter with tears wetted
blessing.

Slight overhang, such as the birth, were the Follow, and soon flourished Elga a rose.

So much favorable incidents were unfortunately interrupted by unpleasant news from the capital.
The old bailiff, Elgas father had died, and had his circumstances in the biggest disruption
leave.


A short distance to the south-west of our camp, is a range of round hills, of moderate height,
covered with grass, and thinly timbered with box and other species of eucalyptus, resembling
the ironbark. These hills are composed of huge blocks of coarse granite, with a stiff soil,
and appear to stretch a long distance to the west.

July 1.

Mr. Kennedy returned this morning, having explored the country for about forty miles, over
which he thought we might travel safely. There being plenty of grass however at the camp, and
the men no better, he determined to defer our advance till Monday.

July 2.

Being Sunday, prayers were read at eleven o'clock.

July 3.

Early this morning we prepared to start, but Luff and Douglas being seized with a fit of ague,
we were compelled to stop. Although our horses had all the way had abundance of feed, they
began to grow very thin--several of them very weak, and one getting very lame, from bad feet.
The sheep also had fallen away very much, which I attributed to the wet journey they had had;
being almost always wet, from crossing rivers and creeks.

July 4.

Mr. Kennedy and three others roamed this morning to some distance from the camp, when they
were followed by a tribe of natives, making threatening demonstrations, and armed with spears;
one spear was actually thrown, when Mr. Kennedy, fearing for the safety of his party, ordered
his men to fire upon them; four of the natives fell, but Mr. Kennedy could not ascertain whether
more than one was killed, as the other three were immediately carried off into the scrub.

July 5.

Luff and Douglas now began to get better, but being still unable to walk, we could not break
up our camp.

July 6.

We started early this morning, and crossed two creeks with narrow belts of scrub on each side,
running north-east. I have little doubt these creeks run into the river we crossed on the 8th
of June. The banks of the second creek were nearly twenty feet high, so that we were obliged
to lower down the carts into its bed by means of ropes and pulleys, fastened to the branches
of the trees which overhung the creek. The horses were got into the creek with a great deal
of difficulty, then harnessed to the carts, and we proceeded along the bed of the creek till
we arrived at a spot where the banks on the opposite side were not so steep. At this place
by harnessing six horses to each of the carts, we managed to get them all out of the creek
without any accident. The bed of the creek was composed of granite pebbles. We encamped on
the northern side of it, the soil being a strong clayey loam, well covered with grass two or
three feet high, so thick that it was difficult to walk through it. The country here was hilly
open forest-land, with a high range before us, running north-east. The trees were principally
Moreton Bay ash, box, and another species of eucalyptus, resembling the common ironbark, but
with long narrow leaves. I also found a magnificent species of Grevillea, with fine pinnatifid
silvery leaves, and beautiful racemes of orange-coloured flowers; also another tree belonging
to the same natural order, rivalling the Grevillea in the beauty of its flowers, producing
an abundance of cream-coloured blossoms, on compound, terminal racemes. In the scrub by the
side of the creek, I found a most beautiful Scitamineos plant, the foliage, root, and habit
of which resembled Hedychium. The beauty of the plant consisted in its large, stiff, shining
bracteae, which continue to grow after the small pink blossoms have fallen. The bracteae are
about half an inch broad at the base, slightly curved inwards, and tapering to a point. The
heads of the flowers, resembling a pineapple in shape and size, and of a beautiful crimson
colour, are produced on the top of a strong flower-stem, 18 inches high, and they will retain
their shape and colour a month after being cut. This plant appears to be very local in its
habits, as I only caught sight of it by the side of three creeks, and always in moist, shady
places. I obtained seeds, and also packed some of its fleshy, tuberous roots in a tin case.

We saw but few wallabies; and not one kangaroo or emu had as yet been seen by any of the party.
The country was not open enough for them to inhabit.

July 7.

We started at daylight, proceeding over open forest ground covered with long grass, very thick
and luxuriant. Travelling was rendered still more difficult by the large logs of dead wood
which strewed the ground in every direction, and which much impeded the progress of the carts.
We camped by the side of a creek, with a narrow belt of scrub on the south-east side, but apparently
a wide extent of it on the other. This creek had a large sandy bed; with large Castanospermums,
Tristanias, and Sarcocephali growing on its banks, which were rather steep. It had a very tortuous
course, coming from south-west and turning east a little below our camp, which was in a bend
of the creek.

July 8.

We were employed nearly all this day in cutting through very thick scrub on the other side
of the creek. Whilst doing so we had to cross several other smaller ones, all turning east,
and in the evening we camped on a small patch of open forest land, covered with long coarse
grass, and large blocks of coarse granite rock jutting out here and there.

July 9.

This being Sunday we halted for the day, and prayers were read at eleven o'clock.

July 10 and 11.

We continued throughout these days cutting through belts of scrub and crossing small creeks,
running from the west and north-west, and turning east. During the latter day we were visited
by a small tribe of natives, who appeared very friendly and did not stop long. I found a large
quantity of Castanospermum seeds in one of the creeks, apparently put there to steep by the
natives, who use them for food. They informed me that they steep them in water for five days,
and then cut them into thin slices and dry them in the sun; they are then pounded between two
large stones, and the meal being moistened with water is baked on a flat stone, raised from
the ground a few inches, with a small fire burning beneath. I afterwards saw some of the meal
baked, but it was not very palatable.

July 12 and 13.

Our journey still continued through scrub, intersected by small creeks, which we had to cross,
and by patches here and there of open forest ground, covered with long grass, the soil a stiff
loam. We were not able to make much progress, travelling on the average from three to five
miles a day. We were compelled to cut away the scrub, and the banks of some of the creeks,
before we were able to cross them, and frequently obliged to run a creek up and down some distance
before we could find a place where it was passable at all.

July 14.

We started very early this morning, and commenced travelling over very uneven ground, full
of small hillocks, and having the appearance of being frequently inundated, the grass growing
very high and luxuriantly over it. Owing to the irregularities of the surface the axletree
of one of our carts gave way this day. We were forced to leave the cart and harness behind,
and load the horses with the spare pack-saddles we had brought with us, covering the load of
each horse over with a piece of tarpaulin. We travelled on till dusk, when we arrived at a
small creek, overgrown with grass, which we imagined we should cross with little difficulty;
but the carts were set fast in the mud, and some of the horses got bogged. We were forced to
carry the loading of our carts and saddle-horses over on our shoulders, a task of no small
difficulty and labour, the mud giving way up to the knee at every step. The horses were then
safely taken across, and we lifted out the carts and carried them to the other side, finding
that it was useless to attempt to draw them out. It was ten o'clock at night before we had
got the things over, and as soon as we had partaken of our late dinner we made a large fire
to dry our clothes, which had become completely saturated by the labours of the day.

Mr. Kennedy arrived at the determination this day, to leave the carts behind at this camp,
as they caused so much extra labour and delay in travelling.

July 16.

Sunday, we halted, and had prayers read at eleven o'clock.

July 17.

We got up early, and prepared all the loads ready for starting, but we were obliged to leave
many things behind, that would have been very essential to the successful prosecution of all
the objects of the expedition; my specimen box, a cross-cut saw, pickaxes, and various other
articles which it was considered were too heavy to be carried on horseback. We however took
good care that not an ounce of provisions of any description should be left behind. The sugar
and tea were more compactly packed than heretofore, and the packages in which they had formerly
been carried were left behind. Near this camp a large swamp extended south-westward, but it
was clear of scrub, containing nothing but Melaleucas of moderate size.

July 18.

Having loaded the horses, we started at eight o'clock this morning, in good hope and high spirits,
rejoicing to have got rid of one great impediment to our progress. The blacks regarded us with
curious interest as we proceeded on our way, forming a train of twenty-six horses, followed
by the sheep, and Mitchell occasionally sounding a horn he had brought with him.

We all felt the inconvenience of leaving the carts behind, and I in particular. I was now obliged
to make two strong bags to fit my specimen boards, and to hang them over a horse's back, one
bag on each side, a very inconvenient method, as it rendered them liable to much damage going
through the scrub. The sheep at this time had grown very thin and poor, not averaging more
than thirty pounds when skinned and dressed; they had, however, become so habituated to following
the horses that they cost us very little trouble in driving them.

After travelling about six miles through open forest land we camped near a creek on the skirts
of a thick scrub.

July 19.

We were cutting through scrub all day, skirting numerous small creeks which we met with here,
most of them running to the eastward. The soil was rather stiff, and indicated a rocky formation,
blocks of granite projecting from it in various directions.

July 20, 21, and 22.

During these three days we travelled over an irregular, mountainous country, intersected by
numerous creeks, running in every direction, but all of them with belts of scrub on each side.
We sometimes crossed the same creeks two or three times a day, owing to the tortuous directions
they took, and our clothes were kept wet all the day; some of them too had very steep banks,
which presented another obstacle to the progress of our horses. Between the creeks, small patches
of open forest land intervened, with large blocks of rock scattered over them; most of the
creeks had a rocky bottom, and were running to the eastward.

July 23.

Sunday, we had prayers read as usual at eleven o'clock, and halted for the day.

July 24.

We resumed our journey through the same description of country, cutting through scrub, and
occasionally travelling through open land, timbered principally with Moreton Bay ash, box,
and flooded-gum, and covered with very long grass. We crossed two creeks running to the northward,
on the side of the last of which we camped. We were here compelled to shoot one of our horses,
which had fallen lame. During the week we had made very little progress, being forced to turn
in every direction to avoid the deep gulleys, and the scrub which invariably prevailed in the
bends of the creeks. A tribe of natives visited us at this camp, and appeared very friendly;
they did not stop with us long. I saw to-day several trees of the white-apple, as we called
it, and which I have before described.

July 25.

We entered the scrub on the side of the creek, and proceeded along its banks with difficulty,
being obliged to cut our way through, but it grew less dense after we had skirted the creek
a short distance. We found the creek to be the branch of a river, which here divided, one branch
running to the south-east (by which we had camped yesterday)the other running east. It is rocky,
and shallow where it divides, but grows deeper in its course towards the coast. It is about
two hundred yards wide, and its banks are overhung with trees on each side. After following
it about a mile up, it grew much more shallow and narrow, and had a rocky bottom.

On the opposite side were patches of open forest ground, but they did not extend to any distance.
After skirting the river about three miles, we crossed it in a shallow place, the bed of it
being composed of blocks of water-worn granite. The impediment offered by these blocks rendered
it very difficult for our horses to pass, although the water was only from one to three feet
deep. Several of the horses fell in crossing this river; the one carrying my specimens fell
three times, and my specimens and seeds received much damage, if they were not entirely spoiled.

The river here runs from the north-west. We crossed it and entered the scrub, but not being
able to get through it before dark, we tied our horses to trees, and slept by them all night.

July 27.

We were cutting through scrub nearly all day, and having recrossed the river, cut our way to
the top of a high hill, which we could not avoid. We found a patch of open ground on the hill,
with grass for our horses and sheep. The trees growing on the hill were casuarinas, and acacias,
with a few box-trees. Here we camped and tethered our horses, for fear they should fall down
the steep bank of the river. At the foot of the hill, on the opposite side of this river, the
rocks were of great height, and almost perpendicular. The river runs through a range of hills
coming from the eastward, joining a very high range, over which our journey now lay. This range
is composed of a dark-coloured granite, very hard; near the water was a vein of talc schist,
running north-west and south-east. On the top of the hill we found large pebbles of quartz.

July 28.

This morning, having loosed our horses from the tether, one of them fell down from the hill
upon a ledge of hard rock at the edge of the river, a descent of thirty feet; he was so much
injured by the fall that he died during the day. We came down the hill through the scrub towards
the mountains, and camped but a short distance from where we rested the previous evening. We
were now at the foot of the range.

July 29.

Mr. Kennedy proceeded to explore the range, to ascertain the best spot to cross it, it being
covered with thick scrub. It runs from the southward and turns eastward. I dug up a piece of
ground here near the edge of the scrub, and sowed seeds of cabbage, turnip, rock and water
melons, parsley, leek, pomegranate, cotton, and apple pips.

I here found a beautiful orchideous plant, with the habit of Bletia tankervilliae, flowering
in the same manner, with flower-stems about three feet high, and from twelve to twenty flowers
on each stem. The sepals were much larger than those of Bletia, and of a rich purple colour;
the column yellow, with a spur at the base of the flower about three-fourths of an inch long.
I packed some of its thick fleshy roots in a tin case. I also here obtained specimens of a
beautiful Hovea, with long lanceolate leaves, a much finer shrub than H. celsii. Also a species
of Hibiscus, with rough palmate leaves, large bright sulphur-coloured flowers, with a rich
purple spot at the base of each petal, the stamens and stigma bright red, the blossoms when
fully expanded eight inches in circumference; the plant has a very erect habit. Also another
Hibiscus, with obcordate tomentose leaves, and pink flowers; both these last were very handsome
shrubs. The trees on the open ground were casuarinas and flooded-gums, with a few Balfourias.
Although we had a very difficult task before us--the ascent of the hills-our spirits did not
fail us; but the horses began to look very poor and weak, although they had always had plenty
of grass.

July 31.

Early this morning Mr. Kennedy, Jackey, and four others left the camp, and began clearing a
way up the mountain. They remained out the whole of the day.

August 1.

Mr. Kennedy and his party returned to the camp, having determined on a route by which we should
proceed up the mountain. Mr. Kennedy spoke very highly of Jackey, and thought him one of the
best men of the party for cutting away scrub and choosing a path; he never seemed tired, and
was very careful to avoid deep gullies.

August 3.

We started early this morning, and proceeded up a spur of the range, in a north-westerly direction,
but could not get so far as they had cleared. We managed to get twenty-three horses and their
loads up to a flat place on the range, but, after several efforts, being unable to drive or
lead the other horse up, we left him tied to a tree in the scrub. We found him all right the
next morning, but as there was nothing but scrub before us, Mr. Kennedy thought it prudent
to send the horses back to where there was grass and water for them, whilst some of the party
cleared a path. After we had entered the scrub, we crossed a small creek, running rapidly,
and which joined another running from the north-eastward, and which at their junction, form
the river we had been camped at for the last few previous days.

The creeks ran over precipitous rocky falls, and it was Mr. Kennedy's opinion, that all the
creeks we have met with on this side (coast side) the range, run into the swamps, and there
spread, and gathering again, form into channels and run into Rockingham Bay. There is a large
tract of land opposite Rockingham Bay which is occupied by swamps, intersected by patches of
open ground, and a few peaked hills. The swamps extend about forty-five miles, to about 145
degrees 20 minutes east longitude. It seemed that a great deal of rain had fallen over this
country, and it rained at intervals all the time we were in the vicinity of Rockingham Bay--from
the 21st May to the middle of August. It was Mr. Kennedy's opinion that the rainy season occurred
very late this year. The whole peninsula seemed to fall from the east towards the west.

August 4.

Mitchell, Dunn, and myself, took the horses and sheep to grass and water, and having hobbled
the former, we made ourselves a small hut with saplings, and covered it with a small tarpaulin.
We divided the night watch into three parts, being four hours each.

August 5.

We mustered the horses morning and evening, and drove the sheep close to the fire, having one
of our kangaroo dogs chained up beside them, and the other one with the sheep dog loose. We
were apprehensive that the natives might attack us.

August 6.

Shortly after we had mustered the cattle this morning, seven or eight natives appeared at the
edge of the scrub, in the direction from which we had come. Just as they approached, an Australian
magpie perched upon a tree, and I shot it to show the effect of our firearms. On hearing the
report of the gun they all ran into the scrub, and we saw them no more. On all occasions it
was Mr. Kennedy's order--not to fire on the blacks, unless they molested us. I was anxious
on this occasion not to let the natives know how few we were, and was glad to send them away
in so quiet a manner. One of our sheep died this day, and as we had lost several before, and
had but little to employ us, we opened it to see if we could ascertain the cause of its death.
We found its entrails full of water. Our party was now divided into three bodies: Mr. Kennedy,
Jackey, and four others, clearing a way up the mountain; Niblett and three others guarding
the stores; whilst myself, Dunn, and Mitchell, had charge of the sheep and horses. It was necessary,
therefore, for us to keep a good lookout, and two of us watched together.

August 7.

Early this morning a man came down to help us with the horses and sheep. We loaded our horses,
with the exception of one, which was too weak and too much bruised from falling to travel.
We turned him toward the open ground, and having packed our horses went on till dark, when
we tied our horses to a tree and lay down for the night beside them, although it rained all
night. We had each of us a water can which held five pints, which we filled, and our two water
kegs, at the foot of the range, fearing we might not find water in the journey over.

August 8.

At daylight we were afoot and breakfasted, and started immediately after. We travelled up the
hills all day, but made very little progress, owing to the great labour of clearing, and the
numerous steep ascents we met with. We fortunately found water in a low place, and with difficulty
lighted a fire, everything being saturated with rain. We then laid down and endeavoured to
sleep, but were unable to do so from the number of small leeches which attacked us. I was obliged
to get up several times in the night, and in the morning I found myself covered with blood.

August 9.

We started at daylight, although it was raining, and continued to do so all day; about six
o'clock in the evening we reached a small river, running rapidly over rocks, and deep in some
places. Its course was north-easterly, but it turned north, a little below where we first came
upon it. We camped by the side of it, it being too late to cross, although there was open forest
ground on the other side. The open ground on the coast side of the range was considerably lower
than that on the other, the highest part of our track being, according to Mr. Kennedy's barometrical
observations, upwards of two thousand feet above the level of the sea. The soil was a strong
loam of a dark colour, owing to the admixture of a great deal of decomposed vegetable matter;
rock projected in many places, and in those parts where the rocks were near the surface, Callitris
(cypress pine) grew. In the deeper soil were large trees of the genera Castanospermum, Lophostemon,
and Cedrela, mingled with Achras australis, Calamus (climbing palm), Seaforthia, Dicksonia,
Osmunda, large shrubs of Alyxia; several very interesting Orchideae were also found in this
place. We also discovered a great many snails, with very large shells of a greyish colour.
One I found on the bushes with an operculum--this I gave to Wall.

August 10.

This morning we took the sheep and horses to a spot in the river where the current was not
so strong, and drove them across. The sheep followed the horses like dogs. We then cut down
three small straight trees, and made a bridge across a deep channel which ran between two rocks
which projected out of the water, across which we carried our stores on our backs. All the
things were got over before dark, after which we made a large fire to dry ourselves, having
been wet to the waist all day. Niblett, who had been very unwell for three or four days, was
taken much worse to-day. The position of our camp here was about 17 degrees 48 minutes South
latitude, 145 degrees 20 minutes East longitude. We this day crossed the range, and prepared
to commence our journey on the other side.

August 11.

We remained this day at the camp to give the horses a rest after their harrassing journey over
the range.

August 12.

Proceeding about five miles over uneven open forest ground, with isolated blocks of rock, we
camped by a chain of rocky waterholes. The trees growing here were casuarina, box, apple-gum,
and ironbark.

August 13.

Sunday. Prayers as usual at eleven o'clock.

August 14.

Complaint was made to Mr. Kennedy of the waste and extravagant use of the flour and sugar by
Niblett, who had the charge of the stores. Mr. Kennedy immediately proceeded to examine the
remainder of the stores, when he found that Niblett had been making false returns of the stores
issued weekly. Up to this time Mr. Kennedy, Niblett, and Douglas (who waited on Mr. Kennedy)
had messed together, apart from the other ten. Niblett took charge of the ration for the smaller
mess, and usually cooked it himself, the ration being taken out weekly from that weighed for
the whole party. Besides issuing a larger ration to his own mess, Niblett had taken a great
deal from the stores for himself.

On finding this out, Mr. Kennedy requested me to take charge of the stores, and issue them
to the cook for the week, and from this date we all messed together. We had at this time about
seven hundred pounds flour left. Everything was weighed in the presence of the whole party
before I took charge, and I always weighed out every week's ration in the presence of the cook
and two other parties. At this camp it was found necessary to reduce our ration to the following
scale per week; fifty pounds flour, twelve pounds sugar, two and three-quarter pounds tea,
and the sheep as before--one every second day. After the ration was cooked, it was divided
by the cook at every meal. We this day burned our sheepfold to lighten our loads a little.

August 15.

We were cutting through scrub nearly all day, and crossed several small creeks running westward.
This day the horse carrying my specimens had become so poor and weak that he fell five different
times, and we were obliged to relieve him of his load, which was now placed on one of Mr. Kennedy's
horses; but we soon found that even without a load he could not travel. We took off his saddle,
bridle, and tether rope, and left him behind on a spot of good grass, where plenty of water
was to be found.

The country here had a rugged and broken appearance; huge blocks of rock were lying on the
open ground, sometimes one irregularly placed on the top of another, and of curious shapes.
The hills as well as the valleys were generally covered with good grass, excepting in the scrub.
On some of the hills the rocks were shivered into irregular pieces, and displayed crystals
of quartz, small laminae of mica, and occasionally hornblende. This evening we camped by the
side of a fine casuarina creek, coming from the north-east. Immediately over our camp its waters
ran over a very hard trap-rock of a black colour, the soil a stiff loam.

August 16.

We travelled on for the most part of this day over irregular, barren, stony ridges, and gullies,
intersected by numerous small creeks, and abounding in rocky holes, all containing plenty of water.

Two more of our horses fell several times this day; one of them being very old, and so weak
that we were obliged to lift him up. We now made up our minds for the first time, to make our
horses, when too weak to travel, available for food; we therefore killed him, and took meat
enough from his carcass to serve our party for two days, and by this means we saved a sheep.
We boiled the heart, liver, and a piece of the meat to serve us for our breakfast next day.
We camped in the evening in the midst of rocky, broken hills, covered with dwarf shrubs and
stunted gumtrees; the soil in which they grew appearing more sandy than what we had yet passed
on this side of the range. The shrubs here were Dodonaea, Fabricia, Daviesia, Jacksonia, and
two or three dwarf species of acacia, one of which was very showy, about three feet high, with
very small oblong, sericeous phyllodia, and globular heads of bright yellow flowers, produced
in great abundance on axillary fascicles; also a very fine leguminous shrub, bearing the habit
and appearance of Callistachys, with fine terminal spikes of purple decandrous flowers, with
two small bracteae on the foot-stalk of each flower, and with stipulate, oval, lanceolate leaves,
tomentose beneath, legumes small and flattened, three to six-seeded, with an arillus as large
as the seed; these were flowering from four to twelve feet high. There was plenty of grass
in the valleys of the creeks. To the South-West on the hills the grasses were Restio, Xerotes,
and a spiny grass, which neither the horses nor the sheep would eat.

August 17.

This morning we commenced to prepare our breakfast of horse-flesh. Notwithstanding,
I not only my strength but also the savings in recent years gave, it was still not me, the
fight with that ghost of poverty victorious quit, and I saw it clearly, even if a little less
loyal and caring hand on my Was replaced, my proteges were forfeited to him.

Often, of course, in the midst of working the nostalgia came over me and gnawed and gnawed at me,
and more than once on the chisel, without that I was aware about Muessig was in my hand, I
am terrified at the sound of the good wife went together, for my thoughts were continued in
the home, and a whole other voice in my ears. The horse which Mr. Wall had been riding
had grown so weak that it was unable to travel, even with nothing to carry but the saddle.
As we were passing along the side of a hill, he fell and rolled down into a gully. Being quite
a young horse we thought he might regain strength, and did not like to kill him, so we left
him and proceeded to find a good place for camping, which we did after travelling about four
miles in the north-west direction, by the side of a fine river, with steep reedy banks, lined
with large casuarinas and flooded-gum trees, and abundance of grass growing in the valley of
the river. At this camp the feet of our horses were all carefully examined by Costigan, who
was a blacksmith: it was also his duty to mark the number of each of our camps on some adjacent
tree.

August 19.

Wall rode back to see if he could bring up the horse we had left behind, but on reaching the
spot found him dead; one of our kangaroo-dogs had also stopped behind by the horse, being unable
to follow us to the camp. We had the good luck to succeed in catching several fish in the river,
and, what was better, shot a fine wallaby, which saved us another sheep. We had all along been
particularly unfortunate in getting anything from the bush to add to our mess, not having been
able either to shoot or catch anything for some time past except a few pigeons and two or three
brown hawks.

The river by which we were camped was running west by south: below our camp it was not nearly
so wide as at the spot where we came upon it. Where it turned through the hills its banks were
rocky and steep, and the bed narrow, but running rapidly. The hills here, as well as the valley
of the river, were well covered with grass. The position of the camp was about 17 degrees 30
minutes south latitude, 145 degrees 12 minutes east longitude.

August 20, 21, and 22.

During the whole of these three days we travelled over undulating open land, wooded pretty
thickly with stringy-bark, box, and apple-gum, interspersed with occasional sandy flats, producing
a broad-leafed Melaleuca, and a pretty species of Grevillea, with pinnatifid, silvery leaves.
Neither the Melaleuca nor the Grevillea grew more than twenty feet high. On the flats we found
a great number of ant-hills, remarkable for their height and size; they were of various forms,
but chiefly conical, some of them rose ten feet high. From the appearance of the ant-hills
I should take the sub-soil to be of a reddish clay.

August 23.

We camped by the side of a creek running to the westward, with rather a broad bed, and steep
banks of strong clay. There was no water in the creeks except in holes.

A tribe of natives, from eighteen to twenty in number, were seen coming down the creek, each
carrying a large bundle of spears. Three of our party left the camp and went towards them,
carrying in their hands green boughs, and making signs to the blacks to lay down their spears
and come to us. After making signals to them for some minutes, three or four of them laid down
their spears and approached us. I went back to the camp and fetched a few fish-hooks, and a
tin plate marked with Mr. Kennedy's initials; having presented them with these they went away
and appeared quite friendly. Shortly after we had camped, Goddard and Jackey went out for the
purpose of shooting wallabies; they parted company at the base of a hill, intending to go round
and meet on the other side, but missing each other, Jackey returned to the camp without his
companion. To our great alarm Goddard did not return all night, although we kept up a good
fire as a beacon to show him where we were camped, and fired a pistol every five minutes during
the night.

August 24.

Three of our party, accompanied by Jackey, rode to the spot where the latter had left Goddard
on the previous day, intending, if possible, to track him, and succeeded in doing so for some
distance to the eastward, but then coming to some stony ground, they lost the track.

They returned in about six hours, hoping to find him at the camp, but were disappointed. We
now began to fear that our companion was lost, and poor Jackey displayed great uneasiness,
fearing that he might be blamed for leaving him, and repeatedly saying that he did not wish
Goddard to leave the camp at all, and that he had waited for him some time on the opposite
side of the hill, where they were to meet. The choice of a favorite poet and
the tone of voice with which they spoke his verses granted them a more immediate Seelenerguß, as
the mysterious musical language that so few to interpret.

Your feelings are present perfect, simply is innate needs of each girl soul. Therefore, this urge
to sing, lacking even where voice and talent. Now comes an external pulse added, which, I fear,
often to blame, that girl to work without inner music crowd still in their temples: I think
that we are so prevalent in music Age, live singing and playing the piano that girls are not
in front of their musicirenden Sisters enjoy an unfair preference. They are already in early childhood
in large Circles drawn more attention, and marry rather than other, unobserved characteristics that
. Remain Girls from cold mind often appear more soulful than others because they wohleinstudirte Express
feelings with a melodious voice, which she did not even capable are. Others who can not surrounded
with the illusion, have perhaps deep feeling, but their unmusical sounds make it appear like a bitter
irony.

The latter would necessarily appropriate to their well-separated from
the music and to representatives oratory are instructed.

You'll call this letter a strange digression, while I, as I promised Up to promote the path of
musical education, I also once = against = the music explain. But I know that eaten by the many
unseemly elements of our art only is, and I would caution any parent, out of mere fashion addiction
a part of their life Child to learn to sacrifice them if it is not
natural talent or strong preference it expresses.

VI.

An increase in musicirenden individuals would be the art world vonnöthen now actually less understood
as an increase of those who truly enjoy music and to judge. Since
the dawn of musical history is the same one used to talk of the amateurs
that achieved with some idols of the summit was, and that no longer
compose the modern could.

This day being Sunday we had prayers at eleven o'clock. We saved the blood of the sheep we
had killed for today's food, and having cut up the heart, liver, and kidneys, we mixed it all
with a little flour and boiled it for breakfast. By this means we made some small saving, and
it was a dish that we were very fond of. We saved all the wool that we could get from our sheep,
for the purpose of stuffing our saddles, a process which was frequently required, owing to
the poor condition of our horses.

August 28.

We started early this morning, but had not travelled far when one of our horses fell from weakness;
we placed him on his legs four times during the day, but finding the poor animal could not
walk, we shot him and took sufficient meat from him with us to last us two days. After making
but a short stage, over ironstone ridges, covered with stringy-bark, and loamy flats, producing
Melaleucas and Grevilleas, we camped beside a small creek, in the sandy bed of which there
was no water, but from which we soon obtained some by digging a hole about two feet deep. We
afterwards found there was plenty of water in the creek higher up to the eastward.

August 29.

We were obliged to leave another horse behind us this morning as he was quite unable to travel.
We camped by the sandy bed of a very broad river, with water only in reaches and holes. There
is, however, evidently a great deal of water running here occasionally, as the bed of the river
was six or seven hundred yards wide, with two or three channels. The flood-marks on the trees
were fifteen feet high; it has a north-easterly course; its bed was composed in places of large
blocks of granite and trap-rock, which was very difficult to walk upon, being very slippery.
Fine melaleucas were growing on each side, which with their long pendulous shoots and narrow
silvery leaves, afforded a fine shade from the heat of the sun. There was plenty both of grass
and water for the horses, but most of them continued to grow weaker.

August 30 and 31.

The country was very mountainous and so full of deep gullies, that we were frequently obliged
to follow the course of a rocky creek, the turnings of which were very intricate; to add to
our difficulties, many of the hills were covered with scrub so thickly that it was with much
difficulty that we could pursue our course through it. We had intended to have kept along the
bank of the river, thinking it might lead us to Princess Charlotte's Bay, and although unable
to do so, we did not as yet lose sight of the river altogether.

September 1.

All this day we continued travelling over very uneven country, full of precipitous rocks and
gullies, until we came to a bend of the river: we now followed it in its tortuous course through
the rocks, till we came to a flat country where its channels were divided by high green banks,
on which were growing large drooping tea-trees (melaleucas); growing on these I found a beautiful
species of Loranthus, with large fascicles of orange coloured flowers, the leaves cordate,
and clasping the stem. On the hills I found a Brachychiton, with crimson flowers; the tree
had a stunted growth, with deciduous leaves. I collected as much of the gum as I could, and
advised the others to do the same; we ate it with the roasted seeds, but were unable to find
much of the gum or of the seeds.

September 2.

We travelled over uneven rocky ground, and crossed several gullies, and camped by the bed of
a river, at a spot where there were fine reaches of water, full of Nymphaea and Villarsia.
There was plenty of good grass in the valley of the river, which was not very wide here, but
on the hills many parts had been recently burned, and the grass was just springing up.

September 3.

Sunday. We had prayers at eleven o'clock, and afterwards, during the day, we shot a small emu
and a kangaroo. Being camped by the side of the river, we were able to catch a few fish, which
were a most acceptable change to us.

The country through which we had passed for the last two days consisted of a good stiff soil,
well covered with grass, openly timbered and well watered.

September 4 and 5.

The country continued much the same, making travelling most difficult and laborious. We were
now in the vicinity of Cape Tribulation. While traversing the bed of the river, in which we
were in many places obliged to travel, we passed two very high peaked hills to the westward.

September 6.

We now found the river beginning to run in all directions through the hills, over which it
was impossible to travel. We were consequently forced to keep the bed of the river, our horses
falling every few minutes, in consequence of the slippery surface of the rocks over which they
were obliged to pass--consisting of dark granite.

The sterility of the hills here is much relieved by the bunches of beautiful large yellow flowers
of the Cochlospermum Gossypium, interspersed with the large balls of white cotton, just bursting
from the seed-vessels. I collected a bag full of this cotton, wherewith to stuff our pack-saddles,
as our sheep did not supply us with wool enough for that purpose. On these hills, too, I saw
a beautiful Calythrix, with pink flowers, and two or three very pretty dwarf acacias. As Mr.
Kennedy and myself were walking first of the party, looking out for the best path for the horses
to travel in, I fell with violence, and unfortunately broke Mr. Kennedy's mountain barometer,
which I carried. I also bruised one of my fingers very much, by crushing it with my gun.

September 7 and 8.

We continued following the river through its westward course, through a very mountainous country.
On the hills I saw a very handsome Bauhinia, a tree about twenty feet high, with spreading
branches covered with axillary fascicles of red flowers, long broad flat legumes, pinnate leaves,
leaflets oval, about one inch long; an Erythrina, with fine racemes of orange-coloured flowers,
with long narrow keel, and broad vexillum, leaves palmate, and three to five lunate leaflets,
long, round, painted legumes, red seeds; also a rose-coloured Brachychiton, with rather small
flowers, a deciduous tree of stunted habit, about twenty feet high. We also passed narrow belts
of low sandy loam, covered with Banksias, broad-leafed Melaleucas, and the orange-coloured
Grevillea I have before spoken of. On these flats we again met with large ant-hills, six to
ten feet high, and eight feet in circumference; the land at the base was of a reddish colour.

September 9.

We had a fine view of the surrounding country from the top of a high hill, in the midst of
a range over which we passed. To the west and round to the south the country appeared to be
fine undulating forest land, intersected by numerous creeks and small rivers falling considerably
to the westward, as in fact all the water had been running for some days past. Doubtless there
must be plenty of water in the holes and reaches of these rivers and creeks at all seasons,
but in the rainy season many of them must be deep and rapid streams, as the flood-marks on
the trees were from fifteen to twenty feet high. The river along the course of which we had
been so long travelling varied in width from two hundred to eight hundred yards. It has two,
or, in some places, three distinct channels, and in the flat country through which it passes
these are divided by large drooping melaleucas.

It is singular that the country here should be so destitute of game; we had seen a few wallabies
and some ducks, but were seldom able to shoot any of them; we had not seen more than four or
five emus altogether since we started; a few brown hawks which we occasionally shot, were almost
the only addition we were enabled to make to our small ration. To-day we got an iguana and
two ducks, which with the water in which our mutton was boiled, would have made us a good pot
of soup, had there been any substance in the mutton. Even thin as it was, we were very glad
to get it. The rivers also seemed to contain but few fish, as we only caught a few of two different
kinds, one of which without scales, resembled the catfish, caught near Sydney;* the other was
a dark thick fish with scales.

(*Footnote. Plotosus macrocephalus.)

September 10.

Finding that the river continued running to the westward, and not as we had hoped towards Princess
Charlotte's Bay, we left it and turned in a northerly direction, travelling over very rocky
ridges covered with cochlospermums and acacias, interspersed with occasional patches of open
forest land, and strewed with isolated blocks of course granite containing crystals of quartz
and laminae of white mica. Prayers as usual at eleven o'clock.

We had not seen natives for several days, but this night, whilst one of the party was keeping
watch, a short distance from the fire, about eleven o'clock, he heard the chattering of the
blacks. Three spears were almost immediately thrown into the camp and fell near the fire, but
fortunately without injuring any of the party. We fired a few shots in the direction from which
the spears came; the night being so dark that we could not see them. We entertained fears that
some of our horses might be speared, as they were at some distance from the camp, but fortunately
the blacks offered us no further molestation.

September 11 and 12.

We pursued our northern course, the ground becoming very rotten; by the sides of small creeks
in sandy flats were belts of broad-leafed Melaleucas and Grevilleas. We met with scrubs of
Leptospermum, Fabricia, and Dodonaea. By the creeks, when the ground was sandy, we saw Abrus
precatorius, and a small tree about fifteen feet high, with bi-pinnate leaves, the leaflets
very small, with long flat legumes containing ten or twelve black and red seeds, like those
of Abrus precatorius, but rather larger.

September 13 and 14.

Most part of these days we travelled over a country of stiff soil, covered with iron-bark,
and divided at intervals by belts of sandy ground, on which grew Banksias, Callitris, and a
very pretty Lophostemon, about twenty feet high, with long narrow lanceolate leaves, and a
very round bushy top. By the side of the small streams running through the flat ground, I saw
a curious herbaceous plant, with large pitchers at the end of the leaves, like those of the
common pitcher-plant (Nepenthes distillatoria). It was too late in the season to find flowers,
but the flower-stems were about eighteen inches high, and the pitchers would hold about a wine-glass
full of water. This interesting and singular plant very much attracted the attention of all
our party.

We here fell in with a camp of natives. Immediately they saw us they ran away from their camp,
leaving behind them some half-cooked food, consisting of the meal of some seeds (most likely
Moreton Bay chestnuts) which had been moistened, and laid in small irregular pieces on a flat
stone with a small fire beneath it. We took a part of this baked meal, leaving behind some
fish-hooks as payment. In the camp we also found a considerable quantity of Pandanus fruit,
which grows very plentifully here. Although, however, it is sweet and pleasant to the taste,
I found that the natives did not eat largely of it, as it possessed very relaxing qualities,
and caused violent headache, with swelling beneath the eyes.

Some narrow belts of land we passed here betrayed indications of having been frequently inundated
by fresh water. The ground was very uneven, full of small hillocks which were hidden by long
grass, which caused our weak horses to fall very frequently.

September 15.

This day we had better travelling, the soil becoming a strong greyish loam; the forest land
open and free from scrub, the trees principally consisting of iron-bark, box, and the leguminous
tree, with bi-pinnate leaves, and dark fissured bark I have before alluded to. We saw here
a great many pigeons of various kinds; Mr. Wall shot one pair of Geophaps plumifera, which
he preserved; also a pair of small pigeons of a greyish colour, with red round the eyes, which
he considered new. I also saw a large tree and obtained specimens of it, belonging to the natural
order Bignoniaceae, with terminal spikes of yellow flowers, and rough cordate leaves; and a
Proteaceous plant with long compound racemes of white flowers, and deeply cut leaves, resembling
a tree with true pinnate leaves. The large-seeded Angophora mentioned by me before, also grew
in this district.

About ten o'clock we came upon the banks of a very fine river, with a very broad bed, and steep
banks on both sides. No doubt this was the river we had seen to the eastward from our camp
on the 9th instant. Mr. Kennedy considered this stream to rise somewhere near Cape Tribulation,
and after running northward about thirty miles, to turn to the south-west, the way it was running
when we came upon it. In this place it appeared a fine deep river, and we followed it in its
south-west course, at a short distance from its banks, for six or seven miles. The south-east
bank was, for the last three or four miles we traced it, covered with a narrow belt of scrub,
composed of Flagellaria, Jasminum, Phyllanthus, and a rambling plant, belonging to the natural
order Verbenaceae, with terminal spikes of white, sweet-scented flowers. The trees were principally
Castanospermum, Melia, Rulingia, and Sarcocephalus, and a beautiful tree belonging to the natural
order Bombaceae, probably to the genus Eriodendron, with large spreading branches, which, as
well as the trunk, were covered with spines. These trees are from thirty to fifty feet in height,
and produce large crimson campanulate flowers, composed of five large stiff petals, about two
inches long; stamens numerous, all joining at the base, and divided again into five parcels;
the filaments are the same length as the petals; five cleft stigma; large five-celled capsule,
many-seeded cells, the seeds being wrapped in a white silky cotton. This tree was deciduous,
the leaves being palmate, and grew on stiff soil: its large crimson flowers attracted universal
admiration.

We crossed the river at a spot where its banks were not so steep, and where there was but from
one to three feet of water; in some places the bottom was sandy and in others rocky, but we
could see rock only in the bed of the river. We camped on the side of the river, on some recently
burned grass; five of the party went fishing a short distance up the river, and caught a few
fish. The country here to the west and the south-west was open undulating forest land, which
had been burned some short time before, and the grass just growing again, formed beautiful
feed for our horses and sheep.

Towards evening about six or eight natives made their appearance, on the same side of the river
as our camp; when about two hundred yards from us they shipped their spears in their throwing-sticks,
and with other warlike gestures gradually drew near to us, making a great noise, doubtless
thinking to frighten us. There being a wide deep gully between the natives and our camp, we
drew up along the edge of it, with our firearms all ready to give them a warm reception should
they endeavour to approach to closer hostilities. We endeavoured to make them understand that
our intentions were friendly, and that we wished them to be peaceable; but they seemed to construe
our signals to make them comprehend this, into indications of fear on our part; this increased
their courage, and strengthened their determination to drive us away if possible, although
they would not come within reach of our guns. We however fired at them, and although none were
hurt, they appeared much frightened at the report of the firearms. They left us and went in
the direction taken by the five of our party who had gone fishing, and for the safety of whom
we began to be alarmed; our fears were increased, by hearing the report of a gun a few minutes
afterwards. It seemed they had seen our party fishing by the side of the river, and instantly
ran at them, to attack them; but one of the party placed on the bank as a lookout, fired at
them as they came up, just as they were preparing to throw their spears, on which they turned
their backs, and took to flight as fast as they could.

September 16.

This morning after breakfast, Mitchell and myself took two horses and re-crossed the river.
We went about two miles back to a spot where I had seen some Portulaca, intending to bring
some of it back to the camp to boil as a vegetable, it being the only description of food of
the kind that we had been able to obtain throughout our journey. We filled a bag with it and
returned to the camp, when I found half a damper, one meal's bread had been stolen from the
stores during my absence. This was not the first theft of the kind that had been committed,
and it was found necessary to watch the provisions night and day. Mr. Kennedy was anxious to
discover the thief in this instance, as it was stolen in open daylight while Mr. Kennedy himself
was keeping a lookout in his tent, not twenty yards from where the provisions were stolen;
every man's load was searched, but in vain, and Mr. Kennedy, knowing that a party left the
camp for the purpose of fishing a short distance up the river, and another party a few yards
down the river to wash some clothes--took Jackey with him, who, by detecting some crumbs on
the ground, discovered that the damper had been eaten at the place where the clothes were washed.

So careless were some of the party of the fatal consequences of our provisions being consumed
before we arrived at Cape York, that as soon as we camped and the horses were unpacked, it
was necessary that all the provisions should be deposited together on a tarpaulin, and that
I should be near them by day and by night, so that I could not leave the camp at all, unless
Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Wall undertook to watch the stores. I was obliged to watch the food whilst
cooking; it was taken out of the boiler in the presence of myself and two or three others,
and placed in the stores till morning.

It was seldom that I could go to bed before nine or ten o'clock at night, and I had to be up
at four in the morning to see our tea made and sweetened, and our breakfast served out by daylight.
The meals we cut up in thirteen parts, as nearly equal as possible, and one person touched
each part in succession; whilst another person, with his back turned, called out the names
of the party, the person named taking the part touched. The scrupulous exactness we were obliged
to practise with respect to our provisions was increased by our misfortune in getting next
to nothing to assist our scanty ration; while the extreme labour to which we were subjected
increased our appetites. Two of the party always went out at daylight to fetch the horses in,
and it was necessary we should start at early morning on account of the great heat in the middle
of the day. We always endeavoured to make a fair stage by ten o'clock, and then, if in a convenient
place, to halt: sometimes we were obliged to halt at nine o'clock, but we started again generally
about three or four o'clock P.M., and travelled on till six.

Twelve or fourteen natives made their appearance at the camp this evening, in the same direction
as on the previous day. Each one was armed with a large bundle of spears, and with boomerangs.
Their bodies were painted with a yellowish earth, which with their warlike gestures, made them
look very ferocious. The grass in the position they had taken up was very long and very dry,
quite up to the edge of the gully; they set it on fire in three or four places, and the wind
blowing from them to us, it burned very rapidly. Thinking we should be frightened at this display
they followed the fire with their spears shipped, making a most hideous noise, and with the
most savage gestures. Knowing the fire could not reach us, as there was nothing to burn on
our side the gully, we drew up towards them with our firearms prepared. They approached near
enough to throw three spears into our camp, one of which went quite through one of our tents.
No one was hurt, but a few of our party fired at them; we could not tell whether any were wounded,
as they disappeared almost immediately. We kept three on watch this night for fear of the natives.

September 17 to 21.

Leaving the river, we turned north-west, and had occasionally fair travelling over stiff soil,
intersected by many creeks, most of them dry, but were everywhere able to find water at intervals
of a few miles. We passed over some ironstone ridges, and rocky hills, covered with Callitris,
Cochlospermum, and Sterculias. On the stiff soil the trees were ironbark, box, apple-gum, and
some large acacias, with long lanceolate phyllodia, and large spikes of golden-coloured flowers.
The grass here in the valleys between the hills had been burned, and was grown up again about
eight or ten inches high.

September 22.

We crossed a creek running eastward, overhung by Melaleucas and arborescent callistemons, with
plenty of grass on both sides; the soil appeared to become more sandy than that over which
we had hitherto passed.

September 23.

We proceeded in our course, travelling over sandy ridges covered with Eugenia, Exocarpus, and
a very pretty Eucalyptus, with rose-coloured flowers and obcordate leaves, and yellow soft
bark, also a dwarfish tree with dark green leaves, and axillary racemes of round monospermons,
fruit of a purple colour, with a thin rind of a bitter flavour; also a great many trees of
moderate size, from fifteen to twenty feet high, of rather pendulous habit, oval lanceolate
exstipulate leaves, loaded with an oblong yellow fruit, having a rough stone inside; the part
covering the stone has, when ripe, a mealy appearance, and very good flavour. I considered
from its appearance it was the fruit which Leichhardt called the nonda, which we always afterwards
called it; we all ate plentifully of it.

The weather for the last few days had been very hot, the thermometer ranging in the shade from
95 to 100 degrees at noon; still there was generally a breeze in the morning from the eastward,
and in the evening from the west. We camped by the same creek as on the previous day, but in
our present position it was running South-West, with several lagoons in the valley, full of
Nymphaea and Villarsia; our latitude here was 15 degrees 33 minutes south.

September 24.

We crossed the creek and proceeded northward, till we camped by a dry creek, from the bed of
which we obtained water by digging. During the day's journey, we passed over some flats of
rotten honeycomb ground, on which nothing was growing but a few stunted shrubs, and a blue
herbaceous plant belonging to the order Boragineae. We also passed over other sandy flats covered
with broad-leafed Melaleucas and Grevillias, and a few Banksias. On these flats ant-hills occurred,
and in their vicinity there was seldom much grass. The grasses generally growing there were
annual kinds. It was Mr. Kennedy's opinion that the creek we crossed this morning joined the
river we left on the 16th, and formed the Mitchell, although the country hereabouts did not
resemble the banks of the Mitchell, as described by Leichhardt; but the appearance of the country
varies so much every few miles, particularly to the westward, that it is impossible to support
an opposite opinion on this ground.

September 25.

As three of the horses could not be found this morning, four men were left behind to search
for them while the rest of the party travelled on. They had not come up with us at about four
o'clock, and being anxious to find water before dark, we proceeded along a narrow open valley
covered with long grass and large pandanus trees, skirted on each side by rather scrubby forest
land. At dark we reached a large waterhole. One of the men left behind shortly arrived, and
stated that the rest had halted for the night. Mr. Kennedy being anxious to bring all the horses
to water, and to have the party together, sent me back to conduct them to the camp, which I
very soon did, even though it was dark, the track being very plain. We collected a great many
nondas to-day and baked some of them with our bread, which was the only way we could eat them
cooked; they were much better fresh from the trees, but we found them rather astringent. Spring,
our best kangaroo dog, was unable to come up to the camp this day, being overpowered by the
heat of the sun, a circumstance we all regretted, as he was a most excellent watchdog.

September 26.

We travelled a good stage this morning before we found water--in a sandy creek, where the country
seemed to fall slightly to the north-east. We still hoped to find a river running into Princess
Charlotte's Bay.

September 27.

We proceeded North-East over alternating sandy ridges and marshy flats; the latter, though
dry where we passed over them, presented the appearance of being generally inundated. We camped
by the side of a rocky creek, containing very little water.

September 28.

Just as we were about to start this morning, two natives, carrying a bundle of reeds and a
basket, passed within a short distance of our camp, and seemed to take no notice of us. Our
sheep were not to be found, having rambled to a distance: although without a sheepfold, this
was the first instance in which the sheep had strayed; they generally remained by the fire,
towards which they were driven at night, till morning.

We had never seen a wild native dog during the journey. Our dog that we had left behind came
into the camp to-night, very much exhausted, having travelled about thirty miles; he must have
subsisted on nondas, as it was impossible he could have caught anything, and we had seen him
eat them before. He died the following morning.

September 30.

After travelling a short distance we crossed a small river running eastward: for some distance
down it, the water was brackish, and at spring-tide the salt water came up to our camp; but
we obtained good water from a small lagoon near the camp. We proceeded over a large plain well
covered with good grass, the soil stiff clay. We proceeded about five or six miles on this
plain, turning westward towards a lagoon surrounded by Stravadiums and a few very large palms.
We hoped to find water in it, but it was dry, and fearing we should not be able to reach water
before dark if we proceeded in this direction, we thought it better to return to our camp.

October 1.

We had prayers this day as usual on Sundays, at eleven o'clock. We saw native fires at a distance
to the north-east of our camp, but the natives did not come near us. I went up what we fancied
was the river by which we had camped, but found it only a creek; but it had plenty of water
in it at this season. There were several small lagoons near it. There were large drooping tea-trees
(Melaleucas) growing on its banks, and large palm trees, of the same kind as those I had seen
in the plain the day before, and which were by far the finest palms I had ever seen; the trunks
were not very high, from fifteen to thirty feet in height, but very large in bulk, varying
from six to eight feet in circumference: they had large fan-shaped leaves, with slightly curved
spines on the footstalk. It is a dioecious palm, the female plants bearing an immense quantity
of round fruit, about the size of a greengage plum, of a purple colour, and rather disagreeable
flavour; the pulp covering the seed was very oily, and not a leaf to be seen on any of the
fruit-bearing plants; the whole top consists of branches full of ripe and unripe seeds. Bushels
of seeds were lying beneath some of the trees, it seeming that but few were eaten by birds
or small animals. One of our party suffered severely from eating too freely of them as they
brought on diarrhoea. I measured two or three of the leaves of the male plants, and those not
of the largest size, and found them to measure six feet in the widest part, and four feet and
half in the narrowest. These leaves were split by the wind into segments of various widths.
The grass growing to the westward of our camp was not so high as that to the eastward, and
appeared to consist of a larger proportion of annual grasses, the perennial grass growing only
in tufts; near the river it was covered with an annual Ipomoea, of very strong growth; the
leaves and blossoms were withered, but I obtained seeds. We shot three ducks to-day, and Wall
killed a wallaby of a light grey colour, long soft fur, and rather bushy tail; he thought it
new, and preserved the skin. I also obtained specimens of a beautiful plant, a shrub about
two feet high, with white sweet-scented blossoms, belonging to the natural order Rubiaceae,
and several other interesting plants. Lately, however, my specimens had been very much spoiled,
being torn from the horse's back so frequently, that I grew disheartened to see all the efforts
I had made, made in vain, although I still took every method to preserve them from injury.

October 2.

This morning we proceeded across the plain, and when we had advanced about two miles upon it,
we discovered that the natives had set the grass on fire behind us, and the wind blowing from
the eastward, and the grass growing thick and high, it rapidly gained upon us; we made all
possible haste to some burned ground which we had seen on Saturday, and reached it only a few
minutes before the fire. We were enveloped in smoke and ashes, but fortunately no one was burned.
The natives did not come near us, although no doubt they watched us, and saw us proceeding
to the part of the plain that was burned. The plain extended a great distance to the westward,
and in crossing it one of our horses knocked up and could travel no longer; Mr. Kennedy ordered
him to be bled, and we not liking to lose the blood, boiled it as a blood-pudding with a little
flour, and in the situation we were, we enjoyed it very much.

October 3.

We killed the horse this morning as he was not able to stand, and dried the meat to carry with
us; we made a small stage of saplings on which to dry the meat, which was cut off close to
the bone as clean as possible, and then cut in thin slices, and laid on the stage in the sun
to dry, and the sun being very hot, it dried well; the heart, liver, and kidneys were parboiled,
and cut up fine, and mixed with the blood of the horse and about three pounds of flour; they
made four puddings, with which, after they had boiled about four hours, we satisfied our appetites
better than we had been able to do for some time: it was served up in the same manner as our
usual rations, in equal parts, and each man had a right to reserve a portion of his mess till
the next day, but very little was saved. Mr. Kennedy found that it was even necessary to have
the horseflesh watched whilst drying, finding that two or three of the party had secreted small
quantities amongst their clothes; such precautions were quite necessary, as well in justice
to the whole of the party, as to keep up the strength of all, which seemed to be very fast
declining. At night we made a fire to smoke the meat, and to destroy the maggots, which were
very numerous in it; we packed the meat in empty flour bags.

October 4.

We proceeded northward over small sandy plains, covered with annual grass, which was now very
much withered, and through belts of dwarf bushy Melaleucas and Banksias. We were not far from
Princess Charlotte's Bay, Jane's Table Land being in sight. We came to the side of a salt lagoon,
very nearly dry; we found it covered with salt, of which we took about 20 pounds, which was
as much as we could carry, but even this was a very seasonable help; we rubbed about two pounds
of it into our meat. We encamped by a small creek, but the water was brackish, and not being
able to find any other we were obliged to make use of it. One of our horses was slightly hurt
by a stump of a mangrove tree. All we got from the horse we last killed was sixty-five pounds
of meat.

October 5 and 6.

We travelled over sandy soil, but with little grass, meeting frequently with salt lagoons,
surrounded by various salsolaceous plants. Near the edge of a saltwater creek we found a native
camp, composed of about seven or eight huts, curiously and neatly built of a conical form;
all very nearly of the same size, about five and a half feet in diameter at the base, and six
and a half feet high. They were made by placing saplings in the ground in a slanting position,
which were tied together at the top and woven inside like wickerwork, with strips of small
bamboo canes. The whole was then covered with palm leaves, over which was a coating of tea-tree
bark, very neatly fastened by strips of cane. They were substantially built, and would no doubt
keep out the wet effectually. They seemed to be occupied by the natives only in the rainy season,
as, from their appearance, they had not been inhabited for some time. I entered one of them
through a small arched opening of about twenty inches or two feet high, and found three or
four nets, made with thin strips of cane, about five feet long, with an opening of about eight
inches in diameter at one end, getting gradually smaller for about four feet, where there was
a small opening into a large round sort of basket. These nets were laid by the natives in narrow
channels to catch fish, as well as in the tracks of small animals, such as rats and bandicoots,
for the purpose of trapping them. There were also some pieces of glass bottle in the hut, carefully
wrapped in bark and placed in a very neat basket, made in the shape of a lady's reticule. The
glass is used by the natives in marking themselves: all of them being scarred on the arms and
breast, while some were marked on the cheeks and forehead.

In the camp we thus discovered were small stone ovens, similar to those we had found in the
camp at Rockingham Bay, as well as one with a large flat stone raised six or eight inches from
the ground, and a fireplace of loose stones beneath. Near to one of the tents was a large stone
hollowed out in the middle, and two or three round pebbles for pounding dried seeds, etc.

October 7 and 8.

Flat sandy ground, with occasional patches of scrub, composed of bushy Melaleucas, Hibiscus,
Banksia, and several rambling plants, with a few large palms scattered in places; there was
not much grass, except at intervals.

October 9. It was deep, and about 100 yards wide, the water salt, and the tide was flowing
up fast, and the banks were high. A few scattered mangroves, and a leguminous tree, with rough
cordate leaves, and large one or two-seeded legumes, were growing on the banks. We were obliged
to turn southerly for a short distance, and found what we had fancied to be a river to be only
a small creek. We crossed it about twelve or fourteen miles from the sea, but the water was
brackish. The trees on the sandy ground were broad-leafed Melaleucas, Grevilleas, and nondas,
and by the waterholes which we occasionally saw, were Stravadiums and drooping Melaleucas.
I also saw a species of Stravadium with racemes of white flowers, much longer than the others,
with leaves ten inches long by four inches broad, and the trees thirty feet high. Keeping at
a distance from the sea-coast to avoid the saltwater creeks, and to obtain good grass for our
horses, we halted in the middle of the day, and were visited by a great many natives, coming
in all directions, and making a great noise. They appeared to have been collecting nondas,
as a great many of their women were carrying large basketfuls away. After the women were out
of sight they made signs to us to go away. We got our horses together, and endeavoured to make
them friendly, but our entreaties were disregarded, and the presents we offered them were treated
with contempt. When we found they would not allow us to come near them, we packed our horses
and prepared to start. They followed us at some distance, continually throwing spears after
us for some time; one was thrown into the thigh of a horse, but fortunately not being barbed
it was taken out, and the horse was not much injured. We then rode after them in two or three
directions and fired at them, and they left us, and we saw no more of them.

October 11.

To-day, when halting in a place where there was no water, but good grass, a tribe of natives
made their appearance, and appeared disposed to be friendly. We carefully collected our horses,
and shortly after the natives drew near to us. We made them presents of a few fish-hooks and
tin plates, and made signs to them that we wanted water. Several of them ran off, and in a
few minutes returned with water in a vessel (if it may be so called) composed of pieces of
bark tied together at each end, and they continued going backwards and forwards until they
had brought enough to fill our cans, besides what we drank. They left us quite quietly.

October 12.

We proceeded along the creek by which we had encamped the night before; the water was brackish.
We attempted to go through some mangroves to the beach, but did not succeed.

October 13.

Jackey, Taylor, and myself took three horses, and tried to get to the beach more to the northward
than yesterday. We passed through a belt of mangroves, where the ground was pretty firm, the
tide coming up only occasionally; we then proceeded along a sandy ridge to the northward, when
we found it succeeded by a saltwater lagoon, surrounded by salsolaceous plants and mangroves,
which it was impossible to get through. We returned to our camp, and here Mr. Kennedy abandoned
the thought of going to the beach, as he felt sure H.M.S. Bramble (which was to have met us
at the beginning of August) would have gone; our journey having occupied so much longer time
than we could have possibly anticipated. This consideration, combined with the great difficulty
which seemed likely to ensue in obtaining water and feed for our horses, determined him to
take a different direction.

October 15.

We had prayers as usual this day, being Sunday, at 11 o'clock; today we finished the consumption
of all our sugar, except a very small quantity, which was reserved for any particular case
of sickness.

October 16.

This morning a horse fell into a rocky waterhole, and finding it impossible to get him out
alive, we killed him, and cured the flesh as before, drying it in the sun on a stage; the blood,
heart, and liver furnished us with a good day's food. Our meat being well dried by five o'clock
in the afternoon, we sprinkled some salt upon it, and put it in bags for the convenience of
carrying. We left one of our round tents, and such other things as we could possibly spare
behind us at the camp, as our horses were now so weak they could not carry their loads.

October 17 and 18.

Our travelling was very uneven, our horses giving us continual trouble from their frequent
falls; we had a few narrow belts of scrub to cut through, but they were not very thick.

October 19.

Several of our horses were now quite unable to carry anything but the saddle; we passed through
open forest land, with a light soil, sub-soil clay, with isolated blocks of granite rock scattered
about. We encamped by a rocky creek, with water in holes only; it ran westerly, and had fresh
green feed on each side, the grass having been burned shortly before, and now growing up again.

October 20.

We passed over a piece of stiff ground about two miles in extent, which appeared to have been
the scene of a devastating hurricane. It was covered with fallen timber, which rendered it
very difficult to cross. The wind must have swept from the south-west to the north-east, and
from the appearance of the saplings which were growing from the stumps of some of the trees
which had been broken, this terrific storm appeared to have taken place about two years ago.
Not a tree had been left standing in the part where we crossed, nor could we tell how far the
devastation had extended to the south-west; but the ground to the north and east being swampy,
and covered only with small Melaleucas and Banksias, the wind had not taken much effect. Many
of the trees in the middle of the fallen timber measured two feet in diameter. Some were torn
up by the roots, and the trunks of others were snapped off at various heights from the ground.
The latitude of our camp here was 13 degrees 35 minutes South.

October 21.

We killed another of our horses to-day, as he was too weak to stand.

October 22.

We got our meat well dried to-day, and having smoked it a little, packed it as before. Our
stock of flour was now reduced to two hundred pounds weight, and many of the men growing very
weak, we were obliged to increase our weekly ration a little. Three of the party, Douglas,
Taylor, and Costigan, were suffering from diarrhoea, in consequence of having eaten too freely
of the pandanus fruit. Their spirits began to fail them, and they frequently complained despairingly
to Mr. Kennedy that they should never be able to reach Cape York. Although our horses were
so very weak, these men were obliged to ride, being quite unable to walk far at a time. The
country before us was very mountainous, but between the hills we found plenty of grass and
water: to the south the whole country appeared to be on fire.

October 23 to 25.

We travelled during these days over a rocky mountainous country, interspersed with deep gullies
and creeks, fringed with belts of scrub. In these scrubs I saw the white-apple and the crimson
scitamineous plant seen near Rockingham Bay; scattered over the country were a few cedar trees
and Moreton Bay chestnuts, and some very fine timber trees belonging to the natural order Myrtaceae,
upwards of sixty feet high, and three to four feet in diameter, with fine straight trunks.

October 26 to 28.

We travelled over stony hills, the tops of which were occasionally composed of white flint
(?), with rusty veins running through it. On the sides of the hills were broken rocks containing
mica, hornblende, and crystals of quartz. The grass on these hills had all been newly burned.

October 29.

Sunday; prayers at eleven o'clock. We this day shot three small wallabies, which were a great
treat to us.

October 30.

This day Luff was taken very lame, being seized with severe pain and stiffness in the right
leg; he was quite unable to walk, so we burned the other two round tents to enable him to ride.

November 1 and 2.

We again had to kill a horse which was too weak, and disposed of it as we had our former ones.

November 3.

We were cutting through scrub all day, intersected by deep gullies and rocky hills; we crossed
a small river, with very uneven rocky bottom, about three feet deep; where we crossed it, it
was running southerly, and as there had been a heavy storm a few days previously, the current
was rapid; five of our horses fell in crossing it--the one carrying my specimens in a very
bad place; we were obliged to cut the girths, and before I could secure his load two bags of
seeds were washed away; we tied our horses to trees, and encamped in a thick bamboo scrub by
the side of the river.

November 4.

This morning Jackey went to examine a scrub through which we wanted to pass, and while out,
shot a fine cassowary; it was very dark and heavy, not so long on the leg as the common emu,
and had a larger body, shorter neck, with a large red, stiff, horny comb on its head; Mr. Wall
skinned it, but from the many difficulties with which he had to contend, the skin was spoiled
before it could be properly preserved.

November 5.

We travelled a short distance to the top of a hill, from which Jackey had seen grass from a
tree. We were obliged to kill another horse to-day, and cured the flesh as usual.

November 6.

We were compelled to shoot two other horses to day, and as we had no other means of taking
the meat with us, we skinned one of them, and made the skin into bags, in which we each carried
a few pounds of meat on our backs.

November 7 and 8.

We were travelling these two days over very rough rocky ground, intersected with gullies and
belts of scrub.

November 9.

We were obliged this morning to start without our breakfast, having no bread baked, and being
unable to find water. We followed the course of a creek at the foot of a low range of hills
running northward, the range being to the westward. In the evening we found water in the creek.

November 10.

We proceeded along the valley of the creek, which was very uneven, and full of small hillocks.
Near the spot where we camped a great number of Pandanus trees were growing. On each side of
the creek there were a few scattered trees and a thick scrub to the westward. The soil was
stiff, with plenty of grass in the valley.

Mr. Kennedy, here, finding from the weak state of some of the men, that it would be impossible
for us to reach Cape York before our provisions were exhausted, resolved to form an advance
party, consisting of himself, Jackey, Costigan, Luff, and Dunn. 

The palace, meanwhile, there was anxiety and concern. Elga own way, was apparently the calmest of all.
She seemed the strange behavior of her husband or the account of to push that nocturnal surprise,
about which, as anyone certainly something specific could be attributed to the count, as they hoped,
to calm himself well at the end am. The former chambermaid was still in her service.

Unexpectedly released after some time the count on the border of his inheritance in his wake a locked
car, no one knew of its contents. A veiled figure, perhaps by gag on talking prevents lifted out
by Ward and the letters in advance to the Limit allotted steward handed over. The old waiting
on the west side of the Tiergarten, since closed carefully, the strange phenomenon took into their
custody, and dark Rumors spread among the residents of the neighborhood.

The count went to his castle. Loud cheering came to meet him Elga, the child on her hand. He
heard how troubled you about his sudden departure was how eagerly he is expected back. The little progress
has been praised, some samples of the acquired skills on the site is stored. Since the time
of the dinner came, declared himself Starschensky inappropriate and tired from the trip. He
went, despite all the ideas, only to be Room, where he single lock. But his desire for peace
was given only at night because He left his room and went alone to the control room, where he
remained until the end gray morning.

The next day was verdruesslich Elga, pouting. The Count's nightly walk was not remained unnoticed. Elga
was found neglected and showed their displeasure about it. Starschensky interrupted their sullen
expressions, speaking of their mutual position began to speak. He noted that during his current
stay in Warsaw, where renewed vision of the distractions that pleasure-loving city, it became
clear to him how a so attractive end, fun-loving nature, as Elga, in the country was not at
all in their place. He asked her if she would prefer to stay in the capital? At his side, said it
.-- He assured the count was being held by his business on the estates; his Vermoegensumstaende are
worse, remain as they believed, he has to. Then stay they also said, Elga. At his side she
would live and die. Now, they cursed the two brothers, who, by their insolent demands the too-good
husband in so many Fix crashed. She assured, and now also every remnant of love for them stored
have to. If her brothers stalls begging at the door, they would not open, "said them. The count
took over some of the defense of his brothers. He did it in Warsaw spoken. It was one of their
Verbannungsgefaehrten with them - what was his name - thought Elga likewise for .-- Oginsky!
cried the count, and looked at her quickly. Do not altered one Face and said: "The comrades of
my brothers are all bad, but this is the worst - What - the? you called - What was that? - Well,
Oginsky! she answered, and a slight twitching in their Trains revealed a temporary move.

The count had gone to the window and looked out.

Elga followed him, she rested her arm on his shoulder. The count stood motionless. Starschensky
said she, I notice a tremendous Alteration in your being. You do not love me, as usual you are
hiding some things to me. The count turned round and said: Well, let's say this because you
want to talk. You know the disruption of my Vermoegensumstaende, you know the cause. What else
expresses me, I just know. Now, if these events are hard on me, no less tortured the Thought that
I had caused the cause perhaps even themselves. Certainly was the carelessness reprehensible,
with whom I administered the inheritance of my fathers, perhaps I was even then punishable as
I, the stubborn, accustomed to solitude, to the hand of the lively Girl courted carefree about the
direction of their feelings and inclinations, carefree, whether I, my wife has become a way of
life condemned the intolerable monotony of her had to be .-- Starschensky! said, Elga, and
saw him with flattering to reproach .-- Man I was offered an outside service, "continued Starschensky,
and strictly speaking, it is perhaps best, I turn away for some, perhaps for a longer time, the
land of my fathers. Yesterday yet my decisions were sinister. But the deliberation on this
night, showed me this decision as the best. Last night, Elga said suspiciously, tonight you do
you mind? And where? On that waiting around? And there went back Starschensky affected: Hab
I up - she went on. From there, you bring your concerns? From there your request to travel?
And probably the Reisegefaehrtin? Through the rumor I had to learn how a veiled figure, probably
a happy lover, there was sold to the Now every night you take away the tenderness that you swore
to me at the altar. Is this is my reward? Come! applied it to the child next to it, come on! We
are at his Last! He met other pleasures than in the bosom of his! So she turned to go. A shrill
Hohngelaechter escaped the lips of the count, over which he himself zusammenschrak how about
that of another. Elga turned. I knew well, she said, it was just a joke. But the unveiling
of the mystery of those waiting will save you so not. I have to see for themselves what it
conceals. Do you promise? The count was on a couch down and hid his face in his two hands. Then
he heard a Doors open. Looking through his fingers, he looks at his wife's chambermaid, with
the same tried to enter her bedside tools, and Elgan, with a sly face their distance waving. Elga
then approached the couch and spoke Flushed sit next to her husband, them: Come, Starschensky,
let us make peace! We have after all been so long not talk without witnesses. So she bent
her cheek against his, and pulled one of his Hands to her throbbing heart. A chill fell over
the count. Hoellenschwarz stands before him. He met his wife back and fled.

Midnight had struck. All was quiet in the castle. Elga slept in her room. Since felt they were
touched and, driving up from sleep, she saw the light of a night lamp her husband, who get up,
a dark lantern in her hand, she was called, dress. On her question: why? He replied: You have
shown desire to know the secrets of those waiting.

On the day that would not, but if they do not shy away darkness and night air, they may follow
him. But you have no evil in the sense? asked the countess, were you last night so strange! If you
do not want to follow, stay, said Starschensky and was about to to leave. Stop! Elga said. If
timidity is the common inheritance of wives, I'm not a woman. Also, it must end state of uncertainty. Perhaps
you are in gone up, have recognized .-- If you want to convince you - said Starschensky, so stand
on and follow me. Elga had jumped out of bed and had a sleep over fur thrown. She wanted to
go. But while the child was awake, the sleeping in the bed at her side. It began to cry. Your
child will awaken the residents of the castle, said the count Da, without saying a word, he
took the little girl wrapped up Elga them in a warmverhuellendes Cloth and the child in her
arms, she followed the senior spouse.

The night was cool and dark. The stars shone on a thousand times but trauergefaerbten Sky but
no moon illuminated the converter lonely path, only the Count threw lantern short streak of
light on the floor and the lower leaves of the midnight sleeping Bushes.

So they had to, passed through from its former use so-called zoo and had now reached those waiting,
the real goals of their migration. As applied the Count himself to his wife and said, "You are
now in the most hidden secrets your husband to explore. You want him to surprise over the breach
of his marital fidelity, shame him in the presence of a rejected
lover.

It's cheap, that risk and benefit was equal on both sides. Before you enter, I swear that
you never used an equal Command language you guilty that you were purely in the crime of which
you accuse your Husband. You make excuses, "said Elga. Woman! "continued the count, continuous in
thought thy bygone life, and if you have a flaw, I will not say a stigma, it discover, it does not
occur within its walls. Elga pushed his way past the count, the To the entrance. He turned her
over again in the way, exclaiming, "You're not one; MIRS before you finally assured. Put your hand
upon the head of your child and swear! Since Elga put the rights to the head of the sleeping
children, and said so superfluous I think such an oath, as well as you yourself are convinced
of how much he had to I affirm it - Stop! shouted Starschensky, it is enough. Occurs and see!

The
Count unlocked. They ascended a narrow staircase, which also to a closed door led. The count
also opened it, and now they were in a spacious Chamber, whose inner part by a dark curtain
was closed. The count was Chairs in a deal inflamed advanced tables on which the light of his
lantern two wax candles in heavy iron chandeliers, moved out of the drawer of the table, a
booklet Papers out and beckoned his wife to sit down, as he likewise settled. Elga saw around
him, but nobody noticed. She sat and listened.

Then began the count, they were advancing to the light to read the papers, which he thought: 'Even
I confess to the daughter of Star East Laschek community to have illicit practices; before
and after her marriage with Count Starschensky. Honor their only child - 'unheard Slander! Elga
screamed and jumped up. Who dares to accuse me of such things? Oginsky! called for the count
Get up and affirm your statement! With these words he had the curtain torn away, and a man form
was found lying on straw, with chains on the wall bound.

Who calls me? asked the prisoner. Elga is here, "said the Count, and asks whether It was true
that you caressed her? How often should I "repeat? said the man, himself in reversing his chains
.-- Do you hear? cried the earl to his wife, pale and frozen stood. Record here the key and open the
shackles of this man! Elga hesitated. Since crack Count his sword half out of the vagina, and
she left. Clanking the chains fell off, and Oginsky stepped forward. What do you want from me?
he said. You hurt me most deeply, said the count You know how men and nobles dismiss their insults.
Here, take this steel, he continued, drawing out a second sword from his coat, and set up I
- I do not fight! Oginsky said. You must! Starschensky cried and insisted on him one. Meanwhile,
we heard noises on the stairs. Elga, who had stood motionless, now sprang to the door and tried to
open it by shouting loudly for help. Starschensky overtook them as they attacked just after the
catch, the woman pushed back and closed the door. The split took advantage Oginsky, and during
the count still busy at the entrance was, he tore open the window and jumped down. The case
was not deep; Oginsky reached undamaged the ground, and when the count from the door ran away to
the window faded, already kicks the fugitive in the distance.

The count now turned to his wife. Your accomplice escaped, he said, but you shall not escape me.
Can you believe that slander? Elga stammered. I think the, I know Starschensky said, and the
stamp of the similarity in the features of this child. You have to die, he said, and while here
on the spot! Elga had fallen to his knees. Have mercy on my life, she cried. Start with me what you want!
Banish me! contrary me! hot myself in a monastery, perform in a prison the rest of my days, just let I
live! LIFE! The Count thought for a while, then he said, Because thou this schmacherfuellte, horrible
existence treasures, everything, know this: there is a single means
to you to Save lives.

Call it call it, Elga whimpered. The burn my honor, "said the count, is this child. If his eyes
closes the death, who knows if my wrath shall not change. We are alone, no one sees us, night
and darkness veil the deed. Go and kill the Kind - What, me? Elga cried. Kill? My child? Inhuman!
Wicked! What are you thinking me? Well! Starschensky cried and raised his saber discarded
on the floor. Stop! cried Elga, stop! I will! They rushed to her child and pressed it to her bosom,
covered it with tears. Why delay? Starschensky screamed and made a movement against them. No!
no! Elga said. Forgive me God, do I have to do what I can not help. Forgive you me, born to the accident! That
they had pressured the child to her breast again, with averted eye, she took a large pin that
bound their fur, the tool flashing, the armed wing - Stop! suddenly shouted Starschensky.
That's where I want to have you! To see whether some emotion in you, the value of the day. But
it is black and night. Your Child should not die, but, disgraceful, you! and with that he
pushed her sword in the Side that the blood sprang up in torrents, and she fell over the uninjured
child.

That night was one of terror for the inhabitants of the surrounding area. From a Feuerroete
startled at the sky, they went to and saw the old waiting on the west side animal garden wall
of Starschenskys castle in flames. All are trying to delete were in vain, sometimes only black
walls were burned in the smoking rubble. They wanted to raise the count, he was missing with
him his wife, his child. The Brandstätter was searched, and found human bones while though, but
that the remains should be three people?

At parting that night did a poor CHARCOAL BURNER felt the happiest
in the mountains all mortals.

For when she was with her husband and slept, there was a knock at the Huettentuere. She got
up and opened before she saw the glow of the dawning morning, a crying child are about two
years ago, instead of clothes wrapped in a wide cloth, Box next to him. Opened, this was more
gold than ever, the poor couple together had dreamed. A few lines enclosed recommended the
child care of the two and promised donations in the distant future.

After two days the count appeared again in the middle of his own,
but only to get a prepare to travel to Warsaw.

Once there, he sought and received personal hearing the Kings, get after it ended the prince, visibly
shaken, his chancellor left and told him to make out open letters, which the Count Starschensky
than last his tribe, which allows for free disposal of his fiefs.

The cargoes were sometimes even sold and used the proceeds to repay debt; partly as a foundation
to a monastery where property which is not far from the spot began to build, where the old,
spent waiting had been.

This is the story of this Monastery, the monk ended.

"The count itself, however," - said one of the stranger.

"I have the same warning at the beginning," said the monk, "do not
ask further, if I stop, now do Hers yet!

Many Seelmessen were donated for the rest of those who the rapid violence swept away in the
middle of their sins, for forgiveness for the unfortunate, convicted of crimes by precipitation
in damnable crime. The count was Moench grown in the monastery founded by him. At first he
found solace in the silence of monastic life, in the uniformity of
penance.

And the time to blunt the sting instead showed He always grisly his
act.

About him was his tribe and the spirit tatenheischender Solitude of his cell was to torment.
In two languages ​​with spirits, and unto himself angry, mad as he was guarded for many a year. Finally
healed, he was wandering in the daytime; every business he was refreshing, to the trees of the forest he
exercised his power. Only at night, at the hour when the lamentable fact happened, the first
after midnight, when the funeral begins "- So far he had come into his narrative, as was the first
by the sounds a cut from the convent church choir singing heruebertoenenden; also proposed the
Bell a clock.

With the first sounds schuetterte together the monk. His knees trembled, his teeth beat each other,
he seemed to want to sink down, when suddenly the door opened and the abbot of the monastery in
high-set position, the cross on his dignity sparkling the chest and stood in the doorway. "Where
you live, Starschensky?" he cried. "The hour of your Buses has come. "As the monk and zusammengekruemmt
whimpered like a wounded animal, in wide circles, the same dog who fears the punishment, he
pushed himself to the door the abbot, stepping back, let him free.

Once there, he shot out like an arrow, The abbot, behind him, locked the door.

For a long time heard the stranger to the choir singing, until it faded into the silence of the
night and they sought their camp a short rest.

In the morning she took leave of the abbot, thanking him for the friendly hospitality. The
younger, it won over themselves to ask the monks last night, after which the prelate, without
reply, wished them a happy journey.

They moved to Warsaw and took the right on the way back further news
of the state collect the monk, in which they had probably the unfortunate
Starschensky detected.

But a change in their shops they wrote a different road to return, and they have never heard
anything more from the monks and the monastery at Sendomir.


The six weeks having expired, which Mr. Kennedy had led me to expect would be the longest period
we should have to wait, I now began to fear the rainy season had set in, and filled the creeks
to the northward, so that his party had been unable to cross them, or that some untoward accident
had happened, which prevented us being relieved.

I did not quite despair, but I knew that we could not live long. Our shot was almost consumed,
not having more than eight or ten charges left, and although we had plenty of ball, we were
too weak to attempt to form any plan to make shot. Our sole remaining companion, the sheepdog,
I intended to kill in a day or two, but he would not last long, as he was nothing but skin
and bone.

December 30.

Early this morning we ate the two pigeons left yesterday, and boiled each a quart of tea, from
the leaves we had left; but we had not had any fresh tea to put into the pot for some time.
Goddard then went into the bush, to try to get another pigeon or two, and if the natives made
their appearance, I was to fire a pistol to recall him to the camp. The paper was a note to
me from Captain Dobson, of the schooner Ariel, but it was so dirtied and torn that I could
only read part of it.

For a minute or two I was almost senseless with the joy which the hope of our deliverance inspired.
I made the natives a few presents, and gave them a note to Captain Dobson, which I made them
easily understand I wanted them to take to that gentleman. I was in hopes they would then have
gone, but I soon found they had other intentions. A great many natives were coming from all
quarters well armed with spears. I had given a shirt to the one who had brought the note, and
put it on him; but I saw him throw down the note and pull off the shirt, and picking up his
spear he joined the rest, who were preparing to attack us. We were expecting every moment to
be attacked and murdered by these savages, our newly awakened hope already beginning to fail,
when we saw Captain Dobson and Dr. Vallack, accompanied by Jackey and a man named Barrett (who
had been wounded a few days before in the arm by a barbed spear) approaching towards us, across
the creek. I and my companion, who was preserved with me, must ever be grateful for the prompt
courage with which these persons, at the risk of their own lives, came to our assistance, through
the scrub and mangroves, a distance of about three miles, surrounded as they were all the way
by a large number of armed natives.

I was reduced almost to a skeleton. The elbow bone of my right arm was through the skin, as
also the bone of my right hip. My legs also were swollen to an enormous size. Goddard walked
to the boat, but I could not do so without the assistance of Captain Dobson and Dr. Vallack,
and I had to be carried altogether a part of the distance. The others, Jackey and Barrett,
kept a lookout for the blacks. We were unable to bring many things from the camp. The principal
were, the firearms and one parcel of my seeds, which I had managed to keep dry, containing
eighty-seven species. All my specimens were left behind, which I regretted very much: for though
much injured, the collection contained specimens of very beautiful trees, shrubs, and orchideae.
I could also only secure an abstract of my journal, except that portion of it from 13th November
to 30th December, which I have in full. My original journal, with a botanical work which had
been kindly lent me by a friend in Sydney for the expedition, was left behind. We got safely
on board the Ariel; and after a very long passage, arrived in Sydney.

I am confident that no man could have done more for the safety of the party than was done by
Mr. Kennedy, nor could any man have exerted himself more than he, in the most distressing circumstances
of our perilous journey. He walked by far the greater part of the distance, giving his own
horses for the use of the weak men, and the general service of the expedition. I never rode
but two hours all through the journey, and that was on two successive days when we were in
the vicinity of Cape Sidmouth, and I was suffering from bad feet.

The unfortunate death of our brave and generous leader, deeply and extensively as I know it
to have been lamented, can have no more sincere mourner than myself.

The tale of his sufferings and those of his party has already been read and sympathised over
by hundreds, and it would ill become me to add anything to the artless narrative of the faithful
and true-hearted Jackey, who having tended his last moments, and closed his eyes, was the first,
perhaps the most disinterested, bewailer of his unhappy fate.

...

STATEMENT OF JACKEY-JACKEY.

MADE BY HIM ON BOARD THE ARIEL, AND WRITTEN DOWN BY DR. VALLACK.

I started with Mr. Kennedy from Weymouth Bay for Cape York, on the 13th November, 1848, accompanied
by Costigan, Dunn, and Luff, leaving eight men at the camp, at Weymouth Bay. We went on till
we came to a river which empties itself into Weymouth Bay. A little further north we crossed
the river; next morning a lot of natives camped on the other side of the river. Mr. Kennedy
and the rest of us went on a very high hill and came to a flat on the other side and camped
there; I went on a good way next day; a horse fell down a creek; the flour we took with us
lasted three days; we had much trouble in getting the horse out of the creek; we went on, and
came out, and camped on the ridges; we had no water. Next morning went on and Luff was taken
ill with a very bad knee; we left him behind, and Dunn went back again and brought him on;
Luff was riding a horse named Fiddler; then we went on and camped at a little creek; the flour
being out this day we commenced eating horse-flesh, which Carron gave us when we left Weymouth
Bay; as we went on we came on a small river, and saw no blacks there; as we proceeded we gathered
nondas, and lived upon them and the meat; we stopped at a little creek and it came on raining,
and Costigan shot himself; in putting his saddle under the tarpaulin, a string caught the trigger
and the ball went in under the right arm and came out at his back under the shoulder; we went
on this morning all of us, and stopped at another creek in the evening, and the next morning
we killed a horse named Browney, smoked him that night and went on next day, taking as much
of the horse as we could with us, and went on about a mile and then turned back again to where
we killed the horse, because Costigan was very bad and in much pain; we went back again because
there was no water; then Mr. Kennedy and I had dinner there, and went on in the afternoon leaving
Dunn, Costigan, and Luff at the creek. This was at Pudding-pan Hill, near Shelburne Bay. Mr.
Kennedy called it Pudding-pan Hill. We left some horse-meat with the three men at Pudding-pan
Hill, and carried some with us on a packhorse. Mr. Kennedy wanted to make great haste when
he left this place, to get the doctor to go down to the men that were ill. This was about three
weeks after leaving Weymouth Bay. One horse was left with the three men at Pudding-pan Hill,
and we (Kennedy and myself) took with us three horses. The three men were to remain there until
Mr. Kennedy and myself had gone to and returned from Cape York for them. Mr. Kennedy told Luff
and Dunn when he left them that if Costigan died to come along the beach till they saw the
ship, and then to fire a gun; he told them he would not be long away, so it was not likely
they would move from there for some time. They stopped to take care of the man that was shot,
we (me and Mr. Kennedy) killed a horse for them before we came away; having left these three
men, we camped that night where there was no water; next morning Mr. Kennedy and me went on
with the four horses, two packhorses and two saddle-horses; one horse got bogged in a swamp.
We tried to get him out all day, but could not, we left him there, and camped at another creek.
The next day Mr. Kennedy and I went on again, and passed up a ridge very scrubby, and had to
turn back again, and went along gulleys to get clear of the creek and scrub. Now it rained,
and we camped; there were plenty of blacks here, but we did not see them, but plenty of fresh
tracks, and camps, and smoke. Next morning we went on and camped at another creek, and on the
following morning we continued going on, and camped in the evening close to a scrub; it rained
in the night. Next day we went on in the scrub, but could not get through, I cut and cleared
away, and it was near sundown before we got through the scrub--there we camped. It was heavy
rain next morning, and we went on in the rain, then I changed horses and rode a black colt,
to spell the other, and rode him all day, and in the afternoon we got on clear ground, and
the horse fell down, me and all; the horse lay upon my right hip. Here Mr. Kennedy got off
his horse and moved my horse from my thigh; we stopped there that night, and could not get
the horse up; we looked to him in the morning and he was dead; we left him there; we had some
horse-meat left to eat, and went on that day and crossed a little river and camped. The next
day we went a good way; Mr. Kennedy told me to go up a tree to see a sandy hill somewhere;
I went up a tree, and saw a sandy hill a little way down from Port Albany. That day we camped
near a swamp; it was a very rainy day. The next morning we went on, and Mr. Kennedy told me
we should get round to Port Albany in a day; we travelled on all day till twelve o'clock (noon)
and then we saw Port Albany; then he said "There is Port Albany, Jackey--a ship is there--you
see that island there," pointing to Albany Island; this was when we were at the mouth of Escape
River; we stopped there a little while; all the meat was gone; I tried to get some fish but
could not; we went on in the afternoon half a mile along the riverside, and met a good lot
of blacks, and we camped; the blacks all cried out "powad, powad," and rubbed their bellies;
and we thought they were friendly, and Mr. Kennedy gave them fish-hooks all round; every one
asked me if I had anything to give away, and I said no; and Mr. Kennedy said, give them your
knife, Jackey; this fellow on board was the man I gave the knife to; I am sure of it; I know
him well; the black that was shot in the canoe was the most active in urging all the others
on to spear Mr. Kennedy; I gave the man on board my knife; we went on this day, and I looked
behind, and they were getting up their spears, and ran all round the camp which we had left;
I told Mr. Kennedy that very likely those blackfellows would follow us, and he said, "No, Jackey,
those blacks are very friendly;" I told him blackfellow always die when he got spear in there
(the back); he said, "I am out of wind, Jackey;" On the following morning, I went a good way,
went round a great swamp and mangroves, and got a good way by sundown; the next morning I went
and saw a very large track of blackfellows; I went clear of the track and of swamp or sandy
ground; then I came to a very large river, and a large lagoon; plenty of alligators in the
lagoon, about ten miles from Port Albany. I now got into the ridges by sundown, and went up
a tree and saw Albany Island; then next morning at four o'clock, I went on as hard as I could
go all the way down, over fine clear ground, fine ironbark timber, and plenty of good grass;
I went on round the point (this was towards Cape York, north of Albany Island) and went on
and followed a creek down, and went on top of the hill and saw Cape York; I knew it was Cape
York, because the sand did not go on further; I sat down then a good while; I said to myself,
this is Port Albany, I believe inside somewhere; Mr. Kennedy also told me that the ship was
inside, close up to the mainland; I went on a little way, and saw the ship and boat; I met
close up here two black gins and a good many piccanninies; one said to me "powad, powad;" then
I asked her for eggs, she gave me turtles' eggs, and I gave her a burning-glass; she pointed
to the ship which I had seen before; I was very frightened of seeing the black men all along
here; and when I was on the rock cooeying, and murry murry glad when the boat came for me.

...

DR. VALLACK'S STATEMENT.

A full account of proceedings taken by the Ariel, from the time of Jackey's arrival at Cape
York, on the 23rd December, 1848, up to the time of her departure from Weymouth Bay, on the
31st December, 1848.

Saturday, 23rd December, 1848.

About eight o'clock A.M., Captain Dobson called down to me, saying that he thought Mr. Kennedy
was arrived, as there was a black on shore with a shirt on and trousers. On going upon deck,
the Captain had left in the dinghy for the mainland, where the black was standing, I observed
with the glass and the naked eye, the black first standing, then walking very lame, then sitting
down on a rock on the mainland. The dinghy made there, and took him on board. It turned out
to be Jackey, of Mr. Kennedy's party, who looked very haggard and told a woeful tale. After
being on board I wished to take down depositions, fearing anything might happen to him from
over-excitement. Depositions were taken, before which he became faint, and a glass of wine
revived him, which he told us afterwards, made him budgeree (that is, well again.) I consulted
with the Captain as to what should be done, and it was immediately determined upon to leave
Port Albany with all possible speed, to save the surviving parties at Pudding-pan Hill and
Weymouth Bay, three men at the former place, and the rest at the latter. It being necessary
to take the sheep with us, they were all but three shipped in the evening, and prompt orders
given for the vessel to be got ready for a start in the morning the first thing. In the meantime
I went on shore with the Captain to get the bullock in to kill, Barrett, as well, on horseback,
and we found it was impossible to get him in--he was so wild: he was therefore shot at the
far and south end of the island, with the intention of bringing as much as possible of the
carcass away. It getting late in the evening, however, none was taken away, nor is there time
now to do so, and to do also an act of duty and humanity to the yet living human beings.

Sunday, 24th December.

Before ten A.M., a dead calm; at turn of tide or rather before, weighed anchor, but the tide
took us towards Cape York a mile; the tide now turned, and a gentle breeze took us through
the strait. The breeze continued, and at sundown we anchored five miles south of Point Shadwell,
Mount Adolphus bearing North-North-West, seven leagues; employed during the day conversing
with Jackey, taking down in pencil what he had to say, changing the subject now and then by
speaking of his comrades at Jerry's Plains. I did so as he told me what kept him awake all
last night was thinking about Mr. Kennedy. Saw three native fires on our voyage here, one on
this south end of Albany Island, one between it and here, and one on shore abreast of us.

December 25th, Monday.

At daylight in the morning a dead calm, and the hottest day we have had, the sun was so glaring
that the altitude could not be taken. At about a quarter before ten A.M. a light breeze came
on and we left our anchorage, the breeze increased a little, before eleven; saw what appeared
to be an island at first; on nearing, found it to be a canoe, about fifteen feet long, with
seven or eight natives in it, shearing about, sometimes in one direction, sometimes in another.
After a little we heard them calling out, "paoud," "whappee," "chauca," some of them standing
up. I named to the Captain that I thought they must be from Cape York, from their words, and
that it would be at least desirable to glean information from them, if possible, concerning
Mr. Kennedy. The Captain said, "We will not call out paoud," (which means peace) but occasionally
the words chauca (tobacco) biskey (biscuit) were called out from the ship. They from this drew
close to the vessel, very wary, however, in doing so. Jackey was placed in the fore-top, and
word came that Jackey knew all these fellows, that they were the party who speared Mr. Kennedy.
One black was allowed to come on board, and whilst he was partly in the ship, word came to
me by Parker (a seaman) that Jackey wanted to speak to me. On going to Jackey, he said, "That
fellow," pointing to the one named, "is the fellow that speared Mr. Kennedy; I gave him a knife,
keep him, bale (don't) let him go. All those fellows threw spears at Mr. Kennedy." This native
was immediately secured. He struggled hard, and it was as much as three men could do to secure
him. The other blacks in the canoe now jumped overboard, and observing now that the native
secured had a part of a bridle round his arm, and a piece of sinew, or tendon of a horse, and
Jackey being so positive as to identity, it was determined to examine the canoe, and an order
was given to fire over their heads, whilst they (the blacks) were endeavouring to recover their
canoe. The ship's long-boat was sent after the canoe, but in the meantime the blacks had recovered
it, and a hard chase took place, the blacks paddling away towards the shore. The boat overhauled
them, when a shot was fired from the boat, and as the boat closed upon them I saw the blacks
jump overboard again, and afterwards the ship's boat bring back the canoe. During this time
several shots were fired over them, and near them, from the ship. The boat returned in about
twenty minutes from the time of leaving, with the canoe. Barrett said to me when alongside
that he was speared, and that he had shot the black who had speared him, and who was now in
the canoe nearly dead. It appears that one black had stuck to his canoe, and on the ship's
boat nearing it, had thrown a spear into Barret's arm, and was on the eve of throwing another
at him, when Barrett shot him. I went into the canoe, and examined the black, and found the
ball had gone through his body, entering on the one side and coming out on the other side.
The ball must have gone through the stomach, from its direction. He was now dying--nearly dead.
The canoe was chopped up, and, with the black, disappeared a short time afterwards. I dressed
Barrett's wounds, three of them, of a triangular shape, in the lower and fleshy part of the
forearm. From the canoe were brought the leg part of a pair of trousers, three spears, a piece
of iron of a saddle, hooks and lines, etc.; and a piece of moleskin was taken off the native's
leg, which Jackey says was part of his trousers, which he tied round Mr. Kennedy's head when
he buried him, Jackey being sure that they had dug up Mr. Kennedy. I observed at the time that
the native was nearly on board, the moment the blacks saw Jackey, they looked at each other
as if everything was not right. Previously to their jumping overboard, when Jackey showed the
native the spear wound over his eye, he would quickly turn away and not look him in the face.
Whilst the native was being secured, after being removed to the fore part of the vessel, a
mutton bone with meat was offered him which he grappled at and ate voraciously, saying, "paoud,
paoud." The wind increased and was fair, and Jackey pointed out a hill ahead of us which he
said was like Pudding-pan Hill, near which the three men were left. This Hill was Pudding-pan
Hill, according to the chart. As we neared Pudding-pan Hill, Jackey said, that is not the place,
that he had been mistaken, and, on continually looking at it, he became the more confirmed
and positive, and said it was no use whatever to land there, but that we must go further on;
we passed the hill; in the meantime, the Captain and I consulted as to what should be done,
knowing this was the only Pudding-pan Hill on the chart; but Jackey, who had been placed on
the fore-top, became more and more positive, saying at length, "Do you think I am stupid?--Mr.
Kennedy sent me from the camp to look out the coast, so that I might know it again when I came
back in the ship, and I will tell you when we come to it, the ship must go on that way further,"
pointing to the south. Proceeding on, towards evening, off Hannibal Bay, we saw numerous native
fires, and in one spot I observed about forty natives. Before sundown a canoe was making off
to us, but after sunset we gradually lost sight of it, and some time after this we anchored.

Tuesday, 26th December, 1848.

At twenty minutes to six A.M., got underweigh with a light breeze; in the centre of Hannibal
Bay, Risk Point ahead. In about ten minutes we struck on a coral reef, and soon got off again;
we anchored this day in Shelburne Bay, opposite where Jackey wished us to proceed to recover
the three men; he was sure this was the place, seeing the mountain which Mr. Kennedy called
Pudding-pan Hill, and other mountains there, which were wanting at the Pudding-pan Hill of
the chart; he was perfectly confident as to this being the right place and it may be here stated
that this hill is the very facsimile of the Pudding-pan Hill of the chart. In sailing in the
bay we found the water getting very shallow, from three to four, and lastly, when we anchored,
two and a half fathoms, and this unfortunately, was a long way off from the land, say three
or four miles; after consultation with the Captain and Jackey, our main guide, we determined
on going on shore at the place pointed out by Jackey before daylight on the following morning;
during this afternoon several fires, about five, were in sight along the coast in the bay,
and not many natives seen; I saw five; after a time it had been determined who should be the
party to go to recover the three men. The Captain, Jackey, Barrett, Thomas (the sailor), and
myself, formed the party. The evening was employed in getting our guns in good order for the
morrow. The Captain thought he observed on shore natives with wearing apparel on.

Wednesday, 27th December, 1848.

At three o'clock A.M., the Captain called me, and such had been the preparation last night
that in a quarter of an hour we were in the longboat, steering for the shore, and just as daylight
was peeping we were near the shore in shallow water, and a fire sprung up nearly in front of
us a little way in from the beach. The boat struck on the ground, and we waded through the
water for about a hundred yards or more knee deep. Jackey took the lead, the Captain and I
following, Barrett and Tom behind, and mounted the low scrubby cliff about two hundred yards
from where we saw the fire. On we trudged through dense scrub inland for about an hour, When
Jackey said we must go further up that way, pointing more in the south part of the bay; that
is where I want to go, said he, and that we had better cross there in the boat and recommence
the trip. On reaching the coast we hailed the boat, which was anchored off a little, and waded
out to it. Having seen a great smoke last evening and apparently one this morning, some distance
beyond where Jackey wished us to land, he was asked if we should go first to this native fire
and camp, and see if they have anything there belonging to the three men, and Jackey said,
yes. We proceeded there, a distance of about four miles to the southernmost part of the bay,
and landed, but could discover only the remains of a bushfire and no camp; we now left this
part and proceeded to exactly where Jackey pointed out on the beach, more in the central part
of the bay, some three miles across, and landed, telling the men in the boat to anchor a little
higher up to the north, where Jackey said we should come out at by-and-bye. We left word with
the men in the boat that we might be away for three hours or more, and that we should fire
a gun on our return, which was to be answered by them.

Jackey was now head and leading man in every sense of the word, and away we went in a westerly
direction, for about, say, five or six miles; Jackey telling us to look out behind and all
about for the blacks. The most tell a similar period in the life of King
plays hero after all, to this ancient Asian world, where I was thirteen happy years 've spent,
from. The sole fact that it stated that I asked to was to write to this new edition of Droysens
book on Alexander's life a foreword. In the summer of 1916 I had the opportunity to remember his
name, when I accompanied the professor Koldewey the ruins of Babylon by wandering. We were then
also to the remains of Emach, Ninmachs temple, of which Koldewey assume that it was here that Alexander,
even offered up during his last illness, his daily sacrifices. (See also Koldewey: The temples
of Babylon and Borsippa, Leipzig 1911, page 17)

Hindenburg in his country, in this Germany that his fight with immortal fame almost auskämpft
against the rest of the world, is king of Macedon, conqueror of Asia more numerous Friends
and admirers find than ever before.

  
  Stockholm, 28 March 1917.

  Sven Hedin

Introduction

Droysens book on Alexander the Great belongs
indisputably to the classic works of German historical fiction: the
solidity of the research, the depth of view, the freshness of style,
as they appear in the book reveal, justify this opinion.

»Droysens understanding for the ideal content of the past, his lively conception of historical characters
and his investment for the realization came with the doctrine of the incarnation of Hegel's
the great, great ideas in the heroes of the story together. This meeting Droysens's first historical
work, Alexander of Macedon "sprung writes Max Duncker in his excellent, immediately after the
death of the researcher, written biographical Sketch. One must certainly admit that the general
principles of modern historical Science are not the same as that of the young Droysen. What we
seek today, is not the "ideal content of the past", but simply the past itself, and our view
of historical figures is not influenced by the teachings of Hegel. However, in the practice of historical
work Droysen proceeded quite modern. The ideal of ancient history, he never investigated by
whitewashing or arbitrary selection of traditional to gain facts, but in a strictly critical
prerequisite-free examination of the tradition Droysen wants to create the image of the Greek
state and its benefits: When this Picture is then great and noble, and exemplary in their own time, that
is for the historian gratifying, but it does not burden the conscience of the scholar. Regarding
the second point, it is actually so often before, that in the great political of the people of each Gains
flesh and blood men as it were, from them completely and in reality be implemented. Suffice it here
to the idea of ​​German unification and Bismarck . Remember But Bismarck's so great skill and will
is been, he would be objective not be achieved if he had not put the fate of a monarch on the page, the him
and his ideas understood and made it possible for him to create his work. And if we not only think
of Bismarck, but also to Kaiser Wilhelm I, we come to a right Findings of the historic Alexander as
good as the image of Alexander Droysen. So little also externally William I and Alexandros, the son
of Philip, have in common, the simple, solid through and through, his staff absolutely loyal,
North German prince, the lives of the old man in the picture in posterity - and on the other
side of the gifted, But theatrical southerners, on whose memory is overloaded, that it's insidious
Moltke was killed, and made the novel and legend through two millennia of heroic youth have:
the decades in which won the German people's unity and world position are under the sign of
William I, and the period in which agreed the Hellenic people, fresh, rule the world, conquered
is the age of Alexander.

Droysen has the King Alexander for a very great man, a genius of the first order, held. Modern research
has gone some other way. It can be in the poverty of authentic material have come down to us to
decide not quite sure who is right, whether Johann Gustav Droysen, or - to attribute the same
to its antipode, Julius Beloch. One thing is the fact that the Hellenic world conquest also an act
of King Alexander was is that separate the development of the nation and the life of one man
can not.

But even for Droysen even the thing was more important than the person: the importance Alexander's is
for him is that he means the end of a world era and the beginning a new one. This new era brings
the "spread Greek rule and Education out-living cultures of the peoples ", in a word: the emergence
of Hellenism. It remains for all time a scientific feat Droysens that he, you may say, the discoverer
become of Hellenism. followed three years after the publication of
the Alexander story continued, describing the period of the Successors
(1836), in 1843 joined the history the next generation of Greek rulers,
the so-called copycats to.

In a second edition Droysen all three volumes as a "history of Hellenism combined" (1877/78). For
the one-sided Listen to the best Greek classicism with Chaeronea and Demosthenes, what then
comes, is degeneration and decay. In fact, it is precisely the Hellenistic period, in which
the Greek people had the greatest political success has, so that one may directly is to speak of
a Greek world domination in the Age of Hellenism, and the cultural creations of this era can be drawn
from the development of Western Humanity can not think away. Droysen was the first by a generous
historical work which world-historical significance of the century by Alexander to the intervention
of the Romans in East made clear, and the relationship of the political events of this time with
a shiny winning combination of strength from the way a lot of fragmentary tradition sought.

In due course, assessment of Alexander and the Hellenistic two preliminary questions were solved,
which, with each other closely related: they are the problems of the nationality of the Macedonians,
and the policy of Demosthenes. In both questions Droysen won the same position, as it essentially
takes the latest research. Of course the dispute over both Problems not over. The question of
whether the Macedonians have been Greeks, or not, is of decisive importance: if so, have Philip
and Alexander the Greeks the national unity, where, if no - then the Greeks under the dominion
of foreign Tyrants fall, which they exploited for their purposes. A decision of the question may
Only one test of language give the Macedonians, unfortunately, our
knowledge of the Macedonian Dialect only moderately, but the linguistic
material can but conclude that the Macedonians have been a Greek tribe
are: this conviction has already Droysen represented admirably.

If he indeed the Macedonians, as well as the others left behind in their development Northern
tribes, called "Pelasgians," we shall use this name here rather; because the theory of the "Pelasgians"
as the Urgriechen can now no longer maintained. It is a speculation of myth historian of the sixth
century BC. From the views of the Macedon question is also partly the good opinion of the policy
of Demosthenes from. King Philip and his son were not Greeks, then was the champion against
Demosthenes foreign rule, in the other case, however, only the representative of an outdated
particularism. The admiration for Demosthenes as a literary phenomenon has in ancient and modern times
to out that we also saw his political activity in the Transfiguration. With excellent Droysen
reasons combated this view: the patriotism of the Athenian deny he does not want and the attribute
of the "greatest orator of all time he will not escape him. But Droysen doubted it, that Demosthenes
as a great statesman, and that he "ever the statesman of the national policy in Greece has been.
" In a fortunate combination paints Droysen the image of the Greek states from how they are undoubtedly
a victory for Demosthenes had designed: "Though the Athenian patriots fighting against Philip
in the name of freedom, the autonomy of the Hellenic culture to lead the national honor, believe or pretend
none of these items would have been ensured with the victory of Athens. "The latest research
is in the criticism of Demosthenes went even further than Droysen: it seems more and more emphasize
that Demosthenes indeed a great lawyer, was a rather small man but is. But it must not forget a
second one: this is the touching sacrifice, with has molded the Athenian people of his blood for
all the things that give it its politicians dazzled. Droysen goes much too far when he writes
of the "talkative, unwarlike, banausic Athens has become middle class, "says. The true hero of
Chaeronea is not the speaker who on the square with his well prepared tirades the Macedon king
destroyed, but It is the simple Athenian craftsman and father, who dutifully for his republican
freedom under the lances of the Macedonian veterans by death. The mood the fighters of Chaeronea
is written in a grave for the fallen touching expression come. The four lines of verse may be
here - find a place - in the translation of Wilamowitz:

Time, you überschauest all human destiny, good and bad, The skill that we succumbed kunde, of
eternity. Boeotia on the battlefield, we fell, like the enemy spears, What we wanted was to
preserve our sacred honor Hellas.

Of course, one may overcome the party let the justice it deserves, objective remains the view
Droysens incontestable that only the victory of the Macedonian kingdom the Greek nation from
the curse of the small states and redeem the slumbering in their Forces could bring.

The theme of the Alexander story had no doubt Droysen for a current stimulus: in the Unification
of the Greeks by the Macedonian dynasty, he will have seen an example in the way he sought the
solution to the German question. On 6 April 1848 stated Droysen that "Prussia incorporated in Germany,
with its large and healthy organization of power, his army and its finances the framework needed
to "make the new entity. As a Member in St. Paul's Church, he has
sought the unification of Germany "under the rule of the Hohenzollern
Followers "to advertise.

    The strong share of the demands of his own time has indeed led
    to Droysen that as researchers to the field of Greek
    history with which the Prussian exchanged in that it refers to the
    "history of Hellenism," the biography of Field Marshal Yorck and
the many volumes of the "Prussian policy was followed."

But except for the reader of 1917, the history of Alexander a direct stimulus of the teaching
on an important era of the past?

It will probably say yes may, because of the excellent military history interest that the campaigns
the Macedonian king's awaken. One can say that we in the conquest of the Persian Empire by
Alexander for first time in world history, the systematic work of a thinking General Staff to follow.
Major troop movements are of course even in the era was conceived before Alexander and passed.
Respectable include the services of the Persian Empire in this field. When King Darius called
his Skythenzug prepared, he had an army enable some of the area of ​​present-day Baghdad in the Dobrudja:
a performance that even in the era of railroads and automobiles would be quite respectable, the more
so in ancient times with its primitive technology. But the soldiers of the Persian king had
this in their own way Country, supported by its own imperial administration to be covered:
the enemy's country actually began only at the mouth of the Danube.

But when the real military mission began, the Persians crossed the lower Danube and penetrated into
Bessarabia, as well as the difficulties began to the company are clear: we know, the Persians soon
beat a retreat need. This is such an example of the military skills of the era around 500 BC.
The military operations of the Greek states of the 5th and 4 Century are characterized is also characterized
by their slowness, clumsiness and relative inconclusiveness. What a different picture type as
the campaigns of Alexander! The Macedonian army began its offensive by crossing the Dardanelles
and suggests a strong, quite respectable enemy wherever it takes him. A secret mechanism seems
to lead this army, in winter It just goes forward and in the summer, flow lines, high mountain
ranges, deserts will smooth over. Each enemy fortress falls, even if it sometimes takes time
and effort right. Section lines of many hundreds of miles into enemy territory, be maintained
in such vast areas occupied and used immediately in their own administration. So happens that
army and Asia Minor then penetrates from Syria to Egypt, it follows the rise to Mesopotamia, Babylon
is taken to enter the real Persia. Iran is criss-crossed the mighty; Afghanistan and the Hindu
Kush, the Greek army moves north to deep in the deserts of Turkestan; then has the final act: the
expedition to India. All these amazing benefits are not possible without a deliberate, working
with a finely branched apparatus Command. A twenty-year reign, and no matter how ingenious, is
it not good as the only Perpetrators of such successes See: here works a general staff, as well
as in the operations of the German Army 1870/71 or 1914/17. We also know precisely who the
General Staff Alexander have are: it is the old generals of his father's school, the so-called Adjutant
(Somatophylakes) that are associated with the King of war aside, and as Chief of the Macedonian
general staff occurs also in our colored courtly tradition, the old Parmenion sufficiently highlighted.

In
the campaigns of Alexander's missing when they are detected correctly, the romantic and enthusiastic
Element quite on the contrary, with calm deliberation, and almost pedantic caution the necessary decisions
taken. This character of Alexander's military dispositions Droysen highlighted excellent, only
he consistently leads the king himself as the spiritual Head of the war, when in fact Alexander,
in most cases, after the Council's Aides will have acted.

This new edition of Droysenschen work there without any change to the text of the last by the author
himself held back output. The material on the history of Alexander since then has only slightly increased,
but at least in some remarkable points of but modern research has gone beyond Droysen. In the following
these points be at least briefly discussed. The reader can then effortlessly even considered Droysens
corrected by the relevant questions.

First and foremost, here is the description of the Persian army, and the estimate of its strength
to name. Droysen still holds fast to the traditional numbers. At the Granicus, he takes 20
000 Persian horsemen and as many Greek, Persian king standing in the service of mercenaries
at.

The army, which defeated Alexander at Issus, he estimates that hundreds of thousands, including
30 000 Greek and 100 000 Asian heavy infantry, and at Gaugamela, he can a Persian army giant
occur. However, the research of Eduard Meyer and Hans Delbrück out of the Persian military system
to the conclusion that the Persian king never an army of millions has set up, the armies faced by
King Alexander, have been considerably weaker, hardly more in number than the winner himself Macedonian
In itself it would have been quite possible that the Persian Empire,
about 50 million inhabitants counted, had had an army of millions.

But in the Persian Empire has a compulsory military service, As in ancient Greek and in modern states,
never existed. The Persian Army was rather a professional army, and professional armies are
never very strong. The Iranian Nation, which represents the actual state-keeping force in the Persian
Empire, delivered the King at first aristocratic cavalry excellent then, a large number of proven
archers. With these thousands of knights and tens of thousands of shooters, the first Persian kings
the militarily powerful but little oriental superpowers: Babylon,
Lydia, Egypt overthrown.

In the conquered area were directed related to the Persians, the Turks later the 15th to 17 Century:
the ruler ordered his knights great fiefs. On the Possession of such goods charged the obligation
in case of war a number of riders to set, perhaps to entertain a few Iranian archers. In addition
to these feudal forces was then the Royal Guard, "10 000 so-called" immortals, according as
the Janissaries the Sultan. Such a professional army remains at the level as long as the State
is waging war and the machinery is in progress. If coming but longer periods of peace, rusted
the movement slightly. It is the Turkish Empire in the 18th Century adopted: from the Janissaries
was a corps of state retirees, which startled no enemy. Similar Designs the development of
the Persian Empire, as the period of continuous wars with King Xerxes ceased. The owners of the franchises
were gradually become comfortable to talk real warriors and when the King announces the military
service, they sent their servant instead (see Xenophon, Cyrop. VIII 8, 20). After all, at least the Persian
cavalry in the battles of Alexander fought bravely. The Asian infantry, however, was completely
degenerated, instead of them presented one since the output of the 5th Century rather Greek
mercenaries.

The operating Persian field army is at its greatest prosperity under King Xerxes, in the campaign
of 480/79, more than 50 000 men have been strong, under Darius III. there were more than just as
many, but probably fewer people. The fantastic idea of ​​the millions Heeren King of the Persians,
the Greek folk tradition of the 5th Century formed on which the Herodotus' presentation is
based. The later historians have accepted this view then, and the historians of Alexander have
not deviated from tradition: on the contrary, they have the horror of the Persian army painted with
ease, the size of the Macedonian military exploits to the right light.

The Greek Federation, stood at the head of King Alexander, had only about 1 / 10 of the population
of the Persian Empire. But his military power was far superior. Hellas at that time was strongly crowded:
many thousands of brave and strong men were willing, in the East , Are moving there to conquer
a new home. The Macedonian people's army in the Orient beckoned a glorious, easy victory and
immense booty, and the powerful of the barbarian tribes Balkan Peninsula, which were under the Macedonian
king, were not militarily unimportant. All in all, King Alexander was able, during the Battle
of Gaugamela with 50 000 Man nuclear forces - with a cavalry that the enemy has grown at least, and an infantry
which he was superior in every way - to attack the Persians.
 Bearings at anchor, North Sand
Hill, D (conical hill) South-East 1/2 East; South Wind Hillock (a saddle hill) South 3/4 East;
the remarkable sand patch, South-West 1/2 West; Jackey's Pudding-pan Hill, West 1/4 North.
Got the whaleboat and crew ready to start at daylight for Shelburne Bay.

On consulting Jackey about going to the camp where the three men were left, he said it was
no use going there; the distance was great, and the country scrubby, and that he was sure if
any of the men were alive, they would be on the seacoast. Dunn, one of the men, told him, if
Costigan died, he should come down to the beach directly. I therefore considered all that we
could do would be to thoroughly examine the coast with the whaleboat, close in shore, and the
brig as near as she prudently could approach.

At daylight despatched the whaleboat, in charge of the second officer, with four seamen, Jackey,
and his two companions, with particular orders to keep close to the beach, and to land occasionally,
to examine all the native camping places and canoes; to make strict search for anything that
might tend to point out the fate of the unfortunate men. At 6.30 A.M. weighed, with a light
breeze from the southward, and steered to pass between the Bird and Macarthur Islands; at noon
abreast of the latter; P.M., after passing Hannibal Isles, hauled in for the shore, for the
purpose of picking up the whaleboat. At 5.30 P.M., having shoaled our water rather suddenly
to 3 1/2 fathoms, hard bottom, anchored about a mile off shore. Saw a canoe and a few natives
on the beach. Bearings at anchor--Risk Point, South 1/2 East; the centre of the Hannibal Isles,
South-East by East 1/2 East. At eight P.M. the boat returned. The second officer made the following
Report:

I kept close along the beach all day, landed three times; first, near the creek where the Ariel's
boat landed, saw no indication there of Europeans. I landed again some distance further on,
where I saw a native camp and a canoe. In the latter I found a leather pistol holster, marked
34, which Jackey recognised as belonging to the party. Three natives were seen by Jackey, who,
on perceiving the boat, ran into the bush. At the third place I landed I saw no indication
of men. I was close to the beach all along, and occasionally fired a musket.

Jackey appears confident that the men left have been killed by the blacks. He said he had hopes
of finding Dunn, he being a man that "knew blackfellow well, and used to go along blackfellow."

Sunday, May 6th, 1849.

At daylight sent the boat on shore, manned as before, with instructions to land at the place
where I saw natives last night. At 6.30 A.M., weighed and set the topsail to a light breeze
from the southward, steered North by East 1/2 East, hauling out a little from the land. At
seven heard a rumbling noise, looked over the vessel's side and saw we were in shoal water,
the vessel gradually losing her way, but still continued forging ahead a little; lowered the
boat and sounded round, found more water ahead, thirteen and fourteen feet; inshore, about
half a cable's length found five and six fathoms; to seaward, eleven and eleven and a half
feet. Set the foresail: having a flowing tide the vessel went ahead and deepened our water;
after going ahead about two or three ship's lengths touched again slightly, and immediately
after got into five and six fathoms. The sea being smooth at the time, and the after part of
the keel being the only part of the vessel that touched, she cannot have received any material
damage. This shoal appeared to be of small extent, composed of sand and coral; it is not laid
down in the chart, but is very dangerous, not being visible from the masthead. I went aloft
after crossing it, and could perceive no indication of shoal water. The bearings I got when
on the shoal were, the outer or larger Hannibal Island, South-East 1/2 East, the inner one
(only a solitary tree visible) South by East 1/2 East.

At eleven A.M. passed Cairncross Island, running under easy sail and keeping as near the shore
as prudent to keep the boat in sight. I have given instructions to the officers in charge to
make a signal if anything was discovered. At half-past four hauled in for Fern Island; at five
anchored under the lee in three fathoms, mud; bearings, the highest part of Fern Island South
by East, the entrance to Escape River, North-West by West 1/2 West, hoisted the recall for
the boat, on the return of which the officer reported as follows:

I ran along close to the shore all day. I landed a little to the southward of Orfordness. We
met about thirty natives on the beach, who came up to us without hesitation, and appeared very
friendly; they shook hands with all of us, and brought us water. Jackey at first thought he
recognised the native who escaped from the Ariel among them; he got a little excited, and wanted
to shoot him, when he approached nearer he was satisfied he was not the same individual. At
another place where I landed I found part of the lower mast of a vessel about 400 tons, and
pieces of wreck; saw no natives or indication of them on the beach.

The schooner remained at anchor, and from the fact of her doing so, I came to the conclusion
it could be no other vessel than the Coquette;* seeing her so far from her station, I imagined
there was something wrong, or that she had heard the unfortunate termination of the expedition,
and was preparing to leave; I determined to communicate with her before proceeding up Escape
River; at half-past eight A.M., saw four natives on the beach.

(*Footnote. Which had been sent from Sydney to await the arrival of Kennedy's Expedition at
Port Albany, the period for which the Ariel had been chartered for that purpose having expired.)

At nine A.M., I left in the whaleboat for the schooner--the small boat employed watering. At
half past eleven A.M. I boarded the Coquette; Captain Elliott had heard by the Sea Nymph, from
Hobart Town, the fate of the expedition, and was about leaving for Sydney. She reported the
ship Lord Auckland, from Hobart Town, with horses, having been aground on the X reef for several
days; she subsequently got off, and had proceeded on her voyage, not having sustained any very
material damage; she had lost four anchors, and the Coquette was going to try to pick them
up. Having explained to Captain Elliott my intention of proceeding up the Escape River in the
morning, he volunteered to accompany me, and to supply two hands, which enabled me to man my
two boats, thus making a most formidable party.

At daylight made preparations for starting. I took the five-oared whaleboat, and the second
officer, accompanied by Captain Elliott, went in the small boat, both well armed and manned.
At half-past six A.M. we left and ran before a strong breeze from the South-East, and stood
in for the entrance of Escape River. At half-past seven hauled in round the south head (Point
Shadwell): in crossing the bar, least water three fathoms, the tide being about first quarter
spring flood.

After entering the river perceived a bay, with small sandy beaches, one of which Jackey pointed
out as the place where Mr. Kennedy first met the hostile natives; from this place we observed
some of them launching a canoe for the purpose of speaking us, but as we could not afford to
lose either the time or the tide I deferred communicating with them until our return. After
steering west about five or six miles, the river began gradually to wind to the northward,
and afterwards South-South-East; the river six or seven miles from the entrance was upwards
of a mile in width, both banks were covered by a dense impenetrable mangrove swamp; after the
river trended to the southward we had to lower our sail and pull; after pulling some four or
five miles the river became gradually narrower. I observed several branches of it trending
to the northward and westward; we remained on the southernmost branch, the principal one; as
we proceeded on the left hand side of the river we came to a clear place free of mangroves,
the only one we had seen; here we landed, and Jackey pointed it out as the place where Mr.
Kennedy had come down on the morning of the day when he was killed; it was here Jackey advised
him to abandon the horses and swim the river, about thirty yards wide. Jackey pointed out the
tree where he made the horses fast whilst they went down to the river and searched in vain
for oysters, they having had nothing to eat all that day.

We again proceeded, the river becoming gradually narrower as we advanced, and the water perfectly
fresh. After going about two or three miles, the river became so narrow that our oars could
not be used. We were compelled to haul the boats along, against a strong stream, by the overhanging
branches of the trees, frequently coming across fallen trees, over which we had to launch our
boats, running the risk of staving them; and again obliged to force them under others. A better
spot could not have been selected by the natives for cutting us off, had they been so disposed--a
narrow creek, and a dense scrub on either side. We still proceeded till the boats could get
no further. We had traced the Escape River to its source--a small freshwater creek. As we advanced
the belt of mangroves became thinner. We landed on a clear place, on the right of the creek.
We went a short distance inland; saw an extensive plain, with numerous large ant-hills on it,
which Jackey knew as the place he had crossed the day Mr. Kennedy was killed. Jackey went a
short distance further to reconnoitre, and presently returned, having perfectly satisfied himself
as to our locality.

After making a hasty meal we proceeded, leaving four hands in charge of the boats; we walked
some distance across a swamp, still following the course of the creek. In the swamp I saw a
great many of the Nepenthes distillatoria, or pitcher-plant; they were not exactly of the same
description I have seen on the Pellew Islands, and other places; nearly all of them wanted
the graceful turn in the stem, for which those elegant plants are so justly celebrated. We
traced the creek for nearly a mile, looking out for a crossing-place, when Jackey pointed out
on the other side the place where he had secreted the saddlebags. At length we came to a tree
which had fallen and formed a kind of bridge, over which we passed with difficulty, and returned
to the place where Jackey said the saddlebags were planted. Jackey then showed us the place
where "horse tumble down creek" after being speared. Some horse-dung was found on the top of
the bank close to this place, which confirmed Jackey's statement; he then took us a few yards
into the scrub to look for the saddlebags, and told us to look about for a broken twig, growing
over a thick bush; the place was found, but the saddlebags were gone; on searching under the
bush among the leaves, the horizon glass of a sextant was found, a strong proof that Jackey
had found the right place.

Jackey then took us through a dense scrub for some distance, when we came on open swampy ground
about half a mile wide; on the opposite side there was more scrub, close to which there were
three large ant-hills; Jackey took us up to the centre one, five yards from which poor Kennedy
fell; against this ant-hill Jackey placed him when he went after the saddlebags. Jackey told
us to look about for broken spears; some pieces were found; he then took us to a place about
sixty yards from the ant-hill, where he put Mr. Kennedy, who then told him not to carry him
far. About a quarter of a mile from this place, towards the creek, Jackey pointed out a clear
space of ground, near an angle of a very small running stream of fresh water, close to three
young pandanus trees, as the place where the unfortunate gentleman died. Jackey had taken him
here to wash his wounds and stop the blood. It was here, when poor Kennedy found he was dying,
that he gave Jackey instructions about the papers, when Jackey said, "Why do you talk so: you
are not going to leave me?"

Jackey then led the way to a dense tea-tree scrub, distant about three or four hundred yards,
where he had carried the body and buried it. When we came to the edge of the scrub, Jackey
was at a loss where to enter, as he said when he was carrying the corpse he did not look behind--all
the objects in front being nearly alike he did not get a good mark. Into the midst of this
scrub we went, divided ourselves and searched in every direction, but could not find the place:
Jackey had not made the spot too conspicuous, fearing the blacks might find it, he had only
bent down two twigs across each other; the scrub was not very extensive but exceedingly thick.

Jackey led the way to a creek, and pointed out the place where he had crossed. Jackey said
"I threw him down one fellow compass somewhere here." It was immediately found, it was one
of Kater's prismatic compasses, the name Chislett, London, engraved on the back. Jackey then
went to a place where he "plant him sextant," but the flood had been over the spot and washed
it away. When returning I found the trough for an artificial horizon washed upon the banks
of the creek, this had been left with the sextant. Jackey crossed the creek, and found a small
wooden bottle of quicksilver in the same place where he had left it.

We returned to the scrub where Mr. Kennedy was buried, when we came to it I placed the party
(eleven in number) five yards asunder, and traversed it this way in all directions, but without
success. I then took Jackey to the plain where the poor gentleman died, and told him to go
towards the scrub in the same manner he did when he was carrying the corpse, and not to look
back, which he did, telling me the manner in which he carried it, and where he shifted it from
one shoulder to the other. In this manner he entered the scrub, and I have no doubt he took
us very near the exact place where the body was buried; we sounded the ground all round with
our ramrods, but without success. After taking another good look we reluctantly gave up the
search, as the night was rapidly approaching, and returned to the boats.

My opinion is, that the remains of the unfortunate gentleman have not been exhumed; if they
had, we should have seen some indication of them; the natives would not have taken the trouble
to fill the grave, or take away the bones. The soil where he was buried was of a light sandy
nature, and the small mound Jackey rose over the grave had been washed down by the heavy rains.
The only clue that gave rise to the supposition that the natives had found the body, was the
fact that part of Mr. Kennedy's trousers was found in the canoe taken by the schooner Ariel.
Jackey said there were other trousers in the saddlebag, exactly like those he had on at the
time of his death. The saddlebags, there is not the slightest doubt, have been found by the
natives. Poor Jackey was very quiet, but felt, and felt deeply, during the day. When pointing
out the spot where Mr. Kennedy died, I saw tears in his eyes, and no one could be more indefatigable
in searching for the remains. His feelings against the natives were bitter, and had any of
them made their appearance at the time, I could hardly have prevented him from shooting them.

When we got back to the boats, we immediately proceeded down the creek, being anxious to get
clear of the intricate navigation before dark. We succeeded in getting into the open river
with difficulty, the numerous snags and branches of trees in the creek, together with the strong
current, requiring great precaution to prevent our boats being stove.

A few yards above the place pointed out by Jackey in the morning, where Mr. Kennedy came down
to the river for the purpose of crossing, we found the water very shallow, not ankle deep,
right across, and had they waited until low-water they might have crossed without difficulty;
as we pulled down the river we found numerous shoals, our boat constantly grounding; in fact
Escape River is not a river, but an estuary, terminating in swamps.

At eleven we arrived at the entrance of the river, where I camped for the night, on a sandy
beach not far from Point Shadwell, having determined to examine the native camp at daybreak.
Set a watch, but made no fire, as I wanted to take the natives by surprise.

Wednesday, May 9th, 1849.

Blowing very hard all night from South-East; passed a miserable night--the mosquitoes devouring
us. At break of day launched our boats and pulled towards the camp where we had seen natives
the day before. Some of the party went along the beach. On arriving at the camp found it had
very recently been abandoned; one of Jackey's companions saw one native, who ran into the bush
and was seen no more.

I went with Jackey some distance into the bush, he showed me the place where a native threw
a spear at him the day before Mr. Kennedy's death; Jackey fired, but missed him. I forgot to
mention that the master of the Coquette had seen a native at Port Albany, who had, apparently,
been wounded in the face with large shot, and as he answered the exact description given by
Jackey, there is little doubt that he was the same individual mentioned in his statement as
shot by him.

We searched the camp, found a small piece of red cloth, which Jackey recognised as part of
the lining of Mr. Kennedy's cloak, also a piece of painted canvas; a canoe on the beach we
destroyed. Finding nothing more could be done, we pulled out of the river, and got on board
about ten A.M., after a very hard pull against both a head wind and tide.

Found the brig riding very uneasy in consequence of the heavy sea, and as Jackey said the other
papers, called by him the small ones, and which I conceive to be the most important, as he
was particularly instructed to take them to the Governor, were secreted at the head of another
river, about eight miles further to the northward, and finding the vessel could not ride any
longer here with safety, I determined, when the tide ceased, to weigh and seek some more secure
anchorage.

At half-past twelve P.M. weighed, the Coquette in company, and stood to the northward. At half-past
four hard squalls and heavy rain; rounded the Tree Island Reef and anchored in five fathoms,
about one and a half miles from the north end of Albany Island.

I do not intend going into Port Albany, as the tides run very strong there; outside is quite
as safe at this season. In the evening went on shore on Albany Island. Saw four or five natives,
who knew Captain Elliott; they were very anxious to get biscuit and tobacco. They seem to be
the same class of men as those at Port Essington, but the language is, I think, different.

Thursday, May 10.

All night blowing hard, and squally. At daylight same weather; no chance of the boat getting
to the southward today. At ten went on shore, for the purpose of selecting a spot to inter
the remains of Messrs. Wall and Niblet. Saw the horse left by the Ariel; he seemed in good
condition, but rather shy; no chance, I fear, of catching him. Took some corn and meal in a
bucket for him.

At three P.M. the weather rather more moderate. Both vessels got underweigh, and worked close
inshore. At 4.30 anchored in three and three-quarters fathoms, mud: Tree Island North-East
by East half East; Pile Island West half South; north extreme of Albany Island South by East
half East; within a short half mile of the shore.

Got all ready for a start in the morning, should the weather be moderate. Should the weather
continue bad, I proposed to Jackey to try the overland route. He said the distance was too
great, and the country very bad to travel through; that it would take several days.

Friday, May 11th, 1849.

All night fresh breeze and squally, at daylight rather more moderate, at half-past six despatched
the whaleboat, fully manned and armed and provisioned for two days, and Jackey and his two
companions. I gave charge of the boat to Macnate, my chief officer. I did not think there was
any necessity to go myself, as Jackey said they were not likely to fall in with any natives.
Captain Elliot volunteered his services and accompanied the party. Employed watering ship,
found water very abundant all over Albany Island.

Saturday, May 12th, 1849.

At half-past one P.M. the whaleboat returned, having got the papers, etc., secreted by Jackey
in a hollow tree. A rat or some animal had pulled them out of the tree, and they were saturated
with water, and I fear nearly destroyed; they consisted of a roll of charts and some memorandum
books. The charts with care may be deciphered. The following is Mr. Macnate's statement:

May 11.

At eight A.M. we rounded Fly Point, set sail and steered South by West, the boat going about
five knots, just laying along the shore. At ten A.M. crossed a bank with only nine feet of
water on it, passed a reef about three miles from Fly Point, and half a mile from the shore;
from former shoal had three and four fathoms to the entrance of the river. At half-past eleven
A.M. entered the mouth of a river, near the centre of Newcastle Bay; here we lost sight of
Albany Island, making the distance from it about fourteen miles; the entrance of this river
is about one mile and a half wide; on the northern half of the entrance the water is deep,
three fathoms; on the southern side there is a sandbank, nearly dry at low-water.

From the entrance we went South-South-West five miles, when the river narrowed to about the
third of a mile, we had from six to two and a half fathoms all the way in. From here we went
into the branch of the river that ran about south, the main river going west. The entrance
to the branch is about two cables' lengths wide, we went in a southerly direction about six
miles, when the river narrowed to forty feet; here we landed at half-past three P.M. Leaving
two hands in charge of the boat, walked about two and a half miles, where Jackey found the
papers, they had been pulled out of the hollow trunk where he had placed them, and were much
damaged, being saturated with water. We then went half a mile to where Jackey had camped, to
look for a pair of compasses he had left; could not find them, but found a notebook that Jackey
had been drawing sketches in; from here we went to another camp to look for the compasses,
but did not find them. At half-past five came back to the boat and camped for the night, none
of us could sleep on account of the mosquitoes and flies, etc.

At six A.M. started down the river; at eight calm, got into the main river, had breakfast.
At half-past eight, a light breeze from the eastward. At eleven passed within half a mile of
two native canoes with seven men in each, stood towards them, they immediately paddled away.
At one rounded Fly Point, and at half-past one got alongside the brig.

Sunday, May 13, 1849.

Fresh breeze from South-East and fine all day. At eight A.M. both vessels hoisted the ensign
half-mast. At three P.M. having put the remains of Messrs. Wall and Niblet in a coffin, left
the ship in the two boats with nearly all the ship's crew cleaned, and pulled to the southern
end of Albany Island, landed and went up to the highest hill on that part of the island, and
on the top, a clear open place, we dug a grave and interred the remains of the unfortunate
individuals Thomas Wall and Charles Niblet, reading the funeral service over them; about ten
or twelve of the natives were present, and we fully explained to them what we were doing, they
conducted themselves with propriety when the funeral service was being read. Poor Jackey was
much affected, and could not refrain from tears.

The spot I selected is the most conspicuous on the island, and would be an excellent site for
the erection of a monument to the memory of the unfortunate men who perished on the late ill-fated
expedition.* At each end of the grave I planted two large bushes, and on the top were placed
several large stones. A bottle was suspended over the grave, with a paper in it, stating who
was interred, with the date, etc.; and at sunset we returned on board.

(*Footnote. A tombstone with suitable inscription was afterwards erected by Captain Stanley,
and two young coconut trees were planted near the grave.)

I cannot close my extracts without mentioning the exemplary conduct of Jackey-Jackey. Since
he came on board I have always found him quiet, obliging, and very respectful; when on shore
he was very attentive, nothing could abstract him from his object; the sagacity and knowledge
he displayed in traversing the trackless wilderness were astonishing; when he found the places
he went in search of, he was never flushed with success, but invariably maintained his quiet,
unobtrusive behaviour; he was much concerned at not being able to find the remains of his late
unfortunate master, to whom he was sincerely attached; his two companions* also conducted themselves
well, and were very useful on shore.

(*Footnote. Aboriginal blacks of his own tribe.)

...

APPENDIX 1.

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF TWO OF THE LANGUAGES OF THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF CAPE YORK.

A few words procured at Cape York and Port Lihou are given in the Voyage of the Fly, and most
of those which I have been able to identify belong to the language spoken by the Kowrarega
tribe, inhabiting the Prince of Wales Islands, and frequently visiting Cape York.

For the materials composing the present Kowrarega Vocabulary, I am almost entirely indebted
to Mrs. Thomson. Unfortunately, however, her total want of education prevented her from acquiring
any idea of the construction of the language; nor could she always be made to understand the
meaning of a question--however simple in its form--framed to elicit information on this point.
Even by carefully sifting at leisure hours the mass of crude materials obtained from her and
written down at each interview, day by day, I did not make sufficient progress in the grammar
of the language to enable me to pursue the subject further, until her value as an authority
had so far declined that it was prudent to reject it altogether. Nearly all the words originally
procured from Mrs. Thomson were subsequently verified either by herself or by our Kowrarega
visitors.

The Gudang Vocabulary was formed at Cape York, and the chief contributor to it was the black
named Paida, mentioned above, to whom I latterly was able to make myself tolerably well understood
upon most subjects, through the medium of the Kowrarega language, which he knew thoroughly.
As several dialects are spoken at this place,* I took care to reject all such words as were
not given me expressly as Gudang.

(*Footnote. Two examples will suffice to show the differences in the five languages which I
have heard spoken at Cape York.

Dog = ing-godinya (Gudang and Yagulle), ngyomo (Kachialaiga), Inyomo (Induyamo), umai (Kowrarega).

Smoke = ekura (Gudang and Induyamo), rong-gura (Yagulle and Kachialaiga), tuo (Kowrarega).)

The following rules have been adopted in the Vocabularies:

[The vowels are sounded as follows:

a as in hard. a as in hat. e as in there. e as in bet. e as in French meme. i as in eel. i
as in bit. o as in hole. o as in not. u as in cool. u as in cut. ai as in eye. ei not represented
in English.]

G is always hard, as in get; ch soft, as in church.

The letters in italics are sometimes omitted.

The numbers appended to some words point out similarities and derivations.

...

1. NATURAL OBJECTS.*

(*Footnote. To form the plural of a noun or adjective, the rule appears to be to add le as
a postfix, sometimes previously supplying a terminal vowel if required: Example: geta = hand
becomes getale in the plural: kuku = foot, kukule: kutai = yam, kutaile: ipi = wife, ipile:
kerne = lad undergoing a certain ceremony, kernele: makaow = mat, makaowle: bom = fruit of
pandanus, bomale. There are exceptions however; mari = shell ornament, makes marurre in the
plural: gul = canoe, gulai: tawpei = short, tawpeingh: all nouns ending in ra have the plural
in re, as kowra = ear, kowrare and all ending in kai gain jille in the plural, as ipikai =
woman, ipikaijille.

Regarding the allusion to a terminal vowel, it may be mentioned here that as most Kowrarega
words end in a vowel, its absence when a vowel commences the following word is commonly owing
to elision. Example: udzu umai = my dog becomes udz'umai. When the last consonant in a word
is the same as the first in the following word, one of the letters is omitted. Example: apa
pirung = soft ground becomes ap'irung. There are numerous other contractions, as ai for aidu
= food: aiye for aiyewel = come here: mue utsem = the fire has gone out, for mue utsimem etc.)

COLUMN 1: ITEM NUMBER. COLUMN 2: ENGLISH. COLUMN 3: KOWRAREGA. COLUMN 4: GUDANG.

1 : Sky : je : -. 2 : Sun : gariga : inga. 3 : Cloud : dapar : otera. 4 : Cloud, heavy, cumulus
: markei : -. 5 : Cloud, driving, scud : ras : -. 6 : Moon : kissuri : aikana. 7 : Moon, new
: kainidung (634) : kichia. 8 : Moon, full : mullpal : ichara. 9 : Moonlight : kapi kissurri
(612.6) : -. 10 : Star : titure : onbi, unbi. 11 : Star, falling : titure udzarizhe (10.745)
: -. 12 : Star, morning : gariga titure (2.10) : -. 13 : Jupiter ? : dogei : -. 14 : Pleiades
: kusali* : -.

(*Footnote. The frequency of words having different meanings may perhaps lead some to suppose
that they may have originated in error on my part. Some have a figurative connexion as upu
= a series of waterholes, also a blister; kusali = the constellation of the Pleiades, also
a plant with bunches of seeds which become white and glittering by exposure to the sun: others
have no obvious community of meaning, as ari = rain, also a louse; gi = laughter, also ripe, &tc.)

15 : Darkness, night : inur : yulpalga. 16 : Shadow, shade : yirada : moda. 17 : Wind : guba
: alba. 18 : Rain : ari : apura. 19 : Rainbow : oripara : ung-gebanya. 20 : Dew : urma : -.
21 : Fog : wunu : -. 22 : Thunder : duyuma : wagel (526). 23 : Lightning : baguma : omba. 24
: Heat, steam : kaman : -. 25 : Sea : wur : -. 26 : Salt water : adabu : ung-onya. 27 : Saltwater
creek : kassur : -. 28 : Saltwater swamp : gowada : gawata. 29 : Deep water : mal : -. 30 :
Shoal water : gata : -. 31 : Wave : baow : -. 32 : Foam : tsika : -. 33 : High-water : wur
pusakuradun (746) : -. 34 : Low-water : wur nuremizinghi : -. 35 : Tide, flood : wur kamizinghi
: -. 36 : Tide, ebb : wur nurezinghi : -. 37 : Salt : - : ? bawa. 38 : Fresh water : nuki :
epi. 39 : Spring : dana nuki (443) : -. 40 : Well, hole dug in ground : marama : akanya. 41
: Stream of fresh water : bubbu : epitaba (38). 42 : Stream, bed of : kassa : artaba. 43 :
Chain of ponds : upu (529) : -. 44 : Land : laga (370) : -. 45 : Sand, sandy beach : butu :
aigi. 46 : Island : kowra (455) : unbonya. 47 : Reef : madji : -. 48 : Flat, plain : bowa :
-. 49 : Hill, wooded : pada : pada. 50 : Hill, stony : baradi (56) : -. 51 : Ground, soil :
apa : ampa. 52 : Mud : barrudder : -. 53 : Mangrove swamp : tugga : -. 54 : Stone, rock : kula,
kola : olpa. 55 : Cave, hole in rock : sakai : -. 56 : Any remarkable rock : adi : -. 57 :
Cliff : thi : -. 58 : Sandstone : iba-eba : -. 59 : Quartz : us : elpowa. 60 : Pumice : maat
: meta. 61 : Ochre, red : parma : anto. 62 : Ochre, yellow : daoma : -. 63 : Fire, wood : mue
: yoko. 64 : Flame : buyeli : -. 65 : Smoke : tuo : ekora, ekura. 66 : Ashes : kunur : buro-buro.
67 : Charcoal : burker : onta. 68 : Path : yabu : alka. 69 : Summer, dry season : aibow : -.
70 : Winter, rainy season : kuki* : adara.

(*Footnote. Also applied to north-west wind then prevailing.)

71 : Spring and Autumn : malgui : -. 72 : Turtling season : sulangi : -.

a. MAMMALIA.

73 : Tail of quadruped : koba : opo. 74 : Bat, large : sapur : -. 75 : Bat, young of : kugi
: -. 76 : Bat, harpy : - : tumidumi. 77 : Bat, small : ararapa : mali. 78 : Native cat : -
: kute. 79 : Dog : umai : ing-godinya. 80 : Bandicoot : - : walkundunya. 81 : Kangaroo : usur*
: epama.

(*Footnote. The sounds of s and z are wanting in Gudang, and when occurring in a foreign language
are represented by ch or ty. Example: The Kowrarega words usur = kangaroo, makutz = mouse,
surka = megapodius, susu = breasts, if pronounced by a Gudang black are rendered by uchur,
makutcha, tyurka, tyu-tyu.)

82 : Opossum : barit : -. 83 : Mouse : makutz : makutcha. 84 : Whale : bidu : -. 85 : Dugong
: dung-ula : wattei. 86 : Dugong, tail of : sun-na (149) : -.

b. BIRDS.

87 : Bird, insect, shell, etc. : ure : wuroi. 88 : Wing : buta : ngaga. 89 : Tail : kupa-luba
(478) : kopagoba. 90 : Quill : kai-kai : aikunya, eikunya. 91 : Down : palissa : -. 92 : Nest
: padama : untinya (242). 93 : Egg (or of reptile) : kakuru (499) : achina (499). 94 : Eagle
: agaleg : -. 95 : Eagle, quill of : baba* (418) : -.

(*Footnote. Literally the father (of feathers); it is much prized as an ornament both for the
persan and to deck graves with.)

96 : Hawk : - : kartam. 97 : Owl : - : tuitru. 98 : Goatsucker : biya : ngoko. 99 : Laughing
jackass : kowru : unbunya. 100 : Kingfisher, long-tailed : - : quatawur. 101 : Kingfisher,
yellow-billed : - : poditti. 102 : Swamp pheasant : - : pura-pura. 103 : Swift : - : ebundyara.
104 : Parson-bird, thrush : - : weya. 105 : Bower-bird : - : yewinya. 106 : Dragoon-bird :
- : eipura. 107 : Fork-tailed flycatcher : - : trokaru. 108 : Small thrush : - : chechurri.
109 : Rifle-bird : - : yagunya. 110 : Starling : - : muter. 111 : Wood swallow : - : kartaquiko.
112 : Small flycatcher : - : kopota. 113 : Sun-bird : - : teredirri. 114 : Many small birds
: - : inchanya. 115 : Leather-head : quako : kakua. 116 : Black macaw : - : peuntu. 117 : Cockatoo
: weama : aira. 118 : Cockatoo, crest of : yelai (493) : -. 119 : Parrot, blue mountain : kerissa
: inbere. 120 : Parrot, rosella : - : wong-inya. 121 : Pigeon, white : gainowa : gainowa. 122
: Pigeon, green : waranis : belbucku. 123 : Dove, ground : ku-u-rug : kudrogo. 124 : Dove,
green : - : waraba (257). 125 : Cassowary of New Guinea : sam (597) : -. 126 : Emu : - : nichulka.
127 : Brush turkey : raon : araunya. 128 : Megapodius : surka : utema. 129 : Megapodius, mound
of : surka pada (49) : -. 130 : Quail : - : gururu. 131 : Native companion : aporega : aporega.
132 : Heron, night : - : wang-go. 133 : Heron, blue : karbai : -. 134 : Heron, white : krem
: -. 135 : Godwit : - : ku-urri. 136 : Sandpiper : - : tyuri. 137 : Frigate-bird : - : owmer.
138 : Gull : keki : keake. 139 : Tern : - : chara. 140 : Teal : - : ropagama. 141 : White duck
: diggi-diggi : -.

c. REPTILES.

142 : Turtle (general) : waru : waru. 143 : Turtle, soft eggs : oebada : -. 144 : Turtle, hawksbill
: unao : -. 145 : Turtle, green : sulur : -. 146 : Turtle, logger-head : urza : -. 147 : Turtle,
small kind : kidu : waru. 148 : Turtle, fore fin : puye : -. 149 : Turtle, hind fin : suna
suro (86). 150 : Turtle, : belly atta : -. 151 : Turtle, back : agu : -. 152 : Tortoiseshell
: todi : wanawa. 153 : Frog : kang-gu : kartakutta. 154 : Crocodile : ibara : -. 155 : Lizard,
large : gang-ura : murunya. 156 : Lizard, middle-sized : - : rauntinya. 157 : Lizard, small
: indyura : dudyuroko. 158 : Snake, brown : karomat : kanurra. 159 : Snake, black : piroan
: -. 160 : Snake, green : - : wachi.

d. FISHES.

161 : Fish : wawpi : wawpi. 162 : Fin : - : merta. 163 : Tail : mabi : chana. 164 : Breast
: pel : -. 165 : Gills : - : ananaji. 166 : Shark : beidum : wandi. 167 : Sting-ray : aona
: waki. 168 : Pelates : dzaram : -. 169 : Diacope 8 lineata : tanigi : -. 170 : Scatophagus
multifasciatus : karmoi : tora. 171 : Lethrinus : djaga, dyaga : -. 172 : Parrot-fish : bila
: uburu. 173 : Mullet : piwer : -. 174 : Whiting (Silago) : kopuru (475 ?) : -. 175 : Flathead
: - : tobu. 176 : Freshwater herring : wila : anburo. 177 : Toad-fish : badar (530): -. 178
: Sucking-fish : gapu : -.

e. INSECTS, ETC.

179 : Crab, blue : kowturri : paka. 180 : Crab, small : gurba : -. 181 : Crab, large : getalli
: getalla. 182 : Crayfish : kayer : lang-gunya. 183 : Beetle, small : - : orona. 184 : Beetle,
water : - : neke. 185 : Humble bee : - : boro. 186 : Honey* : utu : untere.

(*Footnote. This and the next are made by a small stingless bee which builds its nest in hollow
trees.)

187 : Wax : yerka : alpanya. 188 : Small wasp : garur : elpiri. 189 : Ant-hill and ant : mugu
: mong-go. 190 : Ant, bronzed : dupu (532) : -. 191 : Ant, small black : tumi : -. 192 : Ant,
green : musu : eipunya. 193 : Ant, large red : kaguda. 194 : Ant, small, white, wood : - :
benje. 195 : Cicada : edyena : intere. 196 : Fly : buli : wampa. 197 : Fly, horse (Haematopoda)
: burugo : burogo. 198 : Mosquito : iwi : uma, oma. 199 : Butterfly : - : tewinya, tawinya.
200 : Grub in dead wood : oka : etimunya. 201 : Grub in living wood : tolo. 202 : Louse : ari
(18) : ako. 203 : Scorpion : idi-idi, diwi : -. 204 : Spider : enti : tamburra. 205 : Worm
: kurtur : -.

f. SHELLS, ETC.

206 : Cuttlefish : sug-gu : -. 207 : Barnacle on turtle : yetu : yetu. 208 : Clamshell (Tridacna)
: miya : miya. 209 : Cyrena : akula : onti. 210 : Oyster : ita : umpeda. 211 : Sanguinolaria
: tiki : teki. 212 : Fusus proboscidiferus : boa : mabur. 213 : Melon-shell : alopa : ang-kowa.
214 : Murex : - : weloro. 215 : Egg-cowrie : buboam : -. 216 : Olive : - : waraji. 217 : Ear-shell
: - : tepur. 218 : Periwinkle, small : budi : budi. 219 : Periwinkle, large : - : yarawura.
220 : Natica : - : modul. 221 : Auricula judae : - : ngaanbamedi. 222 : Snail, large : - :
tetuka. 223 : Snail, small : - : keno. 224 : Coral : yammar (branched) : wardyo-orge (massive).

g. VEGETABLE PRODUCTIONS.

225 : Tree (general term) : prue : pure. 226 : Log : watur : -. 227 : Driftwood : bete : -.
228 : Touchwood* and its charcoal : kubi : -.

(*Footnote. The charcoal used for painting the body is made from this.)

229 : Small stick : saragi : cheragi. 230 : Bark : purur : rang-a. 231 : Branch : mang : -.
232 : Leaf : nissa : etrara. 233 : Flower : kowsur : erora. 234 : Seed : kawp : -. 235 : Root
: quiku (433) : -. 236 : Root, of grass : - : nontya. 237 : Root, of a tree : - : yalida (493
?). 238 : Seaweed : - : tawar. 239 : Seaweed (food of dugong) : - : purada. 240 : Mushroom
: - : achari. 241 : Fern : - : ganda. 242 : Grass : burda : untinya (92). 243 : Grass, coarse
: - : bagudda. 244 : Sugarcane : garu : -. 245 : Bamboo : marapi ? : marapi. 246 : Calladium
esculentum : bua : -. 247 : Pandanus spiralis : gara : burwa. 248 : Pandanus, cluster of fruit
: bom : -. 249 : Pandanus, fruit, singly : abul, abal : -. 250 : Pandanus, kernel : abul dan'
(443) : -. 251 : Pandanus pedunculata : kowsar : quatyerra. 252 : Seaforthia palm, large :
lulko : akarinya. 253 : Seaforthia palm, small : utu : -. 254 : Caryota palm : - : damaraba.
255 : Rattan : kuchi : -. 256 : Cabbage palm (Corypha) : muru, moro : watu (251 ?). 257 : Coconut
: uraba : waraba. 258 : Sago palm of New Guinea : bisi : -. 259 : White lily (Crinum) : ? gurabi
: korobo. 260 : Banana : - : katamurra. 261 : Hellenia coerulea* : - : kera-kera.

(*Footnote. The root of this is eaten raw.)

262 : Flag (Philydrum) : tagur : dyaimura. 263 : Rush : - : akomba. 264 : Rush, ? (with edible
roots) : - : rewino. 265 : Sedge : - : opolga. 266 : Sedge : - : gwanda. 267 : Yam, wild (Dioscorea)
: derabu : worng-ura. 268 : Yam, fibrous, (Dioscorea) : kutai : perut. 269 : Yam, (do.) : dawb
: -. 270 : Yam, (do.) : sowar : -. 271 : Yam, purple (Convolvulus ?) : bizar : -. 272 : Yam,
: sagu : -. 273 : Yam, (Convolvulus ?) : tapan : -. 274 : Sweet-potato : rugabu : -. 275 :
Cane (Flagellaria) : buji : budya, bodya. 276 : Dracontium : - : epuanoma. 277 : Fig : - :
atara. 278 : Fig, (with large edible fruit) : uguru. 279 : Fig : - : awida. 280 : She-oak (Casuarina)
: gaibur : burbura. 281 : Cotton-tree (Cochlospermum) : - : paotu. 282 : Cotton-tree (Bombax)
: wapada, goguta : wapada. 283 : Cotton-tree, cotton of : - : maye. 284 : Waterlily (Nymphaea)
: ? rumbadi : rumbadi, rombadi. 285 : Wormia alata : - : maartitta. 286 : Cashew nut : dua
: leara, liara. 287 : Grevillea : - : yuwurra. 288 : Parinarium : wibu : elari. 289 : Acacia
: - : garragurra. 290 : Large bean* : kalapi, kulapi : umpira, umbera.

(*Footnote. Eaten with Biyu--the produce of a vine-like climber with legumes a foot in length.)

291 : Coral-tree (Erythrina) : - : pinura, penura. 292 : Abrus precatorius : timikapul : -.
293 : Blue pea-flower : - : waalkuda. 294 : Mimusops kaukii : ubur : wobar. 295 : Convolvulus
(with edible roots) : chawur : atiar. 296 : Vitex macrophylla : - : oroida. 297 : Avicennia
tomentosa ? : - : dyang-a. 298 : Scaevola koenigii : dela : dyara. 299 : Mangrove : taga :
teang-gunya. 300 : Mangrove : - : korad-da. 301 : Mangrove : kuiyur : inchencheiya. 302 : Mangrove
: biyu : biyu. 303 : Tea-tree (Melaleuca) : - : agura. 304 : Tea-tree (Melaleuca) : ubu, wobu
: unera. 305 : Tea-tree (Melaleuca) : - : elembi. 306 : Tea-tree (Melaleuca) : - : adoya, aduya.
307 : Gumtree (Eucalyptus) : - : keru. 308 : Apple, red (Eugenia) : kuai : apiga, apega. 309
: Apple, white (Eugenia) : kupa : bang-gadi. 310 : Cherry (Eugenia) : - : arondyi. 311 : Sciadophyllum
: - : lang-gula. 312 : Cedar (Cedrela) : - : kerum. 313 : Vine (Cissus) : - : mangko. 314 :
Creeper* : wali : -.

(*Footnote. Used in making one kind of fishing line.)

315 : Heritiera* : meker : -.

(*Footnote. The leaf of this rolled up into a cylinder is used to distend the hole in the lobe
of the ear.)

316 : Tree : passei* : -.

(*Footnote. Large tree with very light wood used for making outrigger floats and paddles.)

317 : Tree : - : ung-kunya. 318 : Tree : sira-sira* : -.

(*Footnote. The bark of this is made into large fishing lines.)

319 : Tree : koper : baguntinya. 320 : Resin : yirka* : -.

(*Footnote. Used in fixing the heads and joints of spears and throwing-sticks.)

321 : Bark of which daje is made : mae : -. 322 : Xerotes banksii : walchi : noyo, noyu. 323
: Tobacco : suguba : choka. 324 : Wood, hard, used for spears : - : era. 325 : Wood, soft,
used for spears : - : mang-ga.

2. ARTICLES OF FOREIGN ORIGIN.

326 : Iron : turika : gere. 327 : Glass, bottle : talpura : talpura. 328 : Gun : tarika : tida.
329 : Axe : aga : aga. 330 : Clothes : dumawk : dumawk. 331 : Hat : - : walapa. 332 : Knife
: gi, gi-turik : -.

3. UTENSILS, ORNAMENTS, WEAPONS, etc.

333 : Canoe : gul : ang-ganya. 334 : Bow : bua, buai : oimpa. 335 : Stern : menir : kona. 336
: Stern, ornaments of* : - : koikochupa.

(*Footnote. One central and two lateral poles ornamented with streamers and feathers.)

337 : Raised gunwale : bada (530) : bada. 338 : Platform : tamu : tamo. 339 : Netting : sari
: chari. 340 : Outrigger poles : togo : togo. 341 : Outrigger float : sarima : charima. 342
: Outrigger float, pegs of : sarim' pati : -. 343 : Paddle : karaba : karaba. 344 : Mast :
raba : mulgoburra. 345 : Poles of sails, etc. : suru : malela. 346 : Backstays : buzu : -.
347 : Backstays, grommets on : queada : -. 348 : Sail, mat of any kind : rab'waku (344) waku
: abara. 349 : Rope, cable : uro : chichaluro. 350 : Stone for anchor : yadi : -. 351 : Women's
covering : awash : -. 352 : Petticoat : daje : -. 353 : Petticoat, band of : wakaow : -. 354
: Petticoat, small : mue-daje : -. 355 : Petticoat, long : urge-daje, tabom : -. 356 : Nose-stick
: guba : taiko. 357 : Round shell ornament* : mari : meri.

(*Footnote. Of the mother-of-pearl shell--worn by a string round the neck.)

358 : Small* : dibi-dibi : -.

(*Footnote. The top of a cone ground flat.)

359 : Necklace of cordage : soger : -. 360 : Necklace of reeds : - : anchi. 361 : Fillet (general
term) : quik'uro (438, 349) : -. 362 : Fillet of mother-of-pearl : - : karakopo. 363 : Armlet,
bracelet (general) : musuri : petu. 364 : Armlet, narrow : - : ungkinya. 365 : Armlet, broad
: - : maiagu. 366 : Leg ornaments* : maka : puara.

(*Footnote. Circular, narrow and twisted--worn round the leg above the calf, from 5 to 30 together.

367 : Anklet : dana-kuk'uro (443, 438, 349) : -. 368 : Any painting on the body : menara :
-. 369 : Camp, camping-place : mudu : -. 370 : Hut : laga (44) : eikuwa. 371 : Windbreak of
bushes, etc. : maak : baalkulka. 372 : Basket : li, le : akomi. 373 : Basket, water : lulko
(252) : rolko. 374 : Sticks for producing fire : salgai : -. 375 : Oven : ammai : yarte. 376
: Needle (of bone) : saka : -. 377 : Thread : ketal : -. 378 : Tobacco-pipe : suguba-marapi
(323, 245) : marapi (245). 379 : Fishing line : ariga : -. 380 : Fish-hook : tudi, todi (152)
: neang-gunya. 381 : Stick for digging : pottur : -. 382 : Spear (general) : kalaka : alka
(68). 383 : Spear, plain (for fishing) : rada : ainti. 384 : Spear, large, barbed : tuna :
tona. So Alexander went to him and he found him lying in front of his barrel and sunbathing,
he greeted him, asked him if he had any desire, "go" to me a little out of the sun, was the
philosopher's answer. The king then said to his followers: "By Jove, if I Alexander would not,
I would be Diogenes. "Perhaps only an anecdote, like the endless were told of the eccentric.

Alexander returned to Macedonia with the winter to get the moved up now to prepare the course
against the barbarian peoples of the border. Attalos was not in the way; Hecataeus had joined
Parmenion, and since they believed their power is not strong enough, Attalos arrest amid the troops
he had seen to win, they were kill him under the command and the troops astray, some Macedonians,
partly Hellenic mercenaries, returned to compliance.

So in Asia, and in Macedonia itself had used her son's absence, Olympias, lust to enjoy the revenge
to the last drop. The murder of the king was, if not their Work certainly been her desire,
but still lived, for the sake of her and her son unworthy had had to endure, the young widow, Cleopatra
and her infant should die. Olympias could kill the child in the womb of the mother and forced the
mother to aufzuknüpfen on your own belt. It is reported that Alexander was angry with her mother about
it, was more angry than the son not. Only the courage of the enemy was not broken, always new
concoction were discovered; on a plan to assassinate Alexander was found involved Amyntas, the
son of King Perdiccas, "Philip was afterwards married to his daughter Kynna he was executed.

However had the advance sent to Asia Corps expanded from the coast to the east and south; the free
Cyzicus at the Propontis supported its left flank, was on the right Parmenion Gryneion occupied
the south of the Caicos, and had been in Ephesus, the demos are collected and the Persian-minded
oligarchy driven, for the further advance an important Parmenion Base. Certainly saw the demos everywhere,
from the tyrants in the cities of the island of Lesbos, was pressed by oligarchs in Chios and Kos
and held in the Persian submission, with increasing agitation on the progress of the Macedonian
troops. Might advance their mission a mistake to have been an embarrassment for Alexander's early
days, now this could Corps and the excitement it caused, at least cover the Thracian campaign
for the back; the positions it had occupied, and the Macedonian fleet, which was made in the Hellespont,
an attempt by the Persians to go over to Thrace, impossible.

However, it was urgently necessary, the Thracians, Getae, Triballi, Illyrians, the superiority
to have the Macedonian arms feel around with them before the big companies to Asia has begun to
establish a durable relationship. These nations, which Macedonia surrounded on three sides
were in the part of Philip to subjects, subject to some made allies of the Macedonian kingdom,
or at least, as the Illyrian tribes, by been repeated defeats in their predatory excursions
inhibited. Now with Philips Death seemed these barbarians the time has come to dismiss the troublesome
dependency and streak under their chiefs in ancient independence and armies, as their fathers
done.

So now were the Illyrians under their prince Kletosi, whose father Bardyllis, only Coal burner,
then king, united the various provinces to joint raids and in the worst times of Amyntas and
Aloriten Ptolemy also occupied Macedonian border areas had, until Philip in heavy fighting him thrown
back past the lake lychnitischen had. At least the thought of it passes to the south now to win Cleitus.
Common Thing to do with him, the Taulantiner upgraded under their prince Glaukias, in addition
to and behind those sitting to the sea coast at Apollonia and Dyrrhachium. Equally sent the Autariaten,
since the two generations in the valleys of Brongos and Angros, the Serbian and Bulgarian Morawa
sat, taken from the general movement to a Breaking into the Macedonian territory to.

Even more dangerous seemed to many, the Macedonians of the enemy Thrakerstamm
Triballi, are now in the north of and along the Danube down Haimosgebirges
lived.

They had already once to 370, as the Autariaten they had pushed out of their country at the Morawa,
the found way over the mountains to Abdera and were then loaded with booty, returned to the
Danube, where they drove the Getae from their seats. The expellees moved to the plains back
on the left bank of the Danube, which, like the swamp forests of the Danube delta and the steppes
of Dobrudja the Scythians, which dominated the old king Ateas held,, so they pressed him that
the old king finally through the mediation of his friends in Greek Apollonia Philip's help called,
but before they came, he had made his peace with the Getae and turned his arms against those
who heranzog to his aid, he lost with heavy defeat (339). But the returning with rich booty
Philip - he chose the path through the area the Triballi - attacked those who would scare
he might have thought it took a Part of his booty off, and the wound he carried off, forced him home
draw, without first to chastise; in the fall on him had called the war amphictyonic to Hellas,
then the management of Thebes, the order of the Corinthian League, the war against the Illyrians
Pleurias claimed, before he was against the Triballi can turn, had she dies. How have the beginnings
of a young king and the known in tensions at the court of Pella is not intended to attract Triballi
like the Illyrians?

If they are now raised, so would the next darn Thrakerstämme them that "even the robbers as robbers
terrible "in Haimos lived, the maid, Better, Korpillen, not have
averted its collapse, but is united with them and doubled the risk,
nor the south in the Rhodope Nessostal down to the living, the so-called
free Thracians, would have surely made as before at the train to Abdera,
the Tribal Learning common cause.

And on the north nearest half-humble areas, especially between the Strymon and the upper Axios
located and where further significant Principality of PAION [3] was the Macedonian kingdom by
no means certain for all cases, though for the moment still behaved calmly. No less unreliable
the Thracians appeared in the basin of the Hebros and up to the Propontis the south, the Pontos
in the east, once many small principalities together of considerable power, as long as the Odrysians
kingdom - they all came from this Royal House of Teres, the Odrysenkönigs in the Periclean period
- a kind of cohesive Some had been, from King Philip, they were long and heavy fighting and
more been more isolated and forced into dependency; that the restoration of the Athens Kersobleptes
and called the old Teresa of Philip, the war had caused serious of 340th Possible that after the
victory of Chaeronea Philip in the Thracian order conditions made added, there can be no doubt that
some of these princes retained their heritage, but as a function of Macedonia, which might be
enough to endure them intolerable, insufferable twice as the Macedonian settlements on Hebros and
perhaps a Macedonian Strateg as governor forced her to keep quiet. Without these people the
confusion after Philip's assassination to manifest hostility used, with the conspirators, with Attalus,
with the Athenians had been in contact, the concern was before them in the Council of Alexander
so great that all compliance, and even if they fell off, sorry for runaway held, as with to demand
strict obedience and respect for existing contracts. Alexander realized compliance and that half-measures
and Macedonia, when it attacked, was invincible, reduced to the defensive, daring the wild
and lascivious consuming barbarians, the Persian war impossible were made because neither the boundaries
reveal their attacks, nor as a light Infantry could be spared in the Persian wars.

[3] See the note at the end.

Now were the dangers in the Hellenic land removed happily and the season so far advanced that one
could hope to pull through the mountains without major obstacles. Since those of the designated
nations that were part of Macedonia, not yet decided had done, or at least since Alexander's return
to Macedonia to other ventures did not seem to think because on the other side to it from
any thought of waste and Improvements to frighten the superiority
of the Macedonian arms and determined will, had to make this claim,
as it demonstrated in front of their eyes, so the king decided a train
against the Triballi, which had not been punished for having Philipp
had on the return march from Skythenzuge attacked and robbed.

    

The Kings were open two ways over the mountains in the land of Triballi, either at the Axiosstrom
up through the northern passes and the territory of all time loyal Agrianer in the level of Triballi
go down, or east through the area of ​​free Thracians to move into the valley of Hebros and then
climb up to the Haimos to the Triballi its eastern border to attack, this second route was
preferable because it through the area insecure nations, including leading the Odrysians Thracians.
At the same time Byzantium asked to send a number of warships to the mouth of the Danube, the
transition make on this flow possible. Antipater was left to the administration of the empire
in Pella.

Of Amphipolis from the King first moved to the east, through the territory of the free Thracians,
Philippoi, then to the left leaving the Orbelos in Nessostal up and over this river. It was
he has the Rhodope, to go through the territory of the Odrysians Haimospässen. After a march
of ten days is, it, Alexander was standing at the foot of the mountain, the path that here
pushes through narrow and steep between the heights had been occupied by the enemy, the stop
with all the power seemed to want the transition, some mountain residents of the area, partly
free Thracians.

Armed only with a dagger and spear hunting, instead of the helmet with a Fuchsbalg covered, so as to
face the heavily armed Macedonians could not maintain the field, would they line of the enemy,
if they was advancing against the heights, by rolling down many of their cars with which they
had occupied the heights tear, and bring in confusion, to pounce on the resolved rows. Alexander,
who saw the danger and convinced that the transition is possible at any other point, gave the
infantry the transfer as soon as The car rolled down, wherever it allowed the ground to open
up the lines and the to let cars go through those gaps, where they could not escape at the sides,
should the people, the knee propped against the ground, the signs above their heads firmly together
, Thus closing down the moving car from rolling over them. The cars came and chased to be done
partly through the openings, partly on the shield rooftops, without damage. With loud Cries now
broke the Macedonians to the Thracians, the archers from the right wing pushed out, dismissed
the impacting their enemies back with bullets and covered the rising uphill march of heavily
armed men, and they penetrated into the closed line drove them with little trouble, the ill-armed
barbarians from their position, so that they correspond to the left wing is no longer with the Hypaspists
Agrianern and advancing King was stopped, but threw away their weapons and, as best they could, fled.
They lost fifteen hundred dead, their wives and children and all their belongings were prey
to the Macedonians sent and Lysanias and Philotas in the maritime cities on the market.

Alexander now took the gentler northern slopes of the mountains down into the valley of the Triballi
over the Lyginos (probably the Yantra in Turnovo), one of approximately three marches from the
Danube flows. Syrmos, who had Triballerfürst, set the course of Alexander informed the women
and premised Triballi children of the Danube and cross over to the island Peuke commanded thither
had already fled the tribal learning neighboring Thracians; also Syrmos himself was with his
men fled away; the mass of the other hand, had Triballi backward to the river Lyginos, was the
day Alexander previously broken, pulled, probably to seize the passports
of his back.

No sooner had the experience of the King, so he returned quickly to look for them, and surprised
them, because they just kept had, they were quickly on to the edge of the wood, the entlangzog
on the River. While the columns used in order of the phalanx, Alexander had the archers and slingers
run ahead to lure the enemies with arrows and stones on the open field. This broke forth, and
by, especially on the right wing, is too far dared blew right moved quickly, in the intermediate,
the other, and left three Ilen of chivalry them on a Ilen and behind them the phalanx in front,
the enemy, who had bravely held up to that point, stood for the surge of mailed knights and the
closed phalanx did not flee and the forest back to the river, three Thousands perished on
the run, the others saved themselves by the darkness of the forest and the oncoming night favors.

Alexander
continued his march, and earlier was on the third day on the banks of the Danube, where it already
expected the ships of Byzantium, now they were archers and heavy infantry mans around the island,
who had fled the Triballi and Thracians to attack; but the island was well guarded, the steep
banks, tearing one of restricted flow, the vessels too little, and the Getae on the north bank
seemed ready to make common cause with them. attack Alexander withdrew his ships and decided to
immediately Getae on the opposite bank; when he was humiliated by the lord of the two banks,
could not the Danube Island . Keep

The Getae, about four thousand men on horseback and on foot more than
ten thousand, had at North bank of the Danube in front of a poorly
fortified town, which was set up inland; they might expect that the
enemy would need several days to cross the stream that opportunity
will be found so that individual departments, which landed to attack
and .

Reamed It was mid-May, the fields next to the Getenstadt covered with corn, the highly enough
in the stalks stood up landing troops to escape the eyes of the enemy. Everything came in fact, hold the Getae
with fast attack, and as the vessels from the Byzantine troops not could take up enough so we brought
together from the area a lot of small boat, that the population served, when they were fishing
on the river, drove piracy or visiting friends in the lower village, were also the skins in
which the Macedonians bleary-eyed, filled with hay and tied firmly. sat in the dead of night fifteen
hundred horse and four thousand foot soldiers under the command of the king on the river, landed
under the protection of the vast grain fields under the city.

At daybreak moved them from the seeds, preceded the infantry, with instructions to the grain
with the Sarissa knock down, and, until they came to a vacant field to advance. There rode the cavalry,
which had previously followed the infantry, under the leadership of the king at the right
Wing, while left leaning against the river, in a spread in the phalanx line Nicanor advancing.
The Getae terrified by the incomprehensible courage of Alexander, who so easily the greatest
of all flows, and in one night exceeded, hurried, not for the surge the rider, nor the power
of the phalanx grown to throw himself into the city, and when she and then move up saw the enemy,
they fled by with their wives and children of took them, which could bring the horses, further
into the interior of the country. The king moved in the city they destroyed, sent the loot
to Macedonia under Philip and Meleager back, on the banks of the river offered the savior Zeus,
Hercules and the current offerings. It was not his intention, the limits of his power to the
plains, the northward the Danube spread, extend, and the broad river was once the Getae the
power of the Macedonians met, had a secure border, and near no further tribe, whose resistance
we would have had to fear.


The perfect tense (setting aside some inexplicable irregularities) exhibits a great variety
of terminations for the formation of which no rule can yet be given: these are an, ana, ani;
in, ina, ima: em, ema; eima, eiun; and un.

The future tense alone is perfectly regular; it is simply formed by adding kai to the present.

The present tense of the imperative mood in those verbs having the present of the indicative
ending in ipa terminates (with one exception in i) in ir: in the others the terminations of
this tense are ur (the most frequent); ar (the next in order of frequency), ara, ari; ada,
eada; e, eio, eir, erur; and o.

After all I am inclined to suppose that the Kowrarega verb, although apparently complicated,
is of simple construction; and that its various modifications are caused by the mere addition
to its root of various particles, the exact meaning of which (with one exception) is yet unknown.
That exception is the particle aige or ge (804) the mode of employment of which is shown by
the following examples :

Wawp' yinu ngai purteipaige = I am not eating your fish. Wawp' yinu ngai purteiunaige = I did
not eat your fish. Wawp' yinu ngai purteipakaige = I shall not eat your fish. Wawp' nanu ngi
purtaige = Don't eat his fish.

A few examples may be given in illustration of the preceding remarks.

COLUMN 1: ENGLISH. COLUMN 2: PRESENT. COLUMN 3: PAST. COLUMN 4: FUTURE. COLUMN 5: IMPERATIVE.

Eat : purteipa : purteiun : purteipakai : purtar. Bite : mapeipa : mapana : mapeipakai : mapur.
Take away : meipa : mani : meipakai : mari. Tell : mulepa : mulem : mulepakai : muleada. Lie
down : yuneipa : yunum : yuneipakai : yunur. Leave behind : yuneipa : yunem : yuneipakai :
yunur. Shoot : uteipa : utun : uteipakai : utur. Enter : uteipa : utema : uteipakai : uterur.)

703 : Word implying motion : ngapa* : -.

(*Footnote. This is a word which from the variety of its modes of application long puzzled
me. Careful examination of sentences in which it occurred led to the following results. 1.
It may be used as an independent word to denote motion towards the speaker, the pronoun which
would otherwise be required being omitted. Example: adur = go out, but ngap' adur = come out
(towards the speaker), lak' ngapa = to come again, to return. 2. It is also used as a postfix
to denote motion towards the object to which it is joined. Example: laga' p'(ngapa) aiyewel
= come to the hut, mue' pa teir = throw it into the fire. 3. It is used in a third sense. Example:
wawpi 'pa = to go fishing, kaba 'pa = to go to a dance. 4. It is often used as an equivalent
to give me, the hand being held out at the same time, Example: ngapa = let it come to me.)

704 : Bail : salpumeipa : -. 705 : Be affected with : ameipa* : -.

(*Footnote. Apparently a contraction of ana and meipa. Example: ana kobaki ameipa = (literally)
me cough affects, or I have a cough. The word mizzi, the exact meaning of which is unknown
to me, is also used to express the same thing. Example: quiku kikire ana mizzi = I have a sick
head, or a headache.)

706 : Become : atzipa : -. 707 : Bite : mapeipa : -. 708 : Bore a hole : tartepaleipa (817,
722) : -. 709 : Break (as a stick) : tideipa aterumbanya. 710 : Break wind backwards : - :
penyaka. 711 : Build (as a hut) : mideipa (369 ?) : -. 712 : Bury, plant, sow : maramateipa
(40, 791) : -. 713 : Call for : tureipa : untandurra. 714 : Carry, hold : ang-eipa : -. 715
: Choose, select : yapepa : -. 716 : Climb : waleipa : oquagamurra. 717 : Come here : pateipa,
aiyewel : -. 718 : Come, approach : uleipa : impebino. 719 : Cook : gia paleipa (641 ?) : -.
720 : Copulate : lameipa : erorunya. 721 : Cover over : abeipa : -. 722 : Crush, pound with
a stone : paleipa : akelgurra. 723 : Cry, howl like a dog : maierchipa : rong-gung-ga-murra.
724 : Cut : labaipa : utedung-gurra. 725 : Dance : kaba mineipa (811) : unchigulkamurra. 726
: Die : dadeipa : -. 727 : Dig : pideipa : -. 728 : Dive : penneipa : -. 729 : Dream : piki
lalkeipa* (813, 755) : -.

(*Footnote. The pronoun ana is always used with this. Example: ana piki lalkar = I had a dream.)

730 : Drink : wanipa : ung-gen-ga. 731 : Drown : delupeipa : -. 732 : Dry up : wata' pateipa
(602) : -. 733 : Eat : purteipa, pratipa : atedurra. 734 : Enter (going out of sight) : uteipa
: -. 735 : Fall down : pudeipa : -. 736 : Fill (with solids) : wangepa : -. 737 : Fill (with
fluids) : maleipa (29) : -. 738 : Find : imeipa : angkanya. 739 : Finish (men's work) : min'
atzipa (613, 706) : -. 740 : Finish (women's work) : palpagipa : -. 741 : Feces, to void :
- : anabichung-ar. 742 : Forget : kekochipa : -. 743 : Get up : winipa : amamung-i. 744 : Give
: pibeipa, wiepa* : utera.

(*Footnote. Ana is used with pibeipa only; the exact meaning of both is to bestow, or cause
the transfer of ownership; the actual HANDING OVER of anything would be asked for by ngapa
= let it come here, holding out the hand at the same time, but this last may presume merely
inspection or temporary use of the article.)

745 : Go away : udzaripa : einpira. 746 : Go out, perforate : adeipa : -. 747 : Go out (as
a fire) : utsimeipa : -. 748 : Hear, understand : krangipa : -. 749 : Hide, conceal : muye
teipa (685, 791) : -. 750 : Jump, leap : katapulgipa : ralkagamurra. 751 : Kick : kukuna mapeipa
(485, 707) : -. 752 : Kill : dadeima matameipa (598, 786) : -. 753 : Laugh : gi waleipa (819)
: ung-garung-gari. 754 : Leave behind : yuneipa : -. 755 : Lie : lalkeipa (820) : -. 756 :
Lie down : yuneipa : -. 757 : Make (men's work) : tatureipa : -. 758 : Make (women's work)
: umeipa : -. 759 : Make a fire : muekemeipa : -. 760 : Paddle : karaba tapeipa (343, 787)
: untyendyurra : -. 761 : Pull, drag : yuteipa : -. 762 : Rain : ari pudeipa (18, 735) : -.
763 : Return : mang-epa : -. 764 : Rise (as the sun) daneipa : -. 765 : Run* : - : ringa.

(*Footnote. In Kowrarega, the action of running is expressed by the adverb tari = quickly,
and the verb uleipa = to approach: Example: ngapa tari uleipa expresses quick motion TOWARDS
the speaker, and tari uleipa quick motion FROM the speaker.)

766 : Sail : pong-eipa : reng-gamurra. 767 : Scold : ideipa : inyamung-urra. 768 : Scrape hands*
: getapudeipa (465, 735) : -.

(*Footnote. A mode of salutation practised throughout Torres Strait, and occasionally at Cape
York.)

769 : Scratch, pinch : musiteipa : -. 770 : See, look after, watch : yaweipa : -. 771 : Sew
: tarpeipa : belkagur. 772 : Shake : lupeipa : -. 773 : Sharpen : gizu paleipa (824, 722) :
-. 774 : Shave : piniteipa : angkarung-gurra (449, 450). 775 : Shoot (with gun or bow) : uteipa
: -. 776 : Seize, press, squeeze : gasumeipa : gipaburra. 777 : Sing : sagul piyepa (818) :
-. 778 : Sleep : ute-ipa (825) : eremadin. 779 : Smoke : suguba wanipa (323, 730) : -. 780
: Sit down : tanureipa : engka. 781 : Speak, tell : mulepa : ekalkamurra. 782 : Spear, sting
: pageipa : -. 783 : Stand : kadi (irregular) : -. 784 : Stand up : kadi tanure (783) : -.
785 : Steal : krameipa : -. 786 : Strike : matumeipa : untondunya. 787 : Swim : tapeipa : rolma,
rulma. 788 : Take away : meipa : -. 789 : Tear : ladeipa : -. 790 : Thirst : nukineipa (655)
: -. 791 : Throw into : teipa : umpanya. 792 : Tie : kunumeipa : -. 793 : Touch : tareipa :
abeang-gang-urra. 794 : Turn over : tarteipa : -. 795 : Unloose, untie : ideipa : -. 796 :
Waken : welmeipa : -. 797 : Wash : garwulgeipa : -. 798 : Water, make : ing-uje (irregular)
: -. 799 : Wound : umaliza matumeipa (598, 786) : -. 800 : Wrap round, coil, twist : nureipa : -.

11. MISCELLANEOUS.

801 : Affix expressing article spoken of : dza* : -.

(*Footnote. Example: Nabi'dza = this thing.)

802 : Affix expressing possession : leg* : -.

(*Footnote. Leg or le, is to be possessed of, and, when used independently, is placed after
the noun which it refers to: ngai 'quassur daje leg = I have two petticoats; ngi kutai leg?
= have you (any) yams?)

803 : ---- : ki* : -.

(*Footnote. The meaning of this is to a certain extent doubtful; however it enforces an affirmation:
Example: ina muggi' ki = this is VERY little : it is frequently used after pronouns: Example:
arri ki kabspakai = we SHALL go to the dance.)

804 : Affix of negation : aige* : -.

(*Footnote. Being the negative of leg, or le, as formerly stated, aige, or ge = to have not:
Example: ngai kalak' aige = I have no spears; nga ajir'ge = she has no shame.)

805 : Any small article : zapu (fish-hook, etc.) : -. 806 : Anger, rage : kerket : -. 807 :
Body of any creature : gamu : -. 808 : Cold : sumein : ekanba (? to shiver). 809 : Cough :
kobaki : ulgene. 810 : Crack : pis : -. 811 : Dance : kaba : -. 812 : Dirt : tumit : -. 813
: Dream : piki : -. 814 : Dust in the eye : - : lopicha. 815 : Food : aidu* : -.

(*Footnote. As examples of various forms of this word, I may give, ana pibur aidu = give me
(some) food: ina aio? = is this eatable? ai = it is eatable.)

816 : Greediness : ubi : -. 817 : Hole : tarte : apandya. 818 : Joke : sagul : -. 819 : Laughter
: gi (641) : -. 820 : Lie : lalkai : -. 821 : Name : nel : -. 822 : Noise : nur : -. 823 :
Shame : ajir : -. 824 : Sharpness : gizu : -. 825 : Sleep : ute : -. 826 : Smell : ganu : -.
827 : Taste : mita : -. 828 : Weight : mapu : -.

12. NAMES OF PERSONS.

Males, Number 1 : Piaquai : Paida. Males, Number 2 : Manu : Tumagugu. Males, Number 3 : Wagel
(626) : Waga. Males, Number 4 : Salalle : Kuri. Males, Number 5 : Boruto : Chamida (444). Males,
Number 6 : Gabua : Puroma. Females, Number 1 : Aburde : Mamulla. Females, Number 2 : Seibai
: Ganulle. Females, Number 3 : Yeza : Baki.

...

NATIVE NAMES OF PLACES IN TORRES STRAIT AND NEIGHBOURHOOD OF CAPE YORK.

Mount Adolphus Island : Morilaga. Mount Adolphus Hill : Begunkutche. Small island to northward
: Quiquichaga. Island North-West from Mount Adolphus, larger : Wagilwane. Island North-West
from Mount Adolphus, smaller : Budye. Rock South-East from ditto : Akoine. Rock a : Kolapitchum.
The Brothers : Kurobi. North Brother : Tarakar. Albany Island : Pabaju. Albany Island, north
point : Tarung-i. Bush Island : Marte. Tree Island : Moebamunne. North-East Point of Albany
Island : Tolodinya. Albany Rock : Manurre. Albany Rock, islet East by South : Takunya. Albany
Rock, South-East : Eikoa. York Island (Cape York) : Wamilag. Eborac Island : Dyara. Mount Bremer
: Charua. Evans Point : Maodinya. Sextant Rock : Delua. Beach at Evans Bay : Podaga. Bramble
Hill : Duyemil-pada. South-East point of Evans Bay : Chechuri. Ida Island : Robumo. Beach East
from Mew River : Paiera. Beach East from Mew River, hill behind : Pochinya. Bishop Point :
Qualulga. Osnaburg Point : Kalalurri. Beach West from Cape York : Eintrang-o. Islet West by
South : Purang-i. Peak Point : Karubowra. Possession Island : Bedanug. Woody Island, larger
: Kei' Yellubi. Woody Island, smaller : Muggi' Yellubi. Entrance Island : Juna. Entrance Island,
islet to North-West : Cheruko. Entrance Island, islet to West-South-West : Pipa. Islet on East
side of Port Lihou : Tarilug. Islet off Port Lihou : Dumaralug. West Prince of Wales Island
: Muralug. Cape Cornwall and neighbourhood : Morurpure. Beach on West side of Port Lihou :
Daaka. Creek opposite Pipa and vicinity : Yet. Beach on North-East side of Muralug : Marin.
Thursday Island : Gealug. Black Rock : Gi'omanalug. Green Island : Piwer. Goode Island : Peilalug.
Goode Island, rocks on reef near this : Ipile. Hammond Island : Keiriri. Hammond Island, Rock
: Adi. Friday Island : Weibene. East Prince of Wales Island : Narupai. Horned Hill : Dyugubai.
Wednesday Island : Mowrurra. Strait Island, larger : Kei Kudulug. Strait Island, smaller :
Muggi Kudulug. Travers Island : Mukunaba. Double Island : Nellgi. Mount Ernest : Nagir. Mount
Ernest, islet next this : Pinakar. Pole Island : Getullai. Burke Island : Suaraji. Banks Island,
high portion : Mua. Banks Island, low : Ita. Mulgrave Island : Badu. Hawkesbury Island : Warara.
Tobin, or North Possession Island : Kulbi. Sue Island : Waraber. Murray Island, largest : Mer.
Murray Island, middle : Dowar. Murray Island, smallest : Wayer. Darnley Island : Errub. Nepean
Island : Eddugor. Stephens Island : Ugar. Campbell Island : Zapker. Dalrymple Island : Dzamud.
Keats Island : Umagur. York Island, larger : Massid. York Island, smaller : Kudala. Bourke
Isles, westernmost : Owrid. Bourke Isles, northernmost : Purem.

...

APPENDIX 2.

The materials composing the following Vocabulary are arranged in three columns, according to
the localities where they were obtained.

1. Redscar Bay (on the South-East coast of New Guinea, in latitude 9 degrees 17 minutes South
and longitude 146 degrees 53 minutes East) and its neighbourhood.

2. Brumer Island (on the South-East coast of New Guinea, in latitude 10 degrees 45 minutes
South and longitude 150 degrees 22 minutes East) and its neighbourhood; also Dufaure Island
(about 40 miles to the westward). When the same word was given at both these places, I have
indicated this circumstance by the letter b placed after the word; those procured at Dufaure
Island only are marked by the letter D.

3. Brierly Island (Louisiade Archipelago, in latitude 11 degrees 20 minutes South and longitude
153 degrees 9 minutes East); also a few words, distinguished by the letter D, procured at the
Duchateau Isles from natives of some neighbouring islands of the Calvados Group.

COLUMN 1: ENGLISH. COLUMN 2: REDSCAR BAY. COLUMN 3: BRUMER ISLANDS. COLUMN 4: LOUISIADE.

1. NATURAL OBJECTS.

Sky : - : garewa : buru-buru. Sun : diina* : mahana (b) : parai, parei.

(*Footnote. Since reading Dr. Latham's remarks, I am inclined to suppose that in this vocabulary
the common termination na is often no part of the word, but merely a contraction of the relative
pronoun = this (is).)

Cloud : - : budi-budi : -. Moon : - : nowarai : -. Wind : - : - : wiego. Salt water : dawara,
davara : arita (b) : soga. Surf : - : bagodu : -. Fresh water : ranu : goila (b) : wawei (D).
Sand : - : gera-gera : kera-kera. Earth : - : batan : -. Stone, rock : nati : weu, veu (b)
: pak. Cliff : - : padi-padi : -. Quartz : - : karitao : -. Obsidian : - : nabuka (b) : -.
Fire : lahi, rahi : kaiwa (b) : hiwo.

a. Mammalia.

Tail (of a dog) : - : derena : -. Dog : sisia : wanuhe, daiasi : geiwo. Pig : buroma : tuana,
bawa (D) : bobo. Opossum (Cuscus) : mowra, bowra : - : -.

b. Birds.

Bird : - : - : maan. Wing : - : mabena, pepena : -. Bill : - : esuna, kawana : -. Feather :
iduar : daguri : sao-sa. Hornbill : pawporo : - : -. White cockatoo : karai : rorowa : -. Nicobar
pigeon : - : korauto : -. Cassowary : - : tyuaburo : -. Noddy : - : maga : -.

c. Reptiles.

Green turtle : matabudi : wawnu : -. Eggs : momo : - : -. Shell : nakeme : - : -. Hind flipper
: ai : - : -. Tortoise-shell : kipore, gebore : koma-koma : -. Large lizard : - : makara :
-. Water-snake : - : mata : -.

d. Fishes.

Fish : - : yama : yeimai. Bone : - : - : bebai. Fry of a Caranx : - : - : muwota. Mailed-perch
: - : beirawa : -.

e. Insects, etc.

Sand-crab (Ocypoda) : - : gagaruki : -. Small crab (Grapsus etc.) : - : karagi : wallo-quallo.
Fly : - : wuro-uro : -. Butterfly : - : bebi : bebi (= moth).

f. Shells, etc.

Cuttle-fish bone : - : - : weinaga. Nautilus : - : were-werigwa : -. Ear-shell : - : woka-woka
: -. Snail : - : nin-nu : -. Scarabus : - : wadiwa : -. Small cowrie : - : - : dinga-dinga.
Small cowrie, white : - : mawto : -. Egg-cowrie : lokol : dunari (b), dunai : du-ong-a. Cypraea
mauritiana : - : guna : -. Arca : - : - : emoyamo. Cyrena : keva : kiwai : -. Cockle : - :
kasepin. Donax : - : bogadob (D) : -. Pearl-oyster : meili : kepo, immaro : kepo. Barnacle
: - : - : tuwaraga. Coral : - : puduri, buduri : sangoken = branched.

g. Vegetable Productions.

Wood : au : kaiwa : hiwo. Charcoal, black paint : uma : dum : -. Leaf : - : - : taiyu = yam
leaf. Grass : - : yawa-yawada : wirmwir. Sea-weed : - : - : baan. Tree : - : madyu : -. Scented-herb
: mura-mura : mura (b), kamura : -. Yellow-flowered plant : - : - : tao-ta. Erythrina indica
: - : yowra : -. Casuarina : - : - : dai. Mangrove : - : - : tu-onga. Coconut and tree : niu
: niu (b) : pogia, niu (D). Pandanus : - : duya : elegeli. Areca-nut : - : beda (b) : ereka.
Banana : ani : kassaig, betu and beta (D) : pai-pai (D). Bread-fruit : kunune : -. Calladium
esculentum ? : - : abaiya : piya = plant, poya = tuber, pihia (D). Yam : - : quateya : daha.
Nodulated tuber : - : - : saiwe. Small yam-like tuber : - : nare : -. Betel pepper : - : gugu,
rugu = fruit, peipai = leaf (D) : -. Mango : waiwai : gishoa : -. Yellow plum : - : baowyobi
: -. Fig : - : baware : -. Sugar-cane : - : garu : mon-mon (D). Ginger : - : monewa : -. Amaranth
: - : popori : -. Flax : - : yimone, taoc (D).

2. ARTICLES OF FOREIGN ORIGIN.

Iron : - : ropo-ropo (b) : kellumai. Clothing : - : quama : -.

3. UTENSILs, ORNAMENTS, WEAPONS, ETC.

Catamaran : - : daow, raow : -. Catamaran, lashing : - : owisu : -. Canoe : wanagi : waga (b)
: waga. Bow : kura-kuro : - : hebagi. Figure-head : - : - : tabura. Then came the news that Antipater was approaching with an army.

He was, once he had mastered Memnon, left for the south, after the fast Through the course of
the movement suppressed in Thessaly, in the continuing march of the quotas at least the most
reliable allies had pulled on him, he came with a major army - It is given to 40 000 troops -
on the Isthmus, and he was strong enough for the offered Assistance to thank those who reported
now to have ready for the King's cause. Agis, said to have been the army only 20 000 infantry and
2000 cavalry strong, was the siege of Megalopolis on to something back on the road to Sparta
in a more favorable terrain where He hoped to be able to resist the superior force, to expect
the attack. There followed a highly bloody battle in which the Spartans and their allies, as
the reports received it represent work performed miracles of bravery, to King Agis, covered
with wounds, all pages included, finally succumbed to the rush and found the death he sought. Antipater
had triumphed when fully with significant loss.

This defeat broke the hopes of the Hellenic patriots, and the attempt to to renew Spartan hegemony,
together. Eudamidas, the fallen king's younger childless Brother and successor, who was from the
beginning of her have been against this war, recommended now, though the allies had withdrawn with
the Spartans to give up further resistance; It was sent to Antipater and asked for peace. This
called for fifty Spartan Boys as hostages, they offered him as many men, so contented himself the
winner, he referred When asked about the burglary to the Sanhedrin of the covenant, which was
called to Corinth; After many discussions on the matter showed it to Alexander, what Spartan
envoys to departed the Far East. The king's decision was as mild as possible, he forgave the
Happened, but should Eleans and Achaeans, for they were comrades of the Hellenic Federation, Sparta
- Megalopolis pay 120 talents as compensation. One may assume that Sparta now join the league
had, was in the Constitution of the State altheraklidischen nothing changed, the area is not
reduced again.

Even in Athens, is the tension of feelings have now been resolved, if you also did not cease
to fall into bitter grumbling. Soon after Agis' defeat of the Trial of Ctesiphon heard by the
judges. "Think of the time," says the Aeschines Judges, "in which you say the sentence, in
a few days to celebrate the Pythian, and the Sanhedrin of the Greeks gathered, Demosthenes' policy
in this time concerning the city made a reproach to, if you give him the ring as Ctesiphon sought
will you apply for it, with those who break the general peace, to be of one mind. "The Athenians
will have to be counted as a great political act, that not one fifth of votes for Äschines
found. This fell into this in a fine of a thousand drachmas, he they are not paid, he left
Athens and went to Ephesus, and was given in the next Dionysia Demosthenes a golden crown, which,
it determines after the Battle of Chaeronea, now the Endorsement of his policies then and now
spoke.

The general conditions in Greece were not changed with such demonstrations;
since the collapse of the Spartan survey they performed in the background.

  

  

  Book III

  
  + Ailinon, ailinon eipe, to d 'eu nikatô. +
  
  First Chapter
  

Pursuit of Bessos - Rise in Areia - March of the Army to the south, which Areia, Drangiana,
Arachosia until the southern slope of the Indian Caucasus - The thought of Alexander and Aristotle's
theory - that was discovered conspiracy - The new army organization

Around the time of the Spartan defeat was in Hyrcania Alexander, on the northern slope of that
Mountain wall, which separates Iran and Turan, of him the way to Bactria and India, to the
unknown seas, which he expected to see beyond the two countries as the limit of his empire
liked, behind him half of the Persian Empire, and hundreds of miles back the Hellenic Home. He
knew of Agis' insurrection, from its growing influence in the Peloponnese, by the uncertain mood
in the rest of Greece in which the alternatives of war happiness made doubly dangerous, he
knew the importance of this enemy, whose caution, the Activity. Yet he went further and further
east, with no troops to be sent to Antipater or to wait for good
news.

If Agis had now won? Or Alexander defied on happiness? He despised the danger to which he could
meet no more? He did not dare to to save Greece to follow the regicide with half as many troops
as to the victories had been enough of Gaugamela and Issus?

Einstein was of course the rest of the Greeks and their recognition of the Macedonian hegemony
essential foundation of his power and his victories have been, and now he's guaranteed victory the
rest of Greece, Asia and the possession of the further application of this hegemony, it to
dispute would have been more stupid than dangerous.

Antipater defeated, so were the satraps in Lydia and Phrygia, Syria and Egypt prepared on behalf
of their king, not Earth and water, but they demand satisfaction for treachery and betrayal,
and this love of freedom of the malcontents, this ambiguous heroism of the phrase, intrigue and
corruption would have no Marathon found.

The king could, undisturbed by the movements in his back, follow the plans further, which the
crime of forced upon him and his companions Bessos or made possible. By possession of the Caspian
passes, the crews, at the entrance of the Median pass route were
left to the Tigris in Ecbatana, the mobile column, which the line
of Dominated Euphrates, was Alexander, though by a double wall of
mountains Syrian Lowlands separated, but the connection with the Western
provinces of his empire enough to the big countries and peoples of
the border mountain range to the starting point for new Hyrcanus companies
to make.

After he indulged his army some rest, according to Hellenic custom of festivals and competitions
had done and sacrificed to the gods, he set out from the Hyrcanus residence. He had for the moment
about 20 000 foot soldiers and 3000 horsemen around him, especially the Hypaspists, whose proven
strategic Nicanor, Parmenion son, only to soon succumb to a disease should the larger part of
the phalanx, and finally the entire Macedonian knights under the leadership of Philotas, whose
father Parmenion the important post in Ecbatana commanded by light Troops had Alexander the
shooters and Agrianer with him, during the march should be to and come back to the other corps
in the army, including the 6000 Cleitus phalangites of Ecbatana to
Parthia, Parmenion even the horse and light troops, with whom he remained
was to readjust Hyrcania.

It is expressly testified that Alexander was intentional, to Bactria, the capital of the great Bactrian
satrapy to go. There, he knew there Bessos withdrew with his followers, there all who were with
the ancient Persian thing, summoned to join the Macedonian Conqueror, if he dare to go beyond Hyrcania
to oppose. Alexander might hope, with a rapid march to the banks of the last known oxos army,
which he still resist wanted to take and destroy before the arrival of the Arian lands with her
have united, and if his march, these Arian satrapies for right now, let it was expected that
before the stroke that would crush the king's murderer, even they
would bend.

He followed the great road leading from the northern slope of the mountain Hyrcania, then by the
Part Parthia and Areias by the Turanian desert are initially leads to Baktriana. When he had reached the
limit Areias, it occurred in Susia, the nearest town Areias, the satrap the country Satibarzanes
contrary, to submit to him and the country, both important messages Bessos to worry about. He
was in possession of his Satibarzanes satrapy; Anaxippos of the Hetairen Akontisten with 60 men on horseback
was to guard the place and recording the descendants Columns left, orders, which showed that
Alexander in the form of a suzerainty, that did not mean much, the powerful satraps in the flank
his march initially wanted to keep in idleness, to continue his hurried march safely. For even
Bessos had, as stated Satibarzanes and more of the Persians, who from Bactria to Susia arrived,
confirmed the tiara, the title of King of Asia, the king assumed name Artaxerxes crowds had
gathered and many volatile Persian Baktrianë order, expected auxiliary
army Scythian from the nearby areas.

So Alexander marched on the road in front after Bactria; already were the bundesgenössischen
rider Philippos from the Ecbatana nachführte, the mercenaries and the Thessalian horsemen, which
again Services had taken, joined the army. The king might hope, then reinforced and overwhelm the normal
speed of the usurper him before long. He was in full March, as he approached the most disturbing
news from Areia: Satibarzanes have faithless as the Macedonian post attacked, killed all Macedonians,
together with their leader Anaxippos, the people of his satrapy call to arms; Artakoana, the royal
city of satrapy is, the rendezvous of the rebels, from where would the treacherous satrap when
Alexander of Areias beyond the border, was to unite with Bessos and the Macedonians where Should
that he, attack with the new king Artaxerxes Bessos together. Alexander could not be , Deny
that such movement is in the side of his route from the greatest danger; from Areia, he could completely
cut off from there, the usurpation of the Bessos multiple Support will be given, and the satrap of
Areia the first cross-border landscapes Drangiana Arochosien Barsaentes and was one of the regicide,
it was expected that he joined the join the movement will Arei. Under such circumstances, the train
continued to Bactria, would have been foolhardy, and even at the risk, the usurper time to larger
armor leave, he had the operation error, the entire flank of a suspect's movements have trusted
allies to quickly and decisively to make good, the whole area submit to the edge first look. He
gave the prosecution and the submission of Bessos Bactrian of the country on, now, to get possession
of Areia and other Arian to make sure countries and from there the interrupted operations against
the usurper continue with double certainty.

At the top of two phalanges, the archers and Agrianer, the Macedonian knighthood and Akontisten
on horseback, the king hastily broke against the revolted satraps, while the rest of the army
under Krateros encamped on the spot. After two very strenuous marches Alexander stood before the king
Artakoana city, he found everything in violent motion, by the leave unexpected attack and dismayed
by the war brought together people, was Satibarzanes escaped with a few riders over the mountains to
Bessos; the Arei had their villages and leave taken refuge in the mountains. Alexander threw
himself upon her, thirteen thousand armed men were surrounded and partly cut down, some made into slaves.
This rapid and severe Court subjected the Arei; the Persian Arsames been given the satrapy.

Areia is one of the most important areas of Persia, it is the passage area between Iran, Turan
and Ariana, where the Areiosstrom its course suddenly turns north, crossing the great Highways
from Hyrcania and Parthia, and Bactria Margiana from, from the oasis area of Seistan and the
high valley of the Kabulstromes, a Macedonian colony, Alexandria in Areia, was founded on
this important point, and still lives among the people of Herat, the Memory of Alexander, the
founder of their rich city.

Alexander is in the inquiries which he moved in with the change in his line of approach, an approximate
picture of the situation of the Arian satrapies against Bactria and India, the Mountains and streams,
which determine the design of these countries, from the streets and mountain passes, connecting them,
have won and it will be seemed to him necessary, until the entire southern flank to occupy
the Bactrian country before he turned against the usurper in Bactria, him the support he could
draw from the Arian and Indian lands in itself, to deprive him so inclusive in a wide arc,
finally, the extreme wing of the encountering hostile assembly, according to the same strategic
system, after the battles at the Granicus, at Issus, at Gaugamela had been decisive. With up
to the march Areia was this movement that led first to Drangiana and Arachosia is already underway.
Alexander moved, once again Krateros had joined him, southward to the individual districts this
time rich and well-populated country to submit to. Barsaentes waited his arrival not down, he fled
across the eastern border of his satrapy to the Indians, which it later extradited. Alexander
marched in the valley of the river Adreskan, flowing down to the lake Areia (Haräva) in the land of
the urge or Zaranger, whose capital Prophtasia resulted easily.

Lived south of the whistles are happy in not then sanded fruit of the southern plains Seistan the Ariaspen
or, as the Greeks called it, Euergetes, a peaceful agricultural driving People who, since
ancient times in this "land of Spring" at home, that quiet, industrious and led orderly life,
which portrayed in the teaching of Zarathustra with such high prices is. Alexander honored its hospitality
in many ways, he felt sure of particular Value, this prosperous little country and oasis-like in
the middle of the Arian mountain and desert land inclined to know, a longer stay among these
strains, a small extension their territory, which they had long desired, the maintenance of
their old laws and Constitution, which seemed inferior to those of the Greek cities in any way,
finally a ratio to the kingdom, which was certainly more independent than that of other satrapies
those were about the means by which Alexander the remarkable people of the Ariaspen without colonies
among them to leave or need drastic measures, won for the new order of things.

No less peacefully showed him the tribes of the Gedrosia whose districts it with further March
touched. Their northern neighbors, the Arachosia subjecting themselves and their residences
stretched to the Paßgegend that in the area of ​​the Indus flowing rivers leads over, so this was
Alexander the Macedonians satrapy Menon, presented 4,000 infantry and 600 horsemen under his
command, and ordered that arachosische Alexandria (Kandahar) to , Found the, located at the entrance
of the passes and to this day one of the most flourishing Cities
that district, has preserved the memory in the newer name of its founder.
 The first
of these facts is a contribution to the laws of language in general; the second shows that
a great amount of apparent difference may be exhibited on the surface of a language which disappears
as the analysis proceeds.

In rude languages the Numerals vary with the dialect more than most other words. We can understand
this by imagining what the case would be in English if one of our dialects counted things by
the brace, another by the pair, and a third by the couple. Nevertheless, if we bear in mind
the Greek forms Thalassa and Thalatta, we may fairly suppose that the Kowrarega word for two,
or quassur, is the same word with the Head of Australian Bight kootera, the Parnkalla kuttara,
and the Western Australian kardura, having the same meaning.

The difference, then, between the numerals of the Australian languages--and it is undoubtedly
great--is no proof of any fundamental difference of structure or origin. It is just what occurs
in the languages of Africa, and, in a still greater degree, in those of America.

The extent to which the numeration is carried, is a matter of more importance. Possibly a numeration
limited to the first three, four, or five numbers is the effect of intellectual inferiority.
It is certainly a cause that continues it. As a measure of ethnological affinity it is unimportant.
In America we have, within a limited range of languages, vigesimal systems like the Mexican,
and systems limited to the three first units like the Caribb. The difference between a vigesimal
and decimal system arises simply from the practice of counting by the fingers and toes collectively,
or the fingers alone, being prevalent; whereas the decimal system as opposed to the quinary
is referrible to the numeration being extended to both hands, instead of limited to one. Numerations
not extending as far as five are generally independent of the fingers in toto. Then as to the
names of particular numbers. Two nations may each take the name of the number two from some
natural dualism; but they may not take it from the name. For instance, one American Indian
may take it from a pair of skates, another from a pair of shoes. If so, the word for two will
differ in the two languages, even when the names for skate and shoe agree. All this is supported
by real facts, and is no hypothetical illustration; so that the inference from it is, that,
in languages where a numeral system is in the process of formation, difference in the names
of the numbers is comparatively unimportant.

The extent to which the numerals vary, the extent to which they agree, and the extent to which
this variation and agreement are anything but coincident with geographical proximity or distance,
may be seen in the following table:

English : one two three. Moreton Bay : kamarah bulla mudyan. Moreton Island : karawo poonlah
madan. Bijenelumbo : warat ngargark 2 + 1. Limbakarajia : erat ngargark 2 + 1. Terrutong :
roka oryalk 2 + 1. Limbapyu : immuta lawidperra 2 + 1. Kowrarega : warapune quassur 2 + 1.
Gudang : epiamana elabaio 2 + 1. Darnley Island : netat nes 2 + 1. Raffles Bay : loca orica
orongarie. Lake Macquarie : wakol buloara ngoro. Peel River : peer pular purla. Wellington
: ngungbai bula bula-ngungbai. Corio : koimoil. Jhongworong : kap. Pinegorine : youa. Gnurellean
: lua. King George Sound : keyen cuetrel murben. Karaula : mal bular culeba. Lachlan, Regent
Lake : nyoonbi bulia bulongonbi. Wollondilly River : medung pulla colluerr.

The Verb now requires notice. In languages in the same stage of development with the Australian
the usual analysis, as shown by the late Mr. Garnett in his masterly papers on the structure
of the verb, is as follows: 1. The root. 2. The possessive pronoun. 3. A particle of time--often
originally one of place.

A rough illustration of this is the statement that such a word as dormur == sleep-my-then (or
there). To apply this doctrine to the Kowrarega with our present data, is unsafe. Still, I
am inclined (notwithstanding some difficulties) to identify the pa of the Present tense with
the bu in kai-bu = now, and the n of the preterite with the n of che-na = there.

The double forms of the Past tense (one in n, and another in m) are at present inexplicable.
So are the double forms of the Imperative, namely the one in r, and the one in e. It may, however,
be remarked, that wherever the Imperative ends in e, the Preterite has the form in m; thus,
pid-e = dig, pid-ema = dug. The only exception is the anomalous form peneingodgi = dived. This
prepares the future grammarian for a division of the Kowrarega Verbs into Conjugations.

The last class of words that supply the materials of comment are the Substantives. Herein,
the formation of the plural by the addition of le, probably occurs in several of the Australian
tongues. I infer this from many of those words which we find in the vocabularies of languages
whereof the grammar is unknown, and which are expressive of naturally plural objects ending
in li, la, or l.

1. Star (stars)--pur-le, pi-lle, poo-lle, in Parnkalla, Aiawong, and Yak-kumban.

2. Fire (flames)--ka-lla, gad-la, in Western Australian and Parnkalla.

3. Head (hair)--kur-le, Encounter Bay. Here we learn from the forms kar-ga, from the Head of
the Great Australian Bight, and ma-kar-ta, from Adelaide, that the l is foreign to the root.

4. Hands--marrow-la in the Molonglo dialect; as contrasted with marra in the Adelaide.

This, however, is merely a conjecture, a conjecture, however, which has a practical bearing.
It suggests caution in the comparison of vocabularies; since, by mistaking an inflexion or
an affix for a part of the root, we may overlook really existing similarities.

Father Anjello's very brief grammatical sketch of the Limbakarajia language of Port Essington*
exhibits, as far as it goes, precisely the same principles as Mr. Macgillivray's Kowrarega;
indeed, some of the details coincide.

(*Footnote. Given to Mr. Macgillivray by Mr. James Macarthur, and prefixed to the manuscript
Port Essington Vocabulary, alluded to in Volume 1.)

Thus, the Limbakarajia personal pronouns are:

I = nga-pi. We = ngari. Thou = noie. We two = arguri. He, she, it = gianat. Ye = noie. They
= ngalmo.

Here the pi in nga-pi is the po in the Aiawong nga-ppo; the gian in gian-at being, probably,
the in in the Kowrarega ina = that, this. Ngalmo, also, is expressly stated to mean many as
well as they, a fact which confirms the view taken of tana.

As for the tenses of the verbs, they are evidently no true tenses at all, but merely combinations
of the verbal root, and an adverb of time. In Limbakarajia, however, the adverbial element
precedes the verbal one. In Kowrarega, however, the equivalent to this adverbial element (probably
a simple adverb modified in form so as to amalgamate with its verb, and take the appearance
of an inflexion) follows it--a difference of order, sequence, or position, upon which some
philologists will, perhaps, lay considerable stress. On the contrary, however, languages exceedingly
similar in other respects, may differ in the order of the parts of a term; e.g. the German
dialects, throughout, place the article before the noun, and keep it separate: whereas the
Scandinavian tongues not only make it follow, but incorporate it with the substantive with
which it agrees. Hence, a term which, if modelled on the German fashion, should be hin sol,
becomes, in Scandinavian, solen = the sun. And this is but one instance out of many. Finally,
I may add that the prefix apa, in the present tense of the verb = cut, is, perhaps, the same
affix eipa in the present tense of the Kowrarega verbs.

Another point connected with the comparative philology of Australia is the peculiarity of its
phonetic system. The sounds of f and s are frequently wanting. Hence, the presence of either
of them in one dialect has been considered as evidence of a wide ethnological difference. Upon
this point--in the case of s--the remarks on the sound systems of the Kowrarega and Gudang
are important. The statement is, the s of the one dialect becomes ty or tsh (and ch) in the
other. Thus the English word breast = susu, Kowrarega; tyu-tyu, Gudang, and the English outrigger
float = sarima, Kowrarega; charima, Gudang, which of these two forms is the older? Probably
the Gudang, or the form in ty. If so, the series of changes is remarkable, and by attending
to it we may see how sounds previously non-existent may become evolved.

Thus--let the original form for breast be tutu. The first change which takes place is the insertion
of the sound of y, making tyu-tyu; upon the same principle which makes certain Englishmen say
gyarden, kyind, and skyey, for garden, kind, and sky. The next change is for ty to become tsh.
This we find also in English, where picture or pictyoor is pronounced pictshur, etc. This being
the change exhibited in the Gudang form tyutyu (pr. choochoo, or nearly so) we have a remarkable
phonetic phenomenon, namely the existence of a compound sound (tsh) wherein s is an element,
in a language where s, otherwise than as the element of a compound, is wanting. In other words,
we have a sound formed out of s, but not s itself; or (changing the expression still further)
we have s in certain combinations, but not uncombined. Let, however, the change proceed, and
the initial sound of t be lost. In this case tsh becomes sh. A further change reduces sh to s.

When all this has taken place--and there are many languages wherein the whole process is exhibited--the
sound of a hitherto unknown articulation becomes evolved or developed by a natural process
of growth, and that in a language where it was previously wanting. The phenomenon, then, of
the evolution of new simple sounds should caution us against over-valuing phonetic differences.
So should such facts as that of the closely allied dialects of the Gudang and Kowrarega differing
from each other by the absence or presence of so important a sound as that of s.

The comparative absence, however, of the sound of s, in Australian, may be further refined
on in another way; and it may be urged that it is absent, not because it has never been developed,
or called into existence, but because it has ceased to exist. In the Latin of the Augustan
age as compared with that of the early Republic, we find the s of words like arbos changed
into r (arbor). The old High German, also, and the Icelandic, as compared with the Meso-Gothic,
does the same. Still the change only affects certain inflectional sy1lables, so that the original
s being only partially displaced, retains its place in the language, although it occurs in
fewer words. In Australian, where it is wanting at all, it is wanting in toto: and this is
a reason for believing that its absence is referrible to non-development rather than to displacement.
For reasons too lengthy to exhibit, I believe that this latter view is NOT applicable to Australian;
the s, when wanting, being undeveloped. In either case, however, the phonetic differences between
particular dialects are the measures of but slight differences.

Now--with these preliminary cautions against the over-valuation of apparent differences--we
may compare the new data for the structure of the Kowrarega and Limbakarajia with the reccived
opinions respecting the Australian grammars in general.

These refer them to the class of agglutinate tongues, i.e. tongues wherein the inflections
can be shown to consist of separate words more or legs incorporated or amalgamated with the
roots which they modify. It may be said that this view is confirmed rather than impugned.

Now, what applies to the Australian grammars applies also to Polynesian and the more highly-developed
Malay languages, such as the Tagala of the Philippines, for instance; and, if such being the
case, no difference of principle in respect to tkeir structure separates the Australian from
the languages of those two great classes. But the details, it may be said, differ undoubtedly;
and this is what we expect. Plural numbers, signs of tense, and other grammatical elements,
are evolved by means of the juxtaposition of similar but not identical elements, e.g. one plural
may be formed by the affix signifying many; another, by the affix signifying with or conjointly;
one preterite may be the root plus a word meaning then; another the root plus a word meaning
there. Futures, too, may be equally evolved by the incorporation or juxtaposition of the word
meaning after, or the word meaning to-morrow. All this makes the exact coincidence of the details
of inflection the exception rather than the rule.

This doctrine goes farther than the mere breaking-down of the lines of demarcation which separate
classes of languages like the Australian from classes of languages like the Malayo-Polynesian.
It shows how both may be evolved from monosyllabic tongues like the Chinese or Siamese. The
proof that such is really the case lies in the similarity of individual words, and consists
in comparative tables. It is too lengthy for the present paper, the chief object of which is
to bring down the inferences from the undoubtedly great superficial differences between the
languages of the parts in question to their proper level.

In respect to the vocabularies, the extent to which the analysis which applies to the grammar
applies to the vocables also may be seen in the following instance. The word hand in Bijenelumbo
and Limbapyu is birgalk. There is also in each language a second form--anbirgalk--wherein the
an is non-radical. Neither is the alk; since we find that armpit = ingamb-alk, shoulder = mundy-alk,
and fingers = mong-alk. This brings the root = hand to birg. Now this we can find elsewhere
by looking for. In the Liverpool dialect, bir-il = hand, and at King George Sound, peer = nails.
The commonest root, = hand in the Australian dialects, is m-r, e.g.:

Moreton Bay : murrah. Corio : far-onggnetok. Karaula : marra. Jhongworong : far-okgnata. Sydney
: da-mora. Murrumbidje : mur-rugan. Mudje : mara. Molonglo : mar-rowla. Wellington : murra.
Head of Bight : merrer. Liverpool : ta-mura. Parnkalla : marra.

All this differs from the Port Essington terms. Elbow, however, in the dialects there spoken,
= waare; and forearm = am-ma-woor; wier, tao, = palm in Kowrarega.

To complete the evidence for this latter word being the same as the m-r of the other dialects
and languages, it would be necessary to show, by examples, how the sounds of m and w interchange;
and also to show (by example also) how the ideas of elbow, forearm, and hand do so. But as
the present remarks are made for the sake of illustrating a method, rather than establishing
any particular point, this is not necessary here; a few instances taken from the names of the
parts of the human body being sufficient to show the general distribution of some of the commoner
Australian roots; and the more special fact of their existence in the northern dialects:

English : hand. Peel River : ma. Terrutong : manawiye. Raffles Bay : maneiya.

...

English : foot. Moreton Bay : chidna. Moreton Island : tenang. Karaula : tinna. Lake Macquarie
: tina. Peel River : tina. Jhongworong : gnen-ong-gnat-a. Mudje : dina. Wellington : dinnung.
Corio : gen-ong-gnet-ok. Liverpool : dana. Bathurst : dina. Colack : ken-ong-gnet-ok. Boraipar
: tchin-nang-y Lake Hindmarsh : jin-nerr. Bight Head : jinna. Parnkalla : idna. Murrumbidje
: tjin-nuk. Aiawong : dtun. King George Sound : tian. Molonglo : jin-y-gy. Pinegorine : gena.
Goold Island : pinyun and pinkan. Gnurellean : gen-ong-be-gnen-a.

...

English : hair, beard. Goold Island : kiaram. Moreton Island : yerreng. Wellington : uran.
Karaula : yerry. Bijenelumbo : yirka. Sydney : yaren. Regent's Lake : ooran. Peel River : ierai.
Lake Macquarie : wurung. Mudje : yarai.

...

English : eye. Jhongworong : mer-ing-gna-ta. Moreton Island : mel. Pinegorine : ma. Moreton
Bay : mill. Gnurellean : mer-e-gnen-a. Gudang : emeri = eyebrow. Boraipar : mer-ring-y. Lake
Hindmarsh : mer. Bijenelumbo : merde = eyelid. Regent's Lake : mil. Lake Mundy : meer-rang.
Karaula : mil. Murrumbidje : mil. Mudje : mir. Corio : mer-gnet-ok. Bight Head : mail. Colack
: mer-gnen-ok. King George Sound : mial. Dautgart : mer-gna-nen.

...

English : tooth. Sydney : yera. Moreton Island : tiya. Wellington : irang. Murrumbidje : yeeran.
Moreton Bay : deer. Lake Macquarie : tina. Goold Island : eera.

...

English : tongue. Lake Macquarie : talan. Moreton Bay : dalan. Regent's Lake : talleng. Sydney
: dalan. Karaula : talley. Peel River : tale. Goold Island : talit. King George Sound : talien.

...

English : ear. Moreton Bay : bidna. Kowrarega : kowra. Karaula : binna. Sydney : kure. Peel
River : bine. Liverpool : kure. Bathurst : benang-arei. Lake Macquarie : ngureong. Goold Island
: pinna.

The Miriam Vocabulary belongs to a different class, namely the Papuan. It is a dialect of language
first made known to us through the Voyage of the Fly, as spoken in the islands Erroob, Maer,
and Massied. Admitting this, we collate it with the North Australian tongues, and that, for
the sake of contrast rather than comparison. Here, the philologist, from the extent to which
the Australian tongues differ from each other, notwithstanding their real affinity, is prepared
to find greater differences between an Australian and a Papuan language than, at the first
glance, exists. Let us verify this by reference to some words which relate to the human body,
and its parts.

COLUMN 1: ENGLISH. COLUMN 2: ERROOB. COLUMN 3: MASSIED. COLUMN 4: KOWRAREGA. COLUMN 5: GUDANG.

Nose : pit : pichi : piti : -. Lips : - : anka : - : angka. Cheek : baag : - : baga : baga.
Chin, jaw : iba : ibu : ibu : ebu. Navel : kopor, kupor : kupor : kupar : kopurra. Eye : -
: dana : dana : dana. Skin : egur : - : - : equora. Vein : kerer : kirer : kerur : kerur. Bone
: lid : - : rida : -. Sore : bada : - : bada : -.

Few Australian vocabularies are thus similar--a fact which may be said to prove too much; since
it may lead to inference that the so-called Papuan tongue of Torres Strait is really Australian.
Nevertheless, although I do not absolutely deny that such is the case, the evidence of the
whole body of ethnological fact--e.g. those connected with the moral, intellectual, and physical
conformation of the two populations--is against it.

And so is the philology itself, if we go further. The Erroob pronouns are:

Me = ka. You = ma. His = eta. Mine = ka-ra. Your = ma-ra.

All of which are un-Australian.

Are we then to say that all the words of the table just given are borrowed from the Australian
by the Papuans, or vice versa? No. Some belong to the common source of the two tongues, pit
= nose being, probably, such a word; whilst others are the result of subsequent intercourse.

Still, it cannot absolutely be said that the Erroob or Miriam iongue is not Australian also,
or vice versa. Still less, is it absolutely certain that the former is not transitional between
the New Guinea language and the Australian. I believe, however, that it is not so.

The doubts as to the philological position of the Miriam are by no means diminished by reference
to the nearest unequivocally Papuan vocabulary, namely that of Redscar Bay. Here the difference
exceeds rather than falls short of our expectations.

Head : quara : kerem. Mouth : mao : mit = lips. Testicles : abu : eba = penis. Shoulder : paga
: pagas = upper arm.

On the other hand, the Redscar Bay word for throat, kato, coincides with the Australian karta
of the Gudang of Cape York. Again, a complication is introduced by the word buni-mata = eyebrow.
Here mata = eye, and, consequently, buni = brow. This root re-appears in the Erroob; but there
it means the eyeball, as shown by the following words from Jukes' Vocabulary:

Eye : irkeep Eyebrow : irkeep-moos = eye-hair. Eyeball : poni. Eyelid : poni-pow = eyeball-hair.

Probably the truer meaning of the Redscar Bay word is eyeball.

No inference is safer than that which brings the population of the Louisiade Archipelago, so
far, at least, as it is represented by the Vocabularies of Brierly Island and Duchateau Island,
from the eastern coast of New Guinea. What points beyond were peopled from Louisiade is another
question.

For the islands between New Ireland and New Caledonia our data are lamentably scanty; the list
consisting of:

1. A short vocabulary from the Solomon Isles. 2. Short ones from Mallicollo. 3. The same from
Tanna. 4. Shorter ones still from Erromanga and 5. Annatom. 6. Cook's New Caledonian Vocabulary.
7. La Billardiere's ditto.

The collation of these with the Louisiade has led me to a fact which I little expected. As
far as the very scanty data go, they supply the closest resemblance to the Louisiade dialects,
from the two New Caledonian vocabularies. Now New Caledonia was noticed in the Appendix to
the Voyage of the Fly (volume 2 page 318) as apparently having closer philological affinities
with Van Diemen's Land, than that country had with Australia; an apparent fact which induced
me to write as follows: "A proposition concerning the Tasmanian language exhibits an impression,
rather than a deliberate opinion. Should it, however, be confirmed by future researches, it
will at once explain the points of physical contrast between the Tasmanian tribes and those
of Australia that have so often been insisted on. It is this--that the affinities of language
between the Tasmanian and the New Caledonian are stronger than those between the Australian
and Tasmanian. This indicates that the stream of population for Van Diemen's Land ran ROUND
Australia, rather than across it." Be this as it may, the remark, with our present scanty matcrials,
is, at best, but a suggestion--a suggestion, however, which would account for the physical
appearance of the Tasmanian being more New Caledonian than Australian.

The chief point of resemblance between the Louisiade and the New Caledonian is taken from the
numerals. In each system there is a prefix, and in each that prefix begins with a labial letter--indeed
the wa of New Caledonia and the pahi of Louisiade seem to be the same roots.

1. Brierly Island : paihe-tia. Cook's New Caledonia : wa-geeaing. La Billardiere's New Caledonia
: oua-nait.

2. Brierly Island : pahi-wo. Cook's New Caledonia : wa-roo. La Billardiere's New Caledonia
: oua-dou.

3. Brierly Island : paihe-tuan. Cook's New Caledonia : wa-teen. La Billardiere's New Caledonia
: oua-tguien.

4. Brierly Island : paihe-pak. Cook's New Caledonia : wa-mbaeek. La Billardiere's New Caledonia
: oua-tbait.

5. Brierly Island : paihe-lima. Cook's New Caledonia : wa-nnim. La Billardiere's New Caledonia
: oua-nnaim.

6. Brierly Island : paihe-wona. Cook's New Caledonia : wa-nnim-geeek. La Billardiere's New
Caledonia : oua-naim-guik.

7. Brierly Island : pahe-pik. Cook's New Caledonia : wa-nnim-noo. La Billardiere's New Caledonia
: oua-naim-dou.

8. Brierly Island : paihe-wan. Cook's New Caledonia : wa-nnim-gain. La Billardiere's New Caledonia
: ou-naim-guein.

9. Brierly Island : paihe-siwo. Cook's New Caledonia : wa-nnim-baeek. La Billardiere's New
Caledonia : oua-naim-bait.

10. Brierly Island : paihe-awata. Cook's New Caledonia : wa-nnoon-aiuk. La Billardiere's New
Caledonia : oua-doun-hic.

The Redscar Bay numerals are equally instructive. They take two forms: one with, one without,
the prefix in ow, as recorded by Mr. Macgillivray.

This system of prefix is not peculiar. The Tanna and Mallicollo numerals of Cook are:

COLUMN 1: ENGLISH. COLUMN 2: TANNA. COLUMN 3: MALLICOLLO.

One : r-eedee : tsee-kaee Two : ka-roo : e-ry. Three : ka-har : e-rei Four : kai-phar : e-bats
Five : k-reerum : e-reeum Six : ma-r-eedee : tsookaeee Seven : ma-ka-roo : gooy Eight : ma-ka-har
: hoo-rey Nine : ma-kai-phar : good-bats. Ten : ma-k-reerum : senearn.

Here, although the formations are not exactly regular, the prefixion of an initial syllable
is evident. So is the quinary character of the numeration. The prefix itself, however, in the
Tanna and Mallicollo is no labial, as in the Louisiade and New Caledonian, but either k or a vowel.

The next fact connected with the Louisiade vocabularies is one of greater interest. Most of
the names of the different parts of the body end in da. In the list in question they were marked
in italics; so that the proportion they bear to the words not so ending was easily seen. Now
it is only the words belonging to this class that thus terminate. Elsewhere the ending da is
no commoner than any other.

What does this mean? If we look to such words as mata-da = eyes, sopa-da = lips, maka-da =
teeth, and some other naturally plural names, we should infer that it was a sign of number.
That this, however, is not the case is shown by the equivalents to tongue, nose, and other
single members where the affix is equally common. What then is its import? The American tongues
help us here:

COLUMN 1: ENGLISH. COLUMN 2: MBAYA. COLUMN 3: ABIPONI. COLUMN 4: MOKOBI.

Head : na-guilo : ne-maiat : -. Eye : ni-gecoge : na-toele : ni-cote. Ear : na-pagate : - :
-. Nose : ni-onige : - : -. Tongue : no-gueligi : - : -. Hair : na-modi : ne-etiguic : na-ccuta.
Mand : ni-baagadi : na-pakeni : na-poguena. Foot : no-gonagi : - : -.

COLUMN 1: ENGLISH. COLUMN 2: MOXA (1).* COLUMN 3: MOXA (2). COLUMN 4: MOXA (3).

(*Footnote. These are three different dialects.)

Head : nu-ciuti : nu-chuti : nu-chiuti Eye : nu-chi : - : nu-ki Ear : nu-cioca : - : -. Nose
: nu-siri : nu-siri : -. Tongue : nu-nene : nu-nene : nu-nene. Hand : nu-bore : nu-boupe :
nu-bore. Foot : ni-bope : - : ni-bope.

Now in these, and in numerous other American tongues, the prefix is the possessive pronoun;
in other words, there is a great number of American languages where the capacity for abstracting
the thing possessed from the possessor is so slight as to make it almost impossible to disconnect
the noun from its pronoun. I believe, then, the affixes in question have a possessive power;
and am not aware that possessive adjuncts thus incorporated have been recognised in any of
the languages for these parts; indeed, they are generally considered as American characteristics.

How far does their presence extend? In the New Caledonian vocabulary of La Billardiere we find
it. The names of the parts of the body all take an affix, which no other class of words does.
This is gha, guai, or ghai, or other similar combination of g with a vowel. In Van Diemen's
Land, an important locality, we find the following series of words, which are submitted to
the judgment of the reader.

COLUMN 1: ENGLISH. COLUMN 2: WESTERN TASMANIAN.

Foot : lula. Leg : peea = piya = posteriors, Brumer I. Thigh : tula = turi = knee, Brumer I.
Belly : cawara-ny. Neck : denia. Ears : lewli-na. Nose : me-na. Eyes : pollatoola = matara-pulupulura
= eyelashes, Brierly I. Hair : pareata. Hair : palani-na. Face : manrable. Mouth : ca-nia.
Teeth : yannalople = yinge-da, Brierly I. Tongue : tulla-na. Arm : alree. Fist : reannema-na.
Head : pulbea-ny.

Here the termination na appears elsewhere, as in mema-na = fight, nabagee-na = sun; but by
no means so frequently, nor yet with such an approach to regularity.

COLUMN 1: ENGLISH. COLUMN 2: CIRCULAR HEAD.

Hair : parba. Hand : rabal-ga. Foot : rabuc-ka. Head : ewuc-ka. Eyc : mameric-ca. Nose : rowari-ga.
Tongue : mamana = mimena, Brumer I. Teeth : cawna. Ear : cowanrig-ga.

Here, however, it must not be concealed that the termination ka, or ga, occurs in other words,
such as tenal-ga = laugh, tar-ga = cry, teiri-ga = walk, lamuni-ka = see. These, however, are
verbs; and it is possible (indeed probable) that the k or g is the same as in the preceding
substantives, just as the m in su-m, and ei-mi (Greek) is the m in meus, me, and eme (Greek).
Still, this will not apply throughout; e.g. the words like lalli-ga = kangaroo, para-ka = flower,
and others.

COLUMN 1: ENGLISH. COLUMN 2: EASTERN TASMANIAN.

Eye : lepe-na Ear : pelverata. Elbow : rowella Foot : langa-na Fist : trew Head : pathe-na-naddi
Hair : cetha-na Hand : anama-na = nema-da, Brumer I. Knee : nannabena-na. Leg : lathana-ma
Teeth : yan-na = yinge-da, Brierly I. Tongue : me-na = mime-na, Brumer I. Chin : came-na. Neck
: lepera. Breast : wagley.

Here, the number of other words ending in na is very considerable; so considerable that, if
it were not for the cumulative evidence derived from other quarters, it would be doubtful whether
the na could legitimately be considered as a possessive affix at all. It MAY, however, be so
even in the present instance.

To these we may add two lists from the Lobo and Utanata dialects of the south-western coast
of New Guinea.

COLUMN 1: ENGLISH. COLUMN 2: UTANATA. COLUMN 3: LOBO.

Arms : too : nima-ngo. Back : urimi : rusuko-ngo. Beard : - : minooro. Belly : imauw : kanboro-ngo.
Breast, female : auw : gingo-ngo. Breast, male : paiety : gingo-ngo Cheeks : awamu : wafiwirio-ngo.
Ears : ianie : -. Eyebrows : - : matato-ngo-wuru. Eyes : mame : matatoto-ngo. Fingers : - :
nima-ngo-sori. Foot : mouw : kai-ngo. Hands : toe-mare : nima-ngo-uta. Hair : oeirie : mono-ng-furu.
Head : oepauw : mono-ngo or umum. Knee : iripu : kai-ngo-woko. Mouth : irie : orie-ngo. Nose
: birimboe : sikaio-ngo. Neck : ema : gara-ng. Tongue : mare : kario-ngo. Thigh : ai : willanima.
Teeth : titi : riwoto-ngo. Toes : - : nisora.

Finally, we have the long, and evidently compound forms of p** in the Corio, Colack, and other
Australian dialects; long and evidently compound forms which no hypothesis so readily explains
as that of the possessive adjunct; a phenomenon which future investigation many show to be
equally Oceanic and American. The Macedonians were the corpse, and Alexander, is told,
covered his purple about him.

Thus, the last great king from the dynasty ended the Achaemenid. Not where he succumbed to he had
tried in vain to claim his kingdom, and the battles he lost, had him more as a region and royal
power, they had him faith and loyalty of his Persian people and cost his mighty: a refugee under
the traitors, a king in chains, was it by the daggers of his satraps, pierced his blood relatives,
it was the fame, not bought at the price of the tiara his life, yet the crime a right to the kingdom
have conceded his race, but rather died than to be king. When King honored Alexander him, he sent
the body for burial in the tombs of Persepolis; Sisygambis buried his son.

Alexander had achieved more than he had expected. After two battles he had flee the defeated
king can, but since he, Lord of the royal cities of the empire, on the throne of Cyrus and
was accepted after the Persian manner, the homage of the great, since he was the peoples of Asia
as their Lord and King, and had to apply, was allowed the fugitive King no longer the name of
his lost glory, the flag to ever new rebellion, carry through the vast lands of the East.
 Haliastur leucosternmus 1 2 3. Pandion leucocephalus 1 2 3.
Falco frontatus 3. Ieracidea berigora 2. Astur novae hollandiae 1 3. Astur approximans 1 2.
Accipiter torquatus 1 2 3. Milvus affinis 1 2. Circus jardinii 3. Strix delicatula 1 2 3. Athene
boobook 1. Athene maculata 1 2. Podargus humeralis 1. Podargus papuensis 2. Podargus marmoratus
2. Eurystopodus albogularis 2 3. Eurystopodus guttatus 1 2 3. Acanthylis caudacuta 2. Cypselus
australis 2 3. Collocalia 1. Chelidon arborea 1 3. Merops ornatus 1 2 3. Dacelo leachii 1 2.
Halcyon torotoro 2. Halcyon sancta 1 2 3. Halcyon sordida 1 2 3. Halcyon macleayii 1 2 3. Tanysiptera
sylvia 2. Alcyone azurea 2. Alcyone pusilla 1 2. Artamus leucopygialis 1 2 3. Dicaeum hirundinaceum
1 2 3. Cracticus nigrogularis 1 2. Cracticus quoyii 1 2. Grallina australis 2. Grauculus melanops
1 2 3. Grauculus hypoleucus 2. Grauculus swainsonii 2. Campephaga karu 1 2 3. Pachycephala
melanura 2 3. Colluricincla brunnea 1 2 3. Colluricincla harmonica 2. Dicrurus bracteatus 1
2 3. Rhipidura rufifrons 2. Seisura inquieta 1 2 3. Piezorhynchus nitidus 1 2 3. Myiagra concinna
1 2 3. Myiagra latirostris 1 2. Monarcha trivirgata 1 2 3. Monarcha leucotis 1 2. Arses kaupii
2. Petroica bicolor ? 2 3. Machaerirhynchus flaviventris 2. Drymodes superciliosa 2. Malurus
amabilis 2. Malurus brownii 1. Sphenoeacus galactotes 2 3. Cysticola lineocapilla 1 2 3. Sericornis
maculata ? 2. Anthus australis 1 2. Estrelda bichenovii 1. Donacola castaneothorax 2 3. Pitta
strepitans 1 2 3. Chlamydera nuchalis 1. Chlamydera cerviniventris 2 3. Oriolus assimilis 2.
Oriolus flavocinctus 2. Sphecotheres flaviventris 2. Aplonis metallica 2. Chalybaeus cornutus
2. Corvus coronoides 1 2 3. Ptilotis chrysotis 1 2 3. Ptilotis filigera 2. Ptilotis 2. Entomophila
1. Tropidorhynchus argenticeps 2. Tropidorhynchus 2. Myzomela erythrocephala 2 3. Myzomela
obscura 1 2 3. Nectarinia australis 1 2 3. Zosterops luteus 1 2 3. Cuculus cineraceus 1. Cuculus
insperatus 1. Chrysococcyx lucidus 1 2. Endynamys flindersii 1 2 3. Centropus phasianus 1 2
3. Ptiloris victoriae 1. Ptiloris magnifica 2. Cacatua galerita 1 2 3. Microglossus aterrimus
2. Calyptorhynchus banksii 1. Aprosmictus erythropterus ? 1 2. Platycercus palliceps ? 2. Melopsittacus
undulatus 1. Trichoglossus swainsonii 1 3. Trichoglossus rubritorquis 2. Ptilonopus ewingii
1 2. Ptilonopus superbus 2 3. Carpophaga luctuosa 1 2 3. Carpophaga puella 2. Lopholaimus antarcticus
2. Chalcophaps chrysochlora 1 2. Phaps elegans 1. Geopelia humeralis 1 2 3. Geopelia tranquilla
1 2 3. Macropygia phasianella ? 1. Talegalla lathami 1 2. Megapodius tumulus 1 2 3. Turnix
melanota 1 2 3. Coturnix pectoralis 2. Synoicus australis 1 2 3. Synoicus sinensis 3. Dromaius
novae hollandiae 1 2. Otis australasiana 1. "Forget not the second coming!" she cried. Since the bird spread its Wings
and flew away .-- How through the dark tower came to earth, I'm the white I do not. As I wait
by the gate on the road, I stopped and looked back. Since I recognized clearly on the tower
bathed in the sunshine its dear form, seemed to me that they lean far over the edge of the site
also, so I involuntarily uttered a cry of terror that. But the figure remained motionless.

And
finally, I turned and left without once again to look, with quick
steps on the road continued.

"

The old man was silent for a while. Then he said: "She has waited in vain for me, I'm never come home
again .-- I will now tell you could happen like that.

My first job I found in Vienna, where were then the best piano factories, and from there came I for
one and a half years ago Wuerttembergische, present to my home. A side-fellow I had a brother
there, of which he to the procurement of a reliable assistant was asked .-- It was still a young
couple to whom I came into the house. The shop was small, But the owner of a kind and clever man
with whom I soon everything in these things learned as in the big factory, where I was allowed
only to individual works. Since I took the matter to the utmost and yet also some of my experiences
Vienna added did, I soon won the trust of these good people. Particular joy, set them that
I had in my free time the oldest of her two boys in the German Language teaching, because they
liked my time still northern German pronunciation, and they hope that the children would like
for once, as they thought, so pure speak German. Soon the younger brother was involved in the
lesson, and now it was not at the dry grammar, I knew to give books from which I give all sorts
of provide entertaining and interesting facts used. So it was that the children with great Love
hanging with me. When after-year period for the first time without the aid of a piano very beautiful
sound had brought about, it was a joy throughout the home, as have the dearest relatives are
made masterpiece .-- but I'm now on the return.

Since my young master fell ill. From a cold finally became a serious Breast evil, the seed has long
been located in it have liked. Daily management Of course, as was almost entirely in my hands.
Now I could not leave. It looked I further into the relations of the family, with me an ever
more intimate friendship combined. Unity and hard work were living under their roof. But it
was still a bad thing, The third inmate, the good spirits that had not been able to sell. In
each Angle where the sun did not just saw, the sick man is sitting .-- This thing was concern
.-- "Take the broom and feg it away," I said often to my friends, "I will help you, Martin!
"Then he shook my hand well, and a wistful serenity flew for a moment over his pale face, but
soon he saw again the black cobweb in all things.

Unfortunately it was not mere fantasy.

The capital with which he started his business, was from the outset have been too low. In the
early years he was due to poor working Suffered losses that were not taken into account, and
sales of finished goods would not be as rapid as it requires such circumstances, there came a
hopeless Disease state at that. At last I was not only the whole concern for the maintenance his
family, had also the Comforter of the healthy. The boys made my Hand is not going on when we
were sitting at the bedside of his father, he could not leave soon. This, however, seemed
to lapse Koerperkraft the restlessness of the mind to increase only; brooding he lay on his pillow
and built plans for the future. Sometimes when the rain of approaching death he breathes, he sat
up suddenly and said: "I can not die, I will not die "and then quietly with folded hands:" My God!
my God, I will too, if you want! "

And finally came the moment of salvation.

We were all at his bedside, and he thanked me, he took leave of us all. But then, when he saw
before him something before he protect her would have to, he tore up his wife and two boys hurriedly
in itself, it looked bleak with Eyes and groaned aloud.
 In the latter case
an Assiminea is its companion. A very curious fact noted during the expedition was the presence
of a Unio living within the influence of salt water, in the River Brisbane.

SHELLS INHABIT MUD, ETC. AMONG MANGROVES.

These belong to the Indo-Pacific province. Some are found on the mangroves themselves. Such
are the Littorina scabra, on the trunks and branches of mangroves among islets in Trinity Bay;
a Phasianella inhabiting the trunks and branches of Rhizophora at the Percy Isles; a Littorina
on the leaves of Aigaeceras fragrans at Port Curtis, Auricula angulata, and rugulata on the
trunks of mangroves at Port Essington, and Monodonta viridis on their roots at Night Island;
a new and very beautiful Ostrea was found on the roots of mangroves among Low Islets in Trinity
Bay. In the last-named locality a Cytherea inhabited the mud around their roots. At the Three
Islets several new species of Melampus, a Nerita and a Cyrena lived in a like habitat, and
at Port Essington Cerithium kieneri, was found in the same situation. The fine Cyrena cyrenoides
lives among the roots of mangroves in the Louisiade Archipelago.

LITTORAL ZONE.

Of the many living Gasteropoda taken in this region, very few are new species. Of Patelloid
forms we have a new Fissurella and Parmophorus convexus at Port Dalrymple, accompanied by Haliotis
naevosa, and species of Patella and Siphonaria. In the more tropical regions, Haliotis asinina
and varia, another and distinct Patella, two Fissurellae and a Scutella were collected. Of
convolute shells the littoral species gathered were all Indo-Pacific and inhabitants of mostly
the coral-reef region, such as Cypraea arabica, annulus, isabella, errones and oryza, Conus
magus, arenatus, achatinus, etc., Oliva cruentata, tremulina and ericinus, those of the last-named
genus often living in sand. Bulla cylindrica occurred in sandy pools on the reef at Claremont
Isles. Of Volutes, V. turneri lives on coral blocks at Port Essington, and V. undulata partially
buried in sandbanks at Port Dalrymple. Conus maculosus is an inhabitant of the last-named locality.
The Mitras found in the Littoral zone were all on the north-east coast, and well-known Indo-Pacific
forms. A new Murex was taken on mud at Port Curtis. Fasciolaria coronata, Fusus alveolatus,
and Triton verrucosus were found on the reefs at Port Dalrymple. Many species of Nassa, all
known forms, were collected, mostly on mud in the Littoral zone, chiefly in the north-eastern
province. Phos cyanostoma lives on muddy sand in the Trinity Bay islets, where also in similar
situations is Terebra maculata and Pyramidella maculosa. Pyramidella auriscati is a littoral
shell among the reefs of the Claremont Isles. Several Purpurae were taken on reefs and rocks
at low-water; among them was P. textiliosa, a Port Dalrymple species. A Quoya lives on rocks
being high-water mark in Lizard Island. Several Terebrae, including T. crenulata dimidiata
and affinis, inhabit muddy sand among Pipon's Islets. The well-known Strombus luhuanus lives
on sand among the reefs at Eagle Island. A Cerithium inhabits mud-flats at Port Molle and Pipon's
Islets. Of the holostomatous gasteropods inhabiting the Littoral zone, the Naticae, mostly
well-known species, were taken in sandy localities on the north-east coast, and the Neritae
in the same province, mostly on rocks or reefs. Littorina pyramidalis and mauritiana are inhabitants
of the rocky headlands of Broken Bay; other forms were collected at Port Curtis and at Port
Dalrymple. At the last-named locality, Turbo undulatus, a new Risella, Monodonta constricta
and buccata, and Trochus reticularis were taken on reefs. Littoral species of the same genera
occurred on the north-east coast. A New Rissoa was found under stones at Night Island. Turbo
squamosus and Trochus lentiginosus are inhabitants of the shore at Port Essington. In Broken
Bay species of Bankivia and Scalaria were collected, cast dead on the shore.

The Acephala found living in the Littoral zone of the south-east Australian province were Cleidotherus
chamoides, under rocks at low-water in Port Jackson; Mytilus erosus on the mud of zostera flats
at Port Dalrymple, several species of Venus, Tapes, Cytherea in similar localities; Arca globata
in the same habitat at Brisbane; Arca fuscata in reefs at Port Dalrymple; a new Tellina on
mud at Port Phillip; another with Donax epidermia in sand at Broken Bay, and Clavagella australis
on rocks at low-water, Port Jackson. Species of Pectunculus, Nucula, Pandora, Anatinella, Venus,
Tellina (decussata and deltoidalis) and Mesodesma are thrown dead on the shores.

In the north and north-east Australian province the living littoral Acephala are Solens of
which two new species were taken at Port Essington, Anomia australis, Anatina olerina, and
another, new, in the same locality; species of Mytilus, Meleagrina and Pinna, Ostrea and Pecten
(pyxidatus) Lima fragilis and squamosa, Hippopus and Tridacna, the former detached on coral
reefs, the latter embedded in the coral, Corbis fimbriatus in sand among coral reefs; species
of Venus, Cytherea, Circe, and Tapes in mud, Artemis sculpta at Port Essington on sand, Lucinae
on sand or reefs, Crassatella on mudflats at Port Curtis, where Cypricardia vellicata occupies
the fissures of rocks with Carditae; several species of Cardium in mud or sand, including C.
fragum, C. subrugosum, and C. unedo; Sanguinolaria rugosa at Dunk Island; species of Mesodesma
in sand, and Mactrae and Tellinae in mud; a new Psammobia at Port Essington as also a new Pholas
that bores into coral. Other species, members of the same genera, are cast on shore dead.

REGION OF WEEDS EQUIVALENT TO THE LAMINARIAN REGION OF THE EUROPEAN SEAS.

Some seventeen or eighteen localities in this Bathymetrical province were explored by means
of the dredge, varying in depth from one to seventeen fathoms. In the south-east Australian
province the principal Gasteropoda procured were Bulla brevis, at Port Jackson, in 6 fathoms;
Cyprea oryza, at Port Phillip, in 5 fathoms; Calyptraea connata, in 6 fathoms, Port Jackson,
with Nassa suturalis, and another, a new Terebra, Monotigma casta, Mitra sordida, a Marginella,
a Columbella, and Struthiolaria oblita. A Phasianella was dredged in from 3 to 5 fathoms on
sandy mud, at Port Phillip, with Elenchus rutilus, Marginella fornicata, and Cerithium granarium.
In the North-east Australian province, a different set of shells was dredged in similar depths,
such as a Sigaretus, possibly new, Fissurella calyculata, Mitra obeliscus, a Turritella, a
Murex, Columbella versicolor, and a new species off Cape York, Ranella pulchella, new, several
Nassae, Phos senticosa and blainvillei, and sculptilis, in 3 and 5 fathoms, off Cape York;
Strombus campbelli, in mud off Cape Upstart; Cerithium obeliscus, and a new species of the
genus Obeliscus. In the deeper localities Cypraea fimbriata occurred, dead, off Cape Capricorn;
and two species of Ranella, one being R. pusilla, in 17 fathoms, off the Percy Isles. The univalves
dredged among the Louisiade Islands in this region of depth were mostly known forms, such as
Conus betulinus, Oliva sanguinolenta, Mitra exasperata, Terebra maculata, consors and labiata;
these were all taken in less than six fathoms water.

The bivalves of this region were but few. In the South Australian province species of Mactra,
Psammobia, Venus, Tapes and Pecten, all peculiar, were taken. This is the region of the peculiar
genus Myadora, of which five species were dredged on sand in 6 fathoms at Port Jackson, along
with Myochama anomioides, Trigonia margaritacea, Lima bullata, and Cardium radiatum. In the
North-east Australian province we have species of Donax, Mactra and Corbula, all apparently
new, from the shallower localities; Corbula tunicata, Pectunculus tenuicostatus, and another,
from 8 to 11 fathoms, off Cumberland Islands; species of Arca, Pectunculus, Avicula, Pecten,
Venus, Circe, Cardium, Cardita, and Erycina, mostly new, from 15 to 17 fathoms in a sandy and
shelly bottom off Cape Capricorn.

CORALLINE ZONE.

Some dredgings in both North and South-eastern provinces, in depths between twenty-seven and
forty-five fathoms, give a slight idea of the fauna of this important region. In the South-eastern
province we find in forty and forty-five fathoms on a muddy bottom in Bass Strait, Turritella
sinuata, Trochus nebulosus, a Pleurotoma, an Emarginula, a Dentalium, two species of Cardita,
a Cypricardia, a Venus, a Nucula, and Pectunculus holosericeus. In the North-eastern province
we find off Cumberland Island in 27 fathoms, also on a muddy bottom, species of Murex, Nassa,
Turritella, Ranella pusilla, a Fusus, Cancellaria antiquata, a Terebra, two Dentalia, a Natica,
a Terebellum, a Scalaria, a Cardium, a Venus, a Nucula, a Pecten, and a Spondylus.

It is evident from the comparative paucity of undescribed species procured in the Littoral
zone and the large proportion of new or doubtful forms among those taken by the dredge, that
a rich harvest has yet to be reaped in the deeper regions of the southern seas. In the lower
zones, however, just as much as in the upper, the distinctions of province are maintained.
The explanation of this complete separation of the South-eastern marine fauna of Australia
from that of the North-eastern or Indo-Pacific portion, may be explained by reference to the
distribution of currents along the Australian shores. In both, as in the Bathymetrical regions
of the South Atlantic, the Testacea of the depths are generally smaller and less brightly coloured
than those inhabiting the shallows.

During this voyage notes of the habitats of considerably more than a thousand species of Mollusca
and Echinodermata were carefully registered.

2. ENUMERATION OF TERRESTRIAL PULMONIFEROUS MOLLUSCA AS YET NOTICED IN AUSTRALIA.

The following Catalogue is founded on the monograph of Helicidae by Dr. Pfeiffer. To the species
therein described are added certain new ones, announced by Pfeiffer since the publication of
his work, and others, recorded for the first time in this volume. It will be seen that a great
part of the Australian land-shells is as yet unfigured. The exact localities of not a few have
to be determined; a precise record was kept of the place and circumstances under with each
was found during the voyage of the Rattlesnake. From all we yet know the genus Helix is fairly
represented in New Holland, and presents some very remarkable and peculiar forms; Bulimus has
but few, and those (with the sole exception of B. atomatus) not remarkable Australian members;
a single Pupa, closely resembling one of our commonest European species, is the only recorded
Australian one; and a very remarkable addition to the terrestrial conchology of the southern
hemisphere has been made in a Balea of a type unlike any other member of the genus.

HELIX.

1. H. falconari, Reeve. (Conch. Syst. t. 163, f. 4). Locality: Bellingen River, in the brushes
(Macgillivray).

2. H. irradiata, Gould. Locality: New South Wales.

3. H. australis, Menke. Locality: Swan River. "When the swallows come again?" I heard it. I recognized her
voice, but she sounded dismal in the breath of the storm .-- When I go to such dreams awoke,
I heard probably in the twilight of the swallows on the roof gutter over my window singing.
In the first years I had propped his head and me heart full of longing and homesickness can sing;
later I could bear it no more. More than once, when the singing seemed endless, I have ripped
open the window and chased away the love birds.

On such a morning, I explained again that I must go now that it finally Time had come to think
of my own life. But the two boys broke into loud lamentations out and informed the mother, without
saying a word, her little daughter on my lap, the once the little arms wrapped tightly around
my neck .-- My heart was on the children, dear Lord, I could not leave the children. I thought.
"Stay for another year." The abyss between me and my youth became deeper and deeper, until at last
everything was as inaccessible behind I just dreams in which I no longer allowed to think .--
I was already over forty addition, I unlocked the desire of the already grown-up children, the
Ehebuendnis with the woman I base that only had been so long.

And then something strange happened to me. I was the woman as she is also very well deserved,
always been very fond of, but now, for me inextricably angehoerte began in me a reluctance and
even grow to almost a hatred against them, I have to hide the sometimes difficult knew. So we
are human beings, I threw in my heart to them the guilt of all that but was only the result of
my own weakness. Then God led me to my salvation into temptation.

It was a Sunday in the summer time. We made an excursion to the neighboring Mountain village,
where a relative of the family lived. The two sons with her sister We were way ahead of two
old, her talk and laughter was in the forest, through which the Led away, already missing altogether.
Since my wife made me the proposal that a known to Richtsteig embark along a quarry, so where possible
the boy on the main paths even anticipate. "I went as a bride with Martin here," she said as we
sideways arc in the pines, "a little further then we picked a dark blue flower, I would like To
know if it is found there. " H. similaris, Ferussac. (Hist. t. 25 B, f. 1-4). Locality: Under decaying logs in the Frankland
Isles, chiefly dead (Macgillivruy). This species appears to be most widely diffused. It is
recorded from the West lndies and Brazil, Java, the Seychelles and Mauritius, and Bengal and
China! This is the first announcement of it as an Australian shell. Does it make its way about
on floating timber?

31. H. delessertiana, Le Guillou (H. torresii, Homb. et Jacq. Voyage au Pole Sud. Moll. t.
4, f. 24-27). Locality: Warrior Island, Torres Strait (Le Guillou, etc.) Nogo Island, Endeavour
Strait, at roots of grass (Macgillivray).

32. H. gulosa, Gould. Locality: New South Wales.

33. H. tuckeri, Pfeiffer. (Chemnitz, Ed. 2nd, Helix, t. 79, f. 10-12). Locality: Under dead
leaves at roots of trees in Sunday Island (Macgillivray). The original recorded habitat was
Sir Charles Hardy's Islands, where also Mr. Macgillivray round it in 1844. As Pfeiffer suspects,
H. cyclostomata of Le Guillou (H. strangulata, Homb. et Jacq. Voyage au Pole Sud. Moll. t.
6, f. 1-4), is this species; from Warrior Island, Torres Strait.

34. H. cunninghami, Gray. (Griffith, An. Kingd. t. 36, f. 4). Locality: Darling Downs, New
South Wales (Macgillivray); brushes near Wide Bay (Strange).

35. H. taranaki, Gray. (Chemnitz, Ed. 2, t. 75, f. 4, 5). Locality: Possession Island, Torres
Strait (Ince). The following are not enumerated as Australian in the first edition of Pfeiffer's
Monograph:

36. H. strangei, Pfeiffer. Locality: At Brisbane Water, New South Wales, under logs in the
brushes (Macgillivray).

37. H. dupuyana, Pfeiffer. (Chemnitz, Ed. 2nd, Helix, t. 124, f. 15, 16). Locality: Bellingen
River, in the brushes (Macgillivray).

38. H. pachystyla, Pfeiffer. Locality: Facing Island, Port Curtis; Dunk Island; Cape Upstart,
at roots of bushes; Wide Bay, under bark of Eucalyptus resinifera (Macgillivray). This fine
species was originally recorded as a native of New Zealand; was not the supposed habitat a mistake?

39. H. yulei, Forbes. (Voyage Rattlesnake, t. 2, f. 6). Locality: Port Molle (Macgillivray).

40. H. iuloidea, Forbes. (Voyage Rattlesnake, t. 2, f. 4). Locality: Port Molle (Macgillivray).

41. H. ptycomphala, Pfeiffer. Locality: Roots of trees among dead leaves at Cape Upstart (Macgillivray).

42. H. dunkiensis, Forbes. (Voyage Rattlesnake, t. 2, f. 7.) Locality: Dunk Island (Macgillivray).

43. H. macgillivrayi, Forbes. (Voyage Rattlesnake, t. 3, f. 1). Locality: Frankland Isles (Macgillivray).

44. H. franklandiensis, Forbes. (Voyage Rattlesnake, t. 2, f. 2). Locality: Frankland Isles
and Lizard Island (Macgillivray).

45. H. inconspicua, Forbes. (Voyage Rattlesnake, t. 2, f. 3). Locality: Islet in Trinity Bay
(Macgillivray).

46. H. brevipila, Pfeiffer. (Chemnitz, Ed. 2, Helix t. 124, f. 28-30).

47. H. fraseri, Gray. (Beechey's Voyage Zool. t. 38, f. 6). Locality: Wide Bay and Clarence
River, New South Wales, in the scrubs (Macgillivray). The true locality of this species--first
given by Beck--is thus verified.

48. H. gaertneriana, Pfeiffer. Locality: Night Island, on trunks and branches of a Bombax (Macgillivray).

49. H. sericatula, Pfeiffer. Locality: Port Jackson (Strange).

BULIMUS.

1. B. faba, Martyn. (Reeve Conch. Syst. t. 175, f. 13, 14). Locality: Australian Isles ? A
Polynesian species.

2. B. tuckeri, Pfeiffer. Locality: Inhabits most of the islands on the North-East coast of
Australia. Among dead leaves at the roots of trees and bushes in Fitzroy, Sunday, and Lizard
Islands, and at roots of grass in Sir Charles Hardy's Islands (Macgillivray).

3. B. dufresnii, Leach. (Fer. Hist, t. 3. f. 1-3). Locality: Van Diemen's Land. Under logs
and stones (Macgillivray).

4. B. atomatus, Gray. (Reeve Conch. Icon. Bulimus, t. 30, f. 184). Locality: New South Wales
(Macgillivray). Western Australia (Brit. Mus.)

5. B. kingii, Gray. (Wood, Suppl. t. 7, f. 27). Locality: Bald Head, King George Sound (King).

6. B. trilineatus, Quoy and Gaimard. (Voyage Astr. 2, t. 9, f. 1-3). Locality: Bald Head, King
George Sound (Quoy and Gaimard). "Varietas praecedentis esse videtur." Pfeiffer.

7. B. rhodostomus, Gray. Locality: New Holland ?

8. B. indutus, Menke. Locality: Darling Range and Mount Eliza, Swan River (Priess).

9. B. melo, Quoy and Gaimard. Voyage Astr.

10. B. bulla, Menke. Locality: Darling Range, Western Australia (Priess.)

11. B. inflatus, Lamarck. (Delessert Recueil. t. 28, f. 1). Edgar felt awe that he again
stood alone in the room, and even this little solitude confused him. His Father was strict,
was the only one he truly feared. Edgar also listened, his father seemed to be excited, he said,
loud and angry. In between, the voices sounded soothingly his grandmother and mother, she apparently
wanted him to vote milder. But the voice was hard, hard as the steps that came up now, closer
and closer, now already in the next room were just outside the door, which was now open.

His father was very big. And now Edgar felt terribly small before him as he entered, really nervous
and apparently in anger.

"What's just happened to you guy run away? How can you scare your mother like that? "

His voice was angry and in the hands of a wild motion. Behind him was with a quiet step now entered
the room the mother. Her face was shaded.

Edgar did not answer. He had the feeling of having to justify himself, however, how should He told
the that he had been deceived and beaten? Would he understand?

"Well, can, do not you talk? What happened? You can safely say it! Was not you a little right? You
must be a reason, if one runs away! Has anyone done anything harmful to you? "Edgar hesitated.
The memory made him angry again, he would already accuse.

Then he saw - and his heart was still there - like his mother after her father's back a strange
Motion made. A movement that he understood the first place. But now they saw him, in their Eye was
an entreaty. And quietly, very quietly, she raised her finger to her mouth in the sign of silence.

Then
broke the child felt, suddenly something warm, a huge wild happiness by his whole body. He understood
that they were wary of him the secret that his little Children's
lips was a destiny.

And wild, joyous pride filled him that she trusted him, suddenly he felt a spirit of sacrifice,
a desire to increase his own fault or to show how much he was a man already. He pulled himself
together:

"No, no ... there was no occasion.

Mama was very good to me, but I was naughty, I have behaved badly ... and there ... I ran
away because I feared I have.

"

His father looked at him blankly. He had expected anything but this
confession.

His Anger was disarmed.

"Well, if you're sorry, all right then songwriter.

Then I will talk about anything today. I think you'll consider it to you yet another time! That
such a thing does not happen. "

He stopped and looked at him. His voice was now milder.

"How pale you look. But I think you're already grown. I hope You will do such childish things
no more, you're really no more boy and could have be reasonable! "

Edgar looked at the whole time only to his mother. He felt as if something sparkled in her Eyes.
Or this was just the reflection of the flame? No, it shone there, moist and light, and a smile
was on her lips, which told him thanks. He was sent to bed now, but He was not sad that she
left him alone. He had so much to reconsider, so much colorful and rich. All the pain the last
few days went by in the massive sense the first experience, he felt happy in a mysterious premonition
of future Events. Outside, the trees rustled in the darkness in the darkened night, but he knew
no more fear. He had lost all impatience for life, since he knew how rich it was. He felt as if
he had seen naked for the first time today, no longer covered by
a thousand Lies of childhood, but in all its sensual, dangerous beauty.
He had Never thought that days could be pressed so full of pain from
various transition and the desire and the thought of him happy, that
many such days before him stand, whole life waiting to unveil him
his secret. A first clue to the diversity of life he had come for
the first time he thought he understood the nature of human have that
they needed each other, even if they seem hostile, and that it is
very was sweet to be loved by them. The ground colour appears
as a white band on the body whorl marking its most prominent portion just below the centre.
The sinuation of the outer lip and impression of the whorl behind the peristome, give a slightly
ringent aspect to the mouth. It is very distinct from any known species; its affinities are
more with Australian than with Philippine forms. It was taken on a tree in the South-East Island
of the Louisiade Archipelago.

Helix yulei. Tab. n. fig. 6. a, b.

Testa profunde umbilicata, depresso-globosa, solida, striata, sub epidermide fulvo-alba, fasciis
castaneis cingulata; spira sub-depressa, obtusa; anfractus 6 convexiusculi; apertura subcircularis;
peristoma nigrum, expansum, margine basali reflexo, columellari dilatato, umbilicum subtegente.
Diam. maj. 37, min. 27, alt. 25, mill. (Mus. Brit.)

This handsome species is of a rich fulvous hue, with dark chestnut bands and a deep chestnut
umbilicus, partly covered by the reflexion of the nearly black lip. It is allied to the H.
incei, a well known north-east Australian species. It was found in hollow trees, and under
logs and stones at Port Molle, in the same region.

Helix macgillivrayi. Tab. 3 fig. 1.

Testa imperforata, trochiformis, carinata, striis minutis spiralibus ornata, pallide fusco-carnea,
punctis nigris albo-occellatis sparsa; spira conica; anfractus 6 planati, ultimus carinatus,
basi subplanatus; apertura oblique oblonga, intus brunnea, margine externo bisinuato; peristoma
album, incrassatum, infra reflexum; columella basi rufescens. Diam. maj. 23, min. 19, alt.
21, mill. (Mus. Brit. and Geol.)

Of all Australian Helices, this is perhaps the most curious. Its outline and aspect are singularly
like those of a Trochus of the Ziziphinus group. The colour is also very singular, being a
yellowish flesh hue deepening on the base to rich brownish-yellow, and speckled irregularly
with minute black dots which are areolated with white, the white ring being largest on the
side towards the mouth. The fine striae that encircle the body are also very curious. The outer
lip of the aperture seems as if it had been dented in two places. Behind the white thickened
peristome, intemaily is a dark brown band, which is seen through the shell as a dark blackish
green stripe. The edge of the outer lip declines to join the body whorl a little below the
keel. It was found on trunks and branches of trees in the Frankland Isles.

Helix dunkiensis. Tab. 2 fig. 7. a, b.

Testa umbilicata, depresso-globosa, subcarinata, solida, radiato striata et subtilissime granulata,
flavida; spira late depressa, convexiuscula, apice obtusa; anfractus 6 convexiusculi, ultimo
obsolete carinato; apertura lunaris, intus alba; peristoma superne rectum, margine basali margine
columellarique sub-reflexis, umbilicus profundus, conspicuus, vix obtectus. Diam. maj. 24,
min. 21, alt. 16, mill. (Mus. Brit.)

This snail strikingly resembles some Illyrian forms. It has affinities with H. coriaria, a
species said to be from Ceylon. It was taken under stones and about roots of trees in Dunk
Island, on the North-East coast of Australia.

Helix franklandiensis. Tab. 2 fig. 2. a, b.

Testa aperte-umbilicata, tumido-depressa, nitidissima, superne radiatim striata, cornea, fasciis
angustis transversis distantibus fulvis; spira angusta; anfractus 5 planiusculi, ultimus rotundatus,
antice vix descendentes; apertura rotundata; peristoma simplex, vix acutum, rectum, margine
columellari non reflexo. Diam. maj. 26, min. 21, alt. 14 mill. (Mus. Brit.)

This beautiful snail is of a brightly shining yellowish or greenish horn colour. The whorls
of its spire are small, but the body whorl, whilst preserving a wide diameter throughout, gradually
increases in trumpet-like manner to the round mouth. It belongs to the same group with H. olivetorum
and H. nitida, and is allied to the Australian H. ptycomphala. It occurs about the roots of
trees in the Frankland and Lizard Islands.

Helix iuloidea. Tab. 2 fig. 4. a, b, c, d.

Testa late et perspective umbilicata, orbicularis, superne depressa seu subconcava, rufo-cornea,
regulariter costulata; anfractus 4 1/2 convexiusculi, ultimus tumidus, rotundatus; apertura
lunaris; peristoma simplex, acutum. Diam. maj. 4 1/2, min. 4, alt. 3 mill. (Mus. Brit. & Geol.)

This curious little snail, resembling a rolled-up Iulus, and reminding us of our own H. rotundata
and its allies, was found under a stone at Port Molle.

Helix inconspicua. Tab. 2 fig. 3. a, b, c.

Testa perforata, depresso-convexa, laevigata, nitidiuscula, pallide cornea, basi subcompressa;
anfractus 6, planiusculi; spira obtusa; apertura lunaris; peristoma rectum, simplex, margine
columellari reflexo: umbilicus minutus, subobtectus. Diam. maj. 8--min. 7--alt. 5 mill. (Mus.
Brit.)

A very inconspicuous ordinary-looking little shell, its upper surface recalling the aspect
of H. alliaria but with more convexity and no lustre, and its base that of H. crystallina.
It was found, apparently gregarious, under dead leaves in an islet in Trinity Bay.

Balea australis. Tab. 2 fig. 9. a, b.

Testa dextrorsa, rimata, subcylindracea, turrita, decollata, dense capillaceo-costulata, corneo-lutea,
maculis obscuris flavidis; sutura impressa; anfractus 11, convexiusculi; apertura pyriformis,
columella triplicata, plica inferior maxima, conspicua, elevata, acuta, spiralis; peristoma
continuum, solutum. Long. 18--Diam. 4--Apert 4 mill. (Mus. Brit. & Geol.)

This very remarkable shell, the first of its genus discovered in Australia, differs from all
its congeners. It has exactly the aspect of a Clausilia, but the mouth is not furnished with
a clausium. It was found under stones at Port Molle.

Pupina grandis. Tab. 2 fig. 10. a, b, c, d.

Testa ovato-subcylindrica, superne laevigata, inferne rugulosa, sordide-rufa; spira obtusa;
anfractus 6, secundus tumidus, obliquus, ultimus super aperturam planatus; apertura rotundata;
peristoma laete aurantiacum, rimatum, crassum, dorsaliter canaliculatum, infra columellari,
profunde sinuatum et in canali contorto excavatum; canalis alter minutus ad partem superiorem
et externam aperturae; callus columellaris expansus, appressus. Long. 30, Diam. 15, Apert.
7 mill. (Mus. Brit. & Geol.).

This, the giant of its genus, is perhaps the most remarkable land-shell discovered during the
voyage. It differs from all other Pupinae in having an unpolished surface. It was found in
the South-East Island of the Louisiade Archipelago, under dead leaves chiefly about the roots
of trees.

Pupina thomsoni. Tab. 3 fig. 2. a, b.

Testa ovata, polita, nitidissima, translucens, hyalina, solidiuscula; spira obtusa; anfractus
5, duo ultimi majores; apertura orbicularis; peristoma album, crassum, solutum, canalibus duobus
interruptum; canalis superior ad partem superiorem et externam aperturae, inferior major, basalis,
marginibus disjunctis et in dorsum anfractus prolongatis. Long. 7 1/2, diam. 4 1/2, apert.
2 mill. (Mus. Brit.)

This remarkable and beautiful little Pupina is most nearly allied to the P. bilinguis of Cape
York. From that species (which is larger) it differs, however, very materially, most especially
in the position of the inferior or basal canal of the aperture which is here placed like the
canal of a whelk, but in P. bilinguis is very small and placed high up, cutting as it were
the columella. The curious manner in which the margins of the canals are prolonged on the back
of the body whorl like parallel and somewhat diverging walls is also a singular feature of
this species, which is dedicated to Dr. Thomson, surgeon of the Rattlesnake, and an excellent
botanist. It was found among dead leaves at the roots of trees in Fitzroy Island.

Helicina stanleyi. Tab. 3 fig. 4. a, b.

Testa lenticularis, superne inferneque convexa, orbicularis, acute carinata, fusco-carnea,
spiraliter striata; spira obtusa; anfractus 4 1/2 leviter convexiusculi; basis imperforata,
centraliter laevigata, alba; apertura oblique sublunata, angulata; peristoma simplex, tenue.
Diam. maj. 6 1/2, min. 6, alt. 5 mill. (Mus. Brit.)

Found on the leaves and trunks of trees and bushes (especially Scaevola koenigii) in the Duchateau
Isles, Louisiade Archipelago. Dedicated to the late Captain Owen Stanley, R.N.

Helicina louisiadensis. Tab. This pretty little Helicina is nearly allied to some Philippine
species.

Helicina gouldiana. Tab. 3 fig. 3. a, b.

Testa depresso-globosa, superne sub-conica, orbicularis, obsolete subangulata, flava seu rufa,
spiraliter striata; spira prominens; anfractus 5, planati; basis imperforata; apertura sub-lunata,
inferne angulata; peristoma incrassatum, subreflexum, album. Diam. maj. 6, min. 5 1/4, alt.
4 1/2 mill. (Mus. Brit.)

Under the bark of Mimusops kaukii, in the Two Isles, on the North-East coast of Australia.
Dedicated to the indefatigable illustrator of Australian ornithology.

Ranella pulchella. Tab. 3 fig. 6. a, b.

Testa turrita, utroque alata, acute-caudata, alba; anfractus tumidi, spiraliter striati, longitudinaliter
noduloso-costati, costis crebris, lateraliter varicosi, varices compressi, aliformes, crenulati,
striati, ad margines crenati; apertura ovato-rotunda, inferne longe-caudata; peristoma solutum.
Long. 20, diam. 14, apert. 4 mill. (Mus. Brit.)

This beautiful shell was dredged in from 8 to 11 fathoms water, on a bottom of sand and shells
between Cumberland Island 1.i, and Point Slade (Latitude 21 degrees South Longitude 149 degrees
20 minutes East).

The spiral striae that cross its whorls are grouped in pairs; their interstices are raised,
and more or less finely crenulated; as they pass out on the expanded and wing-like varices
they diverge, and the lobe-like projections that scallop the margins of the wings are separated
from each other by each pair of diverging striae. The fine ribs that cross the whorls are not
present on the wings, nor on the back; they are nodulated at their decussation with the raised
striae. The wing-like varices of the whorls overlap each other alternately on each side of
the shell. The only species to which it has affinity is the R. pulchra.

Scalaria jukesiana. Tab. 3 fig. 7.

Testa lanceolato-turrita, gracilis, alba, laevis, nitida, longitudinaliter costata, costis
lamellosis, reflexis, simplicibus, nnmerosis (in ult. anfrac. 20); anfractus 11, tumidi; sutura
profunde impressa; varices nulli; apertura orbicularis, margine laevi. Long. 13, Diam. max.
14, apert 3 mill. (Mus. But have no Ruhestoerer Rast, until
they all confused and disorganized, father and brother moved to its network, sister and in-laws.
God's destruction upon them - the count had risen. I know quite well, said he, that you are aiming
at my wife's brothers. Have you heard about them again? As was the old man suddenly to Starschenskys
feet and bursting into tears hot, called He: Men, let not tempt you! Think of his wife and
child! In so much of what you own! In your fathers name ruhmwuerdigen - What do you depend on?
angry with the Count - Lord, "cried the old man, Your in-laws plot evil, and you know about their
plans - Does the madness out of you? I shouted .-- Starschensky know what I say, "replied the
old man. A source close to your in-laws comes to you secretly to the castle. Secretly, he is admitted.
For days he lies in the dilapidated waiting at the western end of the Tiergarten Berlin Wall
hidden. - Who says that? - I, I've seen him themselves the secrets of the castle .-- Coming? -
Secrets of the castle - When - Often - A Confidant of my in-laws? - In Warsaw, I saw him at her side .-- Do
you know his name - you is well known that I was once in Warsaw, and since I had more important things
in your to provide services to me as the names of many of your in-laws to Zechgesellen . Troubling
But, I watched them with him, I saw the'm sure at what hour .-- you see him come to the castle
- at night! - Starschensky shuddered involuntarily at this last response, although a brief
reflection it so many ways possible explanation check out this enigmatic offered that upon
his homecoming coming again almost all was quiet. But he said in passing Elgan: whether it has
long been a message have received from their brothers? Since they last even here, were not
answered, they completely at ease. The count charged the old property manager, he's patriotic
concerns had finished easily the most profound silence about the whole thing, but decided,
however, where possible, closer to see to the bottom.

Some time passed, he had risen one afternoon on horseback to one of
its more distant to visit estates, where he wanted to spend several
days.

 It is certainly entirely distinct in every respect
from any known Gasteropod. It is a form of very great interest to the geologist, for in it
we see the nearest representation of certain palaeozoic (especially Lower Silurian) univalves
hitherto referred to Littorina, but which, judging from their associates and the indications
afforded by the strata in which they are found, were assuredly either inhabitants of deep water
or floaters in a great ocean like the Pacific.

I have dedicated this most interesting creature to my friend Mr. Macgillivray, its discoverer,
whose researches have been productive of so much new and valuable contributions to all departments
of zoological science.

I have named the species M. pelagica. Tab. 3 fig. 8. a, b, c, d. (Mus. Brit. and Geol.)

New Genus--CHELETROPIS, Forbes.

Shell spiral, turbinate, dextral, imperforate, spirally ridged or double-keeled and transversely
wrinkled; spire prominent, its nucleus sinistral; aperture ovate, canaliculated below, its
outer margin furnished with two claw-like lobes, the one central and formed by a prolongation
of the margin between the keels of the body whorl, the other smaUer and nearer the canal; peristome
thickened, reflexed, forming a conspicuous margin.

Operculum none ?

Animal unknown, but certainly floating, and probably pteropodous. This I infer from its habits,
and from the analogy of the shell with Spirialis. (Mus. Brit. & Geol.)

The only known species, C. huxleyi (dedicated to Mr. Huxley, Assistant Surgeon of the Rattlesnake,
and now eminent for the admirable anatomical researches among marine invertebrata which he
conducted during the voyage) is very minute, being not more than the 1/24th of an inch in diameter.
It is translucent and of a brownish-white hue. Its aspect is that of a Turbo in miniature.
The whorls are tumid, the spire prominent; the body whorl is belted by two prominent keels,
one of which is continued on the whorls of the spire: between, above, and below these keels
are transverse membranous raised ridges, which in the central division of the body whorl are
curved forwards. This curvature corresponds with the projection of the curious incurved claw-like
lobe that proceeds from thc central portion of the lower lip. Towards the base of the aperture
is a second and similar but smaller lobe, below which is the short but broad and well-marked
canal. The entire lip is marginated by the thickened and reflected peristome. I believe this
curious floating shell will throw some light on the true nature and habits of several palaeozoic
types. It was taken in the towing net, gregarious, in the sea off Cape Howe, the south-east
corner of Australia. Tab.

...

APPENDIX 6.

Among the very numerous Insects and Crustacea, collected by Mr. Macgillivray during the voyage
of the Rattlesnake, the following have been selected for illustration; references to and descriptions
of some of the Diptera, Homoptera, and Hemiptera, collected by him, have appeared in the Catalogues
of the British Museum drawn up hy Messrs. Walker and Dallas, while the names and descriptions
of others will appear in catalogues in preparation. A fine species of the class Crustacea,
discovered by him, has been described and figured in the Illustrated Proceedings of the Zoological
Society. (Cancer [Galene] dorsalis, White.)

INSECTS. COLEOPTERA.

Chrysodema pistor, Laporte and Gory. Buprestidae, t. 6, f. 33.

Habitat: Australia (Cape Upstart). Mr. Macgillivray informs me, that the specimens of this
species were observed by him coming out of a dead tree (Casuarina).

Pachyrhynchus stanleyanus.* Tab. 4 fig. 1, 2.

(*Footnote. In memoriam Owen Stanley, in classe Britannica Navarchi, species haec distincta
et peculiaris nominatur.)

Pachyrhynchus nigerrimus, maculis parvis squamosis plurimis viridiscenti-albidis.

Habitat: Pariwara Islands, New Guinea. Four specimens.

Head between the eyes somewhat rugose, some of the rugose punctures with pale greenish white
scales; an abbreviated longitudinal impressed line down the front. Beak short and thick (somewhat
as in Pachyrhynchus cumingii, Waterhouse). Thorax irregularly and somewhat coarsely punctured,
the sides somewhat wrinkled in front, the punctures scaled, a triangular depression on the
posterior part of thorax, the bottom is covered with scales, at least in some specimens, and
there are three spots similarly scaled and placed somewhat transversely: the Elytra with eight
to ten punctured lines, running somewhat irregularly, especially towards the sides, each elytra
with ten, twelve, or more spots of scales, arranged longitudinally in spots on the sides, and
largest towards the end. Underside of the mesothorax and metathorax with many greenish scales.
Legs thick, polished, and with scattered grey hairs proceeding from the punctures.

I have named this somewhat mourning Pachyrhynchus after Captain Owen Stanley and his father,
the late venerable Bishop of Norwich and President of the Linnean Society. Both of these gentlemen
were fond of natural history, especially the father, who was a good observer of the habits
of birds. The son, Captain Owen Stanley, was an accurate, though not very practised draughtsman;
and I recollect with pleasure his pointing out to me, at one of the soirees at Brook Street,
a volume of sketches (coloured) made by him on one of his voyages, in which objects of natural
history were ably introduced. He encouraged natural history researches.

HYMENOPTERA.

Trigonalys compressus. Smith. Trans. Ent. Soc. Lond. n. ser. 1. p. ---- pl. 16. f. 2.

Sphex compressa. De Geer. Mem. 3.

Trigonalys bipustulatus. Smith (olim) Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist. 7 1851.

Habitat: Nest of Polistes lanio. Brazil.

Among the Hymenoptera, few genera have created greater dispute than the anomalous genus Trigonalys
of Westwood. Mr. Macgillivray one day brought to the British Museum the nest of a Brazilian
Polistes. My friend, Mr. Frederick Smith, is well known for his profound knowledge of the Hymenoptera,
Exotic and British, which, though he has studied them ONLY fourteen years, are better known
to him, perhaps, than to any other living Entomologist; the instant that he looked at the nest,
he exclaimed, "Why, here is Trigonalys!" and certainly a large, black-headed creature, not
very like Polistes, protruded from one of the cells. Mr. Smith, on the 7th April, 1851, communicated
this piece of information to the Entomological Society of London, and in their Transactions
his brief memoir was lately printed. I cannot do better than give it in Mr. Smith's own words.
Mr. Smith, subsequently to the reading of the paper, ascertained that the species had been
described in the great work of De Geer, a book of which it would be well to have a condensed
new edition. Mr. Smith says:

"John Macgillivray, Esquire, Naturalist to Her Majesty's Ship Rattlesnake, lately presented
to the British Museum the nest of a South American species of Polistes, which he says is very
abundant at St. Salvador, where even in the streets it attaches its nest under the eaves of
houses; the species is the Polistes lanio of Fabricius, and in all probability the Vespa canadensis
of Linnaeus; a specimen of the species is preserved in the Banksian Cabinet. On examining the
nest, I found it consisted as usual of a single comb of cells, having in the centre at the
back a short footstalk, by which the nests are attached in their position; the comb contained
sixty-five cells, the outer ones being in an unfinished state, whilst twenty-two of the central
ones had remains of exuviae in them, and one or two closed cells contained perfect insects
ready to emerge; about half a dozen of the wasps had the anterior portion of their bodies buried
in the cells, in the manner in which these insects are said to repose. In one cell I observed
the head of an insect evidently of a different species, it being black and shining. On extricating
it, I discovered it to be a species of Trigonalys; I subsequently carefully expanded the insect,
and it proved to be the Trigonalys bipustulatus, described by myself in the Ann. and Mag. of
Natural History, volume 7 2nd Series, 1851, from a specimen captured at Para by Mr. Bates,
now in the possession of William Wilson Saunders, Esquire. The Philosopher
would receive only the sum of what has been and will continue, the king saw in the immense
change, this revolution, and the result of the criticism of what has been was the elements of
a new design, which go beyond those schematism in which those alleged natural necessities through
the power of the progressive history of overcoming should be.

If the collapse of the Persian power was a proof that they themselves and their life force had completely
exhausted, it was the Hellenic nature finally with his freedom and the mirage of the best
constitution in better conditions? Was it just strong enough the humiliating dependence on the
Persian policy, the threat of invasion to fend off the barbarians of the north, as long as each
city of their freedom and their desire had lived on other man to be? Even the Macedonians,
they had only some had meaning, even in their own safety limits, before her kingdom decided and
strong upward directed, taught and forced them to be and remain not only as had been so long? When Alexander
read his teacher policy, he found a job as significant way: it is the talk of the equality of
rights and obligations among the comrades the state, and that in it the essence of the best
political system is based. "But if by a so excellent superior ability, that the efficiency and
the political power of the other with which this individual is not comparable, then he is no
longer considered a partial; one would do on the drive and power to such an extent unequal injustice
if he is was set as equal, where this would be like a god among men: it is clear, that the legislation
necessary to those who are equal in birth and power is limited; but for those there is no
law, they are themselves law, who wanted to give to them laws would be ridiculous, perhaps
they would respond in such a way as Antisthenes, the lions, as in animal Meeting the hares held a speech
and demanded that all of the same part . Would receive "

Aristotle 'opinions, certainly they were meant by him without any personal relationship; but
who read them, he could help but to think of it Alexander?

"The fact that this king spirit großgeartet been on the human dimension is, "says Polybius," agree
in all. " His strength of will, his broad view, his intellectual superiority testified his Deeds
and strict, so rigid consistency of their relationship. What he wanted, as He thought of his work
- and the just verdict will want to create just this gauge - Only in a roundabout way, just
from what he managed to achieve that, it is almost too . Recognize Alexander was in the level
of education, the knowledge of his time: he is of the occupation of the king have thought no less
great, as "the champion of those who" know. But it is not like his great teacher, as a consequence
of the idea of ​​monarchy and handle have located the "Guardian Office of the monarch," the
barbarians like animals and plants to have, nor will he have meant that his Macedonians about
his father's side of the Weapons were brought up, so that, as the philosopher made that statement,
"Men are on, which Fees are to be slaves, "still less that it was his father, then the Greeks to
the Corinthian Federation have forced the defenseless, so they made with their refined Asia
could exploit suck selfishness and its three most positions, or.

He had taken terribly Asia, it is thought the spear of his ancestor Achilles, he is the charism of the
true king spear have recognized the fact that the wound which it
struck, also heal.

With the destruction of the old empire, with the end of Darius, he was the heir the power
of countless people who had been previously ruled as slaves, it was a real royal work to free them,
as far as they are free to be understood or were able to learn, they get in what they had praiseworthy
and healthy, and promote, in what was sacred to them and their own, to honor and protect.
He had to reconcile to gain knowledge, to make it even to co-sponsor of the empire, they with
the Hellenic World should unite now, in this monarchy was no longer with the victories be
of victors and vanquished the speech, she had the distinction between Greeks and Barbarians
forgot to make.


Ommatocarcinus macgillivrayi. Tab. 5 fig. 1.

Carapace more than twice as wide as long; the sides in front extended into a long slightly
bent spine. The frontal portion between the pedicles of the eyes is narrow, much as in Macrophthalmus,
it slopes down towards the mouth, and is deeply notched at the sides for the reception of the
eyes; the fore-edge is doubly notched in the middle, there being a slight tooth between the
emarginations. The epistome not so prominent as the lower margin of the orbit; the inner antennae,
with the basal joint, long (the others broken off). The eye-pedicles very long and cylindrical,
thickest at the base, slightly bent, somewhat thickened towards the end, so long, that, when
bent back, the eye extends a little beyond the end of the spine. Mouth formed nearly as in
Gonoplax, the third joint of the jaw-feet wider than long. Abdomen seven-jointed, the first
joint scarcely visible, shaped much as in Gonoplax, but rather wider, the base of the terminal
joint longer than the sides. Anterior legs two and a half times as long as the Carapace, measuring
it from spine to spine, the arm long and triangular, the upper portion more or less thickly
covered with small papillae, and having a nearly obliterated spine about the middle; the wrist
smooth, roundish, with a large blunt tooth on the inside; hands somewhat flattened, widest
at the base of the claws, with a broad ridge on the inside, the edge of it rough with small
papillae; the upper edge of hand rough with small papillae; the claws lap over each other at
the tips, and are irregularly toothed on the inside; the fixed claw of the right hand bent
at the base, so as to leave a considerable space when the other is closed upon it; upper part
of arm, hand, and movable claw pretty thickly spotted with red, epistome orbits and greater
part of the upper surface of carapace spotted with red, sides and hind part of carapace white;
upper edge of the orbit covered with small papillae; a tolerably prominent ridge extends across
the carapace before the middle. Four hind pairs of legs long, slender, compressed, the upper
edges of the second and third pairs fringed with hairs, as well as the lower edge of the two
terminal joints, the claws long, thin, and somewhat bent.

Habitat: Port Curtis. Shoal water, mudbanks.

This fine Crustacean is allied to Gonoplax and Curtonotus; and being one of the most prominent
species sent home by Mr. Macgillivray, is selected for description here; the figure is of the
size of nature.

Porcellanella triloba. Tab. 5 fig. 2.

Carapace somewhat flattened, the front produced into three large teeth or lobes; the intermediate
the widest and most prominent; the sides of the outer lobes rounded before the eye; carapace
longer than wide, widest a little behind the insertion of the antennae, the upper surface smooth,
polished, with some transverse scratched lines, which are slight and irregular, they are most
observable in front and on the sides, behind it is somewhat notched in the middle. External
antennae long, longer than twice the breadth of the carapace, inserted in a sinus behind the
eye, the basal portion formed of three joints, the first projecting beyond the sides of the
carapace, the second wider and longer than the first, third short and thick at the end; the
terminal part of antennae long, thread-like, and formed of very numerous articulations; the
eyes large, and with a short pedicel. Anterior legs long and smooth, the pincers overlapping
each other at the end, their inner edge rough, scarcely toothed; from before the base of the
inside of the movable claw a thickish line of hairs extends about halfway down the hands, which
bulge, and are rounded on the inside, but on the outside are straightish or slightly waved,
and rather sharply keeled; the second, third, and fourth pairs of legs are somewhat compressed,
and terminate in claws with four longish hooks on the inside; posterior pair of legs folded
over the back, narrow, with the second joint somewhat bent upwards.

This curious species was dredged by Mr. Macgillivray off Cape Capricorn, in latitude 23 degrees
25 minutes South longitude 151 degrees 12 minutes East in 15 fathoms, the bottom being muddy
sand and shells. It is allied to the species of the second section of the genus Porcellana,
as detailed by Professor Milne Edwards in the second volume of the Histoire Naturelle des Crustaces,
but has characters sufficient to constitute a new subgenus, to which may be applied the name
Porcellanella. The grandmother was sitting
with him and turned not look. She and her aunt and the girl joined him in a silent circle, and he
felt reassured by this heat wonderfully. Only that his mother into the room came, made him confused.
