An Anarchist Woman

By HUTCHINS HAPGOOD

Author of "The Autobiography of a Thief," "The Spirit of Labor"

NEW YORK DUFFIELD & COMPANY 1909

COPYRIGHT, 1909, BY DUFFIELD AND COMPANY

  "The best government is that which
  makes itself superfluous."

  GOETHE

CONTENTS

CHAPTER                                             PAGE

      I. SCHOOL AND FACTORY                            1

     II. DOMESTIC SERVICE                             12

    III. DOMESTIC SERVICE (CONTINUED)                 26

     IV. ADVENTURES IN SEX                            48

      V. MARIE'S SALVATION                            65

     VI. TERRY                                        73

    VII. THE MEETING                                  94

   VIII. THE ROGUES' GALLERY                         120

     IX. THE SALON                                   147

      X. MORE OF THE SALON                           186

     XI. THE END OF THE SALON                        217

    XII. MARIE'S ATTEMPT                             239

   XIII. MARIE'S FAILURE                             261

    XIV. MARIE'S REVOLT                              280

     XV. TERRY'S FINISH                              299

PREFACE

It is possible that in fifty years people now called "anarchists" will have in America as respectable
a place as they now occupy in France. When we are more accustomed to social thought, we shall
not regard those who radically differ from us, as mad dogs or malevolent idiots. We may, indeed,
still look on them as mistaken, but what now seems to us their insanity or peculiar atrociousness
will vanish with our growing understanding and experience. When we become less crude in civilisation,
they will seem less crude to us. When, with growing culture, we see things more nearly as they
are, the things we see, including the anarchists, will seem more sympathetic.

This book is not an attempt to justify any person or set of persons. It is not a political
or economic pamphlet. It represents an effort to throw light on what may be called the temperament
of revolt; by portraying the mental life of an individual, and incidentally of more than one
individual, I have hoped to make more clear the natural history of the anarchist; to show under
what conditions, in connection with what personal qualities, the anarchistic habit of mind
arises, and to point out, suggestively, rather than explicitly, the nature, the value, and
the tragic limitation of the social rebel.

An Anarchist Woman

CHAPTER I

School and Factory

When I first met the heroine of this tale, Marie, she was twenty-three years old, yet had lived
enough for a woman of more than twice her age; indeed, few women of any age ever acquire the
amount of mental experience possessed by this factory hand and servant girl. She had more completely
translated her life into terms of thought than any other woman of my acquaintance. She had
been deeply helped to do this by a man of strange character, with whom she lived. She had also
been deeply helped by vice and misery. The intensity of her nature showed in her anæmic body
and her large eyes, dark and glowing, but more than all in the way she had of making everything
her own, no matter from what source it came. Everything she said, or wrote, or did, all fitted
into her personality, had one note, her note. But perhaps the most intense quality of all was--and
is--this never-failing though gracefully manifested energy, resulting in unity of character
and temperament in expression. To keep everything in tone is a quality of art; it is also a
sign of great, though not always obvious, energy.

Marie was born in a Chicago slum in 1884. Her mother, half French and half German, was endowed
with cruelty truly international. Her father was a drunken machinist of German extraction,
generally out of a job. Both the parents beat the little girl, the mother because she was cruel,
the father because he was a beast.

Her earliest memories are connected with the smoky streets of the West Side. The smell of the
Stock Yards suggests her youth to her, as the smell of walnuts brings back to the more fortunate
country man the rich beauty of a natural childhood. The beatings she received from her parents
and the joy of her escape to the street--these are the strongest impressions derived from her
tender years. To her the street was paradise; her home, hell. She knew that when she returned
to the house she would find a mother half crazy with poverty and unhappiness and a father half
crazy with drink; and that, if for no other reason than for diversion and relief, they would
beat her.

The authorities finally succeeded in forcing the little girl's parents to send her to school,
where she remained only two years. She was not quite ten years old at the time, and the memories
she has of her school life are only a trifle less unpleasant than those of her home. The last
day in school especially lives in her recollection; and she thus described it in a letter to me:

"It was a warm morning toward the end of May, and room seven in the Pullman School was pervaded
with an intense excitement. For soon examination day would come and the pupils were being prepared
for the occasion. The children fidgeted uneasily in their seats and even the teacher became
nervous and impatient, glancing often at the big clock which ticked so monotonously and slowly.
Soon it would be twelve o'clock and teacher and pupils would have a respite for a few hours.
If only those stupid children would solve those problems in arithmetic, the most difficult
study, they would not have to stay after school. But it happened just as the teacher had feared:
A dozen children, of whom two were boys, did not give correct answers. After the school was
dismissed the stupids were ordered to go to the blackboard, and stay there until they saw the
light.

"Meanwhile the teacher sat at her desk with a despairing look on her face and the general air
of a martyr, as she noticed the futile efforts of those stupid children. But she was evidently
determined not to help them out of their difficulty. After a while, one of the boys solved
the problem and was dismissed. The other children looked at his work and quickly copied it
before the teacher could erase it from the blackboard. Not I, however, for I was at the other
end of the room and my eyes were weak. I enviously watched the other children leaving the room,
until I was alone with the teacher. I tried the terrible, senseless problem again and again
and became so confused and nervous that I was on the verge of tears. All the little knowledge
I had of mathematics left me completely. Finally the teacher lost her patience and showed me
how to get the answer.

"'You stupid girl!' she said, 'you will never pass the examination.'

"But I did not care. I ran from the school-house, and on my way home kept saying to myself:
'I don't have to pass, for I'm going to work next week, and I'm so glad. Then I'll never, never
have to study arithmetic any more. Oh, how I wish next week were here already.' I was not quite
twelve years old and I would have been working even then if my prospective employers had not
instructed my parents to secure a certificate showing that I was fourteen years old.

"The next Monday morning, bright and early, with this new certificate, which was sworn to by
my mother and duly attested by a notary, I presented myself at the office of Messrs. Hardwin
& Co., in South Water Street. They were wholesale dealers in miscellaneous household supplies,
from bird-seed and flavouring extracts to bluing and lye, the latter the principal article.
Mr. Hardwin, a benevolent looking old gentleman with a white beard and a skull-cap, glanced
at the certificate, and patting stupid me kindly on the head, hired me for two dollars a week,
and sent me upstairs where I was put to work washing old cans collected from the ash barrels
and alleys of the city. After being cleansed, they were filled with lye, and new covers sealed
on them. Then they were covered with neat white labels, and packed in cases and delivered to
all parts of the United States.

"This sort of work was not what I had expected to do. But I was told by my mother that all
people who worked for their living had to start in that way, and gradually work themselves
upwards. So I waited patiently for the time when I might, perhaps, secure the position of labelling.
Then, too, I thought that great place would bring an increase of salary, for I had already
learned that the lighter the work, the heavier the pay.

"About this time the firm received large orders for lye, and all hands were put to work filling
the cans with this corrosive material, for which purpose rubber gloves were used. As I was
the latest addition to the factory, and the greenest girl in the place, it was easy for the
older and more experienced girls to secure the best gloves for the work. The old, worn out
ones, which were full of holes, fell to me, who was too young and timid to rebel against these
conditions. After a week of this work my hands were all eaten by the lye and it was torturing
agony to move them in any way. At night my mother used to put salve and bandages on them, but
this treatment was of little avail because the next day my hands would be covered with that
horrible stuff which ate deeper and deeper, until the pain became unbearable.

"So, one morning, I went to Mr. Hardwin and begged him, with tears in my eyes, to let me work
at something else until my hands were healed. He looked at my swollen fingers and said: 'My
poor girl, you certainly shall work at something else. I will give you a nice easy job making
bird-seed boxes.'

"I was immediately put at my new work, which seemed really delightful to me, but I was rather
lonely, as I was the only girl on that floor. I made thousands and thousands of those boxes,
which were stacked in heaps upon the shelves above my head. Directly behind me was a great
belt, connected with the cutting machine up-stairs, which all day long cut out the round pieces
of tin needed to cover the cans of lye after they were filled. This belt as it whirled round
and round made a great noise. But I soon grew quite used to it. I became like a machine myself.
All alone I sat there, day after day, while the great belt whirred out the same monotonous
song. I kept time to its monotony by a few movements of the hands endlessly repeated, turning
out boxes and boxes and boxes, all alike. I saw, heard, and felt almost nothing. My hands moved
unconsciously and instinctively. At this time, I think, the first feeling of profound ennui
came to me, that feeling which to shake off I would at a later time do anything, anything,
no matter how violent and extreme it was. Only at noon time when the whistle shrieked did I
seem alive, and then I was dazed and trembling.

"The great belt then stopped whirring for half an hour and I sat and ate my frugal meal, listening
eagerly to the talk going on about me. Sometimes the girls made me the butt of their jests,
for they were envious of me, because of my easy job, and hinted that I was not getting this
snap for nothing. All of this I did not in the least understand, for I was not much more than
twelve years old.

"One morning I was surprised and delighted to see Mr. Hardwin come in and ask me how my hands
were, and if I still suffered much pain. I was so grateful that tears came to my eyes as I
answered. That night I told my mother what an extremely kind and good man Mr. Hardwin was.
He repeated these visits several mornings in succession, always asking me how I was getting
along, and patting me on the head or shoulder as he went away. I had been working perhaps two
months at this job, when one morning it happened that I was the first one of the employees
to arrive at the factory. While I was in the dressing-room removing my wraps, a knock came
on the door, and Mr. Hardwin entered. Quickly seizing me in his arms, he covered my face with
kisses, and did not quit until he heard someone approaching. He left hastily, saying 'Don't
tell!' the only words he uttered during the scene. I was so amazed that I did not even scream.
Nor did I understand, but I did feel troubled and ashamed. All that morning I was uneasy and
nervous, and the following day I waited outside until some of the girls came, so that I should
not have to go into the factory alone. The day following I received an envelope with my pay,
and was told that my services were no longer required.

"I got a beating at home as a result of my discharge, but as I soon found another job, my parents
became comparatively kind to me again. This new work was in a candy factory, where I was both
startled and amazed at the way the beautiful, sweet candies were made. I remained there about
six months, when I was discharged because I had been late several times in one week. The next
job was in a brewery, where I labelled beer bottles. This was the cleanest and most wholesome
place I ever worked in. We had a whole hour for dinner, and the boys and girls were all so
jolly. Nearly every day after lunch we played on mouth organs and danced on the smooth floor
until the whistle blew for work again. Oh, there, it was good to work! Three times a day each
employee received a bottle of nice cold beer, which, after several hours of hard work, tasted
lovely. The people there seemed to think it was not evil to be happy, and I naturally agreed
with them against the good people outside. But one ill-fated day my parents heard that a brewery
was an immoral place for a young girl to work in, and that if I remained there I might lose
my character and reputation. So I was taken away and put to work in another place and then
in another, but I am sure that I never again found a place that I liked half as well as the
dear old bottled beer shop."

CHAPTER II

Domestic Service

When Marie was about fifteen years old, her mother took her away from the factories and put
her into domestic service. Factory work was telling on the girl's health, and the night freedom
it involved did not please her mother. The young woman for some time had felt the charms of
associating with many boys and girls unchaperoned and untrammelled. She liked the streets at
night better than her home.

"When I got into the street," said Marie, "I felt like a dog let loose." Of course, she hated
to go into domestic service, where the evenings would no longer be all her own, but her mother
was still strong enough to have her way.

"At that time," Marie wrote me, "I was a poor, awkward girl, somewhat stupid, perhaps, but
who would not be at my age and in the same environment? I had received most of my education
in the factories and stores down-town, which was perhaps beneficial to everybody but me. Even
my mother, who in some ways was stupid and hard, noticed that this sort of education was likely
to have what is called a demoralizing effect on me. So she induced a kind-hearted, philanthropic
woman, Mrs. Belshow, to take me as servant girl. Mrs. Belshow was high in affairs of the Hull
House Settlement Workers, and generously paid my mother one dollar and a half a week for my
services.

"Mrs. Belshow had a beautiful house. At first these fine surroundings, to which I was entirely
unused, made me more awkward than ever. But soon I got accustomed to the place and became very
serviceable to my employer. I was lady's maid as well as general housekeeper, and my fine lady
duly appreciated my work, for she never asked me to do service after half-past nine at night
or before half-past five in the morning. Besides, she allowed me Sunday afternoon free, but
only to go to church or Sunday School. For the honourable lady told me very kindly that she
did not wish to interfere with my religion in any way whatever. This advice I accepted meekly,
as I was greatly in awe of her, though I should have much preferred to spend my half holiday
in my home locality and to dance there with other stupid boys and girls in Lammer's Hall, where
the entrancing strains of the concertina were to be heard every Sunday afternoon. The young
folks out that way were not strong on religion; or, if they were, they would receive all the
soul's medicine necessary by attending church in the morning, no doubt thereby feeling more
vigorous and fit for enjoying the dance afterwards.

"But I, poor stupid, had learned from my mistress that dance-halls were vile and abominable.
Of course, I believed all that Mrs. Belshow told me. I had not the slightest idea that she
did not know everything. Why, she belonged to Hull House, that big place in Halsted Street,
which had flowers and lace curtains in all the windows, and big looking-glasses and carpets
and silver things on the inside; and many beautiful ladies who wore grand silk dresses and
big hats with feathers came to see my mistress nearly every day, and they all talked a great
deal about the evils of dance-halls and saloons and theatres. I had always stupidly thought
that those places were very nice, especially the dance-halls, because I always enjoyed myself
there better than anywhere else. I had never been in a theatre, but I had often been in the
saloons to rush the can for my father, and I had noticed that people seemed to enjoy themselves
there. There were long green tables in the saloons on which men played pool, and there were
books scattered about in which were jokes and funny pictures. And the men played cards and
told stories and danced and sang and did about anything they wanted to. This seemed to me good,
and I felt sure at the time that if I were a man I should like to be there, too.

"But now I learned that these were terrible places, dens of vice and crime. What vice was,
I did not know, but crime meant murdering somebody or doing something else dreadful. I thought
about what I heard the fine ladies say until my poor little head became quite muddled. Left
to myself, I could not see anything so terrible about these places, but if these finely dressed
ladies said they were terrible, why they must be so. They knew better than I did. But I wondered
dreamily if all terrible places were as nice as dance-halls.

"After the novelty of the situation wore away, life became rather wearisome to me, and I sometimes
wished I were again working in the old factory. I thought of the evenings, when my day's work
in the factory was done and I was walking in the streets with my chums, telling them, perhaps,
of the small girls who worked with me in the factory, and of the guys who waited for them on
Saturday nights and took them to the show. And one of the girl's guys always used to give her
a whole box of the swellest candy you ever tasted.

"Dreaming thus one day of all the happy times I had known, I loitered over my work, as I fear
I often did, and was sharply reprimanded by my mistress, the honourable lady, who wanted to
speak to me as soon as possible on a matter of grave importance. I finished making the bed
in a hurry and went into the presence of Mrs. Belshow, who said to me:

"'My dear child, how old are you?'

"'Past fifteen, ma'am.'

"'Fifteen! H'm, you're quite a big girl for your age. I'm astonished that you have no more
self-respect, or your mother for you! How is it that she allows you to go about with such short
dresses? Why, it is shameful; I am surprised, for your mother seemed to me a sensible sort
of a woman. I declare, I never would allow my daughter to expose herself in such a shameless
manner, and I certainly will not allow anyone in my employ to do so. Only the other day my
attention was called by some of my friends to your most careless condition. They said they
could not help noticing it, it was so dreadful. It is this kind of thing which causes a great
part of the vice and immorality with which we are surrounded. Unless a mother has common decency
enough to clothe her child properly, it seems hopeless for us to accomplish anything. Now,
my dear child, I want you to go home this very night and tell your mother you must positively
have some long dresses, or no self-respecting person would care to associate with you. And
you must try to have at least one respectable garment by Sunday, for I am ashamed to have you
seen going out of my house in your present condition. Run along now and don't be home later
than ten this evening.'

"During this long harangue I stood gazing on the floor, blushing painfully. I wanted to tell
my mistress why I had no longer dresses, but could only stammer 'yes, ma'am' and 'no, ma'am,'
and was very glad to escape from the room as soon as my lady had finished.

"When my mother heard about the affair, she was very indignant, and demanded why Mrs. Belshow
did not buy the dresses for me. 'For my part,' she said, 'I have no money to waste on such
trash. I'm sure, what you are wearing now is all right. It's not so short, either, nearly down
to your shoe tops. But I suppose I must get you something, or she will fire you. I'll give
you a dress that'll be long enough all right--one that goes right down to the floor, and if
Mrs. Belshow doesn't like it, she'll have to lump it. I can't afford to get you new dresses
every year and you not through growing yet. Gee, that Mrs. Belshow must think we're millionaires!'

"When I made my appearance the next Sunday morning in a neat long skirt, the honourable lady
praised me very highly, saying that now I looked like a respectable young woman. 'Why, you
actually look pretty, my child,' she said. 'You must get a nice ribbon for your neck, and then
you will be fine.' This remark made me very happy, for I had been secretly longing for a dress
of this kind. Now, at last, I was a real grown-up lady. Perhaps I might soon have a fellow,
who would take me to the show, just like the girls in the factory. I thrilled with joy. Later
I looked into the mirror a long while, admiring myself and dreaming of the afternoon, when
I would be free. I decided that I would go to the dance, and pictured to myself how surprised
and envious the other girls would be, when they saw me looking so fine. I would certainly not
miss one single dance the whole afternoon, for I was sure the boys would be fascinated and
that the swellest among them would see me home in the evening.

"These joys made the morning an unforgettable one; but soon it was time to get ready to go.
I went to my room and curled my hair, and then was more pleased with myself than ever. I really
looked pretty! Oh, the joy of it! I do not need to explain, even to a man. Briefly, I looked
sweller than ever. The only thing needed to complete my toilet were some bright ribbons to
fix in my hair and around my throat. I recollected having seen some very pretty ribbons in
my mistress's scrap-bag which would do admirably. So I brought the scrap bag from the store
room and dumped the contents on my bed, and soon found just what I wanted--two beautiful bits
of silk. I hastily stitched them together, and was all ready to go. I could return the silk
to the bag the next morning and my mistress would never know they had been gone. I thought
regretfully what a shame it was to throw such beautiful things into a scrap-bag.

"Poor, vain little me! I came home later than usual, that never-to-be-forgotten night!--very
tired, but very happy. And I had been escorted all the way by the grandest young man I had
ever known. I lay awake for a long time, reviewing everything that had happened. I had never
dreamed it was possible to be so happy. It was because I was now a grown-up lady! I should
never forget that all my happiness was due to my mistress, for it was through her that I had
my long dress. I decided to be more serviceable than ever, not dream and dawdle over my work,
and never to be angry when my mistress scolded me. I would disobey her only in one thing--about
going to Sunday School. At least, I would not go every week, perhaps every other Sunday, so
she would not notice. In the midst of these good and delightful thoughts I fell asleep, and
slept so soundly that the alarm bell in the clock did not awaken me at the usual hour.

"It did awaken Mrs. Belshow, however, who was just about to drop off to sleep again, when it
occurred to her that she had not heard me moving about as usual, so she went to my room and
aroused me in the midst of a beautiful dream about the handsomest boy you ever saw just as
he was paying me the greatest attention!

"Jumping out of bed, I was horrified to find it was six o'clock, fully half an hour late. I
rushed about my work, dreading the moment, yet wishing it were over, when my mistress should
summon me for the scolding I was sure would come, for if there was one thing Mrs. Belshow hated
more than anything else, it was being late. All too soon came the dreaded moment. Breakfast
was scarcely over, when I was requested to go to my room. That was rather surprising, for,
as a rule, I received my scolding in the lady's room, while I was assisting her to pull on
her stockings or comb her hair.

"I had scarcely crossed the threshold of my room when my knees knocked together and I nearly
fell over, for there, standing in the centre of the room, with a piece of silk in her hand
and an ominous frown on her face, stood my mistress. She pointed an accusing finger at me and
asked coldly, 'Where did you get this?' Receiving no answer, she continued, 'Don't tell any
lies, now, to add to your other crime.' I stood there, as if glued to the floor and could only
gaze at her dumbly and appealingly. I tried to speak in vain; but even if I had been able to,
she would not have given me a chance. She brought all her eloquence to bear upon the stupid
girl before her; she wanted to make me see what a very evil act I had committed.

"'Oh, how sorry I am!' she cried, 'that this thing has happened. But you are very fortunate
that it has occurred in my house, rather than in somebody else's, for I know what measures
to take to cure you of the propensity to crime which you have so clearly shown. I shall, of
course, have to send you away immediately; for I could never again trust you in my home, for
although it is only a trifle that you have stolen,--yes, deliberately stolen,--yet anyone who
takes only a pin that belongs to another, will take more when the opportunity offers. So, in
order to cure you of this tendency, I myself will conduct you to your mother and impress upon
her the necessity of guarding and watching you carefully, as a possible young criminal. I never
should have expected this of you, for you have quite an honest look. Now, dress yourself quickly
and bundle up whatever belongs to you. I will remain in the room while you are packing. Are
you sure you have taken nothing else which does not belong to you?'

"This question loosened my tongue, which hitherto had clung tightly to the roof of my mouth.
Dropping on my knees before my mistress, I fervently swore that I had taken nothing, that I
had not meant to take anything. I had meant to wear the pieces of silk only once and then put
them back where I had found them. With tears rolling down my face, I begged her not to tell
my mother.

"'I will work for you all my life without pay,' I cried, 'if you will only not tell my mother.
Indeed, I did not mean to steal, so please don't tell my mother!'

"This I urged so vehemently and with such floods of tears that finally my kind-hearted mistress
said: 'My dear child, if you will promise me faithfully never to do anything like this again,
I will not tell your mother. But let this be a lesson to you; never to take anything again,
not even a pin, that does not belong to you. Ie, completed and ironed
a whole. Because the gentleman should be aware that my shop does not leave room without all budgerigars
and ringo ranges. Tell the gentleman that the poor tailor has not other than its reputation,
as you saw, for over ten years, to the grandeur of Havana, and no one could say justice Francisco
de Paula Uribe and Robirosa ...

- Ah! Uribe Maestro! Uribe Maestro! again interrupted the young man more impatiently. He who
does not know you that you buy. Give the word and return with his reputation and few Sometimes,
if any, provided accuracy. Let all this talk for another time and let the facts. When will I get
clothes so tonight, in time for the ball or not?

Here know what matters.

- The will the gentleman or lose the name I bear. As far as the vest, which is all that is out,
I hope by now. Hastily, is held Pardito which is painted a single for BC and it's like the
clock. Since the gentleman has honor the goodness of my studio with his presence, test the
jacket, although I am certain and sure the gentleman will admit that I have a good eye, if
nothing else. Please do not repair in its present state, because I know that for people who
are not art here is work of two days, when an officer is an expert only work two hours. If any
I was once delayed the work, not my fault, or lack of officers, but because I like much at once.
In the workshop I have only five officers, outside, at home, how
I want, but I'd rather have my people always visible.

By then, standing before the mirror Leonardo had been stripped of his coat with the help the tailor,
and while he tested the new, thought he saw reflected in that the image of someone Watching
you sneak up from behind the door of the room. Although he came to mind I had seen that face somewhere,
suddenly could not remember where or when. In this effort of imagination
was a little pensive, completely oblivious.

Of course, during that time did not see what was happening, not heard or understood the teacher's
talk Uribe.

Happened to come at that time in tailoring a girl of color, medium head cover Burato in dark
brown blanket, to the Persian style.

He said good evening, and as if no had noticed what was done there,
passed over to the room, behind the cutting table.

But Uribe was waiting impatiently, and stopped before reaching the door, asking:

- Did you bring the vest, baby?

- Yes, sir, "she answered soft and musical voice, pausing at the top of the table it deposited a
small bundle out from under the blanket.

The name, as well as the voice of the girl, pulled Leonardo from his
abstraction, turned her face and stared him.

Both were recognized course, and exchanged glances intelligence and a smile of affection, signs
certainly not escaped the penetration Uribe .-- Here fishy, ​​he
thought.

Poor girl! I pity! Which claws have fallen!

At least this is the cause of the blood burnings Pepper ... You're right ... But otherwise,
must be about something more than that.

Then he took the vest silk scarf that was wrapped, and giving it to its owner, talking to Gamboa
said.

- Did not I told the gentleman? Here is the pledge. The seamstress is worth a Potosí.

It was the black satin jacket, dotted with bright green bees, woven into the fabric. Leonardo not
tried it, nor the tailor considered necessary.

Neither time was from there for much, because that by appointment, came most of the parishioners
of Uribe. Among them, Fernando O'Reilly, younger brother of the Earl of that name, the eldest son
of Filomeno, after the Marquis of Aguas Claras, Secretary or confidant of Conde de Peñalver,
the young Marquis de Villalta, the Steward of the Earl of Lombillo, and one they called Seiso
Ferino, protected by the wealthy family Valdés Herrera. Almost all of these parts had been ordered
clothing for themselves or for their masters in the master tailoring Uribe said, and on the
way to the Paseo outside the walls in their carriages, and on purpose, entered it and stopped
the time for that inquiry.

Upon entering the first of the above-named characters, put his hand familiarly on the Leonardo
shoulder, called him by that name, and you treated him for you. They had been classmates Philosophy
in the College of San Carlos from 1827 to 1828, in whose last O'Reilly
had left to go to Spain and continue his studies until he received
a lawyer, as received, making the patriotic dollars just a few months
before the day that we are speaking, with the use of Mayor.

After two years away, this was the first time who were, having had no occasion or mood Leonardo
went to greet him, perhaps because, While former classmates, he had not stopped being a member
of a family the proudest Havana, the first greatness of Spain. On the other hand, broke single and married
again a Madrid, a source of more to their tastes and interests were very different now than
they were when they were attending together to hear the eloquent philosopher friendly lessons
Francisco Javier de la Cruz.

The occasion of that influx of gentlemen and their servants was none other than the table dance
to be held in the evening the same day, at the top of the palace in the street San Ignacio
at the corner of Teniente Rey, hired for their duties by the Philharmonic Society in 1828. Since
the days of Carnival, in late February, when the celebrations coincided public through the
marriage of the Princess of Naples, María Cristina Fernando VII Spain, the Company aforesaid
had not reopened their classrooms. Now it was as to dismiss the year 1830, it is known that
the main people of Havana, only to right to attend to his duties, he left the camp since early
December and no returned to the city until long after Reyes. On the eve of the soiree, youth
both sexes flocked to stores to fashion and new costumes made new ornaments, jewelry and gloves.
Tailors like Federico, Turla and Uribe, were the favorites, the stores as the "Palo Gordo 'and' Wonderland
', the jewelers such as Rozan and "The Golden Key"; dressmakers shops like Madame Pitaux; the Baró
shoe like, across the street from O'Reilly and the "Ladies' Street in Health corner of Manrique,
outside the city, several days prior to that for dance were siege morning and evening, for the
most distinguished ladies and young for its elegance and luxury of
their costumes.

The first at that time began to wear shoes or white satin slippers to China, with ribbons to tie at
the throat of the foot and show silk stockings fishnet stockings, even though the dress was
worn over the short. Men also wore slippers golden calf next hebillita outside and silk socks color
of meat.

With the Knights, Uribe threw the rest of the courtesy and kindness, I knew coated whenever it
suited him, with the servants, but came on behalf of people with high position, was dry and sparing
in civil demonstrations. But he had skill enough to leave everyone happy and satisfied, like nothing
had trouble lavish promises right and left, imaginary currency it paid most of the debts to
society. This served exactly the way he talked big from the beginning to the remaining gave
a solemn disappointment without losing that sponsorship.

E gone all because none heated seat was of course to enable the proposed end pieces that night.
Not neglected, of course, the green jersey invisible Gamboa, who, satisfied that no would be
disappointed again, yielded to the request of his friend alive Fernando O'Reilly and he chitin
accompanied in the trip, called in imitation of the famous in Madrid, the Prado.

Occupied it, and takes in the day, the amount of land that spreads from the driveway of the Monte
to the reef at Punta Norte, the death of the glacis of the moats of the city by west side. Cienfuegos
extended road trip of the Mount to the Arsenal to the south, but has never been used as such
but as that part of Broad Street, whose name it bears. Among the works of ornament that had their
origins in the government of Don Luis de las Casas, there are The new Prado (the one we now
speak.) El Conde de Santa Clara finished the first source project left in the houses, and built another
further north, we refer to Neptune Prado on the average, and the Lions to the extreme. Both are
provided water from the ditch real, which crossed the ride (and he still crosses) in front of
the Botanical Garden station today Main railway from Havana to Guines,
and the trench was to shed their turbid waters at the bottom of the
harbor, next to the Arsenal.

Much later, at the southern end del Prado, which was originally the marble statue of Carlos
III, Don Miguel Tacon moved in 1835 to his military tour, he built at his own expense in 1837 the
Conde de Villanueva the beautiful fountain in India or Havana.

The new Prado consisted of a mile long, more or less at an angle almost imperceptible 80 degrees,
facing the square where the fountain rustic rose Neptune. We were four rows of common trees
of the forest of Cuba, some with very old stout, and improper all malls. Down the street from
the center, the widest, could run four carriages paired, the two sides, narrower, with a few seats
of stone served for ordinary people, men only, who in the days of gala feast formed in long
lines along the promenade. Most of these, especially Sunday, consisted of Spanish waiters employed
in retail trade in the city government offices in the navy and army, due to its quality singles
and their occupations, could not use carriage and visit the Prado in ordinary days. It also noted that
at the time of ride, it was forbidden even through Prado in rental car, and when a stranger she
did out of ignorance of the rule or consent sergeant of dragoons
picket guard was there, was struck and excited general laughter from
the public.

Or Creole Cuban youth had at least go to the Prado on foot, on all confused with the Spanish
in the rows of spectators sunday. So that took part there active in the ride just the main people:
women invariably chitin, some Steering Wheel elderly and some young people from wealthy families,
on horseback. No other species carriage was used then in Havana, with the exception of Bishop
and Captain General used car. Recess was reduced to revolve around the statue of Carlos III
and the source Neptune when the attendance was short when I was very, extended to that of Lions
or other anywhere in between, where the sergeant was estimated bite plant one of their dragons,
to maintain order and to keep it a safe distance between coach and carriage. The higher the
influx of these, the lower the step to were allowed to move, that was often a monotonous exercise,
not wasted indeed for the ladies, whose main entertainment consisted of going recognizing their
friends and acquaintances, among the spectators of the side streets, and greet with the fan ajar the graceful
and elegant way that is only given to Havana.

Luckily the monotony and the funereal gravity of such an innocent pleasure, the authorities
Spanish they called arbitrary order, which lasted the presence of dragons picket on Central
Avenue Prado, ie five to six in the afternoon. Because it is well known that, at times with
the tip of the spear, others caned, made the rickshaw pullers to keep pace and line. But after
greeting the Spanish Pavilion at the strength contour for lowering ceremony before, as well
as signals Morro marched the picket line along the edge of the trench in the street address and
headquarters of his name, and immediately began racing, the actual exercise, beauty and novelty
of the fun. Sight to behold was, in effect, then, the horse and carriage ride, the new Prado
de La Habana, half lit by the last rays of golden sun, afternoons in autumn or winter break down
in bunches of silver, before confused with the pure blue of the sky. The rickshaw pullers wanting
experts took advantage of the opportunity presented to them to show off their skill and dexterity,
not only the effect of horses on the turn violent and capricious of chitin, but in the tact
with which plunged into the straits and confusion, and were taken out without shock or friction
even with other wheels. Even the timid girls, at the height of enthusiasm for the whirlwind
of racing and turns, seized in aerial shells, with the action and sometimes with the word, cheering
the riders, with each other contributed to far more danger and grandeur of the spectacle. Gradually
the steamy twilight vanished; a subtle and ashen dust swirling rose to the first branches
of copudos trees and covered the entire ride, so that, when one after another chitin, with its
load beautiful young women, left the stadium around the city or the neighborhoods outside the walls,
least did not believe it went unnoticed spectator of the clouds, which other Venus foam of the
sea.

In those days the metropolis believed science to govern the colony
was enclosed to plant a few cannon battery, was designed to build
the walls of Havana work that began in the early seventeenth century
and was completed near the end of the eighteenth.

Of these walls were part of a vast and complete fortification, and by the landward side and by the
sea or the port and there will be four doors to the country, sally ports into the water, drawbridges,
moat wide and deep, embankments, warehouses, pilings, loopholes, and crenellated ramparts,
so that the most populous city of the island remained of been converted into a vast citadel.
So things existed until the coming of memorable Don Miguel Tacon, who opened three doors and replaced
with bridges, drawbridges fixed in stone. But at the time of history we talking about, that is, when
only were the five original gates, the three call center Monserrate, the Great Wall and Earth,
were for public use in a carriage, on horseback and on foot, and end, called the Punta and the pliers
were designed specifically to traffic. For them, was therefore carried the sugar, coffee and
other heavy effects the only means of transportation then, namely the huge primitive carts
pulled by oxen phlegmatic. The garrison Square, numerous in recent times, gave the guard the gates
and the sally ports, together with the guard, consisting in all of them, for no one and nothing
went in or out without being subject to dual registration, all as is customary in places under
siege.

After entering the carriage in which O'Reilly and Gamboa were in the inner portcullis where was
the booth of the guard, thrust, on the opposite side of the drawbridge, a horse so full of forage
maize in maloja commonly called, were not more the feet and head,
which sought to raise as he could, no doubt because of too weight.

On that mountain of grass came mounted to the philandering, rather, lying to the driver or malojero
rump, Canary Islands natural boy, dressed in the style of Cuban farmers. The Spanish sentinel,
who was walking between the two doors with rifle the arm, looked first to the bridge, then
to the rake, and stood in the middle of means a sign that both should stand, pending the outcome
of which one had to finance, or diverted. Forage stand the horse would be to obstruct, get
in the narrow bridge was impossible without risking a fall, while the carriage he was easy
to hire the horses on the guard barracks and leave the way open. Despite his natural clumsiness,
that it was clear, of course, the Sentinel, so I ordered malojero hand to stop and be moved
at a run into the carriage and shouted: - Back!

But the coachman proud of the nobility and authority of his master, puffed up shields embroidered
gun in his livery, as well as their silver spurs, which were loaded with metal fittings, even
the same carriage, instead of obeying the order of sentinel planted horses inside the front
door, and looked sideways to his master

.
 If she had understood
that my calm, modest bearing was only a mask which hid a passionate soul keenly alive to the
suffering inflicted on me, she would have hesitated, I think, before she entrusted her precious
darlings to my care.

"This period of virtuous serving was the severest strain to which my nature, physical and moral,
was ever put. I finally became very ill, and had to be removed to my mother's house, as completely
broken in body as I had apparently been in spirit.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I sat near the window gazing vacantly at the scene below. All the morning I had sat there
with that empty feeling in my soul. From time to time my mother spoke to me, but I answered
without turning my head. Since my illness I seemed to have lost all interest in life, and this,
although everybody was kind to me. My mother gave me novels to read and money to go to the
dances. The books I scarcely glanced at, and what I did read seemed so silly to me! And the
dances had lost their charm. I went once or twice, but the music did not awaken any emotion
in me, and I sat dully in a corner watching, without any desire to join in. And this, when
I was hardly past sixteen years of age!

"The day before, I had been down town looking for a job in the stores, for my mother had told
me that I might work in the shops or factories again, if I wished. Although even this assurance
failed to interest me, I had obediently tried to find a position, but oh! how weary I was and
how I longed for some quiet corner where I might sit for ever and ever and ever without moving.
This morning I was wearier than ever, my feet seemed weighted, and I could hardly drag them
across the room. My mother asked me anxiously, if I were ill. 'No, no,' I said. 'Then my child,'
she replied, 'you must positively find work. You father is getting old and it would be a shame
to have him support a big girl like you--big enough to make her own living. Don't you want
to go back to your last place? She would be very glad to have you, I am sure.'

"This last remark aroused me, and I replied that I would never go back, even if I had to starve.
'Don't worry, mother,' I said, 'I'll go now, and if I don't find a place, I won't come back.'
'Oh, what a torture it is to have children,' moaned my mother. 'Don't you know your father
would kill me if you did not return?'

"Her words fell on heedless ears, for I was already half way down the stairs. I bought a paper
and in it read this advertisement, 'Wanted: a neat girl to do second work in suburb near Chicago.
Apply to No. -- Wabash Avenue.' Within an hour I presented myself at Mr. Eaton's office, was
engaged by him, received a railroad ticket and instructions how to go to Kenilworth the following
evening. On my way home I made up my mind to tell nobody where I was going. I packed my few
belongings and told my mother that I had secured a place with a certain Mrs. So-and-so who
lived in Such-and-such a street. I lied to the best of my ability and satisfied my mother thoroughly.

"The next morning I went away, and was soon speeding to Kenilworth, where I was met at the
station by my future mistress and her mother, two extremely aristocratic women, who received
me kindly and walked with me to my new home, instructing me on the way in regard to my duties
in the household. These consisted mainly in being scrupulously neat, answering the door-bell
and waiting on the table. I began at once to work very willingly and obligingly, and also helped
the other girl working in the household, and everybody was kind to me in return. I did not,
however, take this kindness to heart as I would have done a year or two earlier, for I had
learned to my cost that kindness of this kind was generally only on the surface.

"But my new mistress soon proved to be a true gentlewoman, who treated her servants like human
beings. To work for a mistress who did not try to interfere with my private life or regulate
my religion or my morals was an unusual and pleasing experience for me. This lady was as tolerant
and broad-minded toward her servants as she was toward herself, rather more so, I think, for
cares and age had removed from her desires and temptations for which she still had sympathy
when showing themselves in younger people. I soon saw, to my astonishment, that things which
my mother and my other employers had told me were evil, and which I had learned almost to think
were so, did not seem evil to this sweet lady. I remember how kindly and sadly she said to
me once, when I had spent half the night out with a young man: 'Little Marie, it is a sad thing
in life that what seems to us the sweetest and the best, and what indeed is the sweetest and
the best, often leads to our harm and the harm of others. It would be foolish of me to pretend
to know which of your actions is good and which is bad; but remember that life is very difficult
and hard to lead right, and that you must be careful and always thoughtful of what is good
and what is evil. I myself have never learned to know for sure what is good or evil, but as
I grow older I am certain that we act always for the one or for the other.'

"Under these conditions, in the home of such a sweet and tolerant woman, all the throbbing
joy of life and youth awoke again within me. Cut off from the old scenes and companions, I
entered upon a new existence. I made many friends with the young people in the neighbourhood,
and for the first time felt free and without the opposition of anybody. I had not written my
mother or in any way let her know where I was, and no disturbing word came from my past. I
sang all day at my work, and in the evening I joined my new companions and together we roamed
and frolicked to our hearts' content. I had many young men friends and could satisfy my desire
to be in their society, talk to, dance with them, without arousing evil thoughts in others
or, consequently, in ourselves.

"Under these happy influences I grew healthier and more wholesome in every way. People began
to say I was pretty, and indeed I did grow to be very good-looking. My figure had reached its
fullest development and the rosy bloom of youth and of health was in my cheeks. I was strong
and vigorous, self-reliant and independent, and very happy. I became quite a favourite and
the recognised leader in the mischievous frolics of the young people. Hardly an evening passed
that did not bring a scene of gaiety. It seemed to me that I had never lived before and that
I was making up for all the pleasures I had not known. There was, indeed, something heartless
and cruel in my happiness, for I never once wrote to my mother, selfishly fearing to have my
present joy disturbed.

"My fears had good reason, too, it seems, for I had lived in those pleasant surroundings only
a few months when one evening, while I was enjoying myself at a moon-light picnic, I was approached
by a sober, stern-looking man who drew me away from my friends and asked me my name. When I
had told him, he showed me a newspaper clipping of an article with the head-lines, 'Mysterious
Disappearance of a Young Girl.' For some moments I stood as if turned to stone, gazing stupidly
at the paper. Then troubled thoughts took possession of me. 'What shall I do? What will become
of me?' I remembered my mother so often saying that if I ran away I would be put in the House
of Correction. At this thought I shuddered and exclaimed aloud, 'No, no.' The man had been
watching me closely and he asked: 'Is it true,' pointing to the article. I stared at him, for
a moment too absorbed in my inner terror to be very conscious of him. When he repeated the
question, I looked at him with a more intelligent expression in my eyes, and he, seeing my
condition, spoke to me kindly and persuasively.

"'Tell me the truth,' he said, 'And I will help and advise you.' So I told him the whole story,
and he reassured me, saying, 'Don't be afraid, little girl, I have no doubt your mother will
forgive you if you explain to her in the way you have to me. It is hard for children to understand
their parents. I know, for I have children of my own, and sometimes they think me unkind when
I am trying to do my best for them.' He was kind, but he was firm, too, and said that if I
did not write my mother, he should do so himself. So I at last consented, and as a result went
back to the city: for my mother, my unfortunate, cruel mother, wanted me for some strange reason,
to be near her."

CHAPTER IV

Adventures In Sex

When Marie returned to her home, she found that her father had died. It made little difference,
practical or otherwise, to her or to her mother, except to make her stay in the house less
dangerous, though quite as irksome, as formerly. Her mother had, of course, reproached her
bitterly for her conduct in running away, and had kept up her complaint so constantly that
Marie could hardly endure her home even for the night and early morning. So for that reason,
as well as for the need of making her living, Marie went again into service, going quickly
from one job to another in the city.

And now there came for her a period of wildness, in the ordinary sense of the word. It was
not the simple joys of her Kenilworth experience. She had returned to her mother's home in
a kind of despair. It seemed to her as if the innocent pleasures of life were not for her.
She had been torn away from her happiness and had been compelled to go back to conditions she
hated. Her passions were strong and her seventeen-year-old senses were highly developed by
premature work and an irritating and ungenial home. So, in a kind of gloomy intensity, she
let herself go in the ordinary way of unguarded young girlhood. She gave herself to a young
fellow she met in the street one evening, without joy but with deep seriousness. She did not
even explain to him that it was her first experience. She wanted nothing from him but the passionate
illusion of sex. And she parted from him without tenderness and without explanations, to take
up with other men and boys in the same spirit of serious recklessness. She had for the time
lost hope, and therefore, of course, care for herself, and her intense and passionate nature
strove to live itself out to the limit: an instinct for life and at the same time for destruction.

From this period of her life comes a story which she wrote for me, and which I quote as being
typical of her attitude and as throwing light on her personality.

"The Southwest corner of State and Madison Streets is the regular rendezvous of all sorts of
men. They can be seen standing there every afternoon and evening, gazing at the surging crowd
which passes by. One sees day after day the same faces, and one wonders why they are there,
for what they are looking. Some of these men have brutal, sensual faces; others are cynical-looking
and sneer. These, it seems, nothing can move or surprise. They have a look which says: 'Oh,
I know you, I have met your kind before. You do not move me, nothing can. I have tried everything,
there is nothing new for me.' And yet they cannot tear themselves away from this corner, coming
day after day and night after night, hoping against hope for some new adventure.

"Others stand there like owls, stupidly staring at the rushing tide of faces. They see nothing,
and yet are seemingly hypnotised by the panorama of life. Here, too, pass the girls with the
blond hair and the painted faces; they ogle the men, and as they cross the street raise their
silken skirts a trifle, showing a bit of gay stocking. Here, too, is the secret meeting-place
of lovers, who clasp hands furtively, glancing around with stealth. All this is seen by the
sensual men, who glance enviously at the lovers, and by the cynical men whose cold smiles seem
to say: 'Bah! how tiresome! wait, and your silly meetings will not be so charming!'

"On my evenings off I had sometimes stopped to gaze at this, to me, strangely moving sight.
I saw in it then what I could not have seen a few months before; but not as much as I can see
now. Then it excited me with the sense of a possible adventure. Strange, but I never went there
when I was happy, only when I was uncommonly depressed.

"On a chilly Sunday evening in October I was waiting on this corner to take a car to the furnished
room of a factory girl, named Alice, whom I knew was out of town. As I was out of a job and
did not want to go home, I had availed myself of her place for a few days. As I was waiting
on this corner, I saw a face in the crowd that attracted me. It was, as I afterward learned,
the face of a club man, who had, on this Sunday evening, drifted with the crowd and landed
at this spot. He, too, had stopped and gazed around him, idly. Several times he started as
if to move on, but he apparently thought this place as good as any other, and so remained.
He seemed not to know what to do, to be tired of himself. His face was quite the ordinary American
type, clean-cut features, rather thin and cold, with honest grey eyes, but, in his case, a
mouth rather sensuous and a general air of curiosity and life which interested me.

"I was sufficiently interested to allow several cars to pass by, while I watched him. I noticed
by the way he looked at the women who passed that he was familiar with their kind. Several
gay girls tried to attract his attention, but he turned away, bored. Finally I began to walk
away, and then for the first time his face lighted up with interest. I was apparently something
new. I wore a straw hat, and a thin coat buttoned tightly about my chest. My thin little face
was almost ghastly with pallor, and it made a strange contrast with my full red lips, which
were almost scarlet, and my big glowing black eyes. He probably saw that I was poor, dressed
as I was at that season. Why is it that for many rich men a working girl half fed and badly
dressed is so much more attractive than a fine woman of the town or a nice lady?

"As I passed him, he said, 'Good evening,' in a low and timid tone, as if he thought I surely
would not answer. I think it surprised him when I looked him full in the face and replied,
'Good evening!' He still hesitated, until he saw in my face what I knew to be almost an appealing
look. I knew that in the depths of my eyes a smile was lurking, and I wanted to bring it forth!
A moment later, I smiled indeed, when he stepped forward, lifted his hat, and asked with assurance:
'May I walk with you? Are you going anywhere?'

"'Yes, I am going somewhere,' I said, smiling. 'To a meeting place in Adams Street to hear
a lecture.'

"'Oh, I say, girlie,' he cried, 'You're jollying. That must be a very dull thing for you, a
lecture.'

"'Sometimes it's funny,' I said. But I did not say much about it, as I had never yet been to
a lecture. I made up for that later in my life! I of course had no intention of going to this.

"'Come,' he urged, 'let's go in somewhere and have something to eat and drink.'

"'Yes, I will have something, not to eat, though, but let us go where there are lots of people
and lights and all that sort of thing,' I finished, vaguely.

"Charley tucked my arm in his and we walked along State Street until we came to a brilliantly
lighted café. The place was crowded with well-dressed men and beautiful women, eating and drinking,
chatting and laughing. Waiters were hastening to and fro. An orchestra was playing gay music,
as we wound our way through the crowd to a table. I was painfully conscious that my shabby
coat and straw hat attracted attention. Some of the women stared at me with a look of conscious
superiority in their eyes, others with a look of still more galling pity. Charley, too, I thought,
seemed nervous. Perhaps he did not relish being seen by some possible acquaintance with so
dilapidated-looking a person!

"But soon I lost consciousness of these things and gave myself up to the scene and the music.
My sense of pleasure seemed to communicate itself to my companion, who ordered some drinks;
I don't know what they were, but they tasted good--some kind of cordial. I took longer and
longer sips: it was a new and very pleasant flavour. He ordered more of the same kind and watched
me with interest as I drank and looked about me.

"'Oh,' I said, 'what beautiful women, and how happy they are! look at that one with the blond
hair. Isn't she beautiful, a real dream?'

"Charley replied in a tone of contempt: 'Yes, she's beautiful, but I would not envy her, if
I were you--neither her happiness nor her good looks. She needs those looks in her business.
Nearly all the women here belong to her class.'

"Charles looked at me intently as he said this. Perhaps he thought I would be angry because
he had brought me to such a place. But I watched the girls with even greater interest and said:
'Ah, but they must be happy!'

"Charles shrugged his shoulders and said, with contempt and some pity in his eyes, 'A queer
sort of happiness!'

"I looked at him rather angrily. He did not seem just to me.

"'You don't like them,' I said, 'you think they are vile and low. But you men seem to need
them, just the same. Oh! I think they are brave girls!'

"Charles looked at me in apparent astonishment. But then a thought seemed to strike him. He
was thinking that I might be one of that class, for he asked me questions which showed me plainly
enough what he was worrying about. He encouraged me to drink again, and said with a self-confident
laugh, 'you're a cute one but you cannot fool me with any such tricks.'

"I paid no attention to his remarks, and did not answer any of his personal questions. He could
find out nothing about me. I would only smile and say, 'I don't want to know anything about
you, why can't you treat me the same way?'

"I could see that the less he knew, the more interested he became. He plied me with drinks,
perhaps thinking that the sweet liquor would loosen my tongue. Soon I began to feel a little
queer and the room began to go round, taking with it the faces of the men and women. After
this dizziness passed, I felt very happy indeed, and smiled at everybody in the room; and wanted
to go and tell them all how much I liked them. But I did not dare trust my legs, they felt
so heavy. I thought I would like to stay there always, listening to the music and watching
the people.

"I suppose my happiness heightened my colour, for Charles said, 'what a beautiful mouth you
have, what red lips. One would almost believe they were painted. How your upper lip lifts when
you smile, Marie! Don't you want to go out now?'

"'Yes, yes,' I replied, hastily, 'I must go home now.'

"I sprang from my chair, I made for the door, but he, quickly seizing his hat, followed me
and took my arm. I went very slowly for my feet seemed weighted. They were inclined to go one
way, while I went another. So when Charles led me I was quite thankful. As we went out into
the street he asked me where I was living, what I did, and if I were married, all in one breath.
This made me laugh merrily, as I assured him I was not married. I told him I lived away out
on the West Side and that he could see me home, if he wanted; but not to, if it was out of
his way, for I was used to going alone. He eagerly accepted, and we took a car.

"I fell dreaming on the way, of all nice things. The days in Kenilworth came back to me and
I smiled to myself and wistfully hoped my present happiness would last. My companion eagerly
devoured me with his eyes, and asked me many pressing questions. I answered only very vaguely,
for my mind was full of other things. So finally Charles, too, was silent, and merely watched me.

"Suddenly I woke to the fact that I was at Alice's room, so I hastily arose and signalled to
the car to stop. Turning to Charles I extended my hand in a good-bye and said: 'This is where
I live.' But he quickly got off with me saying he would see me to the house. 'I don't like
to leave you alone this time of night,' he said. As we stopped in front of the dilapidated-looking
frame building where I was staying for a few days, he seemed much embarrassed and not to know
what to say. Pointing upwards, I said, 'that's where I live.' 'Do you live alone?' he asked.
'Yes, now, not always. Good night--Charles,' I answered, mischievously, but with a real and
disturbing feeling taking possession of me.

"But he seized me by the hand: 'Don't leave me yet, girlie,' he pleaded. 'Think how lonesome
I'll be when you are gone!' He drew me to him in the darkness, and I did not object, why should
I? My lips seemed to prepare themselves and after one long kiss that sad intensity seized me;
and I sighed or sobbed, I don't know which, as we went up the stairs together.

       *       *       *       *       *

"An hour later, as he was about to descend the stairs, I said: 'Charles, when will you come again?'

"'Oh, I can't tell,' he replied 'but it will be soon.'

"'Well,' I said, 'remember I shall be here only a few days. Alice will be back within the week.
Come Wednesday evening.'

"But he left with the remark that it might not be possible! I did not care for him deeply,
of course, it was only an adventure, but this stung me deeply. The light way he took what he
wanted and then seemed to want to have no tie remaining! I felt as he did, too, really, but
I did not want him to feel so! I imagined in what a self-satisfied mood he must be, how he
walked off, with his lighted cigar! He probably wondered what sort of a girl this was who had
given herself so easily? Partly, too, no doubt, he laid it to his charm and masculine virtue:
though he knew women were weak creatures, he also knew that men were strong! Ah! I could almost
hear him muse aloud, in my imagination. His reveries, perhaps, would run about like this:

"'I was rather lucky to happen along this evening! She was certainly worth while, though pretty
weak, I must say. She had fine eyes and, by jove, what a mouth! She said, "Wednesday." I think
I will go, though it is never good policy to let girls be too sure of you. Besides, how do
I know she isn't playing me some game?'

"I didn't know as much then as I do now about man's nature, but now I make no doubt that as
the time passed between then and Wednesday Charles's desire grew: it began with indifference,
but ended, I am sure, with intensity: for men are like that! Their fancy works in the absence,
not in the presence, of the girl. I am sure the girl with the red lips and the deep dark eyes
haunted him more and more as time went on!

"At the time, I didn't know just why, but I did know that I wanted nothing more of Charley.
He had never been anything but a man to me--he was a moment in my life, that was all. But I
decided to meet him, for only in that way could I really finish the affair. Otherwise, if I
merely broke the engagement, he could imagine whatever he wanted to account for it. No, he
must be under no illusion. He must know that I did not want him!

"I waited for him in front of the house, and on the appointed hour he arrived, looking very
happy and eager. He greeted me with much warmth, to which I responded coldly. He suggested
going inside, but I said: 'No, I am going away. I have been waiting here to tell you so, in
case you came to-night.'

"'But,' he exclaimed in an aggrieved tone, 'Did not you ask me to come, and now you say you
are going away. Is that fair to me?'

"I shrugged my shoulders and said, 'I don't know, but I'm going. Good-bye,' and I turned from
him and started to walk away. His tone changed to anger, as he said: 'Now, see here, Marie,
I won't stand for any nonsense of this kind. You can't treat me like this, you know. What right
have you to act in this lying way?'

"I had been walking away and he following, and as he stopped talking, he took my arm, which
I jerked away and impatiently said: 'Well, to be frank, I don't want you to-night. Whether
I have a right to act so, I don't know or care. Why I asked you to come I don't know, unless
it was because I felt different from what I do now.'

"Charles adopted a more conciliating tone and asked me when he might come. His interest in
me seemed to grow with my resistance.

"'I guess you'd better not come at all,' I said, coolly.

"'But I want to,' he said. 'Do name the night, any night you say.'

"Then I turned to him with angry eyes, and cried out, 'Oh, how stupid you are! Don't you understand
that I don't want you at all?'

"I again started to walk away, but he seized my arm and shouted angrily: 'You cannot leave
me like this without explaining some things to me. In the first place, why did you pull me
on last Saturday night, and who are you to turn me down like this?' I answered, with flashing
eyes, 'I owe you no explanation, but I will answer your questions. As to who the girl is who
can dare to turn you down, you know very well she is not what you think, or you wouldn't so
much object to being turned down, as you call it. As to pulling you on, you were the first
to speak or, at any rate, it was mutual, so you need not demand any explanation. What you really
want to know is why I don't want you now. If I were a man like you, I suppose I should never
even think of explaining to anyone why I happened to change in feeling toward some persons,
but as I'm a woman, it's different. I must explain!'

"This speech I have no doubt made him angry, but his pride came to the rescue and he said with
a show of indifference: 'I was angry, it is true, but only for a moment. It was irritating
to me to have a girl like you show the nerve to throw me down; for I'm not accustomed to associate
with your sort.'

"At this insolence my face flushed hotly and I opened my mouth to make some indignant reply,
but I thought better of it and only walked away, laughing softly to myself. As I went away,
I heard him mutter, 'What a cat.'

"But, I imagine, he didn't forget me so easily. I have no doubt that the girl with the red
lips and deep dark eyes haunted him for a long time. Who was this girl who had given herself
to him once and only once? It is this kind of a mystery that makes a man dream and dream and
curse himself.

"Probably for some time, as he joined the crowd at State and Madison Streets, he hoped to see
me as I passed, but all things come to an end and his passion for me did, no doubt, too. But,
in the routine course of his club life, moments came, perhaps, when he thought of little Marie,
her red lips, deep eyes, and pale, pale face. I doubt if he ever told this story to any of
his boon companions."

CHAPTER V

Marie's Salvation

On account of the irregularity of her life, Marie lost job after job. Her relations with her
mother, never good, grew worse and worse. Her profound need of experience, in which the demand
of the senses and the curiosity of the mind were equally represented, impelled her to act after
act of recklessness and abandon. But, as in almost all, perhaps all, human beings, there was
in her soul a need of justification--of social justification, no matter how few persons constituted
the approving group.

The feeling that everybody was against her, that she was on the road to being what the world
calls an outcast, gave to her life an element of sullenness and of despair. Perhaps this added
depth to her dissipation, but it took away from it all quality of joy as well as of peace.
If her sensuality and her despair had been all there was in her, or if these had constituted
her main characteristics, this story would never have been written. Perhaps another tale might
have been told, but it would have been the story of a submerged class, not prostitutes, white
slaves; and then it would have been the story of a submerged class, not of an individual temperament.

What was it that kept Marie in all really essential ways out of this class of social victims?
It was because, in the first place, of the fact that her nature demanded something better than
what the life of the prostitute afforded. And it was natural that the greater quality of personality
that she possessed should attract the kind of love and social support needed essentially to
justify to herself her instincts. When she was very young Marie secured the genuine love of
two strong and remarkable personalities; and at a later time, there gathered about these three,
other people who enlarged the group, which gave to each member of it the social support needed
to remove essential despair and desperate self-disapproval.

One of these two persons so necessary to Marie's larger life was a woman whom she had met several
years previous to this point in the story.

This woman was a cook, Katie by name. She was born in Germany, and her young girlhood was spent
in the old country. She had only a rudimentary education, and even now speaks broken English.
But she was endowed with a healthy, independent nature, a spontaneous wit, and a strong demand
to take care of something and to love.

As natural as a young dog, she never thought of resisting a normal impulse. Her life as a girl
in Germany was as free and untrammelled as a happy breeze. She lived in a little garrison town
in the South, and the German soldiers did no essential harm to her and the other young girls
of the place. These things were deemed laws of nature in her community. What would have been
dreadful harm to a young American girl was only an occasional moment of anxiety to her. It
never occurred to her that it was possible to resist a man. "I had to," she said, very simply,
and did not seem to regret it any more than that she was compelled to eat. She is also very
fond of her food.

She came to America and worked as cook in private families. She was capable and strong and
was never out of a job. She never took any "sass" from her mistress; in this respect she was
quite up to date among American "help."

At the time she first met Marie she had been working for a family several years, and had reduced
her employer to a state of wholesome awe. She remained, like a queen, in the kitchen, whence
she banished all objectionable intruders. Her mistress had a married daughter, also living
in the house, who at first was wont to give orders to Katie, and to interfere with her generally.
One day Katie drove her out of the kitchen with a volley of broken English. The daughter complained
to the mother, who took Katie's side. "You don't belong in the kitchen," she said to her indignant
daughter.

This episode filled Katie with contempt for her mistress.

"She ought to have taken her daughter's side against me," she said, "you bet I would have,
if I had been in her place."

The daughter had two young children. It was to take care of them that Marie came into the household.
Marie's mistress liked to stay in bed and read novels, and this experience is the one described
by Marie in an earlier chapter, how she locked herself and the children in the store-room and
read her mistress's books.

Katie fell in love with Marie almost at once. She was fifteen years older than the young girl
and as she had never had any children, all the instinctive love of an unusually instinctive
nature seemed to be given to Marie. She saw that Marie was not practical or energetic, and
this probably intensified the interest felt by the more active and capable woman. She took
the young girl under her wing, and has been, and is, as entirely devoted to her as mothers
sometimes are to their children.

The German cook was about thirty years old at that time and had never loved a man, though she
had had plenty of temporary and merely instinctive relations with the other sex. So it was
her entire capacity for love, maternal and other, that she gave to Marie.

Almost at once Katie began to treat Marie as her ward. She took her side against her mistress,
when the latter scolded the girl on account of her indolence or slowness. "Marie is so young,"
she would say, "almost a child; and we ought to go easy on her." She also looked after Marie's
morals and tried to prevent her being out late at night. This kind of care had its amusing
side, as Katie herself was none too strict about herself in this regard.

For instance, Katie fancied the butcher's boy who used to come to the kitchen every day with
meat. He was only sixteen, and quite inexperienced in the ways of the world.

"I did him no harm," said Katie. "But I taught him everything there was to know. My life was
so monotonous and I worked so hard then that I had to have him. I absolutely had to, but I
think I did him no harm and he was certainly my salvation. But I didn't let Marie know anything
about it. She was too young. When she found out, years afterwards, she was quite cross with
me about it."

This kind of relation existed between Katie and Marie for several years. About the time the
girl went to Kenilworth and had her idyllic experience, Katie married. Nick was a good sort
of a man, easy and happy, and a sober and constant labourer. Katie had saved some money, in
her careful German way, had even a bank-account of several hundred dollars. It was not an exciting
marriage; neither of them was very young or very much in love, at least Katie was not, but
it was a good marriage of convenience, so to speak, and it might have lasted if it had not
been, as we shall see, for Marie, and Katie's affection for her.

When Marie started in on her career of wildness, Katie and Nick, her husband, had a little
home together. Into this home Marie was always welcomed by Katie, but Nick was not so cordial.
They knew about the girl's looseness, and in their tolerant Southern German way, they did not
so much mind that, and Katie was distinctly sympathetic: Marie was old enough now, she thought.
But Nick did not like the hold the girl had on Katie's affection.

"You'll leave me for her, sometime," he would say to his wife, ominously. Although there are some statues in marble and plaster of merit
indisputable, and some bronze busts above, the collection is rather poor. There, HOWEVER, there a
statue of Pandora, marble pure, so beautiful and delicate, which is worth a whole museum and
draws attention, at the foot of a staircase, the colossal statue of Minerva, plaster work of
a contemporary sculptor, who may appear to honor the most splendid garden Europe.

After the sculpture or statuary hall is in the vast Palace of Art interesting paint the living
room that contains the special gallery of painters Lyon. It is generally observed in the style
of these artists rather force of color, and marked predilection for the landscape and history.
Although the collection is not very abundant and outstanding set is well worth attention. Mia drew pictures
of Claudio particularly Bonnefond, artist of high merit, not only by the master of the brush, but
by the deep knowledge have revealed that the effects of light and perspective. I remember having
enjoyed a lot with the contemplation of a small picture that represents the refectory of a
monastery in perspective precious for its shock of light and dark light energy. However, I do not consider
that Lyon artists have reason to aspire to be a school, if we are to judge by the Museum.

Another gallery much more vast and magnificent museum contains pictures
of common, and indeed there are works of outstanding merit, such as
the death of Abel, Orsel, and Judit showing the head of Holofernes,
top job by his audacity and vigor forms expression and painting.

But most of those pictures are modern copies, and although the gallery is mostly historical,
and contains several senior executives, not really surprising, nor let posters like masterpieces.
Flings himself to see that Lyon wanted at any cost be a major art center, without having passed
a certain mediocrity distinguished (Allow me the expression), because the noise of machinery
and trucks are not allowed there a great spiritual development as befits the fine arts.

Are much esteemed of its kind the other galleries, purely scientific, which contain Natural History
Museum of Mineralogy and Geology. The first, which is not very significant, but deserves much
capital appreciation on a second order, is very well preserved and
chosen set of species most rare and remarkable in the various families
in the kingdom animal.

He is a veritable museum of the province, when compared with those in London, Paris, Berlin and
other big cities, but is complete and polished, and does honor to the opulent metropolis the Rhone, to
France,

But even more interesting is the gallery of minerals, and by the beauty of your samples (Although
some little messy) in point of crystallisation and metallic clusters metalloids, and by the richness
and abundance of marble and precious stones.

Reach hundreds the tablets containing the Museum of marbles of all colors and types, from
many points Europe, like Spain, Italy, Switzerland and Belgium, and especially from the rich
quarries France. There are some wonderful black marble, yellow, and grain, resulting from the Pyrenees,
Jura mountains, the Alps, the Vosges, etc., and seeing such beautiful and varied Samples were
surprised that, comparatively, do not give them the marbles in France all the application
that are susceptible.

* * * * *

       Inspection of the Palace of Arts, which is quick, produces overseas
visitors an important impression, namely, the Lyon company obviously
has a taste for arts, but no real taste in art or in art, since, in
general, public works suffer from mediocrity, and customs are not
in harmony with that distinction exquisite is the hallmark of art.

So much so, as the city spread not distinguished, but in this kind of art toy, I'll call caprice
or art of fashion, oblivious to every inspiration, and is manifested in the beautiful patterns
of silk coming out of the eight hundred small factories of Lyon.

Wherever the industrial spirit is allied with art, is the refinement, delicate work and funny,
because Lyon, in spite of its literary and artistic pretensions, it is par excellence but a
great manufacturing and commercial city.


"Though I helped move the world, I was not an Atlas, and at last, I grew tired, for I found
the world moved me out of all proportion to my capacity. Even at an early age, I found that
I had not the heart for the fray. Stamped on my narrow forehead, on my whole being, perhaps,
so clearly that every unsympathetic boss could understand at once, was the mark of the visionary.
My pitiable willingness to work was truly tragic.

"We were an eccentric family, especially in our peculiar aloofness from others. We clung desperately
to one another long after the necessity was past. Neither eviction nor commerce could disband
us. Only marriage or death could separate us. Though we were Catholics on the surface, we were
pagans at bottom. I had fed my fill on the fairy tales of Ireland. Fortunately, these fairy
tales were told to me, not read, and told in such a way that they led me to seek no individual
foothold in a world at war with my heart: they helped to take away what the world calls personal
ambition. They strengthened my natural quality as a dreamer, my tendency to care only for the
welfare of the soul. If I could bring about no change in this world, it should effect no alteration
in me. This, as I grew older, became a conscious passion with me: not to allow myself to be
affected by the world, or its ideals. Such was, at an early age, my romantic resolution. Now,
as the colour in my hair begins to match the grey in my eyes, and I look back over the changes
of almost half a century, I detect in the wreck of my life almost a harmony, and something
rises above the ruins.

"On that frail foundation from fairy land my trembling imagination rested, even amid the sordid
developments of my experience. How often did I take my youthful oath that the day should never
come when I would out-grow my feeling for all the world! I have been put to the test, and,
I hope, not found wanting.

"The end of my first ten years of life found me regretfully divesting myself, one by one, of
my beloved folk-lore tales, and reverently folding them away, in preparation for the fray.
I worked, during my second ten years, as a journeyman tanner and currier; knocked by fate and
the boss from shop to shop and from town to town. I naturally sought solidarity with my fellows.
Class feeling awoke in me, and voluntarily and enthusiastically I joined the union of my craft.
Though I strained at its narrow confines, I was at one with my class. During the '70's and
'80's the eight hour movement laid me off on several strikes, long and short. This enforced
leisure was not idleness for me, for in these periods the world of science, art and philosophy
shot their stray gleams into my startled mind, and I found time to ponder on what leisure might
do for the mob. What did it not do for me, and what has it not done for me since? And I in
the very ecstasy of my being was one of this mob.

"Whole hours, whole nights, I stole from my needed rest to read and ponder on our human fate.
Sundays! Things after a day's labour incomprehensible to my stunned brain were easily grasped
on a glorious morning of religious leisure. The apathy of my fellows--how well I understood
it when, with nerves unstrung and muscles relaxed, after a tense twelve hours of toil, I fell
asleep over my beloved books! And how well, too, I understood their amusement--the appeal of
the poor man's club!--when in gay carousal we tried to forget what we were. Even in the saloon
and dance-hall we told tales of the shop! Oh, the irony of it! Was there no escape from the
madness of the mart, no surcease from the frenzy of the factory or the shibboleth of the shop!

"Yes! How well I recall the gay transformation in my shop-mates when the whistle blew on Saturday
night. The dullest and most morose showed intelligence then. The prospect of rest, be it ever
so remote--even in the hereafter--roused them from their lethargy. How alert and cheerful we
were on holidays, even the prolonged holiday of a strike brought its pinched joys. Quite a
number of my ancient comrades of industry looked forward to the Poor House with a hopefulness
born of thwarted toil. The luckiest ones out of the thousands whom I knew were those few who,
overcome at last, could find some sheltering fireside and keep out of the way until nature
laid them off for good; the living envied the dead.

"I took part in the famous bread riots of '77, when I had to fly from the shop, before an infuriated
mob armed with sticks, stones, pikes, and pitchforks. In the same year I saw from a distance
the great battle of the viaduct, when the mob, armed as in the bread riots, faced the federal
troops and were shot down and dispersed. It was about this time, too, that I stood by as the
'Lehr und Wehr Verein' in their blue blouses of toil and shouldered rifles strode ominously
onward. These men were the first fruits in America of Bakunin's ideals and work in Europe.
They, too, were put down, by an act of legislature.

"These proletarian protagonists whipped me into a fury. My father, too, had his rifle, and
when drunk he invoked it, as it hung on the wall, thus: 'Come down, my sweet rifle, how brightly
you shine! What tyrant dare stifle that sweet voice of thine.' But my father was only a Fenian
revolutionist; and as it was only a step for me from Ireland to Internationalism, I was soon
beyond his creed.

"We had come to America during war times, with the spirit of revolt already germinating within
us; and although we were against slavery, our sympathies were with the South. We were natural
as well as political democrats, and even when the mob was in the wrong, I always became one
of it. How finely elemental, how responsive to the best and the worst, is the mob when the
crisis comes!

"Although my thoughts were forming through my readings and the larger events about me, the
everyday life in the shop was perhaps the deepest cause of my growing revolt. The atmosphere
of the frenzied factory is well calculated to produce a spirit of sullen and smouldering rebellion
in the minds of its less hardened inmates. From the domineering boss down to the smallest understrapper,
the spirit of the jailer and turnkey is dominant. Much worse than solitary confinement is it
to be sentenced to ten hours of silence and drudgery. The temptation to speak to the man at
your side is well nigh irresistible. But to speak means to be marked, to have hurled at you
a humiliating reprimand, or, as a last resort, to be discharged.

"No lunching between meals is allowed, although it is a well-known fact that few workers have
the appetite at dawn to eat sufficient food to last them till their cold lunch at noon. From
this comes the terrible habit, among the older toilers, of the eye-opener, a gulp of rot-gut
whiskey, taken to arouse the sleeping stomach and force sufficient food on it to last till
noon. As a convalescent victim of this proletarian practice I am well aware of its ravages
on body and mind. It is the will-of-the-wisp of false whiskey followed by false hope, leading
into the fogs and bogs of the bourgeois and the quicksands of the capitalist.

"To be a moment late, means to be docked and to have it rubbed in by an insult. To take a day
off, well--death is taken as an excuse. There is no such thing in a shop as social equality
between boss and men. In my last position as foreman I had charge of three hundred men. Many
of them were faithful comrades in many a brave strike, where starvation pressed hard, whence
they had emerged with hollow cheeks and undaunted hearts. I soon came to know them all, personally,
intimately, and liked them all, though I felt most strangely drawn to those who worked for
one dollar a day. They all did their work faithfully, and there was no complaint from the front
office. One day, however, the owner charged me with treating the hands as if they were my equals.
I tried to make him see the human justification of it, but he would have none of it. He was
a typical boss and also a millionaire banker.

"It was about this time that I discovered the deepest tonic my nerves have ever known. The
explosion of the Haymarket bomb found a responsive chord, the vibrations of which will never
cease in me, I hope. The unconscious in me was at last released, and I held my mad balance
on the crater's edge and gazed into it. Hereafter, I was to live on dangerous ground, at least
in thought. No more doubt, no more shuffling now. I must try the chords of my heart, the sympathy
of my soul, in open rebellion. The iniquities of civilisation had ruined a fine barbarian in
me, and almost made of me a maudlin miscreant, willing to hang upon the skirts of a false society.
The Haymarket bomb made me strip again and for a nobler fray.

"Of what avail was it, I reflected, to raise one's voice in the wilderness of theories? How
do any good by a social enthusiasm merely expressed in theory? Such thin cerebral structures
are shattered to pieces in the ordeal of life. Ah, but this anonymous Avatar, this man with
the bomb! His instinct was right, but how far short it fell, and must always fall. He had settled
the strife within him and become definite to himself: that was all he had done. I too must
settle the strife within me. I was plunged into prolonged dreams from which I was aroused by
hunger, hunger of many kinds, and driven into my former haunt, the shop.

"But now, when I stripped for work in the factory and donned my vestments of toil, I stood
forth without falsehood. I knew, if not what I was, at least what I wanted, rather what I did
not want. I did not want this, this society!

"Each morning as I took my place in the shop I had the feeling of my boyhood--as if I were
celebrating a High Mass before the sacrifice of another day. There was much of the Pontifical
in me, for I was a rapt radical. Each morning on my way to Commercial Calvary I saw another
sacrifice; I overtook small shrivelled forms, children they were, by the dim dawn. How their
immature coughings racked my heart and gave me that strange tightening of the chest! I could
not keep my eyes from the ground whence came the sound of small telltale splashes, after each
cough. Many times I stopped to hold a child who was vomiting.

"Here was a woe too deep for tears; and I must look with dry eyes or I should fail to see.
Have you ever noticed the searching dry gaze of the poor? It is like the seeing, wistful look
of a child--which few can bear without flinching. I had no need to read Dante's imaginary 'Inferno.'
I was living in a real one which made all imagination seem trivial. 'The short and simple annals
of the poor' seems like poetry, but only superficially, for it is not truth, but a fiction.
It is false, for the annals of the aristocracy are not so long, neither are they so complex.

"I am not trying to plead for anything. I am trying merely to express. Prepared for everything,
I have forgiven everything, even myself. Everything that could happen has happened to me, perhaps
the worst that happened did not come from without, but from within. My family came off safely
enough from the fray of the factory. Only two of us were maimed for life and five claimed for
death--out of a family of eleven. That left half a dozen for the statistician to figure on."

Terry, a transcendental poet, who worked in the shop for many years, had quit it some time
before he met Marie. The above letter shows, in a general way, the mood which finally brought
about his social self-exile, so to speak. The letter which follows gives a specific instance
of the kind of experience which disgusted the idealist with the imperfect world. He had been
living against society, had foregathered with outcasts and had thrown down the gauntlet generally
to organised society, for some years, but he still from time to time worked at some job or
other. An incident happening some years after the meeting with Marie, which is still to be
described, is sufficiently typical of what finally threw him entirely out from society to be
truthfully illustrative at this point.

"I was keeping open house for all comers, regardless of law or order, morality or money. I
wished to hurl myself and my theories to the test, and gauntlet my defiance to a withered world.
It was a happy time, looked back on now as a dream, in which, however, there was an undertone
of nightmare. We had three little rooms up many mild flights of unbalustered stairs. Our main
furniture consisted of mattresses which, like morning clouds, were rolled away when the sun arose.

"For the shocking salary of six dollars a week I was collector for the Prudential Insurance
company. One rent day I lacked the necessary four dollars and a half. I telegraphed my other
ego, my dear brother Jim, in Pittsburg. The same day brought from him a telegraph money-order
for twenty-five dollars, and soon afterward a letter asking me to go to Pittsburg and help
him out. I had always been deemed an expert in the leather line, especially in locating anything
wrong in the various processes. My brother was a member of a new millionaire leather firm,
which was losing thousands of dollars every week because they were unable to locate the weakness
in the process. How sad to think that war, besides all its violence, its horror and outrage
that follows to humanity and civilization, often make the great crime of choosing as the scene
of his atrocities the floor of some peaceful people neutral, helpless and humble! Suffice to
recall that the child or the Havre Bordeaux has fought terribly from the wild Cossack of the most
distant deserts, deep valleys Switzerland, to understand all that the war has ambitions and
achievements of wicked and detestable.

       * * * * *

Let us return to Flüelen, and instead of embarking on a steamer again to head to Schwyz by
Brunnen, we take a small boat operated by a single rower. This was the only way closely to appreciate
the magnificence of the geology of the lake called Waldstatt of Uri. In fact, do not remember
seeing in any other European country, except on River Elbe, in the wonderful region called "Saxon
Switzerland" Rocky stratifications strange and great, so striking in its various forms and romantic
aspect, so original, so to speak, like those offered by the formidable walls circulation the
lake, especially on the eastern shore, in the passage of time between Flüelen and Brunnen. The
lightweight car, very rude construction, leaping like a fish, yielding to the strong water
ripples stirred by the wind from the south. In the first few minutes do not stop be afraid,
because the movements were very messy, the wind whipped us hard and sometimes jumping on the
bottom of the boat sparkling glimpses we got wet.

"I quit Pittsburg with nothing but the price of a ticket to Chicago, though my brother told
me the firm would send me a check for $500 or $1,000 for my services as an expert. When, with
a beating heart, I returned to my dear Rogues' Gallery, all was change and dispersion. No more
happy times in our little balcony of fellowship, which had overlooked in its irresponsibility
the jarring sects and insects of this world: the most delightful place in this world to me
is a home without a boss, and this home was for the time gone. The possibility of being unfair
to Marie makes me draw a veil over the cause of the breaking-up of the Rogues' Gallery.

"Poor Jim found that the firm would not pay me a cent for my really brilliant month's work,
for the reason that I had refused to be a conventional boss and had no written or verbal contract
or agreement. Jim therefore resigned, forfeiting fifty dollars of weekly salary and twenty-five
thousand dollars in stock, ten thousand of which he had offered me to stay. Mr. Kirkman thought
all the world of Jim and could not run the shop without him. Nor could he recover from the
blow, for he loved my brother, as everybody did. Mr. Kirkman died a few weeks afterward, and
after a year or two the firm went into the hands of a receiver. All this happened because of
a few paltry dollars, which I did not ask for, for which I did not care a damn--and this is
business! I heartily rejoice, if not in Mr. Kirkman's death, at least in the dispersion of
his family and their being forced into our ranks, where there is some hope for them.

"My brother Jim was one of the maimed ones in my family. Twenty years ago, defective machinery
and a surgeon's malpractice made one arm useless. The Pittsburg affair broke up his beautiful
home. He and his whole-souled wife and charming children, into whose eyes it was an entrancing
rapture for me to look, were a family without a boss; they needed none, for they loved one
another perfectly. Jim is dead now, and the best I can do is to send you his last letter; it
has the brevity of grief:

"'I have no explanation to offer for my silence, more than a feeling which possessed me shortly
after my arrival here--a desire to be considered a dead one, and am doing all but the one thing
that will make my wish a reality. I am long tired of the game, and only continue to play because
of the hardships my taking off would cause those who at present are not able to care for themselves.
A way out of it would be to take them along, but I think if the matter were put before them,
they would decline my proffered service; and take a chance as half-orphans. You calling up
our boyhood days in "Little Hell" makes me question still further if I have any right to deny
those dear to me the delights that only the young can feel and enjoy. I made a great mistake
in coming to this Ohio town. The chase for dollars which I am performing here seven days every
week is very disgusting to me, and every day only adds to the pangs. I am out all day selling
goods, pleading for trade and collecting for former weeks' business; and in the evening I must
do the necessary office work. Every day is the same, except Sunday, when I make up the book-keeping
for the whole week and prepare statements and the like, to begin the usual round on Monday
morning. It is a hell of a life and I wish it were done. I have some consolation in being able
to call up at will those that I love. I have many a waking dream, while tramping the hills,
about the comrades that have added to the joys of my former existence. Let me hear from you
occasionally, because a letter from you seems to revive some of the old feeling that formerly
made life passable.'

       *       *       *       *       *

"I suppose I shall recover in time from Jim's death. I wish I could have been with him when
he died. During his last half-unconscious moments the nurse proposed to send for a priest.
Jim's soul must have made a last effort, for raising himself erect, he flung these words: 'I
hire no spiritual nurse,' and then asked his daughter of fourteen to bring him a volume of
Emerson and read to him. When she returned with the book, he was gone.

"Of course, the doctor and all the wise ones have diagnosed Jim's case. But I think he sized
up his case in that letter I sent you. He died of that great loneliness of soul which made
of his wasted body a battered barricade against the stupidity which finally engulphed him.
The soul of social and individual honour and commercial integrity, he had the misfortune to
find few like himself. He yearned for the ideal; and I am sure he went down with that hope
for humanity. Let us trust that there is an ever increasing number of human beings who have
Jim's malady--'seekers after something in this world, that is there in no satisfying measure,
or not at all.' If this letter seems boisterously blue, remember it is only the sullen marching
of the black sap preceding the unfurling of the emerald banners of spring, when all things
break into a 'shrill green.'"

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Terry's letter, like Marie's, I give verbatim.--H. H.

CHAPTER VII

The Meeting

The mood of rebellious idealism sometimes expresses itself in actual anti-social conduct and
life. So it was with Terry. He is the most consistent anarchist I have known, in the sense
that he more nearly rejects, practically, all social institutions and forms of conduct and
morality. He is very sweet, and very gentle, loves children and is tender to every felt relation.
There is a wistful look always in his eyes. He is tall, thin, and gaunt, his hair is turning
grey; but there is nothing of the let-down of middle age in his nature, always tense, intense;
scrupulously, deeply rebellious.

Even before his meeting with Marie, his open acts of sympathy with what is rejected by society
had put him more and more in the position of an outcast. Some of the members of his family
had become fairly successful in the ways of the world. Terry might easily have taken his place
in comfortable bourgeois society. But his temperament and his idealism led him to the disturbed
life of the radical rejector. And he was rejected, in turn, by all, even by his family.

Between him and his mother there was perhaps an uncommon bond, but even she in the end cast
him out. He wrote of her:

"She taught me that I did not belong in this world; she did not know how deeply she was right.
When she crossed my arms over my childish breast at night and bade me be prepared, she gave
me the motive of my life. She told me I would weep salt tears in this world, and they have
run into my mouth. She loved me, as I never have been loved before or since, even up to the
hour of my social crucifixion: then she basely deserted me. But I rallied, and the motive she
implanted in me remains. Though a child without any childhood, I had my reason for existence,
just the same. Everything is meaningless and transitory, except to be prepared. And I finally
became prepared for anything and everything. My life was and is a preparation--for what? For
social crucifixion, I suppose, for I belong to those baffled beings who are compelled to unfold
within because there is no place for them without. I am a remaining product of the slums, consciously
desiring to be there. I know its few heights and many depths. There have I seen unsurpassed
devotion and unbelievable atrocities, which I would not dare, even if I could, make known.
The truth, how can we stand it, or stand for it? I think a sudden revelation has wofully unbalanced
many a fine mind. Hamlet, revealing himself to Ophelia, drives distraught one of the sweetest
of souls. Fortunately we never know the whole truth, which may account for man being gregarious.
One cannot help noticing that they who have a hopeless passion for truth are left largely alone--when
nothing worse can be inflicted upon them."

Terry's experience in the slums was no other than many another's, but the effect it made upon
his great sensibility was far from ordinary. In another letter, speaking of what he calls his
"crucifixion," he wrote:

"Only great sorrow keeps us close, and that is why, the first night after one of my deepest
quarrels with my mother, I picked out a five-cent lodging-house, overlooking my home, to pass
the night of my damnation in sight of the lost paradise. I never had any reason, or I would
have lost it. Let me hope that I am guided by something deeper than that. All my life I have
felt the undertone of society; it has swept me to the depths, which I touched lovingly and
fearfully with my lips.

"Whenever and wherever I have touched the depths, and it has been frequent and prolonged, and
have seen the proletarian face to face, naked spiritually and physically, the appeal in his
eyes is irresistible and irrefutable. I must do something for him or else I am lost to myself.
If I should ever let an occasion go by I am sure I never could recover from the feeling that
something irreparable had happened to me. I should not mind failure, but to fail here and in
my own eyes is to be forever lost and eternally damned. This looks like the religion of my
youth under another guise, but I must find imperishable harmony somewhere. The apathy of the
mass oppresses me into a hopeless helplessness which may account for my stagnation, my ineffectiveness,
my impotence, my stupidity, my crudeness, and my despair. I have always felt lop-sided, physically,
especially in youth. My awkwardness became, too, a state of mind at the mercy of any spark
of suggestion. My subjectively big head I tried to compress into a little hat, my objectively
large hands concealed themselves in subjective pockets, my poor generous feet went the way
of the author of Pilgrim's Progress. The result is a lop-sided mind, developed monstrously
in certain sensitive directions, otherwise not at all. A born stumbler in this world, I naturally
lurched up against society--but, as often happens I have lost the thread of my thought: my
thoughts, at the critical moment, frequently desert me, as my family did; they seem to carry
on an alluring flirtation, and when I think them near they suddenly wave me from the distance.
But, like a lover, I will follow on--follow on to platonic intercourse with my real mistress,
the proletarian. And soul there is there. I have met as fathomless spirits among the workers
as one will meet with anywhere. Art never has fathomed them, and may never be able to do so.
Often have I stood dumbfounded before some simple day-labourer with whom I worked. Art does
not affect me, as this kind of grand simplicity in life does. I keep muttering to myself: there
must be a meaning to our lives somewhere, or else we must sunder this social fabrication and
create a meaning; and so my incantations go on endlessly.

"The proletarian is that modern sphinx whose thundering interrogative society will be called
upon to answer. You and I know too well that society hitherto has answered only with belching
cannon and vain vapourings of law, religion, and duty. But the toiling sphinx, who has time
only to ask terrible questions, will some day formulate an articulate reply to its own question,
and then once more we shall see that our foundations are of sand--sand that will be washed
away, by blood, if need be. Some there are who will weep tears over the sand: the pleasures
and the joy may die, for to me they are cold and false. My joy cannot find place within the
four walls which shut out the misery and brutality of the world.

"How be a mouthpiece for the poor? How can art master the master-problem? They who have nothing
much to say, often say it well and in a popular form; they are unhampered by weighty matters.
It takes an eagle to soar with a heavy weight in its grasp. The human being, rocking to and
fro with his little grief, must give way in depth of meaning to him who is rocked with the
grief of generations past, present, and to come. It is then that love might rise, love so close
to agony that agony cannot last: the love that will search ceaselessly, in the slums, in the
dives, throughout all life, for the inevitable, and will accept no alternative and no compromise."

This was the man who met Marie at a critical time of her life. He was about thirty-five years
old, had experienced much, had become formed, had rejected society, but not the ideal. Rather,
as he dropped the one, he embraced more fervently the other. He had consorted with thieves,
prostitutes, with all low human types; and for their failures and their weaknesses, their ideas
and their instincts, he felt deep sympathy and even an æsthetic appreciation.

Marie, as we have seen, was only seventeen, unformed and wild, full of youthful passion and
social despair, on the verge of what we call prostitution; reckless, hopeless, with a deep
touch of sullenness and hatred. She was working at the time in the house of one of Terry's
brothers. Katie, too, was employed there; although she lived with Nick, her husband, she still
occupied herself at times with her old occupation; and, as ever, she watched Marie with a careful
eye, rather vainly so just then, for this girl was as wild as a girl well could be.

One day Terry paid one of his infrequent visits to his brother's home, and saw the plump and
pretty Marie hanging clothes in the yard. He was at once attracted to her, and entered into
conversation. He was deeply pleased; so was the girl; and they made an appointment. He soon
saw what her character was, and this was to him an added attraction.

"I had been looking for a girl like Marie," he said, "for several years. I had made one or
two trials, and they always got me into trouble with my family. But the other girls did not
make good. They were too weak and conventional and could not stand the pace of life with me.
I had early formed a contempt for the matrimonial relation. Five years I had nursed my rebellion
and waited for a chance to use it. As soon as I met Marie I felt I had met one of my own kind.
It was partly the fierce charm of a social experiment, the love for the proletarian and the
outcast; for I felt Marie was essentially that. This element of my interest in her Marie never
understood--this unconscious propaganda, as it were. She thought it was all sex and wanted it so."

Katie saw that Terry was making up to her beloved Marie, and tried to prevent their meetings;
but in vain; the attraction was too strong. Katie blackguarded Terry on every occasion, until
she finally saw it was hopeless, and then invited him into her house to meet the girl. There
he began to go frequently and the intimacy grew. Nick warned Terry against the girl on account
of her loose character. "I have often found her," he said, "misconducting herself with some
fellow or other. Why, she does so with everybody. Only this evening I found her on the front
door-step with young Bladen. She is not the kind for you to be serious about. Everybody knows
how common she is."

Nick did not understand that an argument of that kind tended only to confirm Terry in his interest
in Marie. Terry answered him laconically: "That's all right, Nick. When you don't want her,
just send her to me."

Nick, as we have seen, was jealous of Marie, because of Katie's love for her; so he fomented
trouble between the two women. Katie, too, was at this time more exasperated with the girl's
conduct than she had ever been before; and they had frequent quarrels. As the result of one
of them, Marie went off with Terry to his family flat, where he was living alone at the time--to
"have a fish dinner," telling the relenting Katie that she would return in the evening. But
she stayed there with Terry all that night, for the first time. In the morning Katie turned
up bright and early, burst into the flat, and reproached Terry so bitterly that they almost
came to blows. But when Marie took Terry's side, Katie, terribly disappointed and hurt, yet
made up her mind that it was inevitable; and Terry and Marie began to live together.

How did Marie feel about all this? What was her condition at the time, and her attitude toward
this strange man, so different from every other she had met? In a long letter to me she has
given an account of it all.

"I wrote you about my adventure with the club man. Well that was only a single instance of
what finally became frequent with me. I had grown so fearfully tired of the life I was leading
in domestic service that the only problem for me was how to get away from it all. For a time,
I had thought I could get away only by marriage. I was ready to marry anybody who offered me
food and shelter, and I had even thought of prostitution as a means of escape from domestic
drudgery. I had not the slightest idea of what prostitution in its accepted sense meant. I
knew in a vague way that women sold their bodies to men for money, that they lived luxurious
lives, went to theatres and balls, wore beautiful gowns and seemed to be gay and happy. I was
willing to marry any man who offered me a home, without the least suspicion that in that way,
too, I should prostitute myself. But no one at that time offered me this means of escape, so
I was quite ready to take the only other way, as I thought, left to me.

"About this time I met an old girl-friend whom I had not seen for several years; she was a
domestic servant, too, but was in advance of me in her recklessness. When I met her again she
was in the mood to lose all the little virtue left to her. She was quite willing to sell herself:
she had done enough for love, she said, marriage was now an impossibility, and she might as
well realise on her commercial value. To these ideas I agreed, and we arranged to meet in two
weeks from that day and try an experiment. Meanwhile she was to go back to her home, get her
belongings, and tell her parents she had secured a place as a servant-girl in Chicago.

"I left my position, and finding things too disagreeable at home where I continually quarrelled
with my mother, I went to visit Kate, until my friend should return.

"How my ideas and ideals had changed! When I first began to dislike the work I was forced to
do, I dreamed that some charming fairy would come and release me: I had been taught such a
view of life from the novels of Bertha M. Clay and E. D. E. N. Southworth. Some rich man, young
and charming, possibly the owner of the factory I was working in, would fall passionately in
love with me, marry me and carry me away to his palace! Gradually, my ideas came down. I should
have been glad to marry a foreman, then some good mechanic, and finally, some workman, however
humble, whom I would love dearly. And now I was deliberately preparing for a life of prostitution!

"It was then, while living with my dear friend Kate, whom I sometimes helped in the work she
did out, that I met my first, my last, my truest lover and friend, Terry. We met just at the
right moment. I was filled with rebellion at the powers that were crushing me, breaking me,
without realising why, or how, or what I might make of myself, when he came along and taught
me in his own quiet and gentle convincing way how cruel and unjust is this scheme of things,
and pointed out to me the cruelty and tyranny of my parents and of all society. He showed me
that marriage such as I had contemplated was a bad form of prostitution, and he told me why.
Of course, I did not grasp all the things he told me at once, but I listened and felt comforted;
I began to feel that perhaps I might amount to something, might have some life of my own, and
that my rebellion was perhaps justifiable. I began to understand why work was so objectionable
to me and why I rebelled against the authority of my parents. My conceptions of freedom were
crude, but I began to feel that my revolt was just, and was based upon the terrible injustice
whereby the many must toil so that the few may live in splendour. I will not weary you with
all the details of the things I learned at that time from Terry. To you it might seem very
raw and crude, and you no doubt have read some of the pamphlets written by socialists and anarchists
dealing with the labour question in all of its aspects. But to me these ideas were quite new
and they seemed grand and noble.

"And Terry revealed to me, too, almost at once, the great inspiring fact that there is such
a thing as beauty of thought--that there is poetry and art and literature. This, too, of course,
came little by little, but do you wonder I loved a man who showed me a new world and who taught
me I was not bad? He put good books into my hands, and to my grateful joy I found I liked these
books better than the trash I had hitherto read.

"I felt so much better, after seeing so much of Terry, that I decided to go to work again.
Terry was against this. 'Try it,' he said, 'But I assure you you don't need to work. I have
tried doing without work for many years, it is much easier than it seems.' Nevertheless I got
a job in a bicycle factory, but I only stayed a few days. It seemed like a stale existence
to me! And besides, I was in love and wanted to be with Terry all the time. 'By God,' I said
to him that night, 'you are right! I'll never work again.'

"My friend Gertrude, the girl with whom I had intended to go in the last reckless experiment,
came to Terry's flat to see me, and get me to go with her. I had thought, after I gave up work,
that Terry might offer me marriage, but he told me quite frankly that it was against his principles
to marry anybody. I was a little hurt and astonished at this, but as I was very much in love
and was already beginning to imbibe his ideas, it did not matter so very much to me.

"So, when Gertrude came, I led her to Terry and asked him what he thought about her plan. He
said to us: 'The kind of prostitution you contemplate is no worse than the kind often called
marriage. Selling your body for a lifetime is perhaps worse than selling it for an hour or
for a day. But the immediate result of this kind of prostitution which you plan is very terrible
practically. It generally leads to frightful diseases which will waste your bodies and perhaps
injure your minds. The girls you envy are not always as happy, gay, and careless as they seem.
It is part of their business to seem so, but they are not, or only so for a very short time.
Perhaps you will be better off so than in domestic drudgery. It is a choice of evils, but if
you are very brave and courageous you may perhaps get along without either. But if forced to
one or the other, I recommend prostitution. It may be worse for you but, as a protest, it is
better for society, in the long run.'

"He pictured to us as truly as he could the life of the street-walker; he did not seem to think
that morally it was worse than any other life under our social organisation, but he did not
make it seem attractive; nor did he make the life of the domestic servant or factory-girl seem
attractive. He seemed to feel that one might look on prostitution as, under the circumstances,
a grim duty--but it was certainly grim.

"We were rather incredulous at the picture Terry had drawn of the life we had resolved to lead.
Gertrude turned up her pretty little nose and said it would not be like that with her. We talked
about it all that day and night; and Gertrude decided to have a try at it, while I was undecided.
I was somewhat piqued at Terry's attitude. I had expected him to oppose my plan, to do all
in his power to prevent it. But I did not understand him. He knew that if I were determined,
nothing would prevent me, and all he could do was to give us a faithful picture of what such
a life would be.

"Things were happening of which we were ignorant for a time, but which helped to settle our
immediate problem. I had often been seen going into Terry's flat, and this was food for gossip.
It was said that Terry had started a bad house, and had done so in the flat belonging to his
family, who were in the country at the time. These stories reached my mother's ears, and also
were told to Terry's mother and sisters, and the mischief began. I was forbidden ever to cross
my mother's threshold again, and he was requested to leave the home of his virtuous sisters
which he had polluted and contaminated by his debaucheries with that immoral person, myself."

Marie omitted, in the above letter, the details of the split with the two families. It seems
that Terry had, on hearing about the "rumours," gone to his family, then near Chicago, and
presented to them his philosophy of life; also his determination not to give up Marie, and
not to marry her. It was then that the last rung was put in the ladder of his family crucifixion,
as he would call it. It was then that his mother "basely deserted him;" and Terry left for
good, rejecting the money offered him.

"I passed them up," he said, scornfully, "and after spending the night in the lodging-house,
I beat my way back to Chicago. I had been gone several days, and when I got back to the flat,
where I went only to get Marie and clear out for God knows where, I found her gone, and no
apparent way of finding her address. I went to see her mother, and had an awful scene with
her. The violent woman was in hysterics and, after a long dispute, implored me to find her
daughter. 'I'll find her,' I replied, 'for myself,' and left.

"Marie afterwards told me that she and Gertrude had gone to see her mother, when I was in the
country with my family, and that her mother had driven them away. Perhaps, the mother realised
the change in the girl. Perhaps, too, she realised what must happen, if she drove her away.
Yet she did drive her daughter away. From her own point of view, it was diabolical to do so.
Her anger, her exasperation and her outraged desire to rule drove her to doing what she must
have felt was the worst thing she could do. And she did it in the name of virtue! Perhaps it
was for the best: I believe it was, but she did not and I cannot see where her spiritual salvation
comes in."

Terry finally found Marie--found her in the midst of a short experiment, in company with Gertrude,
"in one of the social extremes,"--to be plain, leading the life of a prostitute.

I ask the reader to pause here and reflect. Pause, before you conclude that this book is an
indecent and immoral book. Reflect before you conclude that this woman is an immoral woman.
I am engaged in telling a plain tale in such a way that certain social conditions and certain
social considerations and individual truths may be illustrated thereby. Consequently, I shall
not pause, though I ask the reader to do so, in order to point a moral in any extended way.
In return for the readers' courtesy and tolerance, I will here reassuringly assert that there
will be found in these pages no detailed description of Marie's life during her few months
of prostitution; and nothing whatever, from cover to cover, of anything that in my judgment
is either immoral or indecent.

Well, Terry found her, and Terry did not try to "reform" her. But he stood by her, and was
more interested, more in love with her than ever. In addition to his personal interest, he
felt an even stronger social interest in her. To live with a girl like that was unconscious
propaganda. This passion, as he calls it, was now more deeply stirred than when he first met
her. This deeply aroused his imagination and his keen desire to see what the naked constitution
of the soul is, after it is stripped of all social prestige.

If Marie had been simply a low, commercial grafter, Terry, the idealist, would not have been
interested. But Terry knew that Marie cared nothing whatever for money. He regarded her as
a social victim and in addition a vigorous and life-loving personality, an excellent companion
for a life-long protest against things as they are. He saw she had the capacity for deep and
excited interest in truth, an emotional love for ideated experience. These two human beings
were wonderfully fitted to each other: no wonder they loved!

Terry, telling me about the girl's experience during the two weeks or so before he found her,
dwelt especially upon how well she was treated.

"She has a way of getting the interest, almost the deference, of many people. She and Gertrude
were often reduced to the proverbial thirty cents, but they had little difficulty in getting
along. For instance, one day, almost broke, they went to a restaurant and ordered two cups
of coffee. The negro waiter knew what they were, and offered them a nice steak, at his expense.
Nor did he try to 'ring in,' to make their acquaintance. He treated them with great respect.
They went there several times afterward, and always found the negro waiter beaming with the
desire to help them for quite disinterested reasons, and he never tried to meet them outside.
Marie always appreciated a thing like that. She took a delight in thinking about the fine qualities
in human nature."

Marie is a frank woman, but it is natural that she could never bring herself to talk about
this period of her life with entire openness. She has, however, written me a letter in which
she tells the essential truth, although clothing it with a certain pathetic attempt to conceal
the one episode in her life about which, to me, she was perhaps unreasonably reticent. She
did not say that she and Gertrude were separated from Terry for a time, but she wanted to convey
the impression that she and Terry, from the start, struggled along together, which was essentially,
though not literally, true. Continuing her account, from the time the two families cast her
and Terry out, she wrote:

"So there we were, thrown out into the harsh world, shelterless and almost moneyless. But we
all three put our little capital together, amounting to about eleven dollars, went down town,
and hired a furnished room. We managed to live a week on this capital, and then Terry pawned
his watch, which gave us five dollars. Gertrude soon disappeared with an old rouê and went
out of our lives. Terry and I kept along as best we could. Kate helped us as much as we would
allow her to, and sometimes paid for our room, and I would sometimes eat at her house.

"During this period I was in a curious state of mind and body. Living in the midst of so-called
vice, I was at first both attracted and repelled. Yet my strongest feeling was a hatred of
the life I had formerly led, and I was determined not to go back to it, happen what might.
I should probably have gone much farther than I did, had it not been for my love for Terry,
which made me feel that I did not want to throw myself entirely away. So I did not know whether
to go into the game entirely or keep out of it. Terry did not try to influence me, but seemed
to watch me, to make me feel that he would stand by me in any event.

"For a time we were both of us dazed and stunned by our sudden change in life. The change was
much greater for Terry than for me. I don't know what his thoughts and feelings at that time
were. They must have been terrible. For years he had lived, for the most part with his family,
a quiet, studious life, the life of contemplation; and now he was suddenly plunged into the
roar and din, with an ignorant and disreputable girl on his hands whom he would not desert.
We were certainly on the verge of destruction. The inevitable would have happened, for no other
choice was left me, and I should have drifted with the current and Terry would do and could
do nothing.

"Just at the crucial moment, Terry met an old friend who offered him a political job, organising
republican workingmen's clubs, and Terry accepted it. No one can understand how bitter this
was to Terry. To work for a political organisation was to him great degradation. He did it
for my sake, for the thirty-five dollars a week, so that I could be free to live as I wanted.
I did not realise at the time how much his sensitive nature suffered, and I took poor advantage
of the freedom his money and character gave me. What an intolerable burden I must have been
to him, and yet he never even intimated a desire to leave me!

"I had an opportunity now to satisfy my desire for pleasure. Terry put no obstacles in my way.
Yet the cup already tasted bitter. I tried to deny to myself that this life of pleasure was
an illusion, and so I plunged into the most reckless debaucheries: I really would be ashamed
to tell you of the things I did. I had affairs with all sorts of men, many of whom I did not
know whether I liked or hated--seeking always excitement, oblivion. I frequented cafés where
the women and men of the town were to be found, and made many acquaintances. Two or three of
them proposed marriage to me. They no doubt wanted to 'save' me, and thought I was a prostitute.
I did not care to disabuse them on the subject: in fact I don't know whether I was what they
called me or not.

"This life lasted only two or three months, but it seems like so many years to me. At the end
of that time Terry's work was over, and we left down town and roomed with a respectable radical
family. My health had broken down. I weighed only a hundred pounds, although three months earlier
I had weighed one hundred and forty. My beautiful, healthy body had wasted away. Ah! how proud
I used to be of this body of mine! how I used to glory in the vigorous, shapely limbs, the
well-moulded breasts and throat. I'm moving sometimes
with the imagination to the day, still very young, but already banned, climbed by first time
the high summits of the Jura. When you have followed on the highest plateaux the windings of a severe
way that extends onto the sides of Dole, when reaches the end of the silent walk in which,
at best, no company has had more the cry of a frightened old eagle was surprised to hear the
sound between the rocks, long forgotten, of a human voice when it seems that the earth goes
missing under foot and with an outstretched arm will touch the blue sky solidified, then manifests
suddenly a bit vulgar spectacle that makes you understand in the same moment the need for the
divine mystery of creation. It would seem that the genius of the earth raises the curtain that
separates this world a magical world of mud and stone to get into a region of miracles. I
would describe this, but, how what colors?

Imagine that at the end of Lavatay forest on the last ridge of the
mountain, is a poor house, which from afar looks lost at the bottom
of the clouds, and called house of the sickle, because the trails
before descending the steep path of the deep recurves about themselves
as the reaper's scythe.

Today, that slavery and the work magnificent roads have been constructed for corrupting changes
to trade and invasions of war, the gorges are developed in a less threatening in the depths the
cliff and the mountain goat, surprised that a hand has dared to beautify servile his home, not
adventure in the ways of man. Remains stationary on the angle ledge of rock-cut bill, and
sadly contemplated the sky, all that civilization has left us. All parts of the table presented
in conjunction with the look, worry thereby thought to be a long time before getting put in
order sensations you experience and to distinguish the details, down there where they just
the Jura, France, the vast lake has the appearance of a sea on edge the romantic countryside
of the Pays de Vaud, Valais rugged landscapes, the rugged wilderness of Savoy, and mingled with the
horizon, and as vast as he, the chain of the Alps whose innumerable domes are clustered on the
semicircle of the sky, different shapes, of character, appearance, color, but all the fire of
the sun affects the brightness of different metals, the one shining like polished silver,
the other, depending on effect of shadows cast on its contours, matte or glossy like lead like
burnished steel, with blue or raped, sometimes in order, so dazzling when the setting sun floods,
which say they are bleached masses of iron at the forge. He day the sun was so magnificent
and a sky so pure! The lake steamers, sniffing by dusk, suspended from lightning, swaying on the
water like a light crepe dyed pink, rose gradually from the passenger's feet to the most high
peaks and displayed before him on the horizon, a flaming backdrop that scattered on all objects
in the prestige of its light, then, denser and darker now, Nimba, in Finally, this magnificent
show in a canopy of purple and gold whose splendor only paled before the stars of the night.

And those mountains vast, uninhabited, mostly unknown, they contain an asylum that I can take with me,
steal it from the curiosity insolent, hypocritical censorship secret of my happiness and my
life! I will not be relegated owner, to banish my future. I will die tied to the chain to
me odious tax, without making an effort to break! But no, not my slavery praise! Before chains
break all at once.

Eduardo, have pity on my misfortune.

May 9.

I did not told you that the conversation the other day had been about unhappy marriages, about that
crazy Subligny has ended his career by marrying a novel dancer.

I have supported in this example with a warmth and an abundance of
ideas, which should, rather than the wealth of the case in certain
circumstances of my situation.

I have argued there was nothing more unforgivable, more antisocial,
in the full force of the word, that moral disunity, and were extremely
difficult because it is rare noble souls not closer to their peers,
as Shakespeare says, or be deceived so long by impostors to get to
the point of forming a knot so solemn, without having said the sad
disappointments that what is called a wrong marriage, within the meaning
that refers only to the difference of social position, could not hit
more than the most absurd, the most absurd prejudices, which attaches
to a special class abilities special, or, rather, unique, for as I
did not know of anyone who had dared to say that virtue is tested
by title or privileges acquired by, did not see why had to ban a sensible
and sensitive man the right to seek virtue where found, it was a terrible
thing, in virtue of being ridiculous, condemning a woman interesting
endowed with all qualities and all the graces, to the despair of not
ever belong beloved object, because this unfortunate, to which nature
and education have given all gifts, was deprived of the chance of
an event depends not only of chance, that if the great talents print
to those who possess unquestionable character of nobility in the eyes
of the century and of posterity, the private exercise of the duties
more difficult to fill of religion and morality, even a title less
bright the eyes of the world, was not a title less suitable for straight
and honest souls, that therefore, I would never dare to criticize
an alliance of the genre of spoken, if I could find in it the happy
harmony of manners and character, which is the only guarantee happiness
of marriage and family prosperity.

It is likely that these arguments have seemed totally unworthy of reply to Mr of Montbreuse, because
it has been content to look at me without speaking severely, while Eudoxia who directed a look of
intelligence that has seemed to discover not know what of contempt and bitterness. Eudoxia herself,
whose ideas are rather opposite, I have found to do not enough for my reasons to respect seriously,
is content with a few platitudes to the graces of elocution and firmness of irony have given
more pleasure to strength. Adela listened with excitement, because their cheeks were very animated,
but in vain I tried to find her gaze. Mrs. Adelaide smiled at first, but then his face has become
more serious in nature. Commented gently reproached my words, in a warm, burning showing in
discussion and the enthusiasm with which he embraced the most extraordinary ideas and often so bleak.
Has lamented the ease with which men of this generation take over and propagate fallacies, the
consequences do not appreciate, and they tend to denature on all the relations of things. Conceding
that he had felt in noble truths what you just said, I recommended that reflect on the origins
and effects of these moral convenience, otherwise so respected by the authority they exercised
over our ancestors, and the almost religious dedication they have received from the centuries
whose opinion is final in the last analysis, the entire name, adding the tone a modest resignation,
and not an overriding conviction that the duty of good citizenship is subject to the established
institutions and discuss them, and that since the imperfection Men's tax makes them essential
for certain errors sanctioned by the need or by the time the interest of mankind prescribed
hearts the righteous and sensible duty to fold your right to common convenience.

This may be true. And how much I would not because there are only memories this weak demarcation
that the accident of birth has been drawn between some families and the great human family in this
circumstance so strange to my will, I have had a warrant particular
customs and obligations, restricted, compressed, broken independence
of my heart, that I am forbidden affections simpler and happier, that
has separated me Adela and happiness.

Separated! Barbarian prejudice! I will deliver to the anger of the strong and sensitive souls!

Separated!
To me, that traverse the globe for a kiss from your lips!

Separated! Come on, come on in the heart of Gaston, a poor orphan who reject men! see with
confidence, and I swear on the innocence and the innocence of your soul, that all powers hell
will not get separated.

16 May.

Never been so frequent the grove as the last few days, and never my herbarium had increased so slowly.
This misses Latour is interested in my herbarium as all my distractions. On the other hand, do not miss
you, you know Adela passes there every day. You might have noticed that between this letter
and the above is a great distance and you will no doubt believed that the abundance of sensations
has been distracted for many sweetest days of my occupations. All this is true, my dear Edward,
and yet I have nothing new to tell, because my love is nothing new for you, and all my life
is contained in it.

I gave you not the only source Adela imperfect reports, collected from the masses. Madame Adelaide
had told me something else, but not enough to satisfy my curiosity, , on the other hand, afraid
to show too openly. Anyway, the other day, I kept informed the same Adela, as he escorted the
forest to the village, dealing with all rodeos requiring a very sensitive
issue, and as this story is not without interest even for strange
people to everything that concerns me, I make you hear from the lips
of the very Adela as I've heard.

Forgive me if, with the simplicity of his words, I have had the to preserve its natural grace
and the outpouring as easy and as soulful feelings pays more attractive charm. There are things
that can not be expressed.

"- My father - I said Adela - was born in Valency, a rich peasant family. It was called James
Evrard, and as announced a talent and a manner far superior to most,
their parents resolved to give proper education to make him fit to
pursue a career brighter in the world that they had come.

His progress exceeded all expectations, but to no avail.

At that time it rained the misfortunes of my grandfather, poor harvests,
Two fires that consumed their home on his farm and, finally, the loss
of a considerable process, changed his fortune in misery.

It was impossible to implement the projects that had about my father and gave in to despair.

"Jaime
Evrard entered a regiment was stationed at Saumur. At that time my father was still very young,
arrogant and sympathetic figure, valued at all costs, and joined
this large number of those talents that open to welcome the doors
have of all societies.

Estimated by the Colonel and his officers, had already climbed two
times with a speed unheard of in the service, but without the slightest
envy awakened their comrades, who were sincere justice to their conditions.

Finally, most his superiors had been used in advance to look at him as an equal. Chance made a
young lady of that city, which belonged to a noble family, is set at him and that unaware of his
inclination, so accustomed to it, I could not pass without him. He soon felt that this inclination
was love, but it was too late to remedy; at least she thought so, and my father with her. What does
he say, Mr. Gaston? I was the fruit of that error.

"My mother could not hide his lack their parents, and these, though loving and good, were too
proud to tolerate Jaime Evrard repair.

They just take precautions need to hide my birth to the whole world, and my mother sent me this
village where I was baptized under the auspices of the lady prioress. You understand that did not
give me no reason this asylum, and my mother was happy thinking that I would grow under the eyes
of an attentive father to all my needs. Indeed, having served time of their commitment, sacrifice
some time after the rising hope of all to have the pleasure not to stray from my side and see
developed gradually in my face likeness a person who was so dear. Even went further in its tenderness.
Would he have considered happy if I had not been able to call his daughter? The nurse had given
me, young and unhappy victim of a deceptive slope, went through my mother and wife. Only Mrs.
Adelaide was in the secret.

"So I was raised and, indeed, my childhood was not without joy. The friendship of my good godmother,
attentive and truly care nursery of the mother, which I think with even more sacred titles to my appreciation,
and all the affection of my father I embellished it. Only when he was returning from the fields
still sometimes bath with her tears, but I'm not worried, thinking I was crying with joy.

"However, my real mother continues to profess the same love. Frequently wrote my father, and he
communicated his sorrows and hopes.

By the third or fourth year the Revolution, her father left her alone in Saumur, to go and serve
the king in his army Vendée, she now wanted to take the freedom they enjoyed to see me because
it was had long since lost their mother. It was a beautiful day for us that when we came the unexpected
news of the trip. Even though I was too young to understand clearly those things, my father
made them understand as best he could, and departed after brief preparations, which seemed to him
too long. In short, I returned to that which I had given life and the tenderness I noted that
another had stolen, but not forgotten also my appreciation for that by which he grew up. I was
very happy; But it lasted so little ...

"My father had conceived a project worthy of a soul so noble, and my mother had passed. Civil wars,
which had reached a peak period, opened an easy race to men of resolution, and he did not despair
of acquiring, in the eyes of my grandfather, such titles of glory,
which allowed to marry.

That's why so we left, taking hope to return soon to leave us no longer.

"During his absence, my mother had put me in a school which would see me often. He spent there
for an orphan and I kept all sorts of considerations. When we were alone, my father talked
and cried together over time. After some months I noticed it even had other troubles that I was
saying, but I limited myself to grieve in secret and not asked anything. Finally, one day left
to visit, and spent a week, a month, and no knew me because of it. I realized I had finished
all this for me and wait in vain my mother. Here's what happened:

"The hopes of my father had done. More acts of heroism had made his generals were fixed on him and
had just been promoted to division chief. "

- It's true - Adela exclaimed, interrupting me - it was called Mario Evrard.

- That was his nom de guerre - said Adela.

- Yes - continued I - I remember as if it were now.

The general, surrounded by enemies, was to succumb, and his horse lay dead at his feet, and he himself,
severely wounded, no and opposed any resistance. Suddenly the captain Evrard going through
this crowd astounded at his boldness, starts to general hand to compete for the honor of giving
the coup de grace, and return to our ranks in a hail of bullets that hit him. The division
chief level was, in fact, the prize value, but it disappeared a few days later, and we were
convinced that he had died in an ambush.

- I'm going to explain this event - continued Adela -. From the moment he received to their peers
the new title which may hereafter be owed to recognize, unless proud of that distinction, it can
be disposed of to serve to the success of love, ran to throw himself at the feet of my grandfather
and confess his fault, his repentance and desires.

You be the judge of glad that happened in his soul so many worries and sorrows, when he learned
that was given to my mother for a wife. But as it was not enough to experience such joy, it
felt the need to share. Saumur was not far from headquarters army general. Two days of truce
were enough to escape with the first costume that met and fell in the arms of my mother. The
first time you devoted entirely to pleasure to meet again, the second
to the concern and terror.

Saumur belonged to Republicans and my father was banned.

"Although I have not told you the cause of the gloomy sadness I saw in my mother's last Once I received
a visit at school. A young gentleman who had just left the flags real under the pretext of
not know what secret commission, and had obtained from my grandfather a rather vague recommendation
to my family, had dared to show my mother a few feelings that she should not share more than once.
The passion of that stranger was all the more unwelcome because all
the warned against both him and the individual reports had made into
a distrust of him, even in a completely heart free, there never had
been reconciled with love.

 Hitherto Marie has revealed herself to the reader as a rather
commonplace, very physical, rather lazy, and quite egoistic person, one of many, with no distinguished
characteristics. But she was unusually endowed in some ways. Eminently plastic, up to a certain
point she rapidly assumed forms suggested by Terry's spiritual touch. She derived from him
her interest in all high things, in philosophy, art and literature, but there always remained
an interesting distinction in the way she reacted to her education. Terry remained always the
rather transcendental philosopher, with a predominant ethical sense. Marie, as she developed,
showed a deeper and subtler feeling for expression and a surer sensing of human character,
a juster psychology. Her nature is essentially less beautiful, by far, than that of Terry,
but more real, in a way, more robust, and so constituted that in a long spiritual conflict
she would wear out the finer qualities of her lover. But this is anticipating, except in so
far as it is true that from the start Marie's psychological vividness showed itself, often,
of course, with base and physical concomitants. In this connection I will quote a letter which
well illustrates this side of her character, and which also shows a contrast to some of her
loftier but more conventional and less true qualities. She had been attending an anarchists'
ball and she wrote:

"I danced a great deal and felt very happy, without the aid of any stimulant either. I did
not have any feeling of irritation or even indifference toward anybody, not even toward Rose.
I am fascinated by Rose, and I sometimes think I hate her. I always like to be near her when
there is no one else around. She reveals herself to me then; in fact quite throws off the mask
which all women wear. In order to encourage her to do this, I apparently throw down my own
mask. Oh, how I gloat over her then, when she shows me a side of her life and betrays secret
thoughts and feelings to me half unconsciously! Sometimes I succeed in having her do this when
there is a third person present, and the look of hatred which passes across her face when she
perceives she has made a mistake, is a most interesting thing to see. But she immediately comes
to my side and we kiss each other and call each other 'angel girls' and 'darlings.' Thus we
play with each other, and it is a stand-off which is cleverest. She is quite puzzled sometimes
by my frankness about some things, for instance, about her looks. I notice she compliments
me on my looks whenever I am decidedly off colour, when I wear a green ribbon, or a dowdy dress,
or big shoes. But I am honest with her in these things, and I like to see her look well. The
game is more interesting then.

"Well, at this ball, I wanted to dance with a certain man, but I did not wish to ask him myself.
So I requested Rose to do so, and she consented, and I was soon whirling around in his arms.
I had felt curious about him for a long time: I did not know just what the state of my feeling
toward him was. I did not know whether I liked or disliked him, but I had often experienced
a sort of thrilling sensation when he happened to pass by or touch me, or even when he mentioned
my name, which had occurred only once since I knew him. 'Good evening, Marie,' was all he said.
But the name and the way he said it seemed new, and it kept recurring to me at unexpected times
and always troubled me. When I fancy I hear that name in his voice I feel sad and lonely, and
my heart aches. I see him often, mostly at our Sunday evening lectures. We are very distant,
and I am often rude to him, not answering when he speaks to me.

"So when I danced with him the other night, I was agreeably surprised to find that I did not
experience any unusual sensation at all. And I was relieved, too, for I had a sort of instinctive
feeling that he was not worthy of any strong interest. After the dance was over, we went down-stairs
together and he kissed me. You know, the radicals all kiss one another freely and it does not
mean anything special, as a rule: often it is done without any feeling at all, just a common
habit. But this time I was astonished to find that the moment he touched me I had the same
thrilling sensation, only more intense, as when I heard him speak my name. I resisted however,
and just then I heard Rose's voice ring out exultantly, 'Oh, if you knew how crazy Marie is
about you, how she raved when she first met you and so on.' You can imagine how I felt then.
I managed to get away and drank and smoked and danced all the evening and never looked at him
again. When we all went away Rose and I kissed each other and called each other 'darling girl.'

"In some moods I would like to be a big, beautiful, heartless woman like one or two I know.
In such moods, how I would make men suffer! I was talking about this to little Sadie the other
day, and she assured me solemnly that she would do that when she was thirty, but not merely
to make men suffer, but to develop them."

As Terry continued to read aloud and talk in his Rogues' Gallery, Marie grew to reflect more
and more the results of the reading of good things, and of the thinking and talking about these
things. It shows how some temperaments are able to connect literature and philosophy with life,
and thereby see their real meaning, quite independently of any merely conventional culture
or education. One of the greatest prejudices of our time (and of all times) is the belief that
intellectual culture, which is merely the perception in detail of how life and thought is expressed
in form, is peculiarly dependent upon academic or conventional education. And yet, of course,
somewhere or other, the nature capable of understanding form must come in contact with it,
before the meaning of the whole thing is incorporated into its daily habit. Terry was Marie's
point of contact with form, in its deep relation to life. Marie felt this and loved him and
was grateful, to the depths of her nature, so different from his, so animal, so unideal, in
comparison! She wrote:

"Terry gave me a new way to express myself, and that, after all, is the only thing worth living
for. And he gave me this new way without trying to make me give up any other way of self expression,
my sensuality, for example. This sensuality I have sometimes regretted, but not directly through
Terry's influence, except that he has shown me the beauty of something else. He is a winged
thing in comparison with me, but he is so wonderfully tolerant that he can see beauty in even
the baser part of my nature. Why should I regret what I am, anyway? I believe that the only
purity that means anything is that which results from working one's nature out harmoniously,
not suppressing it. Terry must be a wonderful man, to have been able to encourage me in many
new directions, and to take away the maiming sting of regret for what I inevitably was and
could not help being.

"I do not think an ordinary person could have made me see the beauty of anarchism. I know that
the anarchistic ideas are rather shocking, even at their best, and of course they naturally
appeal most to the man with the hoe, inciting him to rebel, while the man behind the idea is
usually endowed with so much sensitiveness that he shrinks from the rebellion part of the programme
himself; he is not a man of action, only a man of ideas. It is shameful, some think, to disturb
the blissful ignorance of the man with the hoe, for when the gleam of intelligence shines in
his eye and he is aroused to the knowledge of his degrading position, he is likely to rebel
in the most healthy but brutal manner, so much so that the æsthetic reformer shrinks back from
the consequences of the propagation of his own ideas. Of course, the brutality of the proletariat
is not nearly so subtle as that of the aristocracy, and it takes some cleverness to discover
that the latter is brutality at all. It requires time and patience to drive into the thick
heads of the workers that they are downtrodden, and that their oppressors are worthless parasites.
When they finally do awaken to this idea and rebel, how terribly shocked the world is because
these brutes have not the cleverness or delicacy to be more subtle in their brutalities.

"In your last letter you wrote of the crudeness of most propagandists of anarchism, naming
Anatole France as one of the rare anarchists who express themselves otherwise than crudely.
He rarely or never, you say, ever mentions the word 'anarchism,' although much of his writing
is calculated to destroy belief in the value of organised society as it now exists. Don't you
think you are perhaps prejudiced too much against certain words because of their associations?
I know that many words are objectionable to refined, cultured people because they have been
so long associated with the coarse and brutal mob, the working class, as the socialists would
say. But you must remember that anarchism is intended to appeal to this 'mob' especially; that
its doctrines might not be needed by refined people who ought to have enough sensibility not
to enjoy 'freedom' unless it is shared by the coarse and brutal workers. Believe me, there
is nothing so degrading as poverty. It makes the slave more slavish and the brute more brutal.
It acts like a goad, spurring people on to do things which make them seem to themselves and
others lower and lower, until they are truly no longer human beings but animals.

"Therefore it is that the propaganda of anarchism is generally crude. It is true that much
good literature is permeated with the ideals of anarchism, for instance, Shelley, Whitman,
Thoreau, and Emerson. Such reading is excellent as a means of humanising and making anarchists
of refined people, but how could you appeal to the rebellious workers with such books as these?
For instance, my father, do you think he could read Ibsen or any of the others? Indeed not;
but let him go to a meeting where he can hear Emma Goldman speak, or let him read Jean Grave,
or Bakunin, or some other writer of 'crude' pamphlets, and he might become interested, he might
be able to understand. But since it seems that truly refined people cannot enjoy the pleasures
of freedom without being, at any rate at times, worried because of the condition of the 'mass,'
what is to be done? This objectionable crudity must remain until there is a demand for something
more subtle on the part of the workers for whom is intended all propaganda. The rich and cultured
presumably have brains which they can use to solve the problems for themselves or to digest
the things written by Anatole France and others. But how do you suppose that I, for instance,
could a few years ago have relished Anatole France? Wouldn't you think it idiotic for anyone
to have given me such books, at that time, with any expectation of my appreciating their refined
and evanescent anarchism?"

It must have been a strange sight that of Terry sitting on his dilapidated bed in the Rogues'
Gallery, with his eternal cigarette in his mouth, talking to Marie and perhaps to some prostitute
or pickpocket! We begin already to see the result on Marie's education: that will appear complex
and manifold, but it is likely that on many a half-formed creature who afterward passed out
of Terry's life, his words yet made an impression which perhaps in some later darkness revived
an idea which explained and justified his miserable existence.

CHAPTER IX

The Salon

The Rogues' Gallery went the way of all good things: it ceased to exist when the creative spirit
was gone. Terry went to Pittsburg, as we have seen, to find the flaw in the tanning process,
and while he was away Marie attempted to conduct the academy of anarchism. But she was too
much interested in what is called "life" to make a sustained mental or moral effort without
the inspiring presence of a man whose central passionate ideas never changed. The personal
jealousies which Terry's philosophic attitude and idealism tended to dissipate became, during
his absence, too strong for the bond uniting the "rogues," and when Terry returned he found
that his little colony had dispersed and that Marie, unable any longer to pay the rent, was
living with her old friend Katie.

This was, to our idealist, a deep disappointment. On the heels of his final break in Pittsburg
with society came this sign of woman's weakness. Terry might easily have expected it, but one
of the limitations of an idealist is an insufficient knowledge of realities. To men of his
temperament there is always a distinct shock envolved in coming face to face with an actuality.
Truth is the element of the idealist, but an abstract truth into which concrete realities seldom
fit. Terry did not, or tried not to, mind, at this time, this continued sexual freedom, or
rather vagaries, of Marie's life; for that fitted into his scheme of personal freedom: he zealously
strove to respect the private inclinations of every human being. But the least sign, in any
of his acquaintances, of a compromise with the integrity of the soul, of any essential weakness,
met with no tolerance from him. "He passed him up," on the spot, with a scornful wafture of
his hand. That Marie had yielded to the stress of circumstances, had been unable to hold out
in the Rogues' Gallery, galled the relatively uncompromising, exigent idealist. If she had
resorted to temporary prostitution to hold the society together he would have admired her.
But, instead, she weakly sought, like any merely conservative woman, the shelter of Katie's
roof. The first seed of the essential discord which finally resulted, at a much later time,
in their relations was planted thus in this deep irritation of Terry's soul; it did not, however,
affect seriously his love for Marie as a person or his interest in her as a social experiment.
But it tended to make him feel more lonely and to render him more hopeless of any realisation
of the ideal, as he saw it.

When Terry returned, without a job, and with no intention of trying for one, and found Marie
living with Katie, he had a long talk with the two women. Katie was still with her husband,
Nick, but she was willing to quit him in order to live with and take care of, her darling Marie.
She proposed to Marie and Terry to hire some rooms and all live together. She would work as
cook in a restaurant and thus support the three of them.

To this eager desire of Katie's Terry refused to consent; but he also refused to work. What
was to be done? He was too proud willingly to live on Katie, and he was principled against
labour. Katie wanted the luxury of her proposed arrangement. She quarrelled with Terry, but
he interested her. Already she began to look on these two as her superior cultivated ones,
aristocrats, with whom it was a joy to live and for whom it was a pleasure to work. To work
for them, especially for Marie, she would drop her old Nick, good dull man, in a moment.

An event which happened just at the right moment to decide things, finally brought about the
union of the three. One night Terry was drinking in a saloon, talking philosophy, and quoting
literature. Some rapid lines from Swinburne had just left his lips when an elderly man, who
had been listening to Terry's talk approached him and said: "You are the man I'm looking for,
won't you have a drink?"

As he spoke, he flashed a fifty dollar bill over the bar and repeatedly treated the crowd,
all in Terry's honour.

"Before we separated that night," said Terry, telling me the story, "I learned that the old
guy had fifty thousand dollars and that he would soon go down and out, for he had all sorts
of bad diseases. He knew it himself, but he was an old sport and he wanted his fling before
he died. He liked me and wanted me to be bar-tender in a saloon he owned. He lived above the
saloon and wanted a housekeeper to take care of the rooms. So I told Kate here was her chance.
The next day Marie, Katie, and I moved into the rooms, where the old man lived, too, and I
began my work as a bar-tender.

"I did not regard this job as work: it was really graft, for I had decided that my old friend,
not long for this world, did not need all of his money and that I might as well turn part of
it toward Katie, to help maintain a common house for us all. So, every night, after the day's
work, I turned the roll that I received behind the bar over to Katie, who tucked it away in
the bank. I don't know whether the old guy knew about it or not, if he did, he did not care.
He died after two or three months, but Katie had increased her bank account by three or four
hundred dollars."

Terry is strenuous about this story. He is evidently anxious lest it be thought that he later
became a mere parasite on Katie. He prides himself on having taught her to steal from an unkind
world, but he does not like the idea that she has slaved for him without any help in return.
Katie did not prove to be a good pupil. She was not naturally "wise," in the slang sense, but
gained what she gained by hard labour. Even while she was housekeeper for the old guy she felt
she earned all the money she tucked away.

"I worked hard for the old man," she said, "and I only got about one hundred and thirty dollars
for all my work. I thought I made that much."

There is a slight difference in the amount received, in Terry's account and in Katie's, but
it is clear that it was not very much. It is interesting and characteristic that Terry wants
it to appear to have been "graft," while Katie looks upon the money as honest wages, received
in an unconventional way.

Nick was definitely deserted, and the new "salon" formed, with Terry and Marie as the bright
particular stars and Katie as the happy means of living, if not in luxury at least in independence.
They lived on her eight or nine dollars a week with the comfortable feeling that there were
several hundred dollars tucked away in the bank, the result of Katie's savings and Terry's ideas.

The salon was of a more select and higher order intellectually than had been the Rogues' Gallery.
The people who frequented the three little slummy rooms on the West Side where Terry, Marie,
and Katie lived were mainly anarchists in theory, and occasionally one or another of them was
so in practice. They mainly consisted of rebellious labourers who had educated themselves in
the philosophy of anarchism.[2] They had ideas about politics and government and the relation
between the sexes. They were indeed all "free lovers," and quite naturally so; the rebellious
temperament instinctively takes as its object of attack the strongest convention in society.
Anarchism in Europe is mainly political; in America it is mainly sexual; for the reason that
there is less freedom of expression about sex in America than in Europe: so there is a stronger
protest here against the conventions in this field--as the yoke is more severely felt. While
I was in Italy and France I met a number of anarchists who on the sex side were not ostentatiously
rebellious. They were like the free sort of conservative people everywhere. But in political
ideas they were more logical, sophisticated, and deeply revolutionary than is the case with
the American anarchists, who, on the other hand both in their lives and their opinions, are
extreme rebels against sex conventions. It is only another instance of how unreason in one
extreme tends to bring about unreason in the other. Our prudishness, hypocrisy and stupid conventionality
in all sex matters is responsible for the unbalanced license of many a protesting spirit.

So there was many an "orgie" in the salon--sexual and alcoholic: and many wild words were spoken
and many wild things done. But these same extreme people were gentle and sensitive, too, and
emotionally interested in ideas. They went to lectures on all sorts of social subjects, they
read good books of literature and crude books on politics, they grouped together and enjoyed
to a certain extent their communistic ideas. They published their anarchistic newspapers and
they welcomed into their ranks people who otherwise could have attained to no consolatory philosophy--who
would have had no society and no hope. And they did not do it for the sake of charity--hollow
word!--but from a feeling of fellowship and love. You, reader, who may think ill of thieves
and prostitutes--too ill of them, perhaps: if you can come to see that social differences are
of slight value in comparison with the great primal things and the universal qualities of human
nature, you will perhaps be better if not more "virtuous" than before, and may be kinder, less
self-righteous, and do far more good, no matter how "charitable" you are now inclined to be.
You have never been able to arouse the real interest of the proletariat, for the simple reason
that you have never been really interested in them. But you do arouse their hatred and their
contempt. They ought not, of course, to hate and despise anything, especially anything that
means as well as you do. But they, though they are anarchists, are human, all too human, sometimes,
like the rest of us. Here are some of the ideas of the salon about you, about us, let me say,
as voiced by Terry and Marie. To begin with, Terry: about our "culture" he writes:

"There is not much doubt about the sapping influence of culture. It seems that narrowness of
range means intensity of emotion. This is seen in the savage, the child, and uncultivated men
as well as other animals. I might even go farther and say we see it in such titans as Balzac
and Wagner, who seek to compress all the arts into their own particular art. The mind that
finds many outlets generally overflows in dissipation of energy instead of digging a deep single
channel of its own. And yet to focus our feelings to one point may be a dangerous accomplishment.
For instance, the fulminating fire of Swinburne's radium rhymes, while harmless to himself,
may become dangerous through me or some other 'conductor.' Unfortunately, the inability to
foretell the ultimate effect of any given idea produces that form of inhibition called conservatism,
and to this vice people of so-called culture are especially prone. It takes recklessness to
be a social experimentalist or really to get in touch with humanity. Our careful humanitarians,
our charitable ones, never do, for they stick to their conservatism. How we do fashion our
own fetters, from chains to corsets, and from gods to governments. Oh, how I wish I were a
fine lean satirist!--with a great black-snake whip of sarcasm to scourge the smug and genial
ones, the self-righteous, charitable, and respectable ones! How I would lay the lash on corpulent
content and fat faith with folds in its belly; chin and hands[3]; those who try to beat their
breast-bone through layers of fat! Oh, this rotund reverence of morality! 'Meagre minds,' mutters
George Moore, and my gorge rises in stuttering rage to get action on them. Verily such morality
as your ordinary conservative person professes has an organic basis: it has its seat in those
vestiges of muscles that would still wag our abortive tails, and often do wag our abortive tongues.

"To arouse such fat ones to any onward flight it may take the tremendous impact of a revolution.
It may take many upheavals of the seismic soul of man before the hobgoblins of authority are
finally laid in the valley.

"How many free spirits have been caught and hampered in the quagmire of conservatism. Yet they
have the homing instinct of all winged things: they return to the soul and seek to throw off
the fat and heavy flesh of social stupidity. Many great free spirits there have been who possess
this orientation of the race and have brought us tidings of the promised land. How many thundering
spirits have commanded us to march by the tongued and livid lightning of their prophetic souls,
but how few of us have done so! Why, to me, this world is a halting hell of hitching-posts
and of truculent troughs for belching swineherds. The universe has no goal that we know of
unless Eternity be the aim; let us then have the modesty of the Cosmos, and no other modesty,
and be content to know our course, and be sure to run it.

"I have tried for freedom, indeed, everywhere, but I find the 'good ones' always in my way.
How well I know the cost of my attempt! My heavy heart and my parched and choking throat, they
know! I may indeed beat my breast alone in the darkness in a silent prayer for freedom and
hear no response from the haunting hollows of the night. Such hungry freedom I had and have;
and I could share it only with the outcasts of the world: the fat and rotund charitable ones
would none of it. This freedom is possessed only by him who is afflicted over much with himself
because he has been crazed by others and made mad by his escape from them. I suppose I am mad,
for to believe myself perfectly sane in a greatly mad world is surely a subtle species of lunacy.
And yet I am compelled to act towards others as if they were more sane than I. To feel as if
one were eternally in a court-room trial, with lean lunatics for lawyers and fat philistines
for judges, this is life.

"I am only one of the human victims who studies his own malady because he likes universal history.
The world has thrown me back upon myself and made me at times what is called mad. After being
down-hearted for some time, I grow superstitious and imagine that some strange and fatal spell
is hanging over us all. Even my own acts and thoughts take on the futility of nightmare, and
Nirvana is very welcome, if I could be sure of it, but I had rather stay what I am than start
life all over again in some other shape, with a possible creeping recollection of my former
existence. I have at times startled intimations that I lived in vain in some former unhappy
time; so I shall try to postpone the eternal recurrence as best I may."

Thus Terry tries not only to reject the laws of "fat" society, but at times he strives against
what he imagines to be the deep laws of the universe: he tries to stem the tide of fate, and
this in the name of Truth! It shows how far remote from reality is the truth of the idealist;
and yet such an attitude is often forced upon a sensitive spirit by rough contact with imperfect
society. Although Terry is the most perfect specimen of the anarchists I have known, yet they
all have more or less the quality of idealism so marked in him.

Marie's letters teem with the spirit of revolt, which of course was the atmosphere of the salon.
With her it is always less ideal, more personal, more egotistic than with Terry. In one of
her letters she told "how she was led to try to get a job again, in order to buy some pretty
things." A few days' search, however, disgusted her and brought her back completely to the
mood of the salon, and led her deeply to appreciate Hedda Gabler, and to condemn American morality
and the "good" people. Of Hedda she wrote:

"Her character always did appeal to me, but last night I was in the mood especially to understand
and sympathise with Hedda, to be Hedda, in fact. For a few hours I was as brave and wonderful
in thought and feeling as she. It was the reaction from my stupid days in hunting a job. Her
disgust with everything, her search for something new and different, the fascination she felt
for saying and doing dangerous and reckless things--this I could understand so thoroughly!
I was in a very reckless and discontented mood, but I was able to get away from myself and
become Hedda for awhile; and this made me think of what a wonderful thing it is, what a power
Ibsen has, to produce such emotions by merely stringing a few words together. Why, the very
name Hedda, Hedda Gabler! When Eilert says it, what does it not convey! Terry and I had a long
talk about it, and about literature in general, so the result was that I became calm, quiet,
and reflective--as I love to be, but which I can be only very seldom. I have an almost continuous
craving for something new and strange, like Hedda. But somehow reading and thinking about her
calmed me. I can find new emotions in books, and this satisfies me for a time, but they are
never vital enough to last me long. It is only sterile emotions we derive from literature,
and so I turn again restlessly to life.

"But when I turn to life I find for the most part people who are unwilling to give themselves
up to life, who will not follow out their moods, or have none. When I am no longer capable
of abandoning myself, why continue? Most people seem to me to be dried up. They look as if
they never felt anything, so expressionless, so automatic are they, as if they had been wound
up to walk and talk, and eat and sleep in precisely the same way for a certain number of years.
This seems to be the American type. I suppose you have read of the Caruso affair--how he kissed
a woman in Central Park, or wanted to, and the howl it made? The way they all jumped on him,
in the name of morality! And you remember what happened to Gorky, when he was here? Why, these
American stiffs, what do they mean by morality? Since they are much too cold-blooded for immortality,
what do they know about it? This country is composed of pie-eating, ice-water drinking, sour-faced
business people. If one with emotions comes to this country, he is of course immoral. If there
were no foreigners here, this country would resemble the North Pole.

"I'm glad I am not an American in blood, for then I would not be as interesting to myself as
I am now. Sometimes I stand before my mirror and look at myself for a long, long time; it always
surprises me that I look so commonplace. Surely, something of what I have in me ought to show
in my face. But I know it's there, anyway. I know I'm altogether different from anyone else,
I know it with a kind of fierce joy; not better, of course, but different.

"For instance, this regularity and system they talk about! You wrote me to be more regular
and the like of that, if I wanted to sleep better. You, too, are a typical American! Just imagine
me drinking milk to make me sleep or grow fat! The thought of such a thing makes me shudder.
Your remark about amorous sport being a soporific if performed regularly and without excitement
made me double up with laughter. But I am quite sure that the performance of such a 'duty'
would not induce sleep. I am only moved to such things by new lovers, and then I desire not
sleep but wakefulness. And then, too, usually such desires come to me at noon, not at night,
and who ever heard of sleeping at noon!

"As for the other physical exercises that you recommend, I do walk along muddy, prosaic streets
and work in our household until I grow weary and ask the gods what sins I have committed. My
beloved cigarettes, which are as dear to me as sleep itself, my solace when sleep flies, my
comfort, you would take these away from me! What would I do without them? I am without them
sometimes, when Terry takes some of my tobacco, and then I am angry at him! The only plan I
have is to have enough tobacco. Otherwise, I have nothing arranged, no plan. You think there
is something fine in having logical arrangements for all things. I have never felt that way.
I am only a poor creature of an hour, of a moment, and have never had plans. I would love to
be where you are now, in Paris, that home of the planless, the free and joyous and emotional
people."

What most people think is good, is worth while, is in good taste, the salon rejected; partly,
of course, in the spirit of mere rejection, of revolt, but based nevertheless on a higher ideal
of human love than obtains in our society. These anarchists are not historians or practical
people and they are not as much interested in what society must be as in what society ought
to be; and because they see that society is not what it ought to be, because they as unfortunate
members of the labouring class feel that the origin of our society is the root of injustice,
they rebel totally against that society, rejecting the good with the evil. They passionately
believe that the real and radical evil in our social world is partly kept there by our very
justice, by our very morality, our very religion--kept there not so much by what is called
evil in our society as by what is called good. They see that much large kindness is prevented
by the morality which is expressed in the idea of private property, that much large virtue
is denied by the institution of marriage, that psychological truth and Christian kindness at
once are not considered by the social court, which looks only to the law--to the complex, historical
law, so often meaningless and unjust to human feeling, so often based upon special "interests"
and ancient prejudices.

Their situation, as proletarian interpreters of the working class, enables them to see whatever
is true in this view with peculiar vividness. For, of course, it is to their interest to see
this truth; for truth is only an impassioned statement of our fundamental needs.

The salon was composed of the poor and the criminal, and what kept it together was the human
desire to form a society, the norms of judgment of which should give value to the individual
members--the deep need of justification.

There were fakirs in the salon, unkind people, unjust people, vicious people; there were mere
"climbers," persons who saw their only chance for recognition and livelihood in the espousal
of anarchistic ideas. But there were also kind people, relatively just people, and moderate
ones, honest and strenuous with themselves. There were none perfect, as there are none perfect
in any society. We shall see how Terry became disgusted finally with the anarchists themselves,
preferring even insanity and probable death to them.

And Marie's letters are full of satire of her companions, of the perception of their weaknesses
and inconsistencies. She never embraces or rejects them so completely as Terry does, for she
sees them more clearly; therefore she sees them more humorously, understands them better. Her
letters teem with "psychological gossip," so to speak, in which some of her companions seem
portrayed with relative truth. One she wrote me, while I was seeing something in London, of
an anarchist named Nicoll, who was a friend of William Morris and still edits Morris's old
paper, is full of both appreciation and satire of a number of "radicals":

"An old friend of Nicoll's used to talk to me by the hour about him. He, the friend, an ordinary,
rather stupid fellow, once helped poor Nicoll, got a room for him and gave him money, after
he was released from prison. He felt proud to think that a man like Nicoll would accept hospitality
'from a poor bloke like me,' as he put it. His friendship with Nicoll has been the great event
of his life. Whenever anything occurs in the radical movement which recalls ever so slightly
the affair of which Nicoll was the scapegoat, his old friend will say, in his funny Jewish
Cockney, 'That's always the wey, like Nicoll's kise, for example.' Then he launches forth into
eloquent streams of denunciation, for he does not regard Nicoll as at all insane, but on the
contrary, 'the finest man ever downed' by aristocrats like Turner and Kropotkin.

"This affair has made our friend pessimistic about anarchism, at times, and inclined to join
the socialist party. His life is made miserable by the ceaseless debate of his mind and soul
over which of these two philosophies is the best one for the race. He, suspiciously, is always
looking for another case like Nicoll's, and is doubtful about all movements, not only anarchism
and socialism, but all which preach liberty, justice, and the like, such as Theosophy, Single
Tax, Sun Worshippers, Spirit Fruiters, Holy Rollers, Upton Sinclair's Helicot Colony, and Parker
Sercombe's Spencer-Whitman Centre. All these he has tested and found more or less wanting.
Life grows daily more melancholy for him, as he continues, on account of 'Nicoll's Kise,' to
probe beneath the surface of all the cults and movements which profess boundless love for humanity,
truth, justice and freedom.

"P. R., whom you have also met in London, has got himself into trouble by making inflammatory
speeches in Germany. When they talked of arresting him, he immediately claimed American citizenship.
But if he ever turned up in America again they would clap him in jail so quick it would make
his head swim. He, together with McQueen, was arrested here some years ago for helping start
the New Jersey riots, but he skipped his bonds, to the great disgust of the bondsmen, who were
comrades in the movement. The movement in the whole United States, Canada, Europe, and Asia
was divided into factions over this affair, and very nearly went to pieces. But it was ridiculous
to arrest him in the first place, for he could not incite a feather to riot. He is one of those
flamboyant wind-bags, with a terrific command of high-sounding phrases, eloquent gestures,
and fine eyes--the kind sixteen-year-old girls admire--to think I once loved him, or thought
I did! He is a big little physical coward and prides himself on being the realisation of Nietzsche's
Uebermensch.

"The movement in Chicago is about to resume its usual winter activity by the opening of the
Social Science League this Sunday evening. There are many cultured people in this city who
think the Social Science League is too crude and vulgar to grace with their presence, therefore
it has been resolved to establish another society of a more exclusive order, in which may be
discussed important questions in a more subdued, rational, and artistic way. It is especially
desired that only the 'artistic' anarchist be admitted to this new society. The crude element
of anarchism is to be excluded as much as possible, but what cannot be excluded is to be subdued.
If this is impossible, it shall be expelled. All illustrious lights will speak there. Terry
has been invited, but has refused on democratic grounds, and sticks to that 'bum' society,
the S. S. League.

"One of the girls who has gone over to the 'swells' is Mary. She is a factory girl and an important
little person, who prides herself on the amount of culture she possesses, and the famous people
she has met and talked with. I introduced her once to a literary man, but she did not know
he was so, at the time, and only nodded coldly. But when she found he was the famous Mr. F----
she was angry at me for not putting her 'next' and was much distressed, for here was another
famous man whom she had nearly talked with.

"Another girl whom I know has done a wonderful thing with a certain man. He is a great, strong
German, who guzzles beer and bullies the other fellow in his arguments about anarchism. When
I first knew him, several years ago, he was married to a nice non-resistant sort of a girl,
whom he treated awfully bad--without intending to. For he is really generous and good-hearted,
but is firmly imbued with the idea, which he thought was the beginning of anarchism, that one
must be firm and have one's own way and do all that one wants to do, without allowing any scruple
of conscience or morals or delicacy to interfere; that to be a man and an anarchist one must
never allow a petticoat to come between you and your desire. So he did what he wanted, regardless
of anybody. He was a sort of brutal Overman; one could not help admiring the kind of barbaric
splendour there was about him. And his poor wife idolised him and would stand everything from him.

"Now he is here with another girl. Talk about a change! He has turned from a lion to a mouse.
She is a little bit of a thing, only nineteen, rather silly and not very attractive. She is
pretty in an outward way, but her features are unlit by any glimmer of feeling or thought,
or even good nature--a slothful, empty sort of prettiness. She makes him walk a chalk-line,
and it is contemptible and ridiculous and pitiful to see that big man cringe before this poor,
pretty, empty little thing. Once in a while he tears himself away, and a glimmer of his old
self returns; for an hour or two he plays his old rôle again, but if she finds out about it,
it is very unpleasant for him. It is strange how weak women can subdue at times these big,
husky creatures. But the more they succeed, the more dissatisfied they grow, until at last
they feel contempt for the man they have subdued. The girl in this case feels that way about
this big, powerful man. If he would assert himself, she would love him, as she did when she
saw how he bullied his wife and all others. But at bottom we women are pleased, for it is a
triumph for our sex, though we feel a little jealous because not one of us could have been
the lion-tamer, instead of this weak little creature. Terry is wild about it, and tries to
lead the enslaved Hercules into evil ways and keep him out at night, but all these things have
lost their charm for the big man, who now would rather stay at home with the little girl. She,
however, finds things very tedious, particularly in the day time, when her big man is at the
factory, for she has nothing to do. So she passes her time at Esther's house.

"I would go crazy were I in Esther's place. Poor Esther, she doesn't know what to do, either,
for she cannot be always ill. She takes pleasure in being an invalid, but she can't use this
plea for sympathy all the time, people get tired of it. But Esther is fortunate in having somebody
to whom she can tell all her aches and pains and their history. She has found a unique occupation,
in scrubbing. She starts Monday mornings and finishes Saturday afternoons, and then on Monday
starts again. I was with her a week, and that's the way she spent the days. Perhaps she is
like Mary Maclain and finds a peculiar inspiration in this fascinating task. If you were a
woman I would write more about Esther's scrubbing, which is very wonderful, but you probably
would not understand. Jay, her lover, comes home from work every evening, and, after eating
the chaste evening meal of rice and beans, lights his corncob pipe, settles himself comfortably
in his chair and listens carefully to the description of the aches and pains which have afflicted
Esther that day. These pains continue in spite of all the beautiful scrubbing. He suggests
different remedies until his pipe is finished, then he calmly retires to his library and reviews
a book and reads several pamphlets, writes an article for 'The Demonstrator' or 'The Appeal
to Reason' or some other radical paper and attends to his voluminous correspondence with the
leading radicals of the day. Then he retires for the night, also Esther, after the farewell
scrub of the dishes, table, and the rest, and the kids, too, go to roost. When I was there,
I also went to bed, though it was only about half past eight.

"About half past five in the morning a most infernal alarm clock emits a most hellish noise.
Jay and Esther tumble from their couch, light the lamp, and resume their occupations. After
a very chaste breakfast Esther continues her scrubbing and Jay finishes his correspondence
and puts in the rest of the time until seven o'clock, when his work in the factory begins,
in studying the new language, Esperanto. Oh, I spent a most charming and delightful week there;
I could hardly tear myself away."

One of Marie's amorous episodes led her to Detroit, with a "fake" anarchist, of whom there
are many. After a week or two of dissipation and disillusionment, Marie returned, very ill,
to the "Salon," where Terry received her with his usual stoicism, and acted as trained nurse.
Repentant and disgusted, Marie wrote me from her convalescent bed:

"I am still far from well, but am much better. My illness was caused by too much dissipation,
which I plunged into for relaxation. For some weeks previously I had got a particularly large
dose of my environment. Terry and I live in surroundings which would kill an ordinary person.
Our little home is not as bad in the summer time. We can have the windows and doors open, but
now in this cold winter we must all live in one room, a very small room, where there is a stove.
The dampness penetrates right through the walls and the wind comes through the holes in the
window panes. Sundays are the hardest days for me. Then Kate, queen of the kitchen, is here,
and she delights in cooking all sorts of things on that day, so for the remaining six days
our home smells of her culinary operations--most abominable, this odour of stale cookery! And
what a mess our rooms are in on Monday morning! You wouldn't comprehend, even if I told you.
I have to clean up all this, and I wish I could fly away every Sunday. At times I get so tired
of this way of living. I hope some day I may find a large barn with a hay loft: I would immediately
abolish Kate and her cookery and would be comfortable for once in my life.

"So I ran away, for a time, partly for relief, partly because I was rather taken with a Detroit
anarchist who was visiting us. Though he was a comrade, he was really a Philistine, which I
did not see till afterwards. I saw only that he was young and lusty and wanted a lark, as I
did, so I went with him on an awful tear, and returned terribly done up, as you know.

"I have been lying here in this little room for three weeks. I thought surely I should die,
and I was neither glad nor sorry. It was curious, this sensation of approaching death. All
these days Terry sat opposite me at a table reading or writing. I could see him distinctly
at times, at other times everything was misty or completely dark, only his voice reached me
from such a long, long distance. He sat there like an implacable fate, with calm, cold eyes,
gazing above and beyond me. Between two slow heart beats I felt it was almost a duty to call
him and bid him farewell, but some strange sense of shyness held me back. I tried so hard to
think of what I might do, and the most grotesque and comical things suggested themselves. At
one lucid moment I had the brilliant idea of becoming a jockey!

"Other ways of passing my life revolved ceaselessly in my brain, and now at last perhaps I
have found it. Now that I am better I am reading Swinburne aloud, in bed. The sound of my voice
carried along with the music of his matchless rhythms is to me a delight and a wonder. I have
discovered that the Garden of Proserpine should be read only when one is in a reclining position.
Then one's voice conveys more perfectly the weariness of all things mortal and the sweet delight
of rest. I find I must practice breathing more deeply, if I wish to render the voluptuous,
sinuous lines. Don't you think this is a great ambition, to read Swinburne well? I am so glad
to find something to do, something I love to do. Perhaps I may escape from all by this.

"It is now five days since I started to write to you, but I still lie on my back and dream
and have not found my place, and never shall. Swinburne's never-ceasing, monotonous rhymes
have palled upon me. Even this is sordid, and then, if so, what is the rest?--the daily life
filled with brutish and shallow men and women? When I can no longer endure poetry and daily
life--it is then that I rush into brutal dissipation, from which I awake sick in mind and body,
without hope or desire for anything but sleep: and then, once more, the Garden of Proserpine
reveals itself to me, or some other thing of beauty. It is an eternal round.

"I often think that the only way for me to be in harmony with the scheme of things would be
to go down into the gutter. Some years ago during my brief period of--prostitution, I suppose--I
felt a strange importance. It was death to me, but something real, too. I was fulfilling a
need of society, a horrible need, but a need. And then, too, all my men friends often go to
these houses. All the nice, intellectual men are to be met there--men from all ranks of life--men
a girl like me could never meet in any other way. During that brief time, at moments between
a sleep and a drink, I used to have this fancy, which sometimes makes me shudder now, as I
think of it, and yet somehow seems such a fine satisfying protest--a feeling that some day
I would be seen waddling about the streets of Chicago, known to all the denizens of the under
world as Drunken Mary! I saw myself fat and repulsive, begging nickels from the passers-by
and perhaps strangled at the end by some passing hobo for the few nickels in my stocking. And
am I essentially worse than you, or my lady, or anyone whom Society protects and honours? To
me poet and pimp, politician, reformer, thief, aristocrat, prostitute are one. Caste and class
distinctions are too subtle for my poor brain and too outrageous for my heart, which still
tries to beat with and for humanity."

Terry refers only in a line or two, characteristically, to this adventure and illness of Marie.

"She is seriously ill, the result of a mad adventure. As I exist for others when they are in
pain, I am her trained nurse. She is now recovering from the drugs, the debauching, and the
raving madness of sleepless nights. I will give you an account sometime of a strange piece
of magic charlatanism, practiced under the guise of beautiful art!...

"I think her growing recovery is largely due to the inability to secure a doctor to christen
her disease. I feel rather worn with domestic drudgery, cooking, laundering, wrestling with
disease without and demons within. Still, as a trained nurse who can go sleepless for three
weeks, I do not look upon myself as a failure."

Marie's health improved slowly, due in part to the unsanitary conditions of her home. She wrote:

"The roof of this miserable shack leaks all the time. The other day the owner came around in
his automobile. I was speechless. It made me mad to think of that hound, riding in his car
which we had paid for. Oh, the miserable people who live in these two houses: old, decrepit
women who earn their living by washing clothes for others. It would make your blood boil to
see them. And then to see that fat dog in his auto, accepting money from them and not ever
giving them a whole roof in return. When I saw him I wanted to say so much. I could only choke.
Oh, when you hear of the brutality of the mob, don't believe it. The mob may indeed, under
the impulse of the moment, burn and destroy; but think of the cold brutality of a judge sitting
on his bench and calmly condemning some poor wretch to be killed, and this with no emotion.
How can this be? The revolutionists in France were the kindest beings, in comparison. They
had personal injuries to avenge, and all they did was to strike off an enemy's head and that
was the end. There was even a chance of being saved, if the doomed one could find the right
expression, some little sentence that would affect the brutal (?) people. But this could not
happen before a judge!

"The trouble with the poor is, they have not enough imagination. They are not refined in their
cruelties. They could never invent the Bull Pen, but would only quickly destroy. It is raining
to-day, and I have been moving about trying to find a dry spot where I can continue writing
without having a large splash come down on my nose. But I guess I'll have to give it up. Oh,
that cursed landlord! I'd like to do something to him, not so much for myself as for those
poor old things, they are all rheumatic and stiff, but continue to live here because, poor
souls, they think the rent is low. Ye gods, the place is not fit for dogs to live in, and yet
he charges all the way from five dollars up for these filthy, worm-eaten, rotten holes. And
yet the old decrepit inhabitants of this rich man's house unbend their stiff knees in profound
salaams whenever he appears."

But in these leaky rooms of Kate's there was often much jollity and gaiety, when the "Salon"
had its sessions, and proletarians of the pale cast of thought sat and smoked their cigarettes,
drank their beer, kissed their girls, and talked of philosophy and literature and social evil
and possible regeneration. Then they were always happy, whatever the subject of their talk.
Marie wrote me to my villa in Italy:

"You write of your beautiful gardens and seem quite happy. We too are well and happy in our
little old joint; you are the only one missing to make our circle complete. But perhaps sometime
you can be with us, with a can on the table and good talk going round, and then I'm sure you
will not miss your Italian garden. Emma Goldman and Berkman have been visiting Chicago, and
we had some jolly good times while they were here. She is a good fellow, when she is alone
with a few choice friends. Then she lets herself out. The other day we gave a social for these
two celebrated ones. Positively, no police, reporters, or strangers were admitted. Next day
there was a hue and cry in all the papers, dark conspiracy, and so on! But all we did was to
have a great time: everybody was drunk before morning, and everybody felt kindly toward the
whole world, and would not have cursed even the greatest 'exploiter.' We finished the evening
or rather the morning by an orgy of kissing. It was quite interesting and innocent. Smith has
at last begun to return my affection. I think he likes me a little now. At least, he calls
here frequently, and he told me once he would like to tear me limb from limb! This remark made
me shudder, not unpleasantly. It must be good to be torn in that way by such a nice man.

"The rose-leaves you sent from Italy retained some of their sweet smell. The rose is my favourite
flower, and I like to imagine that perhaps some day my dust will be soil for roses. Last summer
I found a poor little stillborn thing which had been hastily thrown aside, near a place where
Terry and I were camping. Some poor little 'fleur de mal' which I covered from sight, in the
sand, and marked the place with some stones and flowers. The next year I found some wild white
daisies growing there. This made a deep impression on me and strengthened my hope that I, too,
might become soil for roses, flowers of love.

"Henry is a rose, too, in his way. He is getting more picturesque every day. At the Emma Goldman
social he was ornamented with a new straw hat, which had a very high crown and narrow brim
with little black ribbons for the side. Also, an enormous tie, the ends of which fluttered
gaily and coquettishly in the wind. His curling black locks nearly reached his shoulders, and
he has vowed never again to cut his hair, as a protest against the conventions of society.
I left the social with him, and as we walked down the street in the morning he was a target
for all eyes. He was talking philosophy and love to me, but this changed to fury. He flung
his arms about, and shouted to the crowd: 'Oh, you monkeys, sheep, dogs,' and several other
kinds of quadrupeds and birds. Henry is a peculiar man, but he is as sincere as anybody living
and is a friend of that wonderful man, Kropotkin. When Kropotkin was in Chicago some years
ago a reception was given him at Hull House. Poor Henry eagerly hastened there to see his friend--dressed
in unbecoming and informal attire. He had not seen Kropotkin for years, and so anxious was
he to meet him again that he forgot his raggedness. But the dear, sympathetic settlement workers
were decidedly polite in showing Henry the door. But, at the psychological moment, Kropotkin
appeared, threw his arms around Henry, kissed him, and carried on like an emigrant who runs
across an exile."

FOOTNOTES:

[2] See "The Spirit of Labour," Chapter 4, called "An Anarchist Salon," for a description of
some of the principal members of this society.--H. H.

[3] This is worthy of some of the mythological-Christian paintings of Mantegna, where the vices
are being scourged by the indignant virtues.--H. H.

CHAPTER X

More of the Salon

"I have been imagining you in Paris," wrote Marie, "having a delightful, bohemian time. My
ideas of Paris are all derived from reading Balzac, who has certainly created the most delightful,
gay and mysterious, sad, mystic, sordid, everything one could wish in a city of dreams and
realities.

"When Terry brought me 'Evelyn Innes,' by George Moore, the other day, I dug into it with zeal
and delight, and was surprised and pleased with his subtle psychology, during the first part
of the story; but psychology can be carried to the point where it becomes incomprehensible,
stupefying and monotonous. I finally grew indescribably weary of the problems of Evelyn's soul,
but I kept on to the end, and then sank back on my pillow exhausted. I think I shall stop reading
for a while, lest I have literary indigestion. I'll try to be satisfied for the time with Swinburne
and Shelley. Our anarchistic poet lectured on Shelley, the Poet of Revolution, the other night,
and I was disappointed. He did not do justice to Shelley either as a revolutionary poet or
as a poet of beauty. I think Shelley should be spoken of with a delicate passion, which our
anarchist poet lacks. He tried hard to speak with fervour, but there is no fire in him, and
what is a poet without fire? Perhaps it was as well, for what's the use in casting pearls before
swine? For the critics in the audience arose and condemned Shelley because he was a socialist,
or because he was not one. Some of these critics seized upon the word libidinous. Oh! there
was their clue! The lecturer arose like an outraged moralist to repudiate the scandalous charge
of libidinousness. I was so disgusted I vowed I would never go to another meeting.

"I have indeed been going to so many 'humanity lectures,' and clubs, such as the Shelley Club,
where the divine anarchist B----misinterprets the great bard every week to his flock of female
admirers, and had been reading so much Swinburne and other sublime things that recently I have
had a reaction, and there is nothing now at the Salon except Nietzsche. He is a relief, although
I feel that if I were to keep on with him I should go mad. When I feel my brain begin to turn,
I start scrubbing or some other stupid thing.

"Though Nietzsche says some very bitter things about women, who have no place whatever in his
scheme of things, except perhaps for the relaxation of the warriors, yet there is something
dignified in his very denunciation. His attitude toward our sex is so different from that of
Schopenhauer, and many other philosophers. They usually take the 'rag and a bone and a hank
of hair' attitude, and are disgusting. But Nietzsche warns men that women are dangerous, and
danger, in Nietzsche's philosophy, is a sublime thing. Also, we must become the mothers of
his Overmen.

"Terry, too, is much interested just now in Nietzsche; quite naturally, for Terry is one of
those 'men of resolute indolence' who will not work without delight in his labour. He talks
a great deal just now of a plan to seek some cave and there try to become an 'Overman.' I pointed
out to him that that was difficult, for to become an Overman he must of course 'keep holy his
highest thought,' without being disturbed by the struggle for existence, and that, like Zarathustra,
he must have an eagle and a serpent to minister to his wants. And I suggested that I might
be his eagle, for Zarathustra says that woman is still either a cat or a bird or at best a
cow. I prefer to believe that I am a bird, and as such could minister to my sweet Overman.
But Terry wouldn't have it so, and replied that of course I was a bird, in a way, but he would
rather have me as a pussy, or as a combination of cat, bird, and cow. I thought that too cruel,
so now I am determined to be none of them, but to become an Overwoman, and so be a fitting
relaxation for my warrior, my Overman. 'Tis but a step from the sublime to the ridiculous,
and I think, in this letter, I have made that step."

Marie's moods are many, and in her next letter she wrote in quite a different vein:

"I almost wept when reading your letter about the baby. Perhaps it was because of the line,
'A little daughter was born to me.' It recalled to me this Christmas time many years ago when
I was a little child and I heard the story of the little Jesus. 'And unto us a child was born.'
How those words ring in my ears! So vividly come back to me the pity I felt when I heard the
story of the poor little infant born to be crucified. It always made me cry--out of pity, the
pity of it all! And I wonder if we are not all, all of us, born to be crucified.

"But I suppose I must congratulate you on assuming the responsibility of fatherhood for the
third time. You might long ago have studied pre-natal influences and the rights of the unborn.
I hope you have not neglected these sacred duties. It surprised me that you wished for a girl,
for not long ago you expressed the opinion that women were soulless creatures without memory!
Suppose your daughter should not be an exception, how would you feel then?... You have been
very active. As for me, I fear my only activity will be that of a dreamer. I differ from the
dreaming class only in one respect and that is, in making confidences, which dreamers never
do. They shrivel up into themselves. They usually create their own sorrows, which have no remedy
except the joys they also invent. They are natural only when alone, and talk well only to themselves."

In the same letter she plunges into the gossip of the Salon:

"I don't blame Scott for his carelessness. The poor fellow has been suffering terribly because
of his wife, who has left him and gone off with a new love to a new home. Scott has been quite
heroic about it, but he suffers. You know how in our radical society men and women try to deny
that they are jealous, try to give freedom to each other. But whatever our ideas may be, we
cannot control our fundamental instincts, and poor Scott is now a wounded thing, I can assure
you. But he speaks beautifully of his wife--even packed up her things for her and escorted
her to the new place.

"Scott came here the other night with your friend the journalist, Fiske, who has become quite
a part of our little society. I am sorry to say that he is quite sad, too, but for a different
reason. The poor fellow seems to be suffering from lack of literary inspirations. He has a
habit of asking people what shall he write about. He asks Terry, and even me, and in pity I
am trying to write up the old women in our tenement for him....

"I see a good deal of Thompson and his wife Minna. Now that Thompson, who was a famous radical,
is more prosperous, he is growing careful and conservative. The glory of her husband is reflected
in Minna. I don't call at their home so much as I did, because I made what they call a break
there the other day. I thoughtlessly introduced myself as Miss L---- to someone of his relatives
or relatives' friends, after she had already introduced me as Mrs. C----. And Thompson informed
me next day that it was inconvenient to explain such things to conservative people, and that
I ought to be more careful in dealing with the unenlightened ones. I suppose I ought to think
more of the reputation of my friends."

Marie likes the Jews of the Salon, many of them, very much, but there are some she doesn't,
as the following shows:

"Things are rather dead in the 'movement,' just now. But there is something doing among the
Jewish radicals, who, you know, are very important in any radical movement here in Chicago.
No wonder things are lively when the Jews have such a leader as Mr. Kohen, whom one might believe
to be the long wanted Messiah, destined to lead his race into the promised land, which is evidently
Chicago. There was a hot time about three weeks ago in the Masonic Temple meeting when this
modern prophet demonstrated to us who were not Jews that they (he and his friends) were the
chosen people who would not only liberate themselves but also us from the yoke of capitalist
oppression; and contrary to all previous rules, they would do this without any consideration
of moneys; all that Mr. Kohen expected in return was due appreciation. I suppose I ought to
be grateful to Mr. Kohen, but somehow I am not. I ought, too, to be grateful to our Jewish
Madonna, Esther, but there again I am not. Poor girl! she is really the Madonna of the Chicago
movement. All the sorrows and troubles of the Salon rest upon her poor shoulders, and she silently
suffers, sacrifices and redeems. Then there is little Sara, another chosen one. It is she who
is chosen to make men miserable for the good of their souls. She has been very pensive since
the great poet B---- left, for now she has no one to worry about. I suggested to her that she
might worry about Terry, if she liked, and she said she would try, with a weary little sigh.
It was she who one day explained to me at great length that all love except sensual love was
of a transient character. If, she said, man swears he loves you, but does not show any physical
interest in you, you can bet that his passion is of that intangible sort that has the radiant
tints but also the evanescence of dew!...

"I am going to a ball next Sunday night. It's on the Jewish holiday in memory of the time when
poor Moses led the Jews from Egypt and they had to eat unleavened bread. All the orthodox Jews
will spend the day praying in the synagogue, without tasting food or drink. They make up for
it the next day, though, you bet. The ball is given every year by the radical Jews, usually
right in the Ghetto, and nearly always the followers of holy Moses jump on those who no longer
follow, and there's a hot time. Last year the radical Jews, mostly anarchists, had to have
police protection! The police are good for something, after all! What should we do without
them? We would exterminate each other without delay!"

Perhaps Marie's temporary "grouch" against the Jews was partly due to the irruption into her
Society of three new and attractive Israelites of her own sex--an event happening about that
time. In one of these newcomers, Terry, it appears, was somewhat interested, and Marie has
often admitted that her philosophy of freedom is powerless to overcome her "fundamental emotions."
Writing of Miss B---- she said: "She is a regular little Becky Sharp, very demure and quiet,
and proper and distinguished. All the women hate her, and the men flock about her, for she
is pretty and a free lover, of course. She comes once or twice a week to our salon, and then
Terry is always present, and they get along famously. She talks of 'the realm of physics,'
or 'of biology,' and I admit it bores me, her voice is so monotonous. She takes evident pleasure
in Terry's society. Perhaps I am a little jealous, but it does not make me feel any different
toward him, and that is the main thing, the only thing I really care about....

"I must admit that I grow tired at times of the 'movement.' Kate says she has cut it out altogether,
and Terry goes to the meetings very seldom. I dutifully attend the lectures, where they talk
about the same old things in the same old way, and also the socials and visit the comrades
once in a while. But they do get on my nerves sometimes. I prefer to stay at home, in the inner
circle of the salon, reading and sucking at my cigarette when I have one. I scrub the floor
once in a while, just because of sheer weariness from not doing anything.

"Terry has been writing an article on 'the general strike,' but did not finish it. He is like
me in lacking energy enough to carry out any plan or purpose unless great pressure is brought
to bear upon him either from within or without. I am sure that if he continued to feel strongly
about the general strike he would go on to finish it. But he has a great distrust, really,
of the 'labour' movement and of labour leaders. He believes that all social improvement must
come from the workers, but how many difficulties there are! One of the greatest is the lack
of good leaders. I myself have not much hope for the workers as long as they remain sheep who
are lost without leaders, are dependent and led either by honest men who know not clearly how,
where, or why, or by intelligent men, whose intelligence usually takes the form of trickery
and self-interest. The intelligent honest ones seem not to be cut out to be leaders, or successful
in any way. Sheep are led or driven most easily by those who can make the most noise, and they
follow as readily over the precipice as over the road. The slightest thing serves to frighten
and scatter them in all directions, in outward confusion and helplessness, unless the burly
insistent watchers are for ever at their heels. Leaders of such a herd must often be unscrupulous
to have any success, must use their intelligence for all sorts of devices, often cruel and
unjust, to keep their flocks from wandering: any means justifies the end, which is the good
of the cause.

"Perhaps it is a good sign that people from the higher walks of life are beginning to take
notice of the workingman's problem, and maybe the ideal leader will come from above, but even
so I doubt if that will help much. I have a feeling that all movements dependent on leaders
must necessarily fail. Of course, I know that the people of the 'higher life' fear the stupidity
and brutality of the mass of workers, and argue that leaders are necessary to guide and restrain
them. This is only partly true; there is hardly any doubt about the stupidity of the mob, but
they are not at all so brutal. True, during times of strike they will throw stones and slug
strike-breakers, but they are not nearly as brutal as the 'scabs,' who are incited, aided,
and protected by the employers and police, and who lack the emotional exaltation which often
inspires the workers to this violence.

"During the teamsters' strike I witnessed a scene where the strikers hustled the scabs, overturned
several huge wagons loaded with beef, in the centre of one of the poorest districts of Chicago,
where the people were suffering from want of meat, but the wretches did not even have sense
enough to help themselves from this plentiful store which was left on the street guarded only
by one or two policemen. And there would have been no danger of arrest, for the policemen could
easily have been swept aside by the rest of the mob. It made me mad. I felt like shouting at
them, 'you fools, why don't you help yourselves?' How differently a hungry bunch of kids would
have acted!"

Terry, in his very different way, wrote on the same subject:

"I never knew a sincere, not to say honest, labour leader, from business agent up. Poor proletaire!
forever crucified between two sets of thieves--one rioting on his rights, the other carousing
on his wrongs. Labour plods while plunder plays, thus runs the world away. But if he should
take it into his thick head to be his own walking delegate some day!"

This strange master of the "salon," this poetic interpreter of the philosophy of the man who
has nothing, has, in spite of his pessimisms, a profound mystic hope. He wrote:

"That toiling humanity--the labour movement--to me is a thing so vast, that whatever other
movements try to exclude themselves from it, they must be swallowed up in it. All other things
are but the shadows cast behind or before the ever-marching phalanx of the unconquerable, the
imperishable proletaire. This is the hope which sends its thrill through us when nothing else
can. At the bottom of my heart I know I am living but for one thing, and my life has been nothing
but a preparation for this. Of and for myself I have accomplished nothing: for to be ever ready
and alert is not accomplishment.... I see a profound hope in the proletaire, for to him is
granted that intense, wistful awareness of his common lot and life with his fellows. His very
crowding in factories and tenements, salons, unions, and brothels, brings it home to him. Yes,
this very lack of space must remorselessly rub it in, even by dumb, physical close contact.
The friction resulting from ten living in one room must make one of them phosphorescent--and
capable of giving light to humanity. The tenement houses are harmless boxes of lucifers as
long as none is ignited. The inhabitants are wofully benighted, but they possess wonderfully
the quality of brotherhood, of oneness, hence arises their wonderful psychology and their æsthetics,
so full and overflowing with pathos, so piercing, it carries one to that borderland where comic
and tragic make marriage.

"This strange crowding in our consciousness of things that do not seem to come from us and
yet are of us--this clamouring consciousness is what drives me to despair and makes me feel
I have not the form or shadow of things, though I may have the substance. Yet I am determined
to strain my self-consciousness even to the breaking point; for though I know madness lies
that way, there stands my Ideal, beckoning. I must grasp this great common thing which comes
from all of us, from us crowded proletarians, and yet is not in any one of us. Together we
enjoy and suffer more than any one of us alone. There is, I believe, something deeper than
the deepest woe: our racial consciousness is there and we must find it. At moments of great
insight we are suddenly made aware of this, the mysterious unity of the Race, but it is flashed
and gone and we must await another crisis. It is only in moments of sublime sorrow that the
depths of the racial consciousness is heaved up to us. Joy cannot do this, for joy is narrow
and wants us to do away with sorrow; but sorrow never wants us to do away with joy. Keats always
beheld joy in an external attitude of farewell and this is profoundly and perfectly mystical
and real: joy is swallowed up in something deeper, away down in the common racial consciousness.
We must all strive to be men beyond essential harm; else, standing blindly before the meaning
and destiny of the race, we should go mad. Most of us try to think, intellectuals; fear to
abandon ourselves to alarming states of feeling where reason is crowded to the wall. And yet
I feel that by abandoning ourselves completely to mere feeling lies our only hope to find the
logic of the race that no individual reason can master.

"Let me tell you of something that recently happened to me which shows how strong this race
feeling is, as opposed to merely individual or family feeling. I heard that my mother was dying.
I had become reconciled long ago, had seen many things more clearly; for if joy is of the heart,
sorrow is of the soul, by which we see. I wonder if woman has a 'lake' in her heart. I used
to think my mother had, and when I called to see her once more, the old love-longing caught
me by the throat. My presence seemed to help her some, but, though moved, I had passed beyond
the family boundary-line, and was engaged in stripping myself of everything not belonging to
the soul. If I wish to be something more than myself, I must be prepared to lose all, even
myself. And what is my family and my mother?"

Terry does not like to use the word "religion." But he certainly belongs to the type of the
religious man. One of the most marked characteristics of the religious temperament is this
abandonment of personal and family ties, this indifference and often hostility to social law,
"this emotional devotion to something intangible." All the anarchists and social rebels I have
known have, more or less, the religious temperament, although a large part of their activity
is employed in scoffing at and reviling religion--as they think the God of theology has been
largely responsible for the organisation of social and political injustice. But the deeply
religious spirits have often been hostile to theology, as well as to all other complicated
forms of society. Here are some religious words:

"There must be some meaning," wrote Terry, "for all this ancient agony. Oh, that I might expand
my written words into an Epic of the Slums, into an Iliad of the Proletaire! If an oyster can
turn its pain into a pearl, then, verily, when we have suffered enough, something must arise
out of our torture--else the world has no meaning. On this theory, all my pangs are still to
come. I too will arise out of my sacrificial self and look back on my former bondage in amaze,
even as I now look down on the dizzy slums where I am and yet am not! It cannot be that I came
up out of the depths for nothing. If I could pierce my heart and write red lines, I might perhaps
tell the truth. But only a High Silence meets me, and I do not understand. In letting myself
down to the bottomless, I discovered I could not stand it long enough. I am dumbly dissatisfied.
I feel like a diver who has nigh strangled himself to bring up a handful of seaweed, and so
feels he must down again--and again--until he attains somewhere the holy meaning of Life."

Terry feels that somehow deep in his life he has been crucified, that society has nailed him
to the cross:

"I was alone on the cross and with bloodshot, beseeching eyes beheld the world objectively.
Yet I was aware of a harmony beyond me, though not in me or around me."

It is this "harmony beyond," this religious sense of "something far more deeply interfused"
which, ever conscious in the idealist's mind, makes the concrete vision of everyday fact so
ugly, leads to anarchism of feeling profound and constant. 

XXXVII

11.

Have come to spend the day with us my brother and Mademoiselle de Lamartine, his sister. I
told that my good brother is in good health and my poor son Alfonso has won two awards for its application
in the study, and that their teachers are very satisfied with their behavior. This latest
news has me very proud.

I pray to God to forgive my vanity, for I I have not contributed anything to the creation of goodness
in the depths of the soul of my son there.

This afternoon we received a visit from Mme. of Lavernette, who has stopped here on his return
Lyon: I am told that has seen my dear son Alfonso and his teachers have said that the poor do
all it can to come out on top in the race.

His father conceal his pleasure at hearing because praise your child,
but is actually prouder than I am.

How long will this satisfaction? The child the man is a distance large. Mme. Lavernette has
delivered me a letter in which Alfonso tells me want to live with us.

I'm afraid that when he comes I'll find pale, haggard and thin.

Y this has me worried.

       Mothers can not be happy ever.

When we have reason to congratulate ourselves, we they poison our
happiness with foreboding and sad forebodings.

XXXVIII

September 18.

Today I went to Macon to receive Alfonso.

My heart beats when I think that within a few hours I will see my son.

* * * * *

       

Finally, although a bit late, has already arrived.

I prayed to God in the oratory of the ladies Forcardos, secularised
religious who have made your house a convent.

I calmed my anxiety at the foot of the altar.

My Alfonso has gone very well.

I think he has lost the devotion that I have tried to communicate, that makes me very afraid.

XXXIX

23 September.

Today we had lunch with M. Blondel, an old friend of ours.

In the table we talked about (such once too) of Alfonso. We have read some of his writings and poetic
composition made on behalf of his father, having been all very happy
and particularly I conditions and the talent that seems to have my
son.

Perhaps these thoughts are only dictated by the love of a mother, who sees his children enlarged
their good qualities and minimize the bad.

* * * * *

Follow the diary containing detailed and too intimate details that
relate only with domestic life.

XL

October 6, 1801.

How time flies! Today is a memorable date for me. Twelve years have passed!

I remember it well.

It was that famous October 6, so fatal to the royal family Versailles, and I was then in Chatou
with my mother. The two were returning from Mesnil with the intention of reaching Paris was
necessary to reinforce the shot horses, their absence did night Chatou, staying at the house of
Mme. Duperron, our friend.

This interruption of our trip was for us a lot, because Paris was abuzz between revolutionary
upheavals. In the house of M. Duperron overnight in continuous alarm
as M. Lambert, his son, was on military service in the palace of Versailles.

The wife, children, entire family, in short, trembled for his life.

After a few days at Chatou, we head to Lyon without passing through Paris, accompanying Mme.
Montbriand. This lady had been like me, canoness de Salles.

This trip found my wedding with the Chevalier Lamartine.

One day we saw in chapter Salles, home of the Countess Lamartine
and since then we love forever.

We stopped for four hours in Macon, it was necessary to fix the carriage one of whose aims was
broken and we had occasion to visit the family Lamartine, which gave us in the extreme. It
was at that time the gentleman Lamartine joined the regiment.

During the day I spent in Macon thought having attracted the sympathies of his family, disappeared
some little difficulty, due to not fully know had set for the wedding.

This was arranged.

I am happy to remember all the details that occurred during the week of October, because to them
I owe my happiness.

I thank God for leading me back to Macon, where together with my husband
and of my children I am happy and lucky.

XLI

On October 7 and the following are not interested.

11 October.

       

My mother tells me in a letter that I received today, which is preparing to return from Germany
to Miss of Orleans, the young princess has a terrible fear of the
sea and do not want to cross the French; from these causes have not
yet decided to make the trip to Spain.

Yesterday I accompanied my brother to a village of Champagne next to the castle of Peronne, belonging
to my family.

M. Lamartine has taught me a little house just to build in the village, which will remain as a legacy
for our children. My brother speaks of them as a real parent.

With all this land to be inherited from his uncles, will my children a good future. May God
rich in honor and pity, which is what constitutes the true wealth!

       Every day I read to my son Alfonso a part of a religious book written
by a priest German: In this book you learn to understand religion
and its emanation from nature.

Alfonso intelligence satisfy me, but I fear has to make some dislike his character too haughty and
imperious, if not corrected. Very often uncomfortable with his brothers, and this disgusts me.

XLII

November 9, 1801.

Occupations not have allowed me to continue this daily today.

At this moment arrived from Lyon, I went to accompany my son to school.

This new separation My Alfonso has caused me deep regret. During Mass this morning I heard in the
chapel the establishment, saw only the beautiful blond hair of my
son in the midst of many heads pure as an angel.

How sensitive is, my God, have to abandon the tender bud mercenary
hands of our heart!

Leaving the church I have experienced a profound melancholy.

Neither Baebey Island Fourvière the picturesque mountains of Saona and bustle of people coming
down the slope Red Cross and Lyon, have managed to divert my imagination. I looked to the biblical
Abraham When I look to see Hagar and her son, stranded in the desert, unless certainly dangerous
this immense crowd, where mothers, forced by society, abandon their children.

       Every day I spent with Mme. de Vaux, my good sister, and my mixed
tears to yours, it also is very unfortunate.

I spent eight days in Lyon to see once more my Alfonso and get used
to to be away from him.

The Abbe Lamartine, dwelling on his property near Dijon, gives us his next house the Ursulines Street
in Macon, where we spend the winter.

This house is near the palace family living my brother-in M. Lamartine and his two sisters.

*
* * * *

On January 10, 1802 is listed only with thanksgiving to Providence
for benefits received during the past year.

XLIII

January 7, 1802.

Bonaparte has been here in the direction of Lyon, to chair the "Cisalpino." Who knows As result
of this meeting!

At this point I just wrote to my mother who is preparing to ship in
Livorno the direction of Spain, accompanied by Mademoiselle de Orleans.

Have a safe trip and God Bless the waters that they have to cross to avoid the misfortunes that
happen to you so afraid. M. Pierreclos has been deleted from the list of emigrants, and we visited
today. Comes Lyon and has seen my Alfonso, who was with his professors at the Place Bellecour, Lyon,
witnessing the last military parade by Bonaparte.

* * * * *

During the winter of 1802, the paper contains only the impressions of a soul that continuously
is refined through the examination of herself, and constantly fighting
against the weaknesses that beset him.

XLIV

On April 17, our mother returns to the field and get some letters from Spain.

These days I have received a letter from my mother announcing his
arrival in Barcelona (Spain).

He says that during the trip has suffered many setbacks, including
a storm in Cruise Livorno, the port of Roses, which lasted three days.

Moments after landing Rosas, sank the ship that had led.

The meeting between the Duchess of Orleans and his daughter was very young: Eleven years ago the
Revolution, had separated.

I said my mother when she returns to France.

XLV

September 5, 1802.

The cause has been discontinued for so long this day, it was because the day August 18 I had to stay
in bed as a result of having given birth to a girl, which I am raising
just as it did with his brothers.

My sister has come to assist me.

We have established the habit of praying house together, masters and servants. This must be very
useful, if it is to be the house as the Scripture says: "A house of brothers." The communion
of masters and servants kneeling before God, that does not distinguish between small and large
lifts the spirit to higher regions, calling each Christian equality and others to the faithful
performance of their religious and moral duties.

* * * * *

September 7.

My mother is back to Paris, and has already left Spain.

XLVI

2 October.

       I am in Saint-Point since yesterday, along with Alfonso, Cecilia and
Eugenia, during the trip the children have so much fun.

Alfonso, particularly, was drunk with joy gentleman to be a mule.

We picked the grapes from the arbor, from which we will draw two casks of wine. My husband has
bought a farm with the money his brother has borrowed. These farms
have cost ten thousand dollars.

God wants us to do fortune to bequeath to our children a small position to live free from want!

I
have in my possession the Confessions of St. Augustine, a book that I think a lot, this morning
I Alfonso seen with pleasure that I was reading.

XLVII

28 October.

With the greatest sadness that I returned to accompany my Alfonso to Lyon. My mother asked me,
in all I write letters, to be comforted is in Rieux, a small village near Mont-Mirail. On his
return he has found all his affairs so entangled, that the poor are disgustadísima. I'll go
alone, because it would aggravate their expenses, was very poorly done that I favor my comfort
while my mother has perhaps the loss of their property.

In order to undertake the journey to complete freedom, I have to raise my little one robust village
of Milly. The journey is going to take long, but I feel as agile as if I had fifteen years.
Yesterday I went to mass in Bussiers and made the journey on foot,
although the way is long and bad the weather was rainy, I felt no
discomfort.

I remember my good times as a child and walks in the company that
made my father and my sister from the castle Saint-Cloud at Meudon.

My poor aunt has died, my governess during the years of my childhood.

I'm worried about the fate of the old Jacqueline, her maid and my second mother, I fear will
be found, after her death my aunt, all alone and destitute in case.

       

I would pick it up at my house, but the family oppose this, and my
husband is concerned, with good why insult to his brothers, on whom
we depend, but I proposed that we pay secretly a pension to poor Jacqueline,
with which the old lady may be sheltered of misery and loneliness.

While I would like to attend this woman as she probably me I would attend if I were in his
place, but I will do everything you can in your favor by ridding
course of homelessness and providing few amenities allow my limited
resources.

XLVIII

December 17, 1802.

Alfonso has leaked from the school with two of his companions.

About six miles from Lyon achieved.

I understand that the subject of school is unbearable, and this has me disgustadísima. The independence
of character of my son scares me.

I will try to write to his father asking sorry for the need to commit.

Every day I read the Confessions, I try to imitate as far as possible,
try to make as Santa Monica, constantly praying for my children.

XLIX

January 14, 1803.

I arrived yesterday to Rieux, after a very painful journey and stopped me in Paris some days.
From Coulomiers to Rieux I have needed to make the journey on horseback
rent, led by a boy.

It was a very cold north wind, and I think that in Siberia can result in as much as I suffered through
those mountains to snow.

What a joy it has been my poor mother to see me!

I'm installed in my beloved cottage Rieux, where I spent many summers during my childhood, but in
these places is not something that once the quickened. Next to my
mother forget all pain.

       The poor thing is very distorted, an effect no doubt of the trouble
has been in travel and exile.

She enjoys telling many times interesting things that relate to our
family and has made trips accompanying the princesses.

I admire his resolution, his wisdom to the great dangers and caution and firmness in its actions.
Is very old indeed, but keep in mind the youthful freshness of the
past.

Is very sensitive to their age found in the precarious situation she is. I wish I were rich
enough to restore his fortune; but very little I can distract the attention of my children.
Want to express this As she daily count of remarkable.

       

Yesterday I said that our family descends from Vivarais, and a young woman like Roys has yet heir
to the main branch of the manor house of Rubec, in Montfaucon. After
the current having, this feud must go to my mother, maybe then I can
live more comfortably. For lack of resources has been required to
withdraw the waitress, and age this is very painful. I will always
remember their hardships when I try to complain about my luck.

God
succor this poor old lady!

* * * * *

My mother has told me many
things tonight concerning Mme. of Reynière, widow of his landlord
and some relative of ours.

M. Orsay, also a relative of ours, he
married a German princess, relative King of Prussia, a child of this
marriage has been married to an Italian princess.

During these conversations
by the fireplace, remember the people I lived during my childhood,
and of which there are very few, after the terrible shock revolutionary.

I
leave here contained a very original story, related to Jean-Jacques
Rousseau and the marshal of Luxembourg, which my mother was very closely
linked. 

It was the marshal of Luxembourg friend of Rousseau knew
it happened to a woman with whom he lived was on tape, doubtless believing
that Rousseau wanted to send this new the foundling child, as he had
done with others, and ran to M. Trouchin, Genoa, friend Rousseau,
and charged him as soon as the creature came into the world, made
possible by send it to her charge of their care. M. Trouchin discussed
this issue with your friend Rousseau, who apparently agreed that the
marshal was satisfied in their desires, which were very agreeable
to the mother of the unborn child. As soon as this good woman gave
birth, warned M. Trouchin, which presented itself immediately in the
home where he showed a beautiful child. Were agreed for the next day
to take care of the child, but no sooner had gone M. Trouchin, his
friend Rousseau, wrapped in a cloak of dark cloth, approached the
bed of the new mother, despite her tears, he took his son and took
him to the Hospice, lost forever, because not even put on delivery
brand recognition.

Here, my daughter - my mother said, - the sensitive
man as people say.

Fool, I call, whose brain disease has broken my
heart!

If genius is not accompanied by good sense, it is not genius,
madness, good proof are Tasso and Rousseau.

If God sends us the genius,
welcome it, but only a mother should want for their children the right
direction.

* * * * *

It is snowing heavily and intense cold. The
countryside is covered with snow. I spend time reading Tacitus and
other historians of antiquity, a delight to my mother.

Surely, these
hobbies of my mother had born as a result of their dealings with philosophers
and writers who, at one time, frequented her salons.

My mother has
accompanied a priest Abbe name of this venerable man Chauveau and
of great merit. This morning we said mass. In the temple had a baptism
and it has already remembered my poor children, baptisms always soften
me.

Today I visited a poor woman has just given birth, sick and poor.
Reflecting on their misery and attention that I was surrounded, I
made the decision not to bargain anything, food, clothing, firewood,
money, everything, in short, as with my savings can provide this poor
woman.

How they feel the suffering of others when one's been tested!
It is very good charity exerted indirectly, but it is more efficient
one that is done face to face heart to heart. May God inspire me often
in these resolutions, and do not allow to forget the performance of
my duties!

Last night I read Tacitus. This historian entertains me
and almost built their narratives; others only teach me. My father
has a library rich in history books Fortunately there is not even
a novel.

My mother has today written a letter to Miss Orleans, located
in Spain, and I also wanted to write two lines. After that, we went
out for a walk and reached to Mont-Mirail, while visiting friends
of the family. In this village we have spoke highly of the lords of
Larochefoucauld-Dondeau, who have here a castle which comprises abundant
alms to the poor of the region. Not many days ago that these lords
have lost their only child they had, only one child is left, say,
is a handsome lad of eighteen (now Duke of Larochefoucauld), which
include features of kindness to the villagers of this neighborhood.

Arrived
yesterday and my unfortunate brother made peace with my mother. Everything
is forgiven and seems in very formal air. He has said he wants to
go to England, where my mother recommend it to the princes of Orleans,
I am sure he will do all they can.

L

Milly my mother again in the
spring and expressed in his diary the joy he experienced when they
saw her husband and their children. After going to Lyon to find out
the reasons took his son to escape from school, taking after this
resolution ends their studies in another house a little more religious
and paternal than today was.

* * * * *

Follow the diary:

Yesterday
I did some shopping in Lyon fabric to fix my bed, I spent little,
as there I spend as superfluous as those who lack what is necessary.

These
days there is much talk of war with England, my brother wrote to me
from there telling me that is very well placed, but if war is declared,
who knows what your luck!

* * * * *

Today I bought a new book I've
read tonight, is titled Genius of Christianity, is written by M. Chateaubriand.
I do not know if I'm competent to judge this new work, but I love
to read.

This note in Marie--protest against Terry's tendency to cut out the simple joy of life--grew
very strong at a later time; now, however, it was only suggested, and played no important part.

Indeed, the idea of his leaving her was to her an intolerable thought; and yet there is many
a letter which suggests the approaching dissolution of the salon and of their relation. They
were both, at times, terribly tired of life: with no strenuous occupation, the word of Nietzsche
and of world pessimism, of excessive individuality, tortured their nerves and made everything
seem of no avail.

Work takes one away from life, is a buffer between sensitive nerves and intensest experience.
Strong natures who for some reason are dislocated and therefore do not work, or work only fragmentarily,
come too much in contact with life and often cannot bear it; it burns and palls at once. So
it was with Terry and Marie. Without either work or children, they were forced into strenuous
personal relations with one another and into a feverish relation with "life."

"I feel so depressed," she wrote; "so many things have happened this last year which seemed
trivial at the time, but have had big results, while other things which seemed events have
turned out to be only incidents, and very small ones. Thus, a careless remark of mine resulted
in a quarrel between Terry and me which did not lessen with time, but grew larger and larger,
until now the relations of us two idyllic lovers are anything but pleasant. And a very serious
attack of love from which I suffered last summer has passed as quickly and lightly as a breath
of wind, while another light love of mine, which came to me last February, has assumed large
proportions simply because I have been abused for it by Terry, whom no one could ever displace
in my heart. I was bound to defend my lover from the attacks of Terry, whom I had always regarded
as above such a common display of irritation in such matters. So this other man became a sort
of ideal lover in my mind, and all because of Terry's opposition. This man had wooed me in
a great, glorious, godless fashion. He was a big man in the labour world, and he flattered
me immensely, but I should never have cared for him, if Terry's nature had not suddenly seemed
to weaken....

"I have been so uneasy about Terry lately. He has been talking so much about joining the criminal
class. He seems to be losing his interest in our movement and to be looking for some other
way of escape, as he calls it. He says his liberty is only a figment of his mind, that he has
now reached the time for which he had all along been unconsciously preparing himself. I am,
of course, used to this kind of talk from Terry. He has been in the depths of despondency often
enough, but nothing ever came of it except a saloon brawl. He would usually seek Harris; they
would break a mirror or a few glasses in some saloon, and the next day Terry would have a headache,
after which he was usually content to browse around his philosophy in that mild and subtle
way of his, for a week or so.

"But now Harris is gone, and Terry does not know any other person quite so strenuous in the
fine art of breaking glasses and barroom fixtures in general, so, finding no vent for his accumulated
despondency, he may possibly do real things. I feel so sadly for him and wish I could help
him. The Lord knows I would be willing to break any amount of glassware with him, but he has
not much confidence in my aim, I guess; women never can throw straight. In fact, he has little
confidence in me in any way lately, for he never tells me the details of his schemes, but only
throws out dark and terrible hints....

"Truly, something may indeed happen this time. He is so anti-social. He positively won't go
out anywhere to meet people, won't go to our picnics or socials, and in manner is very strange,
distant, cold, and polite to Katie and me. One would think he had been introduced to us just
five minutes before. Perhaps he thinks that Katie and I want him to go to work--common, vulgar
work, I mean, for Katie has lost her job and we are living in the most economical way, for
we don't know when another desirable job can be found. Now, Terry really ought to know that
I shouldn't have him work for anything in the world. I know that Katie has not said the least
word to him, but he is so terribly sensitive that perhaps he suspects what she may be thinking.

"Katie is despondent, too, and nearly makes me crazy talking of her life, past, present, and
future, in the most doleful way. Last night, after talking to me for two hours about the misery
of life, she made the startling proposal that she and I commit suicide. 'For,' said she, 'I
cannot see anything ahead of me but work, work, like a cart-horse, until I am dead. I'd rather
die now and be done with everything, and you had better come with me, for you haven't anything,
and if I went alone, what would become of you, such a poor helpless creature; see how thin
you are, I can almost look through your bones! Who would take care of you?'

"After talking in this strain for what seemed to me hours and hours, Katie went to bed and
to sleep, and then came Terry from his solitary walk--he usually goes for a walk if there are
any indications that Katie will do any talking--and entertained me by carelessly, carefully
hinting at one of his dark, mysterious plots. Then he, too, went to bed, and I, too, had forty
winks and seventy thousand nightmares."

But Marie, even in this growing strain, never failed in her love and admiration for the strange
man with whom she lived. On the heels of the above came the following:

"Terry is one of those characters who has not lost any of his distinct individuality. His is
a nature which will never become confounded or obliterated in one's memory. The instantaneous
impression of large soul, sincerity, and truthfulness he made upon me at our first meeting
has never left me. This impression must have been very strong, for generally these impressions
grow weaker, if people live together so closely as poor people must. All his faults, as well
as perhaps his virtues, come from the fact that he is not at all practical. In spite of his
experience, he does not know the world, and is a dreamer of dreams. His wild outbursts are
the result, I think, of his sedentary life. Sometimes we two remain at our home for weeks without
venturing out, without hardly speaking to each other, and then suddenly we burst out into the
wildest extravagances of speech!"

A few days later there was a wilder burst than ever, and Terry left the salon. Marie wrote:

"Last week we all had a row, and Terry has not been seen or heard of since. The last words
he uttered were that he should return for his belongings in a few days. I am dreadfully sorry
about it, especially that we could not have parted good friends. I realise and always shall
be sensible of the great good I had from him and shall always think of him with the best feeling
and greatest respect. The parting has not been a great surprise to me, for it really has been
taking place for a long time, ever since he withdrew his confidence from me, now months past,
and I have been acting with other men without his knowledge. Nothing mattered in our relation
but mutual confidence, but when that went, it was, I suppose, only a question of time. And,
at the same time that he withdrew spiritually from me, he seemed to lose his interest in the
movement, and grew more and more solitary and hopeless.

"I don't know what Terry is doing, or where he has gone, and I am uneasy. I would not fancy
this beautiful bohemian life alone with Katie, and I don't know what to do."

"Terry is still away," she wrote a few days later, "and my horizon looks bleak and lonely.
I want to be alone where I can collect my thoughts, but, even when Katie is out, I cannot think,
but sit by the window staring at the old women hanging up the clothes which everlastingly flap
on the lines tied between the poor old gnarled willow trees. Poor old trees, their fate has
been very like that of the old women. They bear their burden uncomplainingly, groan dolefully
in the wind, and shake their old palsied heads. Even the sparrows, true hoboes of the air,
disdain to seek shelter in their twisted arms. They will die as they have lived, withering away.

"I try to interest myself in household affairs, but that is so stale and unprofitable. Neither
can I read: my thoughts wander away and Terry intrudes himself constantly on my mind. I may
get so desperate that I will seek a job as a possible remedy: perhaps in that way I could get
tired enough to sleep....

"I have been trying to meet Terry, but he is as elusive as any vagrant sunbeam. I feel it would
do me a world of good to have a long heart-to-heart talk with him. If I could only see him
once a week and have him sympathise with me in a brotherly fashion and hear him say, in his
old way: 'Cheer up, Marie, the worst is yet to come,' I should be comparatively happy and satisfied."

Several more days passed, and with the lapse of time Marie's mood grew blacker. Her next letter
to me had a deep note of sorrow and regret and remorse:

"Terry has been away since August thirteenth. He came, while I was out, for his things. I fear
it is his farewell visit; for he has not shown the slightest disposition to meet me and talk
things over. I have tried in every way to see him again, but he has thus far ignored my existence.
I had an idea that we two were made for each other, but I have been an awful fool. Last February,
as you know, I had an affair, if it may be dignified by even that name, and just for the fun
of the thing I went with this light love to Detroit, and came home ill, as you already know.
I returned to Terry full of love and regret and most properly chastened by my illness and disappointment;
for other men almost always disappoint me. But I found him positively beastly. The way he abused
that poor man was terrible, and I had to defend him, for I know that Terry was unjust to him.
I begged him to blame me, not the other man, for it was all my doing, but that only made matters
worse.

"I know that some people can conceal their obnoxious qualities and show only the sweet and
lovely side of themselves. I sometimes like to see the reverse side of the medal, and I expected
Terry, as a student of humanity and an anarchist, to welcome any phase of character which might
enable him to understand me more completely.

"I must hesitate in attributing Terry's attitude to jealousy, for I have had some affairs before,
and he never seemed to care about them in the least; indeed, I often felt piqued, and thought
he did not mind because he did not care about me enough. The following two weeks were, I can
truly say, the most infernal and awful that ever happened to me, and I wished thousands of
times that I might die, and I did come very close to it. I cannot describe that hellish time
or give you any idea of Terry's conduct during those weeks. He was no longer the calm, philosophical
Terry that you know, but the most terribly cruel thing the mind of man can conceive.

"Now, I know these are strong words, and I don't know if you can imagine Terry that way, or
if you can believe me when I say it is so. I have thought of it so many times, and I have come
to the conclusion that perhaps while I was away, he and Harris had a great debauch together
and that Terry must have taken some dope which unbalanced him for a while."

I do not think it needs "dope" to explain Terry's conduct. Marie, perhaps, could not understand
the possible cruelty of a disappointed idealist. When Terry began to see that neither the anarchists
nor Marie would ultimately fit into his scheme of things, when his idealistic hope began to
break against the hard rocks of reality, he was capable, in his despair, of any hard, desperate,
and cruel act.

Marie continued:

"During this awful time I did not blame Terry, dope or no dope. I considered it all coming
to me, and even wished it would keep on coming until it killed. But I made up my mind right
then and there that if it was fated that I should keep in the game, there should be no more
'affairs' for me. And so help me God I have not had any from that time--six months ago--till
the day Terry left me. And that other man's name has not once passed my lips in Terry's presence,
and when it was mentioned by others when he and I were there, I grew dizzy and sick.

"In time, these dreadful things were thought of as little as might be, and Terry and I became
excellent, though platonic friends, a novel and fascinating relation, wherein sex had no part.
Night after night have we sat around this table, discussing books and people, trying to penetrate
the mystery of things strange and new to us. I should rather say that he talked, and I was
his eager listener. Often, after tossing restlessly on our pillows, when no sleep would come
'to weight our eyelids down,' the rest of the night would be spent in reciting poetry, the
inevitable cigarette in one hand, the other gesticulating in the most fanciful and fervid manner.
He would recite in passionate whispers--so as not to awaken Katie--for hours at a time, poems
from Shakespeare to Shelley, and Verlaine to Whitman, poems tender and sweet, bitter and ironical
and revolutionary, just as the mood suited him. His feeling for poetry and nature seemed to
grow as his hope for human society grew less.

"So our relations were ideally platonic--the kind you read about in books. Nevertheless, some
of the old bitterness remained in Terry's heart, for at times he became depressed and melancholy
and so sensitive about the least little thing that I was nervous and in hot water all the time
for fear I might inadvertently say or do something to hurt him or make him angry. I admit I
am not as placid as I look, and Katie, too, is very inflammable, so you can understand how
tense the atmosphere was at times.

"Not very long ago, at the breakfast table one Sunday morning, I urged Terry to come to a meeting
of the 'radicals,' adding that he was becoming a regular hermit and that it would do him good
to have more social pleasure. He turned on me savagely, called me a hypocrite, and a contemptible
one at that, and made a few more remarks of the kind. After a few days of strained politeness
on both sides I made bold to ask him for some explanation--and I have got it coming yet!

"These are just the facts. I don't go into all the little details of our many little vulgar
rows, about the most trivial things. I am sure, if Terry writes you about this, that his innate
delicacy would never permit him to go into these sordid details, too many of which I have perhaps
told you. But I am made of rougher stuff than he. I am never quite as unreasonable as he can
be at times, but I am commoner."

Terry did, indeed, express himself in a much more laconic way about the quarrel, than Marie.
On the day he left, August thirteenth, he wrote me the following note:

"The premonition in my last letter is fulfilled: the salon knows me no more."

A later talk I had with both Katie and Terry throws light upon the precipitating cause of Terry's
departure on the thirteenth of August. It was due to Terry's sensitiveness about his money
relationship to Katie. On that morning Terry was asleep on the couch, when Katie got up, made
breakfast, and she and Marie asked Terry to join them.

"Not me," said he.

"I think you have been eating on me long enough," rejoined Katie. "It's time you got out."

Katie had never allowed herself a remark of this kind before. But she had not found another
job and the three had been on edge for some time.

The remark brought about the climax so long preparing.

"I'll go," he replied, "as soon as I have finished this cigarette."

"In the wordy war that followed," said Terry, "we all three went the limit in throwing things
up to each other. I told Katie that if it had not been for me and Marie she would not have
had anybody to steal for; that I was eating on her stealings and mine, too. And then I left."

Although, as we shall see, this was not the end of the relation between Terry and Marie, it
was in reality the sordid end of the idealistic Salon.

CHAPTER XII

Marie's Attempt

While Marie was trying to find some trace of Terry, the latter was wandering about the country.

"I have been tramping about the country," he wrote me, "living most of the time in the parks.
This life, where you 'travel by hand,' crowds out consecutive meditation, but I like it because
I can go away at the first shadow of uneasiness betrayed on either side. My existence now is
so responsive and irresponsible that it comes very close to my heart. I am living a life of
contrasts: one week I spent with a rare friend who has many good books and admires me for the
thing for which all others condemn me. Strange, is it not, that the one thing which redeems
me in his far-seeing eyes is what places me beyond redemption in the minds of others. I have
spent some sleepless nights in his fine home, kept awake by the seductions of social life tugging
at my heart-strings. So one night I stole away from this seduction and slept with some drunken
hoboes in the tall soft grass, where I could have no doubt about being welcome. I might as
well doubt the grass as those pals, who without question hailed me as an equal. I, having the
only swell 'front,' tackled a mansion, and the Irish servant-girl, to whom I told the truth,
gave me a whole hand-out in a basket, enough for all of us. My brother hoboes swore I should
be the travelling agent of the gang. But a copper gave me the 'hot foot,' while I was 'pounding
my ear' in the woods with the other 'boes, so I straightened and hiked to the stock yards,
where I feel more at home with the Hibernians.

"Never have I seen Life more triumphant and rampant, more brimming over with hope and defiant
of all conditions, hygienic and otherwise. I am rooming with an Irish family whose floor space
is limited, so we all have shake-downs, and in the morning can clear the decks for action with
no bedsteads in the way. I am very 'crummy,' badly flea-bitten, overrun with bed bugs, somewhat
fly-blown, but, redemption of it all, I am free and always drunk. Still, I am really getting
tired of playing the knock-about comedian and shall soon 'hit the road.'

"I am willing to do anything for Marie I can, except to love her as I once did, but never shall
again. Even spirits die, and the spirit of the salon is so dead that it is beyond resurrection."

Marie, however, would not believe that the spirit of the salon, or at any rate, as much of
that spirit as depended on the relation between her and Terry, was dead; she was more conscious
than Terry of the ups and downs of the human nerves and heart and the ever-present possibility
of change, and she went to work in a wilful attempt to get back her lover. Her next letter
was a triumphant one:

"I am a very happy girl to-day, and I must write to tell you so before the mood vanishes, for
I have learned that good moods are very fleeting.... The cause of my happiness is, of course,
that I have at last met Terry and we have had a long, delightful talk together, and I hope
our misunderstanding is all cleared up. 

In my opinion, therefore, only genius is capable of inventing types, and not more skillful
imitation get appropriate them. The counter-proof of a type itself is treason efforts to avoid making
the comparison, and their efforts are even more awkward, since can not produce anything credible
altering a true nature. It is better then shut in the modest powers of the translator and copyist,
literary destiny that does not yes absolutely nothing humiliating, because there are one hundred
thousand copyists for each inventor. A translation spiritual well-made imitation, a business arrangement,
although they are not works of genius, do not leave to be works of taste and talent, and then does
not meet this set, which is the heritage of all distinguished men, if they are narrow rows on which
raise a few geniuses endowed with the rarest of privileges, if it is equipped with a of these
assumptions is considered robust usurped all the glories which fail heights achieve, yet there
is a resource, such as Aristotle, La Harpe and Marmontel, you can exclaim barbarism and stupidity
by the roadside of the winners, and there is still the middle of shelter, like Achilles in his
tent, in honor of the Academy: This is a great comfort.

THE PAINTER OF SALZBURG

JOURNAL OF THE EMOTIONS OF A PAINFUL HEART

1803

August
25.

Yes, all life events are related to the forces of man because my heart
has not broken yet.

I wonder even if it is a nightmare that has brought me this blasphemy: - Eulalia wife of another!
- And I look around to make sure if I'm awake, and I despair when find nature in the same state
as before. It would be better to have lost my reason. Sometimes I would also like to stand in my value,
but here comes the news suddenly incredible that still echoes in my ears and that comes over me
with the anguish of death.

I have had many misfortunes, but this is too bitter! Outcast of Bavaria a miserable partisan, outlaw
and fugitive, wandering for two years from the banks Danube to the mountains of Scotland, somebody
had stolen everything, country and honor. But Eulalia was me! and this memory unspeakable
misery loved me and was accompanied by my loneliness.

I was happy for the future and for her.

Yesterday, throbbing with desire, impatience, love, even thought ...
And today!

...

26 August.

There is an idea that oppresses my heart, a painful and deadly idea.

What is our deepest impressions are a thing so uncertain, so yaga,
the course of several months, a few days, a moment almost indisputable,
the delete?

What is the nature of this feeling, so violent in his drunkenness, so fast in duration, which aims
to subjugate the future and devours a year? Is it true that affections of man are nothing but a
sandy inverted slowly lets out all his content? What will need to die wherever we lived -
right where we found so much sweetness in immortalized - in the heart of those who love us?

Oh!
How wise Providence was assigning a career so young travelers life! If it had been more lavish
and if time had brought more slowly when our destruction, what man could boast of drag along some
memories youth?

Having missed in an endless cycle of ever-new sensations, come alone to the tomb and, glancing
off on obscure and confusing scene the past, look in vain one of the emotions of his early
years he would have forgotten everything, everything! until the first
kiss of his beloved, until his father's white hair. 

But if the common
people used their days in those miserable irresolution, it seemed,
at least it was possible to perpetuate their feelings certain souls.
Once I thought I had found that soul similar to mine and I confided
my happiness. After being so intimate with Terry for seven years
I ought surely to know something of his moods and disposition; and I do hope and expect that
he will in time grow weary of roaming about and living the way he does now and that he will
begin to yearn for feminine influences and caprices and tyrannies, and I hope, for mine in
particular!...

"I should be much happier if I did not care for him so much, and I hope that in time I may
have only a strong friendly interest in him. At times I envy him: he is so care-free, without
the slightest responsibility toward anything or anybody; he can break from old associations
and habits so easily and light-heartedly. I never could have done that....

"I am awfully absent-minded these days; you would laugh at some of the funny things I do. I
ride on the cars miles past my street, and wander about and forget where I am going. Sometimes
I think of things and then forget I was thinking."

In another six weeks' time came still more gloomy news:

"Our meetings are as uncertain, unpremeditated, and unarranged as his wanderings about the
city are. It happened that I was all alone for the whole of last week, eight precious days
of freedom, especially from Katie and her woes. I love her, as you know, but she does get on
my nerves, at times. So I wrote Terry, asking him to come and visit with me for several days.
It must have been my Jonah day, for the letter reached him, and he came and stayed here with
me for the whole seven days. During this time we talked a great deal of our life together and
of our life since we have not been together, and with his most calm and philosophical air he
spoke of our circumstances, past and present. It seemed so pleasant and homelike, so much like
the old days, to have dear Terry here with me, and I felt such lazy content to see and hear
him, that at times I awoke with a start, for I could not keep myself from the idea that our
separation was only a horrid dream.

"So, when he said things that ought to have hurt me dreadfully, I positively couldn't feel
hurt. Somehow, the sound of his voice was so pleasing that I missed the sting of some of his
pessimistic reflections about our love; it seemed to me that he spoke of others, surely not
of our two selves! But now, since he has gone, and I have been forced to think of the things
he said, many of the easily accepted but only half understood reflections on our love have
come back to me with all their sting. And I must now believe that I have passed out from Terry's
life utterly, and that there is no return, nor hope of return. The most I could possibly hope
for is an indifferent friendship, for so he has willed it, or perhaps fate, rather, has so
willed it. 'Dead love can never return,' he said. And I am now only one of the people he knows!
It is so terrible that I must avoid the blow, must seek an independence of my own.

"And I had such high hopes, such dreams of pillowing his dear head on my bosom, and, alas!
he would consider that intolerable. And, upon reflection, his head would, in fact, rest very
uneasily on my scrawny breast!

"So I am trying to resign myself and to readjust what is left of my life. It seems pitiful,
though, that my life has been so commonplace all through. Not one single exception, not one
thing that ever happened to me, or that I ever did, has been different from the experiences
of all the world. My life with Terry, which I surely expected would be different, would be
an exception to the commonplace love affairs of all people, has now ended the same way as everyone
else's.

"Well, I have had seven years of life, that is perhaps a little more than some people have,
and I ought to be satisfied with that. The biggest chapter of my life is over and done and
closed for ever and I will try not to look back or think of it too much. And I shall tell you
the same as if I were making some solemn vow, that I will not try any more to regain the love
I have lost."

This resolution of Marie's seemed to have helped her considerably, for her later letters are
not quite so exclusively concerned with the unhappy aspect of her relations with Terry. The
strong vitality of mind and temperament which enabled this factory girl and prostitute to adjust
herself to a relatively intellectual and distinguished existence still stood her in good stead,
and enabled her to meet the present deeply tragic situation step by step and not go under:
her youth and vitality and her love of life triumphed, as we shall see, over even this terrible
rupture; the consolatory philosophy of anarchism, which had educated her, largely fell away,
with the love of the man who had created it for her. But the work of the social propagandist
has been done on Marie: the woman is a thoroughly self-conscious individual, as capable of
leading her life as only are very few really distinguished personalities. Her next letter shows
again a more general interest, though still largely concerned with Terry:

"The other night Terry spoke for the Social Science League on 'The Lesson of the Haymarket'--referring,
as you know, to the hanging of the anarchists in 1886. The Saturday Evening Post had quite
a lengthy notice about it the day before the lecture, and nearly all the morning papers spoke
of it the day after. The lecture hall was well filled with people who do not usually attend
the S. S. League. And I think these people, who were not radical, were much shocked and disappointed,
for Terry was not a bit gentle and well-mannered, nor as philosophical as he nearly always
is. I thought his lecture good, though there was something forced about it. Perhaps because
he no longer has so much faith was the cause of his greater violence. It was as if he was trying
to remember what he had once felt; and that made the expression rougher than if it had been
more spontaneous. I really do not believe that he is, at bottom, at all violent. But he tried
to be so in this lecture. He advocated assassination and regicide and other most violent and
blood-curdling things. His voice and manner, however, in saying these terrible things were
not at all convincing. When replying to the critics, he was most violent, and was hissed and
shamed, over half of the audience leaving the hall, very angry and indignant. I thought, for
a while, that a regular free fist-fight would follow, and it very nearly did, but Terry had
a few friends with him, among them a German hen-pecked anarchist I must write you about, and
your friend Jimmy, both of whom were ready to stand by Terry.

"Needless to say, Terry was gloriously drunk, and utterly reckless, and after the meeting was
over quite a bunch of us became as drunk as he, though not quite so gloriously. He was quite
helpless toward the small hours, when our party broke up, and I took Terry home with me, as
Katie was not there, and on the way I had the pleasure of acting as a referee when he and a
stranger, who Terry fancied had insulted him, did really have a fist-fight; I gathered up their
hats and neck-ties and kept out of the way, ready to call assistance if need be, which fortunately
was not necessary, for they only rolled around in the dirt a little, and Terry only had his
chin smashed slightly by the fall.

"Drunk as he was, he did not strike the other man, though being stronger he could have pounded
the life out of him; he only tripped him up and rolled him on the ground. Terry is certainly
instinctively and naturally gentle and chivalrous, and I loved him as much as ever as I took
him home and put him to bed.

"I am beginning to think I am a genius in taking care of drunken men, for I have managed in
some way to take home and care for quite a number of them, for instance, Harris, who is the
most unmanageable and perverse creature when drunk. I had an experience taking him home which
I would not dare write you; and I can hardly realise to this day how I even succeeded in half
carrying and half dragging him to our home from away down town. He certainly was the limit.

"On Monday the papers were all shrieking for Terry's head--wanted him deported or persecuted
or prosecuted. But Terry has a good many friends and too much of a reputation as a philosopher;
and his friends and his reputation prevented his becoming a martyr. Two friends, both newspaper
men, managed to eliminate the most objectionable parts of Terry's terroristic utterances from
their respective papers, and Terry's sister, the lawyer, one sergeant of police, and the ferocious
but humane Tim Quinn did the rest. For the present, therefore, Terry's desire to be acquainted
with the inside of a prison, or otherwise to suffer for the cause which he still half-heartedly
believes in, is frustrated.

"To me the most important aspect of the lecture was that he prepared it in our home. So, for
another week, we enjoyed one another's company; and after the lecture he not only went home
with me, as I have said, but he has remained ever since. I am trying not to build up any more
hopes on this, because I know that Terry has been in a particularly reckless mood, and does
not care much where he is. I am sorry that he could not find a better outlet for his mood than
lecturing for the Social Science League, but that perhaps is a better and more harmless way
than getting in with the criminals, as he has wanted to do so often of late. You may be sure,
however, that his talk on the platform will not be forgotten, and should anything happen, in
any way like the McKinley affair, for instance, I am sure things would be made very unpleasant
for him. So I hope nothing will happen.

"Terry is really harmless. He expends all of his energy in desiring and thinking and talking,
and has nothing left over for action. Whenever he had any scheme in mind I did not like, I
used to encourage him to talk about it, knowing that he thus would be satisfied, without acting.
He lives almost altogether in the head and in the imagination, and is really a teacher, in
his own peculiar way, rather than an actor or practical man. That is why he takes offence at
what seems to me such little things: they are not little to him, in his scheme of things, which
is not the scheme of the world, and, alas! not even mine, I fear. He is so terribly alone,
and growing more so, and I feel so awfully sorry for him.

"Especially since our rupture I have been compelled to be so careful not to hurt his feelings
or trespass on his ideas of right and wrong; for he imagines he can feel what I am thinking
and feeling, even if no words are said. He says words only conceal thought and do not express
it. At times I feel so oppressed and depressed that I should experience the keenest ecstasy
if I could hurt him in some physical way, use my muscles on him until I were exhausted. In
imagination I sometimes know the fierce delight and exaltation of my flesh and spirit in hurting
this man whom I love, in hurting him morally and physically--and I feel the lightness of my
heart as the accumulated burden of my repression rolls away in the wildest, freest sensations.

"Of course, I have only felt this way at times; and at those times I know I was very passionate
and unreasonable. I had regular fits of jealousy and anger, but at other times I had a boundless
pity for him, there was something so pathetic about his gestures and his voice when he told
me he knows just how I feel about him, that I could have cried out with the ache of my heart.
It was so terrible to see how he suffered in his heroic attempt to suffice unto himself, to
defy the world. He tries to think and feel deeper and higher than anyone else, but this is
a terrible, terrible strain. It is all fearfully sad, and sometimes I wish I had never known him."

About his speech, Terry wrote:

"I am one of the by-products that do not pay just now, until some process comes along and sets
the seal of its approval on me. Just now I am deemed worse than useless, and since my speech
on 'The Lesson of the Haymarket Riot' the authorities are looking for a law that will deport
me. This will suit me, as I will swear that I am a citizen of no man's land. What I really
need is not deportation, but solitary confinement, for the sake of my meditations. For even
with my scant companionship I feel as if I were a circus animal. I still clutch convulsively
to the idea that thought is the only reality and all expression of it merely a grading down
of what was most high. If I am shut up I must cease talking and may think about real things,
that is, ideal things. That would help me to put up with the world, which cannot put up with
me unless I am in cold storage. There is a mental peace which passeth all understanding, and
perhaps I might find that peace in prison. I have been insidiously poisoning my own mind for
some time, and unless I can stop this I had better cease from talking, which does not seem
to purge me of my unconscious pose, and retire to solitude behind the prison bars. There, undisturbed,
I can meditate and often remember peacefully the beautiful things I have known in literature
and nature. Beauty is like rain to the desert, it is rare, but it vanishes only from the surface
of things, and deep down who knows what secret springs it feeds? As my sands run out, the remembrance
of the brief beauty I have known will break over me like the pleasant noise of far-off Niagara
waters on the stony desert of my life.

"I once thought that I could help the mob to organise its own freedom. But now I see that we
are all the mob, that all human beings are alike, and that all I or anyone can do is to save
his own soul, to win his own freedom, and perhaps to teach others to do the same, not so much
through social propaganda as by digging down to a deeper personal culture. Though I sometimes
think that just now the prison would help me, yet I also long at times to talk to the crowd.
I wish to tell the smug ones that we waste our lives in holding on to things that in our hearts
we hold contemptible. I wish to tell the mob just why there are thirty thousand steady men
out of work in this city: to do this I may take to the curbstone."

After his speech Terry returned to the home of Katie and Marie, as has been described by Marie,
but on no basis of permanence. He thus speaks of it:

"You may think that I, too, have 'cashed in' my ideals; for I am back at the Salon--for how
long nobody knows--by special proxy request of Katie. I will spare myself and you any moralising
on my relapse."

Katie, explaining Terry's return, said: "When he went away, Marie was sad all the time. She
could not eat nor sleep and was looking for her lover every day. After weeks had passed I said
to her: 'When you see Terry at the Social Science League, bring him home.' 'Do you mean it,
Katie?' asked Marie, her eyes sparkling. She did so, and Terry went quietly into his room,
and the next morning I made coffee as usual and Terry came out, and it was all right; it might
have been all right for good, if this damned Nietzsche business had not come up." But that
is anticipating.

It was after Terry's return that the famous miner Haywood, just after his acquittal from the
charge of murder in connection with the Idaho labour troubles, visited Chicago, and spent most
of his time at the Salon with Terry and Marie and several of their friends. The Salon was temporarily
revived, like the flash in the pan, under Haywood's stimulating influence. The men of our time seem those children who
break their toys to find the secret of its construction, broken toy What is it?, A steel spring,
a piece of glass, a bell, and, as to charm has disappeared.

April 21.

Renewing! I said the other day, oh! If I could only distract ... forget! No desire I do not
expect happiness, but a lasting and deep sleep, a freedom without reservation. I have repeatedly
said that they do not hate their lives for the things it found and that in general, I attract
and retain me. I understand those illusions and seek willingly. I hate life as men have done, as
a mutual obligation, as a social duty submitting my interests independence recognized, established
conveniences without me. I hate like everything that is not spontaneous in the will of sentient
creatures strong and intelligent God has deigned to make to your image. Convention is shameful to me
that to think that life is not a free act and that the soul is condemned in advance the existence ...
What am I saying? to immortality, to have consented ...

This state
of mind I've fallen for some days, I have attempted, however, a sweet
emotion, an emotion so much nicer, because I'm not used to it.

My mother, alarmed by my melancholy, wanted to find out why and oppose my sentences heart the charm
of the consolations and hopes. I've shaken with an involuntary joy at the thought that he loved
me enough to pity, and then I regretted bitterly for bringing angry for a reason so little motivated,
because I myself look good pregnant if to explain what she calls my pain. You will believe that it
is assumed that the love ... love! Illusions of child miserable than I have acknowledged many times
frivolity! ... Love!


CHAPTER XIII

Marie's Failure

Though Terry was back in what was formerly the Salon, and though the old spirit seemed at times
to be still alive, yet it was more in appearance than in reality. It is difficult to regain
an emotional atmosphere once lost; and it is especially difficult to live by the gospel of
freedom, when once the eloquence of that gospel is no longer deeply felt. Then there is nothing
left to take its place--no prosaic sense of duty, no steady habit, no enduring interest in
work. As these two human beings drifted further and further apart from their common love and
their common interest, the idealistic man became more self-centred, more unsocial, more fiercely
individual, and the emotional and sensual woman became more self-indulgent, more hostile to
any philosophy--anarchism such as Terry's, with its blighting idealism--which limited her simple
joy in life and in mere existence.

So their quarrels became more brutal, more abrupt. Both intensely nervous, both highly individualised,
their characters conflicted with the intensity of two real and opposing forces. A tragic aspect
of it all was that it was due to Terry's teaching that Marie attained to the highly individualised
character which was destined to rebel against the finally sterilising influence of her master.
Even physical violence became part of their life, and words that were worse than blows. The
strong bond which still lingered held them for a time together, notwithstanding what was becoming
the brutality of their relations. One day Marie called Terry to his coffee and he refused.
A quarrel followed, in the course of which she hit Terry on the head with a pitcher, and the
resulting blood was smeared over them both. When calm came again she said to him:

"Terry, how can we live together?"

"Ain't we living together? Doesn't this prove it?" he replied, grimly.

And this man would use violence in return--and this was the delicate idealist, the idealist
whose love for Marie had at one time been part and parcel of his high dreams for humanity and
perfection, a part of his propaganda, a part of his hope: during which period he had been scrupulous
not to use force of any kind, spiritual or physical, on the girl whom he doubly loved--the
girl whom he held in his arms every night for years with a passionate tenderness due to his
feeling of her physical fragility and her social unhappiness, rather than to any other instinct.

"Marie," he said, "did not fully understand the character of my love for her. She loved me
intellectually and sensually, but not with the soul. She wanted my ideas, and sex, and more
sex, but not the invisible reality, the harmony of our spirits. From the day that I fully understood
this, my confidence in her and in all things seemed to go. She felt that I had withdrawn something
from her, and it made her harder. She began cruelly to fling the amours that I had tolerated
as long as I hoped for the spiritual best in my face. It was a kind of revenge on her part."

Practical troubles, too, lent their disturbing element to the little remaining harmony of the
three.

"We shall probably be forced to leave our rooms in a short time," wrote Marie. "Our landlord
has asked us to leave, without giving any other reasons than that he wanted a smaller family
in these most desirable rooms! Terry is indignant, for we have been quiet and orderly, and
Katie has always paid the rent in advance. We shall certainly stay until the police come and
carry us out and our household goods with us.

"It is true that we have had unusual difficulty in paying the rent and in getting enough to
eat and smoke; and this has not added to our good-nature. You have no doubt read about the
'money stringency' in this country. Times are indeed very hard, thousands of men are out of
a job, and the so-called criminals are very much in evidence. For a long time Katie could not
find work to do and could not get any of her money from the bank, so that things looked very
'bohemian' around here for a while. She could not get anything to do in her own line, and finally
had to go out to 'service.' But this she could not stand more than a week, for Katie has fine
qualities and is used to a certain amount of freedom, so she couldn't stand the slavishness
of the servant life, though she had good wages and nice things to eat, which Katie likes very much.

"When Katie started in on this venture she had the proverbial thirty cents, which she divided
up with me--Terry had not returned from his wanderings at that time--and I recklessly squandered
ten cents of this going to and returning from the Social Science League. In a day or two there
was nothing edible in our house but salt, so I squandered my remaining nickel for bread. I
made that loaf last me nearly four days: I ate only when I was ravenously hungry, so that it
would taste good, for I hate rye bread. I slept a good deal of the time. I suffered terribly,
though, when my tobacco gave out, and I spent most of my time and energy hunting old stumps,
and I found several very good ones in the unswept corners and under the beds. I even picked
some out of the ashcan. These I carefully collected, picked out the tobacco and rolled it in
fresh papers, as carefully as any professional hobo."

When Katie was temporarily hard up, that naturally put Terry and Marie "on the bum." But they
remained "true blue" and did not go to work, Marie being willing to put up with all sorts of
discomfort rather than try for a job. She continued:

"It is a strange thing that nobody came to our house during these six days. But on the sixth
day, Terry came, and then I had a good square meal, and he even left me carfare and some of
the horrible stuff he calls tobacco. Two more days elapsed before Katie returned. Until then
I lived on that square meal. I had ten cents from Terry, but I was sick of rye bread. On the
day that Katie returned, in fact only a few hours before, I was foolish enough to visit an
anarchist friend, Marna. I was awfully lonely and thought a little change would do me good.
So I went to Marna, but got there a little too late for supper. I must admit I was hungry.
I hinted to Marna that I was, said I'd been in town all day, and things like that, but she
did not catch on and I was stubborn and wouldn't ask. Stephen was there, and for a moment I
thought I might eat. He had not had his supper, and he said that if Marna was not too tired
to cook, he would go and buy a steak. I tell you, the thought of that steak was awfully nice
and I had to put my handkerchief to my mouth to keep the water from flowing over. I offered
to cook it for him, but he passed it up. I made one more desperate bluff and asked him if he
would get some beer for us! And I reached for my purse, and for one wild moment I thought sure
he had called my bluff and would really take my only nickel, my carfare home. I nearly fell
over with suspense, but in the nick of time he went out, refusing my money. And I even taunted
him, asked him if he thought it was tainted!

"When the beer came, I drank most of it. Beer is a great filler, but of course it went straight
to my head and feet--that is, my head got light and my feet heavy. But I managed to navigate
to the street car and so on home, where I found Katie, a cheerful fire and a delicious smell
of cookery and coffee.

"Now, I must make you a confession. During these six days I had some thoughts of working, the
only thing I could think of being a job as a waitress. But when a vision of ham and pert females
and more impertinent males came to me my courage oozed away, and I did not even try. I don't
think I'll ever work again. Did you ever read Yeats' story 'Where There is Nothing?'

"I love Marna, as you know, but when she talks to me about 'work,' 'health,' and the like,
I feel like becoming even more solitary than I am. She says I am not ambitious! Ye gods, I
think I am ever so much more ambitious than she! I am more ambitious to live in these little
squalid rooms than in the mansions of the rich. My kind of happiness--I mean ideally--is not
Marna's kind; and I am sure now that if I ever find it, it will be in the slums. Here I can
sit and muse, undisturbed by the ambition of the world. Blake comes to me as an indulgent father
to his tired and fretful child and sings to me his sunflower song. If I were in a castle I
don't think even Blake could soothe my restless spirit.

"But, unfortunately, even in the slums one needs to eat. Without warning I tumble from my air
castles because some horrible monster gnaws at me, and will not let me be, however much I try
to ignore him. That mean, sneaking thing is hunger. And because I am only mortal, and because
the will to live is stronger than I, I must eat my bread. I often cry when I think of this
contemptible weakness. I have often tried to overcome this annoying healthiness of my body.
How can people be gourmands? Even Shelley and Keats had to eat. What a repulsive word 'eat'
is! I would I could eat my heart and drink my tears. The world is what it is because we must
eat. See the whole universe eating and eating itself, over and over! If it were not for this
fearful necessity, Terry and I should not, perhaps, have failed in our high attempt! If Terry
and Katie and I had never had this need, we might have become angels of virtue and insight.
But on account of this we never could really attain freedom; that embittered our souls and
turned us at times viciously against each other."

Terry's growing jealousy, which seemed to surprise Marie, was a sign of the weakening of his
philosophy, as far as it was social and not purely individual. It may seem strange that after
his real love for her appeared to pass, his jealousy increased; but this was due to several
causes: if his social interest in her--his propagandist interest--had continued, her sexual
license would have continued to feed his passion for social protest. But when Marie had ceased
to interest him as a "case," or a "type," or a "victim," the only bond remaining must be that
of the pure individual soul or of the body. Terry's lack of sensuality--his predominating spiritual
and mental character--precluded any strong tie of the physical kind. So there remained, as
a possible tie, only a close spiritual relation between two individuals, a soul bond--and this
Marie's character and conduct tended to prevent. Always
believe in something less ethereal and transcendent sobresubstancial. The friendship of spirits Platonism,
selfless worship a woman, but is regarded as rude simile, I like how spicy, but understand that
it is not like that dish where no there is more to the sauce. Mysticism is a condiment without
which love to be surly delicate palates, but never goes to the common people, to be a condiment
is as salt, mustard, pepper and other exotic spices.

Wretched, abominable is that people think so, but think this is so. What is Rosie in the party
were all very cultured and refined so as not to neglect the mystical side of love, and none
were quite metaphysical to grant this part mystical a substantive nature, as they say now the
philosophers. Mysticism, however much you put an in the press there in the mind, not talk show pulled
no love, but an adjective, an epithet, an attribute of love. Love mysticism was for the most spiritual
of the commentators as icing on the cake, but with one difference, namely that if the cake
with honey remove the flakes, honey remains, while in love with mysticism, if it is removed
love ... the smoke.

With this way of looking at things is not surprising that everyone had for exorbitant claim and
absurd whim of Condesito desire to want to go through a friend or a devout worshiper Beatriz Petrarchist.

Some
excuse was, it must be confessed, for as roguish disbelief.

Background the Count and his character and position militated against what he wanted, not got
along with represent the role he craved.

The Count was known conqueror Alhedín-nigh irresistible. On the other hand, nobody stopped to notice
that the worshipers perpetual, eternal lovers sigh have been always from the bottom up, and
not vice versa. King never fell in love with Plato's pastor, not the rich of the poor, nor the
Duke of the seamstress. Generally is that in this lineage of love Always see his beloved mistress
as you walk, as on an altar, and there in the sky, dead and, as Dante saw. Thus have longed troubadours
of humble birth and bag empty by the great lady who received benign feudal in his castle, the
courtiers, by a beautiful queen who has been virtuous and gruff, but fans to sigh for them,
and many Gerineldo of varying rank, the beautiful lady who served. All these cases are plausible
Platonic love.
 The other
day an old lover of mine turned up in Chicago, and this brought about a scene with Terry.

"To explain this episode I must go back several years. I once knew a Swiss boy, a typical Tyrolean.
The day I met him in Chicago he had just arrived from his native land, and seemed so forlorn
and lonely and miserable that my heart went right out to him. He was such a big, handsome child,
too, about twenty years old. He could not understand a word of English, and no one talked to
him, but me, who, as you know, had parents who spoke German. He was delighted and told me his
whole life story, how he became emancipated and one of the Comrades. His eyes sparkled so and
his cute little blond curls jumped all over his head with the enthusiasm and joy of having
found some one to talk to, that I was quite content to sit and watch and listen. And he thought
me the most sympathetic person in the world.

"Had I only known the result of my impulse to say a few words to a lonely boy! For he did fall
in love with me, and in such sturdy mountaineer fashion that I very nearly had nervous prostration--and
he too--in trying to get away from his strenuous wooing. For he started out to win me in the
same style that he would have used toward one of the cow-girls in his native Alps. He waylaid
me and followed me around everywhere, just camped on my trail; wanted to carry me away to some
place out West, where there were mountains. The more I discouraged him, the more lovesick and
forlorn he became, until finally he became the laughing-stock of the 'movement,' and I was
chaffed about it unmercifully. He knew I had a lover, but that was no obstacle; and he told
me several times with fine enthusiasm that he would not object to sharing his love with another
man! He had read something about free love, and thought he should like to be an Overman and
superior to petty jealousies.

"Strange to say, my curly-headed Swiss lover did not 'insult' me, as they call it, though I
naturally enough supposed that he wanted to, but didn't have enough courage. But I was wrong,
as I discovered later, when I grossly insulted him! Perhaps a girl is loved only once in a
lifetime in just that way, perhaps not at all, and I often think I made a mistake in being
so cruel to my boy lover. But I, alone on this miserable earth, brings me all the miseries
of mankind, and all that can be a charm or a relief I is cruelly prohibited. My sweetest affections
have become unbearable torments, and the very air we breath is poison on my lips since God has disowned
me your Providence.

10 September.

And yet, he has loved, still loves and cries another. Do not know love as I loved her. Can not devote
to it all his memories, all his thoughts, his whole life, and when you lie upon her bosom, think
of another love and another happiness. Kid yourself of your joy, gentle soul and confident! That
husband is not that the sky destined. Their transportation, their sighs, their tears are not
for you. It is not you who he wants in his dreams. Unfortunate! Is not he loves you! And to
what you require right affection that he can not give? Does is not no commitment has canceled all
commitments of the heart and has betrayed to nature?

I could, well ... Ever! This idea has been brewing in my chest now, but ... Ever! Chimera! Illusion
of darkness! Who am I? Ay! a captive whose imagination has rested for a moment in voluptuous
dreams, I thought walking on roads full of greenery and under canopies
of roses not occupied his imagination rather than hopes and expectations
laughing easily and that, Suddenly he finds on the basis of his chains
and his prison.

When I am well away from all this by a sea without shores, when I feel overwhelmed, overwhelmed by despair,
when I watch all my faculties degrade and irritate in this state of turmoil and pain when
trying to calculate the extent to which slight modifications circumstances or temperament can influence
our most serious decisions, and when I reflect on so many burning sensitivity unfortunate that
the sky has thrown between the setbacks and struggles of life, I miss unless we have such a
great number reputations written in blood, and unworthy of the trials I foolish in the crowd.
Question these arrogant, blind to these dispensers of glory and punishment: they will have assessed,
measured and planned everything. There is no crime, not a thought that escapes its laws, their
investigations to their executioners, and yet they do not know or will never know how weak,
narrow or imperceptible is the distance between a rebel emperor and
punishment of an outlaw of the apotheosis of a demigod.

11.

I've seen a second time I entered a strange house, and being announced, came to my Mr. Spronck meeting,
giving the most vivid evidence of disease. "Carlos Munster! - Said - Ay! "So it was you ...?»
and has not finished the sentence, but his silence spoke the same
my heart.

And justify seemed pitying, as if to avoid my hate, and I, while
So, trembling, self-conscious, his eyes moist with tears, I have been
twenty times tempted to throw myself at your knees or in their arms.

September 12.

There are pleasures that we have tasted so delicious, that figure we recall that we have them, should
be sufficient to nourish our hearts and blissful laughing ideas for entire lifetime, and when we meet,
long after in the same circumstances, occurs, however, that these
emotions, so nice and so longed for, have lost almost everything prestige.

We regret then the instability of human things and because we and we have no ability to enjoy
the beauty that rob us, we acknowledge the nature madly have changed.

There's nothing sweeter, I say, be able, after long years major setbacks of exile and suffering,
transported to the days thinking of happy as pure childhood to see again the places that have
been the scene of our first games, of our first jobs and our early success, the prospects we have
our first employee pencils, the top home and hereditary domains, that recognize the field that
our father has demarcated, the tree whose shade he loved, his plow, the rustic home and the bed
of peace from which we are blessed. He remembers one with so much emotion in that time, rich
in ignorance and simplicity, which limited our laborious mediocrity wishes and a narrow horizon
our universe! We so often want to bring our about all they have done with us learning about
life and hopefully many joys of evoking those memories! I left Salzburg to revive my heart
home that innocent pleasures and comforts rather than I expected, all I've seen has not only
served to redouble my disgust. More painfully Pleasures those who
have purchased such memories!

Nietzsche's doctrine of the distinguished individual being "beyond good and evil," a man superior
to the morality of society, his hatred of Christian civilisation and Christian ethics, his
love of the big forcible blonde who takes his right by his strength only, all this was congenial
to Terry's character, and especially so after the weakening of his social philosophy. The aloofness
of the Overman, the individualistic teachings of Zarathustra, appealed to the anti-social Terry,
to the man who more and more went back to his egotistic personality, to whom more and more
the "communist" Christian anarchists made little appeal, who more and more became what is called
an individualist anarchist, with whom there is little possibility of relationship, who is essentially
anti-social, whose philosophy is really that of social destruction. This indeed is the anarchist
who lives in the public mind--a destroyer. But what the public mind does not see is that this
destructive anarchist is the result of a lost hope in anarchistic communism, a lost hope of
radical extension of social love, in absolute solidarity.

CHAPTER XIV

Marie's Revolt

"The winners fall by the wayside," wrote Terry, "while the losers must ever on--hearkening
to some high request, hastening toward a nameless goal. I am loser, for my motives are large
and my actions small. In my desire to embrace the universe I may neglect a comrade. I can be
as hard as my life and as cruel as its finish. I have only an ideal, and whenever anything
or anybody gets in the way of it I am ruthless in feeling. I must not give up all that I have--what
is in my imagination: I have nothing else."

Yes, Terry is hard. He "passes up" remorselessly not only the individual, but all society;
but it is the hardness of the idealist, of the man who is still religious in the sense that
he sees a beyond-world with which to compare this world and find it totally lacking. So, more
and more he "passed up" Marie, found her more and more lacking, more and more human. The fact
of her being a social outcast no longer had its strong appeal. He became hard and cruel to
her through idealism, just as she had been hard and cruel to him through sensuality and false
philosophy. But her hardness never equalled his fine scorn.

For a year or two preceding this point in the situation I had been living in Europe, and had
met a good many men and women who had given a larger part of their lives to the making of a
social experiment. Some of them, discouraged, had returned to a "bourgeois" manner of life,
some even to a "bourgeois" philosophy. Almost all of the anarchists I have known lost their
philosophy and enthusiasm with middle age, and experience with the actual constitution of things,
combined with disillusion regarding the ideal. Most of them had been hurt or broken by their
attempt, but they all retained a certain something, a certain remaining dignity of having struggled
against the inevitable, and had acquired insight into some of the deeper things in life, though
having lost some of the childlike simplicity which is a characteristic of the social rebel.

I saw a great deal of an old Frenchman, who had known Bakunin, and had been astute in the dangerous
work of the "International" in England and Germany. An associate of William Morris and the
other English anarchists who at that time called themselves socialists, my friend came in contact
with much that was distinguished in mind and energy; he afterward carried the propaganda of
revolutionary socialism to Germany, where he was arrested and imprisoned for five years. He
is now a handsome, white-haired, well-preserved old man, with fine simple manners and joy in
simple things, love of children and of long conversations with friends, good will and peace.
He has retained a certain mild contempt for the "bourgeois," for people who prefer an easy
time in this world to an attempt, even a foolish one, for radical improvement. But he knows
the world now, and I fancy many of his illusions are gone.

Another of my radical friends is now only thirty-six years old; but already he is tired and
discouraged, socially speaking. He is a Frenchman, too, with all the easy mental grace and
intellectual culture of his race. Soon after his student days at the Sorbonne, the social fever
of our day, which burns in the blood of all who are sensitive, took possession of him. Like
Terry, he was drawn emotionally to an interest in the social outcast; like Terry, a girl in
that class interested him, and he took up the cause of the girls, and led an attack against
the policiers des moeurs, the special police who attempt to regulate prostitution in Paris.
He spent all the money he had in the attempt, lost his respectable friends, and, after several
years of fruitless effort, hope left him. When I met him he was living quietly, in bohemian
fashion, drawing a very small salary and devoting himself to abstract philosophy, to science,
and to pessimistic memories of the days of his social enthusiasm, or what he now calls his
social illusions.

One of the most pathetic social experiments I have known was made by a young girl, whom I also
knew at Paris. She generously determined that she would have no sex prejudices; and for several
years she strove against the terribly strong social feeling in that regard. Not only theoretically
but practically she persisted in thinking and acting in a way which the world calls immoral.
She wanted to show that a girl could be good and yet not what the world calls chaste. She did
not believe that sex-relations had anything to do with real morality. In one way, she has been
successful. She is as good now--better--as when she began her experiment. She is broader and
finer and bigger; but she has suffered. She has been disappointed in her idealism, disappointed
in the way men have met her frank generosity, she has been injured in a worldly way. Her strongest
desires are those of all good women--she deeply wants the necessary shelter for children and
social quiet and pleasure, and these essentials are denied her because of her idealism. She
half feels this now and is tired and discouraged.

Another woman who has paid heavily for her "social" interests is in quite a different position.
She is married to a man who is also a social idealist. He is so emotionally occupied with "society"
that nature and life in its more eternal and necessary aspects touch him lightly. He hardly
realises their existence. She tries to follow him in this direction; strains her woman's nature,
which is a large one, to the uttermost. It is probable that the loss of his child was due to
this idealistic contempt for old wisdom. Not a moment must be lost, not a thought devoted to
anything but the revolution; this necessitated social activity, and that exclusively. Where
was the opportunity for the quiet development and care of an infant? The children of the "radicals"
are few, and as a rule do not grow up in the best conditions. This certainly is a terrible
sacrifice entailed upon the social idealist.

Writers in France and in Europe generally are much more interested in radical ideas of society
and politics than they are in this country. The most distinguished among them are from the
American point of view radical, at least. There is hardly a play of note produced in France
or Germany that does not in some way trench upon modern social problems. Anatole France is
a philosophical anarchist, and so is Octave Misbeau. It is not a disreputable thing to be so
in France. An Emma Goldman there would be an object of respect. The prime minister of France
was generally regarded as an anarchist before he went into office. A man of the type of Hervê
would be deemed a madman here. Even a man as little radical as Jaurès would be considered a
terrible social danger in America and could not conceivably have the power he exerts in France,
where they have a respect for ideas as such.

But, combined with this interest in social things and this willingness to entertain the most
radical ideas, there is a note of pessimism and disillusionment. Anatole France's work shows
this double tendency well. He reflects the social revolt and lack of respect for the old society
in a most subtle way, but also he mirrors the failing hope of the social enthusiast. He has
a deep sympathy for the social idealist, but nearly every book suggests the inevitable wreckage
of enthusiasm on the rocks of actuality.

When, after an absence of several years, I returned from Europe and went again to Chicago,
I found Terry alone, disheartened, and different from the Terry I had known. Soon I saw that
in him had taken place a process not unlike that which had happened to my friends abroad and
which was reflected in European literature. His letters and Marie's had already indicated,
as we have seen, his social disappointment. But I found him more bitter even than I had expected;
cut off even from the anarchists, nourishing almost insanely his individuality, full of Nietzsche's
philosophy of egotism, rejecting everything passionately, turning from his friends, turning
from himself. Old society had long been dead for him and now he had no hope for the new!

Besides, Marie was not with him: she had revolted and run away. I had expected to see her in
Chicago; she had written me that she would be there, but when I arrived I learned from Terry
and Katie that she had gone away. During the few weeks preceding my return to Chicago, the
quarrels between the three had grown in poignancy. Terry, unlike some of the disappointed anarchists
I have known, could not settle back into an easy acceptance of life. With him it was all or
nothing. More and more fiercely he rejected all society, even, as we have seen anarchist society.
Of course, Marie came more and more in the way of this general anathema. She was young and
pleasure-loving, and at last her nature could no longer stand this general rejection, the absence
of the simple pleasures of life. It was not their quarrels, even when they came to blows, that
determined her action. It was a revolt from the radical sterility of Terry's philosophy. Katie
furnished her with the necessary money, and she went away to California. There this tired creature,
this civilised product of the slums, this thoughtful prostitute, this striving human being
full of the desire for life and as eager for excellence as is the moth for the star, went into
camp, and there, in the bosom of nature, her terrible fatigue was well expressed in the great
sense of relief that resulted: a new birth, as it were, a refreshing reaction from slum life
and overstrained mental intensity. This new birth and this reaction from Terry's philosophy
are well expressed in her letters to Terry and to me. To me she wrote:

"I have not dared to write you before for fear of your anger toward me for my abrupt dismissal
of our plans of meeting, but I could not help it. The life instinct in me would not be doomed,
but was insistent in its demands and made me flee from insanity and death. So here I am, far
away from civilisation, from the madding crowd, away up in the mountains, making a last effort
to live the straight free life of Nature's children, a suckling at the breasts of Mother Earth.
And truly her milk is passing sweet and goes to the head like wine, for I feel intoxicated
with the beauty and joy of all things here in this new, wonderful world. I did not know that
such beauty existed, and my appreciation of it is so intense that it produces sensations of
physical pain. I live much as the birds do, or at least try to--no thought of the morrow, or
of the past, except when I receive a letter from dear old Katie or from Terry. Katie asks me
if I have found a job yet, and Terry has some sweet reflections about death or dead things.
But I recover in an amazingly short time from these blows, climb to the mountain-top, extend
my arms to the heavens, and embrace passionately the great, grand, throbbing stillness.

"I have been here now a whole month and have not yet wearied of it for a moment. Each day brings
a new, wonderful experience; and each day I feel a real part of the great wonderful scheme
of things. Indeed, I am becoming a part of nature. I have grown so straight and tall, and so
beautifully thin and supple that I can dart in and out of the stream without bumping myself
against the rocks, can climb steep hills, and let the winds blow me where they will. I should
not be at all surprised to awaken some morning and find that I had become one of the tall reeds
that sway to and fro along the banks of our mountain stream.

"In one of my brief periods of returning civilisation, just after receiving a terrible letter
from Terry, I had myself weighed at the store and post-office of the town not far away from
our camp; my weight was exactly eighty pounds! It seemed to me that I was fading away into
something wild and strange. But I have never felt such physical and mental well-being since
I can remember. I hardly need to eat, but our camp cook actually forces me to swallow something.
He is a German 'radical' of the old school. Frightfully tired of the radical bunch as I am,
I like this simple old man. He is like a part of Nature, has lived on her bosom all his life,
and loves her and no other. We have visitors at our camp occasionally, and they bring things
to eat and drink. When they are gone, the cook and I live on what is left and get along as
best we may. There are lots of wild fruits and nuts growing about here and they are delicious.
Neither of us has any money nor care for the morrow.

"After I arrived here, all the bitterness of life vanished. I thought and felt very beautifully
of Terry, and always shall, for I have made an ideal of him, and his grand, noble head, like
a blazing tiger-lily perched upon a delicate and slender stem, will always be for me the greatest,
most wonderful recollection of all the years. But I have no longer any desire to be with him,
yet I do love and adore him, my own wonderful, sweet, great Terry!"

To Terry she wrote: "I am intoxicated by all this beauty and love the very air and earth. I
feel the ecstasy of the æsthetic fanatic. Were I not disturbed by thoughts of you, I would
indeed become another Eve before the fall, though I have strange desires and my blood beats
as in the veins of married women. But no lovers can quench my fever. All the tiresome males
are far away and I feel new-born and free. The air is scented with balsam and bey, and a pure
crystal stream flows through this valley between two hills covered with giant redwood trees,
and rare orchids of the most curious shape and colour toss wantonly in the breeze on the tree
and hilltops. Birds and fishes and reptiles disport themselves in the sunshine, and giant butterflies
of the most marvellous colours flutter so bravely among the ferns and flowers. There are no
tents here in our camp, but we are covered with the fragrant branches of the spicy pines and
nutmeg trees. It is a Paradise, and I think of you always when I am in the midst of beauty.

"My trip here included an eighteen-mile walk--in one day--think of that! I am getting as thin
and strong as a greyhound. I don't wear clothes at all, but when I do, it is the old man's
overalls, which I put on to go to town to get groceries or call for the mail. At night, our
old cook builds a huge fire of redwood logs, and then his tongue loosens and he quotes poetry
by the column or talks of his experience as a preacher, actor, village schoolmaster, and vagabond.
Without a cent he travels all over California, as strong and rugged as any redwood tree that
grows in this wonderful valley.

"It is so secluded here that no one would suspect campers were about. The trail leads down
a steep descent. How stately it is between the huge stems of the trees, along our beautiful
creek, cool and clear as crystal, and filled with trout and other fishes. There I sit in the
sun and allow the water to pour over my shoulders."

In another letter to Terry she writes:

"Our sylvan retreat has been somewhat disturbed by the advent of Mrs. Johns, her children and
her dog. Annie is also here, but they will not remain long, it is too quiet, too lonely, and
the nights are too mysterious and uncanny, strange noises to disturb the slumbers of the timid.
And besides there is nothing to do, no hurry or bustle or activity. The spirit of repose, of
rest, of sweet laziness broods over this spot, inviting us to dream away the hours among the
spicy pine trees. And for two such active ladies it is very dull here. Even when they go to
town they return disgusted and weary in spirit because of the slowness of the natives, who
are half Spanish, half Mexican. Even the beautiful trail winding in and out among the mountains
does not compensate them for the dreadful slowness of the natives. I, however, love this slowness
and converse amicably with the natives. And when I am a little active I go fishing, or climb
about, or take a lesson in Spanish from my old philosopher-cook. I am now learning a little
peasant song, the refrain being, 'Hula, tula, Palomita,' and it does sound so beautiful that
I repeat it over and over. It means, 'Fly, fly, little dove!'

"The fishing I do not care for much. It is exciting for a time, but soon grows a bit too strenuous
for my lazy temper. The little stream is filled with trout; one has flies for bait which have
to be kept on the move continually. Walking and jerking the lines out of the water continually
soon makes my arms and legs tired. I like best of all to lie in a bed of fragrant leaves, my
head in the shade and the rest of me in the sun, the murmur of the brook in my ears, the skies
mirrored in my eyes, fantastic dreams in my mind--in these you are seldom absent. At night
I sleep as I have never slept--a deep, dreamless slumber. I awake to a cold plunge in the stream.
Oh, it just suits me!

A letter from Terry came like a dart into her solitude and for a moment disturbed her mood--her
deeply hygienic, fruitful mood. She wrote to him:

"Your letter was a dreadful, an overwhelming shock. It aroused passions in me which I thought
were laid to rest. But, after getting very drunk, I had sense enough to sleep over it, so that
this morning I am almost my new self again. Last night I felt like cursing you with all the
wrath of the earth and heaven. The last three weeks I have been camping here, caught in the
spell of the wonder and beauty of nature. I have written you the half crazy rhapsodies of a
girl intoxicated with the joy of life and health. Now I do indeed think that life is beautiful
and worth the living. No, I do not worry about you. I am as happy and care-free as the birds,
and live in and for the moment. Everything in the past is dead. Only when your letter came,
these old things of my old self raised their heads for a little time, but they too shall die
speedily, if I mistake not. Life is too wonderful, too beautiful to be marred thus by the ends
of frayed and worn-out passions, by memories or regrets of you. I have become happy, healthy,
and free, free without hardness, and in my freedom and joy I have found my love, my beautiful
Terry, whom I may love passionately, tenderly and for ever, the dear ideal one. Is it not wonderful?
I crown myself with flowers and go forth to meet him every day. I kneel at his feet and caress
his dear hands. For I love him dearly, this very new Terry. Yet, my dear, if you should come
near me, I mean, you, my old poisonous Terry, I would flee from you as from a pest. I would
loath myself and the sun and flowers and all the other beautiful things of earth. I do not
think of you at all, my old Terry, but I think of you and love and adore you, my new, wonderful
Terry, and I make myself beautiful for you. So, my dear old Terry, I will leave you to 'lice
and liberty,' to your 'hard free life,' and I will now lave myself with the pure crystal waters
and make myself clean again, and then look on the sun once more and dream again of my own adorable
Terry."

In this letter, Marie said, by implication, a deep truth about social revolt. She could never
have lived her life without him, this strange, poetic man. He awoke in this outcast, rather
vicious girl, a keen longing for the excellent, for the pleasures of the intelligence and the
temperament; he gave her an assured sense of her own essential dignity and worth; defended
her against the society that rejected her. This was a truly Christ-like thing to do, and this
she could never forget or do without. So, in her wilderness, she holds fast to her ideal Terry.
But with this idealist she could not live, practically. The growing irritation felt by him
because of his radical mal-adjustment to this world rendered him step by step more impossible
to live with. Harshness, injustice, became forced upon him as qualities of his acts. The interior is
very spacious, but lacks the luxury and elegance, when compared with other more beautiful European
cities.

The city already has a beautiful modern market, ie foundations and plinths stone walls and buildings of
steel and glass. They are also running Exchange, splendid palace,
very tasteful and will be a monument to the arts and speculation.

The City Palace is a beautiful and elegant building, a simple architecture that belongs at
the time of the first rule, lacking certain character, but cheerful and unpretentious plagiarist.
In the rest, under modern buildings around the style of Paris, specializing in always tend to feature
the simplicity of this century. If the material Lyon is a kind of copy of Paris, in the moral is
something approaching to caricature. Is easy to see in the pretension to imitate customs in
particular those of Paris; but as the southern type objects there special conditions, is a kind of
moral struggle that destroys all local color, without allowing assimilation porous. Here comes
many applications are exaggerated, and often encountered in the streets
with faces and groups have their good points of extravagance.

The population of Lyon is very liberal and still Republican, revealing a general style pleasantly
stimulating voluntary basis to the traveler. And one of those eccentricities apparent peoples,
who never lack of explanation, that city, which is an emporium wealth and living in the toils
of a great industrial and commercial movement, reveals a decided inclination for the arts,
cultivates the taste with dedication and enthusiasm, and has monuments of every kind that can
boast more than one reason. Are famous the Lyon orchestra, the theater is looking for pleasure,
work beautiful works of sculpture, Lyon and vanity fair preserved with its rich museums and
monuments and their schools of painting, sculpture, architecture
and music, and has been and continues to be the birthplace of many
artists great merit.

The first monument to the traveler visiting Lyon is the Palace of Arts in which Museums are antiques,
paintings, sculpture, natural history and geology and mineralogy, as well as temporary living of
the Exchange. The building has such a vast sum of precious curiosities from their cloisters to
its high galleries and terraces, which requires A study of several
days.

The reader to forgive me because I just give you a sense is given very concise fingerprints
taken only eight hours of observation very quickly.

If the exterior of the Palace is without merit, within the interest begins to enters the vast
courtyard cloistered, overlooking a terrace in circumference, with balustrades stone, the whole
building, and a number of large groups and high reliefs representing many historical passages, outdoors
and weather.

Most are excellent, despite many mutilations in the details, but some groups are much merit
power of expression and delicacy and boldness of the chisel and the chisel, to delight and fascinate
wondering to find such a fine rough stone sculptures.

The four lower cloisters contain abundant archaeological collection only Lyon, which alternates
the most curious objects, some (very few) of the previous era the conquest of Gaul by Caesar,
and most relevant to the Roman, Byzantine and Gothic. Etruscan vases, fake, rude, statues,
busts and groups most curious, huge rough stone slabs or pieces of marble with beautiful reliefs,
revealing all a civilization - and graves, tombstones and broken columns, inscriptions curds
are preserved with great regularity, and sketches Byzantines in stone
with the air cartoon of a society that the dust of ages tuck, - all
placed with intelligence against the walls of the cloister, is not
only a popular school for senses, but the bleak picture but eloquent
of past generations. He felt it and
wrote me:

"While you were in Italy, I sent you a letter in which I represented myself as one clamouring
up out of the depths of his being to you who might understand. Now I sincerely and deeply regret
having made this attempt with you. In the same letter I predicted that your return might find
me back in the depths of my being, where I belong. I regret I did not stay there when you came
along. This feeling is due to no fault of yours or mine; but points to the fact that I must
become still more exclusive and circumspect."

Of Marie he wrote: "This attachment between two human beings is in all circumstances very terrible.
The bond between Marie and myself was as strong as death, and partly so because of our great
and essential differences. The first night we spent together struck one of the deep things
in our discord. I was too nervous and sensitive to touch her that night, and in the morning
she bitterly reproached me. The first book that really aroused her to the meaning of life was
'Mademoiselle de Maupin.' Deeper than this difference was her galling interference in my affairs
which never prompted me to meddle in hers. And her failure to appreciate or reciprocate my
respect for the integrity of her personality is the hardest blow she can ever give to me. I
have the same fatal charge to make against almost all men; the exceptions are so few and doubtful
that I doubt whether I can ever gain from another that intense receptive attitude which I am
willing to bestow. Fortunately for me, this illusion that there are such intense perceivers
re-creates itself out of the veriest dust and dross of humanity. Like Shelley's 'Cloud,' my
illusion may change, but it cannot die. Now I am in a state of mind when I am willing to let
everything go by default--everything except my last illusion, that I can never let myself out
to anyone. To Marie--and to you--and one or two others--I have been sorely tempted to lay myself
out--but not even the moon can seduce me to reveal myself. My dead and buried self is my first
and last seduction. This is crazy, of course, but I am heartily sick of all the 'sense' I know
or can know. I believe, however, that I have lived so close to the 'truth' that its shadow
has been cast over all my life. If, in the last analysis, all is illusion, I shall stick to
the most powerful one--myself. My feeling for Marie arises largely from the fact that she is
an expression of the irreparable part of my life--of its deepest essence.

"A year ago to-day, on the thirteenth of August," he wrote, "occurred my first, last, and only
breakaway from the best pal I have ever hoped to have, Marie. Now that it has passed, I see
it in its proper proportions, just as if it had happened to someone else, but to one as near
and dear to me as myself. I have broken away from the Mob, too. My sympathy for what is called
the People has been worn down to a mere thread that might easily be broken and turn me against
them. When one has been stoned long enough, one may easily turn into something as hard as stone
itself. I am like the knight of old, turned inside out. I am developing a coating of internal
mail, as so many of the attacks come from within. But worse than attacks from within or without
is the sordid security and mental inertia of all the people about me: they are strangling me
just as surely as if they put a rope around my neck. By day they hurry on like ghosts about
their business, and by night they gather in the little tombs of many rooms they call their homes.

"You may call it madness, this my cutting off of all things. I know that I have kept off madness
a long while now. I have shrunk from 'business' to social anarchy and pure beings, from these
again I have shrunk to books and poetry, from these again into the solitude of myself where
only I am really at home. Though I have lost my general bearings, I still stand at the helm
of myself. I am going to pieces on the rocks of the world, but I still inhabit the realm of
the soul.

"When I could no longer see my ideals rise out of my work, I quit that work; for then the work
was no longer an expression of myself. This is the origin of all modern problems. A man stands
to his job because of the visions that come to him only when at work. He sees in imagery his
own possibilities arise out of the thing on which he is at work, and easily links himself to
his fellows. Thus does the worker make of his eternal cerebral rehearsals an endless chain
of imaged solidarity binding him in a maze from which he can never think his way out. The fixed
gaze of those who try to grasp the abstract is proof of this.

"When I could no longer see my ideals arise out of human solidarity, I quit my fanatical belief
in the possibility of a Utopia. So that now I am not even an anarchist. I am ready to pass
it all up."

When I saw Terry for the last time, and found him in this almost crazy crisis of extreme individualism,
where he hopelessly "passed up" everything--human society, love and friendship, all the things
his warm and loving Irish heart really desired, I felt that here indeed was a complete expression
of the spirit of revolt. It was so extreme that I and no one else could follow him in it. It
had passed beyond the point where social rebellion may be useful or stimulating or suggestive
poetically and had reached the sad absurdity of all extreme attitudes. One lesson Terry's proud
and strenuous soul has never learned: that the deeper and simpler things in social growth we
must take on faith. We cannot demand an ideal reason or justification for all social organisation,
for the ways that human beings have of living together. The elementary social forms at least
must be instinctively and blindly accepted. To go beyond in one's rejection the anarchism of
the social communist into what is called individualistic anarchism is mere egotistic madness
and has as its only value the possible poetry of a unified personal expression. Into this it
was that Terry fell, and of course he could find no support for it except in his own soul,
which could not bear the strain. No soul could, for, struggle as we may, we are largely social
and cannot stand alone. Terry's life well shows the sympathetic source of social rebellion
and its justification, but it also shows the ultimate sterility of its extreme expression.

The latest word I have about Marie is that she is at work "keeping house for a respectable
family" in San Francisco. Her experience in camping-out seems to have rendered her normal to,
for her, an extreme degree. Going to work certainly represented as radical a reaction from
Terry and his philosophy as well could be imagined. A friend of mine in San Francisco writes
of her: "She is now to all appearances a good, respectable girl. She wants to live a new life,
is working hard, and is trying to break away from smoking. Sometimes she feels the restraint
severely, and comes to our house where she knows she can smoke and express herself. She is
in better health, and I think now is in close enough touch with nature not to want to go back
for nourishment to ideas and the slum."

The latest word I have from Terry shows him faithful to the end--faithful to his character
and his mood:

"There is a rumour that Marie has got a job at general housework. This gave me the blues--after
all our life together, this the end! I'd rather have her do general prostitution, with the
chance of having an occasional rest in the hospital. But perhaps her drudgery will kill her
enthusiasm for 'vita nuova!'

"I should have answered your letter had I not been suffering from an old malady of mine which
is accompanied by such mental depression that I could not answer the communication of even
a lost soul. The old town, which they called Lugdunum, was all over the hill
and Fourvières skirts, and fire that was touched him to send rebuild Neron, extending on both rivers.
Today he has two hundred and sixty streets, and four very long driveways or avenues which follow the
banks of the rivers, was fifteen considerable fortifications the round. Some of the oldest churches
are in ruins, and restored today, the same while completing or continuing vast buildings to rejuvenate
the city. "Anarchism" she embraced as long as it enhanced her
being; as long as this deeply emotional philosophy added to the fulness of her life, she saw
its meaning and its use; when it finally tended to sterilise her new existence, its "pragmatic"
value was nothing.

This is the test of all social theory: How It Works Out. In Marie's case, as in the case of
many proletarians, it worked out well, as a general civilising and consoling philosophy, for
a time, but when carried to an "idealistic" extreme, it tended rapidly towards general death--from
which all live things react. So it was with Marie: she left her "poisonous" Terry and sought
for another vitalising experience. Goethe said that the best government is that which makes
itself superfluous. Terry's spiritual influence on Marie, important for her in the beginning
as rendering her self-respecting and mentally ambitious, had become superfluous. But it had
been of great value to the girl. So, too, with our society. The sun is white and
cold, the flowers do not have the strength to open and not heard in the field rather than birds
chirping in the brambles. Before there was an air so sweet, so nice when it started to fall
afternoon and I liked it so much when shaking my hair! Now dry breezes that all and scares
me the noise they make when they squeak in dead branches. If I could only to see a spring like
my youth, I think I'm cured, but not see now. "I wanted to talk about Adela and I stopped putting
a finger to his lips. "We should not name it so high - I said - could vanish. The angels are
merely passing on land. They have never been seen older.


     "To one reader at least--one weary reader of many books
     which seem for the most part 'flat, stale and
     unprofitable'--this is a book that seems eminently 'worth
     while.' Indeed, every word of the book, from cover to cover,
     is supremely, vitally interesting. Most novels are tame
     beside it, and few recent books of any kind are so rich in
     suggestiveness."--Interior.

     "What is the value of such an autobiography of a thief as
     Mr. Hapgood has given us? It is this. Professional crime is
     one of the overprosperous branches of industry in our large
     cities. As a nation we are casting around for means to check
     it, or, in other words, to divert the activities of the
     professional criminals into some other industry in which
     these men can satisfy their peculiar talents and at the same
     time get a living with less inconvenience to the mass of
     citizens. The criminal, being as much a human being as the
     rest of us, must be known as he is before we can either
     influence him personally or legislate for him effectually.
     If we treat him as we would the little girl who stole her
     brother's candy mice or as the man who under great stress of
     temptation yields to the impulse to steal against his
     struggling will, we will fail, for we overlook the very
     essence of the matter--his professionalism. It is safe to
     say that perusal of Mr. Hapgood's book will help many a
     student of criminology to find his way through the current
     tangle of statistics, reform plans, analyses of 'graft' and
     what not, by the very light of humanity that is in
     it."--Chicago Record-Herald.

     "The manner and style of 'The Autobiography of a Thief' is
     that which attracts even the fastidious lovers of
     literature. It is the life-story of a real thief
     unmistakably impressive in its force and truth. As a matter
     of course, the book is on the hinge of a novel, but it
     contains the gem and sparkle of genuineness and its
     complication has the flavor of accuracy."--New Orleans
     Item.

     "It is not only a powerful plea for the reform of abuses in
     our penitentiaries, but it is an extraordinary revelation of
     the life of a criminal from his birth up, and an explanation
     of the conditions which impelled him first to crime and
     later to attempted reformation."--New York Herald.

     "The truth found in 'The Autobiography of a Thief' is not
     only stranger but far more interesting than much of the
     present day fiction. The lake was at that time absolutely
deserted, and we, in spite of the national airs of time whistling while the humble boatman,
we were completely devoted to the supreme delight of contemplation of nature, whose poem is mixed to
the silent hymns of love and memories of the country, - that sweet darlin do not have sex for
their worshipers. We played in the rock where William Tell put his foot to escape from Gessler's
boat, and visit the chapel that had hardly looked at when we step on board the steamer. Forty
minutes after Brunnen we arrived at the port, and we took a car that was to lead by way of Schwyz
Goldau to, at the foot of Mount Rigi.

Brunnen, as I said, is the port city of Schwyz for its trade relations Lake side Waldstatt, is
a small village situated on the edge of Muottas Valley (Muottathal), but not without interest
in the historical perspective. It was in Brunnen, where, on December 9, 1315, delegates from the
three primitive cantons contracted the final alliance formed the basis of the Confederation, there
were met diets or assemblies of deputies and heads of Schwyz, Uri and Nidwalden to decide on
the common affairs of the Confederation mother, and there they fought with fury, at the end
of century past and current principle, the armies of France and Austria fought over via the
St. Gotthard.

Brunnen Valley, irrigated by the waters gathered in the valleys and Lowerz Muottas opposite, and
bounded on the north by the mountains that has its nucleus in the Rigi, is very funny, fertile
and picturesque. Wherever the visitor looks delightful gardens surrounded by swarms of wet grasslands
that are limited by the hilly slopes of the mountains, and check to see that the valley takes
a population of manners gentle, happy with her condition and modest strongly attached to their
traditions and to the habits of democratic freedom and Roman Catholic
worship.

     "It may be that 'Jim' puts things strongly sometimes, but
     the spirit of truth at least is plain in every chapter of
     the book. That, in general, it is the real thing is the
     feeling the reader has after he has finished with 'The
     Autobiography of a Thief.' It is not a pleasant book; it is
     anything but a book such as the young person should receive
     as a birthday gift. It is a book however which the man
     anxious to keep track of life in this country should read
     and ponder over."--JOSIAH FLYNT, in the Bookman.

DUFFIELD AND COMPANY

36 EAST 21ST ST. NEW YORK

       *       *       *       *       *

"The Spirit of Labor"

$1.25 Net

     "A straightforward narrative which has the tremendous
     advantage of disclosing more things about the greater life
     of Chicago--and more which are not generally known to the
     more sheltered classes--than any book of its size ever
     written. Those who wish to be written down as loving their
     fellow-men should read this volume with care. It is a real
     book, and worth anybody's while."--The Interior, Chicago.

     "Much of the story is set down in this man's own words, and
     the whole is made vividly interesting and really meaningful
     by the author's broad understanding and sincerity of
     purpose."--Life, New York.

     "Mr. Hapgood's portrayal of the American workingman is a
     'moving picture' in two senses of this equivocal phrase. It
     is kinetoscopic, first of all, in its lifelikeness and the
     convincing reality of the actions it pictures. Then, again,
     it is emotionally moving; for the character of Anton, the
     big, honest, alert and energetic Chicago laborer, can hardly
     fail to arouse in the reader intense admiration, lively
     sympathy and not a little amusement free from all cynicism
     and class feeling. In 'The Spirit of Labor' we are brought
     into living contact with the men and women we meet on the
     streets, the great American public with whom every business
     man, every pastor and every politician has daily to reckon.
     Teamsters, masons, unionists, saloonkeepers, policemen,
     wash-women, newsboys, walking delegates, waitresses, ward
     heelers, local bosses, anarchists--the procession seems
     endless and the medley beyond all hope of disentanglement.
     But it is real life and no parade of puppets."--New York
     Tribune.

     "We cannot doubt, however, that Anton is a true type and
     represents a large portion of the men of this land with whom
     workers and students in social matters must meet. The book
     deals intimately with the questions arising between labor
     and capital, and is especially interesting in its analysis
     of the Chicago spirit as it relates to these matters."--The
     Christian Advocate, New York.

     "The story of Anton and his socialistic, anarchistic, and
     trade union comrades is a faithful and photographic picture
     of aspects of the urban activity of vast multitudes of
     industrials combining to assist each one in his fellow in
     the struggle for existence and fullness of life. The forces
     revealed are full of danger, the temper is ugly, the manners
     are always urbane, the judgment not always well informed,
     the range of knowledge often limited; but there is wondrous
     power, vigor, and the chaotic promise of a better and larger
     morality than anything the churches yet have taught, or the
     mere book students have ever dreamed. Miss Jane Addams has
     discovered this larger morality in seeming coarseness and
     evil, and Mr. Hapgood has given us glimpses of it in the
     biography of his man of toil and rebellion. The Philistine
     needs the Anarchist to wake him, as Hume did Kant, from his
     dogmatic slumbers, and the Philistine may (let us hope
     rarely) wear cap and gown."--The Dial, Chicago.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | Transcriber's Notes:                                         |
  |                                                              |
  | Page 54: woman amended to women                              |
  | Page 97: acount amended to account                           |
  | Page 102: interst amended to interest                        |
  | Page 145: pamplets amended to pamphlets                      |
  | Page 148: envolved sic                                     |
  | Page 154: senstive amended to sensitive                      |
  | Page 166: inconsistences amended to inconsistencies          |
  | Page 172: beause amended to because                          |
  | Page 241: concious amended to conscious                      |
  |                                                              |
  | Punctuation has been standardised.                           |
  |                                                              |
  | Where a word is hyphenated and unhyphenated an equal number  |
  | of times, both versions have been retained: pickpocket/      |
  | pick-pocket; upstairs/up-stairs.                             |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

