In sailing the weather must be watched very closely, and the amount of sail carried will depend
entirely upon the weather conditions. A yacht should never be overloaded with sail. If she
has more than she can comfortably carry she will heel over and drag her sails in the water.
Not only this, but she will also drift to leeward when beating to windward. When sailing a
new boat, her best trim for various points of sailing and force of wind must be found by painstaking
experiments. The boat should always be sailed with her sails as slack as she will take them
and keep in her course. In this way she will move faster than when the sails are pulled in close.

The model yachtsman should always watch the wind and note whether it shifts its direction or
alters its force. The boat is trimmed accordingly when the boat is put about. Easing or tightening
the jib or main-sheet slightly will make a very noticeable difference.

By taking down the top-sail or setting a jib-head top-sail in place of a jack yard top-sail,
the yacht will be caused to ride easier in puffs of wind. In case she does not point well to
windward when beating, the yachtsman should try a smaller jib, or he can slacken the foresail-sheet.
If she runs off regularly to leeward on one tack only, while keeping well to windward on the
other, she has some defect in construction or a bent keel.

CHAPTER XIV

TWO-FOOT SAILING YACHT

THE model yacht described in this Chapter is the design of Mr. W. J. Daniels, of England, and
was described by him in "Junior Mechanics." Mr. Daniels is one of the best known and most successful
English designers of model yachts, and the one here described can easily be constructed by
the average boy:

          In order that the reader may realize the obstacles
          to be surmounted in designing a model yacht that
          will sail in a straight line to windward,
          irrespective of the different pressure that the
          wind may expend on the sails, it must be pointed
          out that the boat is continuously altering the
          shape of the submerged part of her hull:
          therefore, unless the hull is so designed that
          harmony is retained at every angle to which the
          pressure of wind on the sails may heel it, the
          model's path through the water will be, more or
          less, an arc of a circle. Whether the boat sails
          toward the wind, or, in other words, in a curve
          the center of the circle of which is on the same
          side of the boat as the wind, or in a curve the
          center of the circle of which is on the opposite
          or leeward side, will depend upon the formation of
          the boat.

          As these notes are intended to first initiate the
          reader into the subject of model yacht building
          and construction, the design supplied is one in
          which all things, as far as shape is concerned,
          have been considered.

          It is the endeavor of every designer to produce
          the most powerful boat possible for a given
          length--that is, one that can hold her sail up in
          resistance to the wind-pressure best. Of course,
          the reader will easily realize that breadth and
          weight of keel will be the main features that will
          enable the model to achieve this object; but, as
          these two factors are those that tend to make a
          design less slender, if pushed to extremes, the
          designer has to compromise at a point when the
          excess of beam and buoyancy are detrimental to the
          speed lines of the hull.

