The Missing Ship; The Log of the "Ouzel" Galley, by W.H.G. Kingston

This is a long and exceptionally well-written book by this prolific author.  It is full of
interest and strong situations.  The date of the events is supposed to be early in the eighteenth
century, and of course all matters nautical are under sail (or oars).  That date is stated
in the Preface.

The copy of the book that was used for this transcription was quite hard to work with, mainly
because the type appeared to have been set a bit close to the gutter (the fold down the centre
of the open pages). However, it later appeared that the book had been kept for a long time
in some position that caused a fold in the pages near to the gutter, so that the scans were
more usable than was at first feared.

This book does make an exceptionally nice audiobook.  The book is fifty percent longer than
the average novel, and takes about 18 hours for the audiobook to play.

You will enjoy this book a great deal.

THE MISSING SHIP; THE LOG OF THE "OUZEL" GALLEY, BY W.H.G. KINGSTON.

CHAPTER ONE.

THE MASTER OF THE OUZEL GALLEY--HIS SON AND DAUGHTER--THE FIRST MATE--A CALM--A GALE SPRINGS
UP--A RAFT SEEN--OWEN RESCUES ITS OCCUPANT--DAN, AND POMPEY, THE BLACK COOK--SURMISES ABOUT
THE STRANGER--THE GALE CEASES--THE STRANGER APPEARS ON DECK AND GIVES AN ACCOUNT OF HIMSELF--
GIVES FIRST NEWS OF WAR BETWEEN ENGLAND AND FRANCE--LANCELOT CARNEGAN BECOMES SECOND MATE OF
THE OUZEL GALLEY.

"No sign of a breeze yet, Owen?" asked Captain Tracy, as he lay in his cot, slung in the state-room
of the Ouzel Galley, West India trader, of which stout bark he was the commander.  His fair
daughter Norah sat by his side fanning his pale cheek--for he, like several of his crew, had
been struck down by fever, and he probably owed his life to her watchful care.  For many days
the vessel had lain becalmed on the glassy ocean under a tropical sun, the excessive heat tending
greatly to increase the sickness on board, three of the crew, besides the second mate, having
already succumbed to it.  Day after day the survivors had been anxiously looking out for the
wind to fill the sluggish sails hanging down against the masts; but each morning they had seen
the fiery sun rise out of the calm ocean and pass across the blue vault of heaven, to sink
again beneath the horizon, suffusing with a ruddy glow the whole western sky.  The night brought
relief from the heat, and hope revived; but when morning returned, again the suffering crew
had to endure the scorching rays of the sun, from which even the shade cast by the sails afforded
them but inadequate shelter.  The chips from the carpenter's bench which had been thrown overboard
still lay alongside; while the creaking of the yards and blocks, and the slight splashing sound
as the vessel moved from side to side by the now scarcely perceptible undulations of the broad
Atlantic, alone broke the silence which, reigned over the watery expanse on which she floated.
Norah--a fair and beautiful girl, who, though scarcely sixteen summers had passed over her
head, had already the appearance, and what was to her of the greatest consequence, the calm
resolution of more mature age--stopping for a moment in her employment, looked up with an inquiring
glance from her blue eyes towards the first mate, who had just then, hat in hand, entered the
cabin.

"A bank of clouds has just appeared above the horizon in the sou'-west, sir, and from the rapid
way in which it is rising we shall, if I mistake not, have the wind before long, and as much
as we want of it," he replied.

"Thank Heaven!" ejaculated the captain.  "See all ready for shortening sail.  I must try to
come on deck, for we are sadly short-handed."

"Oh! don't attempt it, father," said Norah; "you have scarcely strength to stand, and Mr Massey
and the crew will do all that is necessary."

"Miss Norah is right, sir--stay where you are," said the mate.  "I am inclined to furl everything
at once, so as to be prepared for the wind when it reaches us; it is near the hurricane season
in the West Indies, and they are sometimes felt as far to the eastward as this.  Should the
wind not prove as strong as I expect, we can easily make sail again."

"Do as you propose, Owen," said the captain; "you are always careful and prudent."

"Ay, ay, sir," answered the mate, and he sprang quickly on deck.  "All hands shorten sail!"
he shouted.  "Be smart, my lads, or we may have old Harry Cane aboard us before we have time
to open our weather eyes."

He knew well that a joke would tend to inspirit the downcast crew, most of whom were Irishmen--the
Ouzel Galley belonging to Dublin, though trading chiefly to the fair port of Waterford.  She
was a deep-waisted vessel, with three masts, the foremast and mainmast square-rigged, while
the aftermast carried a long lateen-shaped sail called the mizen, with a square topsail and
topgallantsail.  The mainsail and foresail having been brailed up and handed, Owen ordered
the crew aloft to furl the main-topsail.

"Gerald, lend me a hand to furl the mizen!" he sang out to a lad who had been actively engaged
in the former operation.  Gerald Tracy, the captain's son, a fine-looking youth, sprang aft
to the mizen-brails. The mate having already let go the sheet, the sail was drawn up close
to the yard.

"Now, aloft to the mizen-topsail," cried the mate; "we must have every stitch of canvas off
her before the wind reaches us; for, depend upon it, it is in no playful mood."

The mate and Gerald sprang up the rigging, and getting hold of the bunt of the sail, quickly
furled it.  Pompey, the black cook, and Tim Maloney, a boy, were on deck letting go or hoisting
away at the ropes as required; every other man in the ship able to move was aloft.  All the
after sail having been taken off the ship, Owen, as he was about to descend from the yard,
cast a glance to windward.

"Here it comes, sharp and strong," he sang out; "down--down, quick, all of you!" and, seizing
the backstay, he glided like lightning on deck. Gerald followed his example.  As soon as the
mate reached the deck, he sprang to the deserted helm and gave another look in the direction
from which he expected the wind to come.  Already could be discerned a long line of white foam
curling up above the hitherto calm sea, over the surface of which innumerable cat's-paws were
playing, now sweeping across it, now vanishing, to reappear speedily in another direction.
The men were in the mean time employed, under the mate's directions, in getting the ship snug.

"Gerald, do you go and assist them," he said; "we haven't a moment to lose."

The jib only remained set.  Some of the crew had begun to grumble at having so much pulling
and hauling, with apparently no object.

"What's the use of furling sails in a dead calm? we shall be after having to set them again,
as I hope we shall get the breeze before long," exclaimed Dan Connor.

An active seaman was Dan, though he could seldom see much further than his own nose.

"Nebber fear dat," cried Pompey, "we get de wind 'tiff and 'trong as you and I like de grog,
Dan--de mate hab um wedder eye open as 'wide as de captain--see what coming--look out, man--what
say to dat?"

Those standing near him turned their glances over the larboard side, towards the south-west,
the vessel then lying with her head to the north-west, where they saw a long line which had
now assumed the appearance of a vast foaming wave, while at the same time a loud hissing roar
reached their ears.  The mate shouted for another hand to come to the helm.  Dan Connor sprang
aft at the mate's call; but scarcely had he grasped the spokes of the wheel, than the wind
with a furious rush struck the vessel.  Down she heeled, while a deluge of spray flew over
her.  For an instant it seemed as if she was irretrievably gone, but the jib happily standing,
she drew ahead, and feeling her helm, round she spun, and, righting as suddenly as she had
heeled over, away she flew before the hurricane.  The young mate drew his breath.

"Gerald, go below and tell your father that we're all to rights and no damage done.  We had
a narrow squeak for it, though; but don't say that--it may trouble your sister," said Owen.

Gerald went into the cabin with the satisfactory intelligence.  On entering he found Norah
clinging to the sofa, which was placed athwart-ships, at the after end of the cabin.  She looked
pale and anxious; happily, the captain had escaped being thrown out of his cot when the vessel
had been hove on her beam-ends.

"How goes it, Gerald?" he asked.

"All right, father," answered Gerald; "the stout ship is behaving beautifully.  Thanks to Mr
Massey, we were well prepared for the squall when it struck us--though it's my belief if we'd
had our canvas set it would have been all over with the Ouzel Galley.  We are now scudding
along under bare poles at a rate which will soon carry us into Waterford harbour, if the wind
holds as it is."

"Little chance of that, I'm afraid," observed the captain; "but, Gerald, tell the mate to have
the dead-lights closed.  The sea will be getting up presently, and we shall have it washing
through the stern windows."

"Ay, ay, sir," answered his son, who knew that an order given must be delivered immediately,
and was about to go.

"Stay, Gerald--tell him to set the fore-topsail closely reefed, and to rig preventer-braces;
we must not run the risk of having the ship pooped, and there will be a great chance of that
happening before long, unless we have merely caught the tail of the hurricane."

The boy hurried on deck and gave the orders he had received.  He found that the mate had anticipated
them.  The carpenter was at that moment coming aft to close the stern-ports, while several
hands were going aloft to loose the fore-topsail.  The mate had seen the necessity for this,
as already the furious wind had lashed the ocean, hitherto so calm, into wildly leaping seas,
which came rushing up on both sides of the vessel, with foaming crests like war-steeds charging
on the foe; but onward she flew before them, now rising to the summit of a wave, now pitching
down into the trough on the farther side.  It needed all the strength of the crew to reef and
set the sail.  The carpenter, as soon as he had performed his task, went forward again to assist
the rest, while the mate and Gerald took the helm.  The sail was at length set, and the men
came down off the yard.  The mate kept an anxious eye on the canvas, doubting much whether
it would stand the tremendous strain put on it--he expected every moment to see it blown away
from the bolt-ropes--but it was stout and new.  He had little fear of the rigging, for every
inch of it he had himself assisted in turning in and setting up, and not a strand had parted--all
was thoroughly served.  He now summoned one of the best hands to relieve him at the helm; he
then had a spare fore-topsail got up on deck ready to bend, should the first be carried away.
Having made every arrangement which as a good seaman he considered necessary, he sent Gerald
back into the cabin to report to the captain; he would, he knew, be anxious to learn how things
were going on.  Gerald, who was an enthusiastic admirer of the mate, did not fail to tell all
that had been done.

"He is a good seaman, father, that mate of ours," he exclaimed.

"I can always trust him to do the right thing," observed the captain.

"He is as fine a fellow as ever stepped," answered Gerald, warmly; "when I thought the ship
was going over, I looked at him, and there he stood, as calm and unmoved as if we had been
running before a light breeze with all sail set."

Norah's eye brightened as her brother spoke, and a smile played over her countenance, though
she said nothing.

"You will do well to imitate him, Gerald," remarked the captain; "he is calm and confident
because he thoroughly knows his business and what will have to be done under every emergency.
A better seaman never trod the deck of a merchant vessel, or a king's ship either.  When this
voyage is over, as Norah insists on my not going to sea again, I intend to get the owners to
give him the command of the Ouzel Galley--they know their own interests too well to refuse
my request.  Before long you will be old enough, Gerald, to become second mate, and perhaps,
if the stout ship meets with no mishap, to command her one of these days, should Owen get a
larger craft, or take it into his head to come and live on shore."

Gerald was glad to hear his father speak in this style; it showed that he was already getting
better and recovering his spirits, which had been much cast down, especially since the death
of so many of the crew.  He now inquired how the others were getting on, and sent Gerald forward
to learn.  He soon came back with the report that two already seemed much better, but that
the third had as yet shown no signs of amendment.

"They'll pick up, poor fellows, when we get into a cooler latitude," observed the captain.
"I feel myself already another man, and hope to be on deck in a day or two."

Tim, the cabin-boy, now entered to prepare the table for supper.  It still wanted an hour or
more to-night, but that meal in those days was taken earlier than at present.  Pompey, notwithstanding
the way the vessel was tumbling about, had managed to keep his fire in and to cook some broth
for the captain and the sick men--for they were unable to partake of more substantial fare.
Norah had become so accustomed to a sea life in all weathers, that she was able to attend to
her father and to take her seat at table.  Tim, as soon as he had placed the dishes, well secured
with the usual puddings and fiddles, went to summon the mate, who was generally on such occasions
relieved by the boatswain; but Tim came back to say that Mr Massey could not quit the deck
till the gale moderated.  Gerald, having despatched his supper, quickly joined him.

"What do you think of the weather, Mr Massey?" he asked.

"That it is blowing big guns and small-arms," answered the mate, laughing.  "Not that that
much matters as long as it holds steadily in its present quarter; but I'm on the look-out lest
it should change, and if it does, it will not give warning of its intention.  It would be an
ugly thing to be taken aback with this sea on, and it is that we must be prepared for."

The waves had indeed, since Gerald had been below, greatly increased, and were now rising far
above the bulwarks, and as they curled over threatened to come down on the deck and overwhelm
the good ship.

"Keep a tight hold of a stanchion or the mizen-mast, Gerald," said the mate; "if one of those
seas breaks on board, you might be carried away in a moment.  See, the men know what may possibly
happen, and are doing as I advise you--though, if I had my will, you should remain below."

"My father and Norah would be ashamed of me if I did," answered Gerald; "depend on it, I will
take good care to hold on with tooth and nail if we get so unwelcome a visitor."

Onward flew the ship; already the gloom of night had begun to steal over the waste of waters,
when the look-out forward shouted, "A lump of timber or a boat capsized right ahead a point
on the starboard bow!" Immediately afterwards he added, "It's a raft, sir, with a man on it;
he's waving to us!"

The mate sprang into the mizen rigging, and having glanced at the position of the raft, of
which he caught sight as it rose to the summit of a sea, he exclaimed, "We must save the poor
fellow's life--port the helm half a point.  Steady now.  Get ropes ready to heave to him,"
he next shouted out; and, securing one round his own waist, he leaped into the fore-chains.

The ship flew on, but he had rightly calculated the position of the raft.  There was a fearful
risk, however, that she might run over it, or that the force of the sea might dash it against
her side and crush its occupant.  But no time was allowed for considering the risk to be run.
Owen saw that the man had disengaged himself from the ropes by which he had been secured to
the raft, and was holding on to one of them alone. He must have well known his terrible danger,
for a sea might in a moment wash him away, in spite of his holdfast.  The mate stood ready
with another rope in hand to heave to him.  The next instant the raft was driven against the
side of the vessel, and the man lost his hold. Prompted by a generous instinct, Owen, at the
great risk of his own life, sprang on to the raft, and, grasping him round the waist, put the
rope into his hand, while he held him fast.  The crew were in readiness, in the rigging or
leaning over the bulwarks, and before another moment had passed both Owen and the stranger
were drawn up and stood in safety in the main-chains, whence eager hands hauled them on board.

"You have rendered me a good turn, and I hope to live long enough to repay it," said the rescued
man, as soon as he had sufficiently recovered his breath to speak; for he had been pretty nearly
exhausted by the efforts he had made to hold on to the raft, and the sudden jerk he had received
in being hauled on board.

He was evidently a seaman, for a seaman and a strong and determined man alone could have exerted
himself as he had done to preserve his life. By his dress and manner, also, he appeared to
be an officer.  The physical suffering and mental anxiety he must have gone through had naturally
so much exhausted him that, though able to stand, he was compelled to hold fast to the bulwarks
to support himself.  From his appearance, however, he looked like a man capable of enduring
as much as most persons; he was strongly built, rather above the middle height, with a countenance
which if not handsome was good-looking, and betokened courage and resolution.

"I am glad that I was fortunate enough to get hold of you, and to help you on board--though,
as I should have tried to do the same for any human being placed in the situation in which
you were, I do not feel that you have any special reason to be thankful to me," answered Owen.

"As to that matter, all I know is, that if you hadn't jumped on the raft at the moment you
did and thrown me a rope, I should have been washed away, and have been by this time where
many a bold fellow has gone before; and though a more exalted fate may be in store for me,
according to the old saying, as I have no wish to leave the world just yet, I am bound to be
grateful to you, captain--for I conclude that you are the skipper of this craft," said the
stranger.

"No, I am but the mate," answered Owen; "the skipper is ill, and as the berths in the state
cabin are occupied, I can only offer you mine--and I would advise you to get off your wet clothes
and turn in between the blankets, with a stiff glass of grog, or you may be the worse for your
wetting and exposure."

"I have knocked about too much up and down at sea, with all sorts of adventures, to be much
the worse for what I've gone through.  However, I will accept your offer.  A stiff glass of
grog, especially, will be welcome, and something to eat with it; for I had no opportunity of
dining on the raft, as you may suppose," answered the stranger.

He said this in an off-hand, careless manner, laughing as he spoke; but notwithstanding his
boasts, he was glad of the assistance of Owen and Dan Connor, on whose shoulders he rested
while they conducted him to the cabin of the former.  No sooner did he reach it than he sank
down utterly exhausted, and it was not without considerable help from Dan that he was able
to get off his garments and turn in to bed.

"You'll be all to rights now, your honour, and I'll be after bringing you a basin of soup and
a glass of grog," remarked Dan, as he was gathering up the wet clothes to carry to the galley fire.

"Stay, there are some papers in my pockets which I wish to keep in my own possession," said
the stranger, as he saw what Dan was about.

"They're like to be in a pretty mess, which it will take a pair of sharp eyes to read, by this
time," observed Dan.

"They are in a tin case--hand it to me," was the answer, as Dan began to feel about in the
pockets of the stranger's jacket.  "You may take the clothes away now, my man; and don't be
long in bringing me the grog, mind you," added the stranger, when he had possessed himself
of the tin case and, in addition, a well-filled purse and several other smaller articles, which
his pockets had contained.

"By-the-by, what's the name of this vessel, and to what port is she bound?" he asked.

"Shure, she's the Ouzel Galley, your honour," answered Dan, "and as sweet a craft as sails
between the West Indies and Dublin city--though we're bound just now to Waterford, and we'll
be after getting there, I hope, some day."

"And what's the name of your skipper and your mate, who pulled me out of the water?" continued
the stranger.

"It's Captain Tracy you mane, and the mate's Mr Owen Massey, as fine a man as iver stepped
a deck.  I'm after belaving, if he wasn't, he wouldn't have done what he did just now, as your
honour will be willing to own," answered Dan.

"You're right--it was a brave deed," said the stranger.  As soon as Dan, bundling up the clothes,
had left the cabin, its occupant eagerly opened the tin case and examined its contents, apparently
to satisfy himself that they had escaped damage; then closing it, he placed it under his pillow,
on which he sank down exhausted.

"Faith, I've had a narrow escape--but as this craft is bound to fair Waterford, I must either
quit her before she gets there, or take care that none of my friends recognise me when I step
on shore," he murmured to himself.  "However, my good genius may enable me to escape that danger,
as it has to scramble through many others.  Strange that my life should have been saved by
Owen Massey--he does not know me, however; but that is not surprising, as I am greatly changed
since we were together. Few traces remain about me of the slight youth I then was.  I must
be on my guard not to betray myself to him, or he and his commander may take it into their
heads that their loyalty obliges them to deliver me over to the Government.  As long as they
don't find out who I am, I shall have no difficulty in making my escape, even though I am compelled
to set foot on shore in Waterford itself.  I wish those fellows would bear a hand and bring
me some food--that and a night's rest will restore my strength and enable me to consider what
to do better than I now can.  I have run many a narrow chance of losing my life, but never
was I nearer to death than to-day--another hour or two on the raft would have finished me,
and then where should I have been?  Bah!  I must not allow such thoughts to trouble me, or
I shall become nerveless as a young girl."

In spite of all his efforts the thoughts he dreaded would intrude on the stranger's mind. 
He looked eagerly for the return of the seaman with the promised food and grog.  Dan, in the
mean time, with the bundle of wet clothes under his arm, had made his way forward to the caboose,
where Pompey was busy blowing away at his fire and trying to get his kettle and a saucepan
of broth to boil.

"Well, Dan, my jewel, who dis fellow just come on board?  What you tink about him?" asked Pompey.

"Faith, it's more than he thought fit to tell me," answered Dan.  "All I know is that he's
a mighty fine-spoken gentleman, with a big purse of gold in his pocket."

"In which pocket?" asked Pompey eagerly, taking up the jacket.

"You big thief, you don't think I am after laving it to your itching fingers--no, no, Pompey,
even if the gentleman himself hadn't taken it out, he's been too long at sea not to guess pretty
shrewdly that the shiners would vanish if the purse found its way forrard," said Dan.

"You'll not be after calling me a big thief, Dan?" exclaimed Pompey, getting angry at this
insinuation against his honesty.

"No, but I'll back your tongue to wag faster than any man's in this ship," replied Dan.  "Come,
bear a hand and get the water to boil, and then we'll hang up these clothes to dry, for the
stranger doesn't look like a man who'll be content to lie in bed longer than he can help, and
he'll be wanting to get up to-morrow morning and show himself on deck."

"He may be a mighty fine gentleman," muttered Pompey, "but I never did see much good come in
hauling a man, whoever he was, out of de water."

"What's that you say, you old thief of the world?" exclaimed Dan. "Whether good or bad comes
of it, it was as brave a thing as you or I or any man ever saw done, to leap on the raft as
our mate did and manage to bring the stranger on board.  We've some stout fellows among us,
but not one would have dared to do that same.  When the skipper hears of it he'll be after
praising him as he deserves; and there's some one else, too, who'll not think the less of him
than she does now.  It won't be my fault if I don't let the skipper know how it all happened--though
maybe the stranger won't forget to tell him--but as for the mate himself, he's as likely as
not to make light of it, and just to say that it's what any other man would have done as well."

The opinion uttered by Dan was shared generally among the crew, with whom Owen Massey stood
deservedly high.

"Come, bear a hand, Pompey," continued Dan; "the watch will be out before you get that fire
to burn."

By dint of hard puffing Pompey succeeded in his object, and Dan went aft with a kettle of hot
water in one hand and a basin of soup in the other. He then, having obtained the requisite
amount of rum, repaired to the mate's cabin, where he found the stranger on the point of dropping
off from exhaustion, and almost in a state of insensibility.  The broth and grog, however,
quickly revived him.  He uttered but few words of thanks, and again falling back on his pillow,
dropped off to sleep.

Gerald, who had witnessed Owen's gallant act, trembling lest he should fail and lose his life,
gave a shout of joy when he saw him successful and safe again on board.  Prompted by his feelings,
he sprang towards the mate, and grasping his hand, exclaimed, "Bravely done, Mr Massey! Oh,
how thankful I am that you got him on board!  It did not seem possible.  Had you been lost,
it would have broken Norah's heart, and my poor father's too--for, sick as he is, he couldn't
have borne it.  I must go and tell them how it all happened--they'll think more of you than
ever--but I'm very glad Norah wasn't on deck, for she would have felt as I did, and been terribly
alarmed."

"Hush, Gerald, hush! you think more of the affair than it deserves," said Owen; "had I run
any risk of losing my life, your father might have blamed me, as the safety of the ship while
he is ill is committed to my charge; but remember that I took the precaution of having a rope
round my waist, so that I couldn't come to any harm, and what I did any man with strength and
nerve could have done likewise--so, Gerald, don't make a fuss about the matter.  I saved the
man's life, there's no doubt about that, and he, therefore, is the only person who need thank me."

Notwithstanding what the mate had said, Gerald hurried into the cabin and gave a report of
what had occurred, not failing to express his own opinion of the gallantry of the act.  Norah,
who had listened with breathless interest while he spoke, uttered an ejaculation of thankfulness,
forgetting to make any inquiry about the man who had been saved.  Captain Tracy, however, expressed
himself much as Owen expected he would.

"It was a rash though brave deed," he observed, "but I'll not blame him--he had no time, evidently,
to think of the risk he was running, but acted as his gallantry prompted him.  He did not get
any hurt, I hope?"

"No, father, beyond a thorough wetting--it was all done in a moment--he was on board again
almost before I could have looked round, walking the deck as if nothing had happened," answered
Gerald.

"I am thankful for that," said the captain; "and where have they stowed the man he saved? 
Poor fellow! it would have been hard lines with him, in such a sea as is still running, if
he had not been picked up."

"The mate put him into his own cabin," said Gerald; "the cook has been heating some soup for
him, as he seemed very weak and pretty nigh exhausted."

"Owen might have let him go forward with the men; they would have looked after him carefully
enough," observed Captain Tracy.  "There was no necessity for Owen to give up his own cabin--but
he is always generous and ready to sacrifice his own comforts for others."

"But the stranger from his way of speaking and dress seems to be an officer, and he would think
himself badly treated if he had been sent forward," said Gerald.

"I must hear more about him from Owen," said the captain; "ask him to come here as soon as
he can leave the deck and has got on dry clothes. How's the weather now, Gerald?"

"It is moderating rapidly, father, and the mate thinks we shall have smooth water and a light
breeze before night," was the answer.

When Gerald returned on deck he found the mate giving orders to loose the topsails.  As soon
as this was done, the wind still decreasing, the foresail and mainsail were set, and before
long the ship was bounding proudly over the seas with as much canvas as could be carried. 
At length, leaving the deck in charge of the boatswain, Owen repaired to the cabin and answered
many questions put to him by the captain.  He might well have been satisfied with the approbation
he received from Norah, if not from her lips, from those bright blue eyes of hers--even the
captain forgot to scold him as he had intended for his rashness.

"We shall hear more about the man to-morrow, when he has recovered," he observed; "he'll need
a long rest, for he must have pretty well given up all hope of his life when you saved him,
till the ship hove in sight-- and even then he could scarcely expect to be picked up with the
sea there was running at the time.  Well, I trust that he'll be grateful."

The captain then made inquiries about the sick men, of whom Owen was able to give a favourable
report.

"Thank God for that!" said the captain.  "I feel myself quite another man to what I have been
for many a day, and I hope to-morrow to be on deck again.  If this stranger proves to be a
seaman he may give you some relief by doing duty on board; you've had a trying time of it,
Owen, and it is a mercy you've not knocked up."

Owen now bade the captain and mistress Norah good night, and went on deck, when he desired
the boatswain--the only person besides himself to whom the charge of the ship could be confided--to
turn in, that he might relieve him in the next watch, should the weather continue to improve
as he hoped it would do. Monthault flew into heroics, and struggled to detain her. "Cruel Constantia,"
said he, "know you not that love is an involuntary passion which reason vainly tries to subdue?
Cannot you, who see the conflict in my soul, pity me without doubting my friendship or my honour?"

"I
confess I do doubt both," was her reply; "but provided you no more offend me with such language,
I will not mention my suspicions to Eustace. I am, 'tis true, a simple girl, yet not so weak
as to value myself on an extrinsic appendage which, if I possess, I share with the butterfly. If
beauty renders me more amiable in the eyes of those I love, it is a welcome endowment; but I
never will patiently hear it commended at the expence of any better quality."

It is probable that, after this repulse, Monthault would never more have thought of Constance
if some other pursuit had intervened.

But, in the leisure of suspended warfare, a vacant understanding and depraved appetite sees
no resource from ennui but gallantry. He had tried flattery; but it failed to excite vanity,
or to lead his intended prey into the toils of ambition. He resolved to pursue another scheme,
by which he hoped that beauty might be separated from its plighted
love.

While Oxford resounded with preparations for the removal of the Prince and the commencement of
the campaign, Monthault affected regret at leaving Eustace. "I wish," said he, "you could accompany
me to see actual service; you would then feel a just contempt for military martinets and parade
exercise. Goring would, I know, delight in bringing forward a spirit like yours. But it is impossible.
The barriers which detain you are insuperable. I myself know too well the power of beauty; yet, if you
knew all that was said, even for Constantia's sake you might resolve, for a few months, to tear
yourself from her arms."

"I cannot understand you," answered Eustace. "True, I am contracted to Constantia; but it is
not she who detains me at Oxford. We are not to be married till we are both at full age; nor
even then unless the times wear a happier aspect."

"Her character!" retorted Eustace; "can that need any other vindicator than my honour? or rather,
does any man impugn it?

We have loved from our childhood; but it has been with that innocence which enables us to look
forward to years of happiness, unembittered by reproach."

Monthault smiled, said he rejoiced at this expurgation, but added, "Can you wonder Oxford is now
the metropolis of slander, since it is full of court-ladies who have now no revels or maskings
to amuse them, and never leave reputations in quiet when they are out of humour. But, to put
a stop to defamation, let me advise a military excursion."

Eustace explained, that it was the will of an absent father, and not amorous dalliance, which kept
him from the field. It was doubtful whether that father lived; for
he was engaged in most severe service.

"Meantime," added he, "my uncle is bound by a promise to keep me
from dangerous enterprises; but as I now begin to think it is disloyal
for any one on the verge of manhood to refuse rallying round the King
at his greatest need, I trust the prohibition will soon be removed.

The last time that I urged Dr. Beaumont on the subject, he answered, that it was not courage, but
bravado, to buckle on the sword, while the discussion of a pending treaty afforded a prospect
of its being speedily ungirded. But as the Parliamentary commissioners are returned to London,
I am determined again to ask leave to join the army."

"And if refused," said Monthault, "would you stay at Oxford, like
a tame lion in a chain, caressed by old women, and wondered at by
spectacled fellows of colleges."

Eustace paused. "I see, my brave fellow," resumed the tempter, "you are determined to be one of us.
I know your heart, and can predict that the consciousness of positive disobedience will make
you miserable. Go, then, in the hope that your uncle would not have restrained you. Are you not
old enough to judge for yourself? They have permitted you to chuse a wife; why not also choose
your profession?"

"You have determined me," said Eustace, "I will only bid adieu to Constantia."

"A most lover-like determination!" was Monthault's reply, "and made with a right prudent command
of the impulses of valour. I anticipate the result. In another hour you will return; press
me to your heart; look a little ashamed; wish me good success; and then sigh out, 'I cannot
bear to leave her.'"

"No," said Eustace; "to prove that I am not a woman's slave, I will only look the adieu, which
may be our last, without telling her my purpose. Had you a treasure, Monthault, which you valued
more than life, would you not bathe it with a parting tear as you placed it in a casket, while
about to enter on a dangerous undertaking, where your first step may be to meet death?"

Monthault answered, that soldiers never thought of dying. They separated; Eustace, to bid a
mental farewel to his kindred, home, and love; and Monthault, to prepare the Prince and Lord Goring
to welcome a pleasant addition to their party in a spirited youth,
who had resolved to escape from the restrictions of austere friends,
and to try the agreeable freedom of a military life.

In this view these defenders of the Crown and the Church of England looked on the last resources
which a falling King committed to their care.

[1] This paragraph is copied from Fenelon.

[2] Walton's Lives.

CHAP. XIII.

O! holy men! Ye are the sons of piety and peace; Ye never felt the sharp vindictive spur That
goads the injured warrior; the hot tide That flushes crimson on the conscious cheek Of him who
burns for glory; else indeed Ye much would pity me.

Mason.

Eustace kept his promise, and rejoined Monthault, at the time and place appointed, equipped
for service. His friend commended his heroism. "And did you," said he, "obtain Constantia's
permission?" "No," answered Eustace; "I felt unequal to such a trial. I only pressed her hand with
greater tenderness, and more earnestly implored Heaven to take her into his especial care."

"You
will both thank me for projecting this separation," replied the Major.

"Seeing the world with your own eyes will improve you, brush off that home-bred air which makes
you bashful, and enlarge your ideas and powers of conversation. I promise ourselves a spirited,
agreeable campaign. Hopton's office in the council will confine him about the person of the Prince,
who must be kept at some distance from the scene of action; and Goring is no rigid disciplinarian.
The enemy is not in force in the west; Cromwell and Fairfax are both to play at King-hunting; so
we shall have time to divert ourselves and do our duty too."

From Bristol, Eustace wrote to his uncle and Constantia, excusing his absence by the uncontrollable
avidity he felt to engage in the cause of his injured Prince, to
whose commands he promised a strict obedience, and vowed to be sedulously
attentive to all his new duties.

To Constantia he added that he hoped to return worthier of her, and to feel in future the glorious
consciousness of having contributed to restore his virtuous persecuted Sovereign, and give peace
to his afflicted country.

There was so much loyalty, honour, love, and gratitude in these letters, that they must have
softened the Doctor's displeasure at his elopement, had they come to hand; but they were confided
to the care of Monthault, and, either through forgetfulness or treachery, were never forwarded. It
was therefore only from the vague testimony of an accidental passenger
that the family knew Eustace had taken the road to Bristol; and, from
his being in company with Major Monthault, they guessed his destination.

Constantia

had now the twofold anguish of fearing for the safety and apologizing for the faults of her
beloved. The latter task was by far the most painful. She could only urge that he had a bad
adviser, and that it was his first offence. Every day she flattered herself that she should
receive a letter, deprecating her father's anger, and assuaging her own fears. The summer
passed away, and they heard nothing from Eustace. Had he forgot her, as well as the ties of
duty and gratitude? It was impossible! letters might be lost, but
her plighted Eustace must be good and faithful.

I have before remarked that Lord Hopton was the officer under whom
Dr. Beaumont would have wished his nephew to learn "the noble game
of war;" but there were circumstances in his present appointment which
made it differ widely from that of the preceding year, when, with
his compatriot, Sir Bevil Greenvil, he drew a cordon across the western
peninsula, and preserved, in that happy spot, the laws, the virtues,
and the honour of England.

He was now, indeed, to be the ruling head; but his former associates in arms lay cold in earth,
and the persons to whom the execution of his plans was to be intrusted,
were the avowed votaries of Bacchus and Comus.

It was with gay voluptuaries, freethinkers, and revellers, that Eustace must converse; at
a distance from those whose wisdom might govern his impetuosity, and whose steady principles
would correct his backslidings. Contemplating the dangerous situation of a generous, but indiscreet
stripling, Dr. Beaumont now wished him in the army which the King was leading northward, to collect
the remains of Lord Newcastle's forces, as that route might have afforded him a chance of joining
his father in Carlisle, which held out with unexampled firmness,
enduring the most incredible privations, and repelling the most vigorous
assaults.

The event of the fatal battle of Naseby, which palsied all the King's efforts to preserve
the constitution, and ended all the hopes of his friends, would have made Dr. Beaumont rejoice
that Eustace did not swell the list of noble and illustrious persons left on that bloody field,
had not his sorrow for a "King and kingdom lost" been too acute and overwhelming to receive
any diminution from private considerations.

The infantry, cannon, ammunition, baggage, and all the resources of the King, were there wrested
from his grasp by victorious rebels; and England virtually exchanged the government of the religious,
conscientious descendant of her ancient Princes, for that of a low-born, cruel hypocrite, who
ruled her with a rod of iron. The King indeed escaped from the battle with a small body of horse;
but it was only to fly from place to place before his unwearied enemies, pursued into every
corner of his kingdom, without knowing where to rest his head, allowed no pause, even to ruminate
on his misfortunes, till at last, trusting that his own countrymen
would not betray the Prince who flew, like a bird hunted by the hawk,
to their bosoms, he appealed to the pretended loyalty of the Scotch
Covenanters; and they sold him to those who thirsted for his blood.

Yet neither the desperate state of the kingdom, nor the ruin of their
own fortunes, long since embarked in the same vessel with his rights,
could compose the feuds of the western generals, or induce them to
attend to the directions of the Prince's council, or to the discipline
and behaviour of their troops.

The latter, from their intolerable insolence and rapine, became formidable only to their friends;
and the approach of Fairfax was hailed, even in the best-disposed districts, as a signal of
deliverance from the galling yoke of military extortion. Goring, the soldier's darling, who combined
all the alluring qualities of a demi-god, was found to want the distinguishing marks of a Christian
hero. Possessed neither of self-command, obedience, nor fortitude, he was ever ready to dash
at splendid actions, but was without resources in the day of peril. He was too vain of his wit and
companionable talents to submit to the command of others, and too
supine, dissipated, and rash, either to improve opportunities of action,
or to defeat the views of the enemy.

Such was the leader under whom Eustace hoped to serve his king, and learn the art of war. His
friend, Monthault, was a transcript of all Lord Goring's faults, to which he added the most cool
and determined treachery, under the garb of blunt simplicity and unguarded frankness.

It had been previously settled by the two friends, that their common wants should be supplied from
the purse of Major Monthault, in case the Royal exchequer was inadequate
to the supply of the army.

That purse was either soon exhausted, or closed by the sinister designs of the owner. "It
is his own fault if a soldier wants," was his answer to the urgent
requests of Eustace for a small supply.

"We are now," returned the other, "quartered among friends, to whom
we ought to be not only punctual but liberal, lest we indispose them
to the service.

You see the Royal funds are scarcely adequate to the maintenance
of the Prince.

You are aware that I must depend on you, as the circumstances under which I left Oxford prevent
my asking my uncle to assist me." "Certainly you must not," answered Monthault; "and I say
again, a word will always carve a dinner. This, I own, is called a well-affected district;
but there are many corrupted parts in it. Your host, for instance--a vile republican, a Presbyterian
round-head--I saw him pelt the bishops when they appeared at the bar of the Lords, and join in a clamorous
petition to behead Lord Strafford. Give him a hint of this, and make
him bleed.

Tell him we will inform Sir Richard Greenvil of his behaviour; and talk of Launceston gaol."

Eustace
had long thought that every man concerned in either of those proceedings deserved the gallows, and
fancied he could perform the office of executioner. He therefore made less scruple to require
a pecuniary commutation for those offences, but thought the proceeds should be carried to a
public account. Monthault laughed at this suggestion, said that self-preservation was the soldier's
motto, and begged he would only bring the sum total to him, and his receipt should be a full
discharge.

Eustace met Monthault next morning with a blank aspect. The accused had not only protested his
innocence, but offered to bring testimony that he was in Devonshire at the time. Alarmed,
however, at the impending charge, and knowing that riches were in these cases construed into
a proof of guilt, he offered half the sum demanded as a present, provided Monthault would be
his friend and protect him from further contribution.

Monthault held out his hand carelessly, and only said, "Disburse." Eustace protested that his
principles would not permit him to take a commutation for offences
from a person whom he believed innocent.

Monthault flew into a rage, asked Eustace if, in a battle, or when storming a town, he would stop
to ask those he met, "Pray, Sir, are you in heart a rebel? Good Master, were you pressed into
the service?" before he hewed them down with his broad-sword? The very proposal of a bribe implied
guilt. Eustace acknowledged there was weight in that remark; the offered sum was taken; Eustace
carried it to his superior, and received the jackall's share.

Indignant at the wrong, the plundered Loyalist, for such indeed he was, appealed to the Prince's
courts.

The Lords Hopton, Capel, and the incorruptible Hyde, formed part
of that body; and it will be anticipated, that only a want of ability
to redress the wrong, prevented immediate reparation.

The power of Lord Goring protected his favourite, Monthault; but it was thought proper to reprove
the youth, who had acted as his agent. Eustace was summoned before the council. Shame and self-reproach
bowed his erect head, and cast a gloom over his ingenuous features. The President explained
how greatly such actions endangered the fugitive King, whose life now depended on the fidelity
of his subjects, as he flew from post to post, seeking to hide his proscribed head. Eustace
burst into tears. "I need proceed no further," continued Lord Hopton, "tell me what urged you
to this base action."--"Necessity," replied Eustace, with a look of deep contrition. "That is a bad plea,"
returned the nobleman, "and urged with a bad grace, by those who
refuse to admit it as an excuse for the crimes of rebels.

In this instance too, I fear it is a false one. I know you are one of the party, who distinguish
themselves by their midnight carousals in Major Monthault's quarters. The necessity which arises from
dissipation, can never be urged to excuse peculation."

"Place me in the forlorn hope," said Eustace, "the first time you have any desperate service, and
let me expiate my crime."

"So keen a sense of it," resumed Lord Hopton, "is its own punishment. Your name is Eustace
Evellin. I have heard of a youth so called.--At Oxford he was said to be one of uncommon hope,
the son of a noble Loyalist, distinguished alike for honour and valour; the nephew of a learned
divine, a confessor in the cause of monarchy and episcopacy. Are you that person?"--Eustace
answered by a burst of agonized grief.--Lord Hopton took him aside, and slided a purse into
his hands; "Use this frugally," said he; "'tis the mite of one, whom duty has stripped of superfluities,
yet apply again to the same source, rather than give your own heart the pangs which I see it now
endures."

"But I am disgraced," said Eustace, with a look which at once bespoke intolerable anxiety and
ardent gratitude. Lord Hopton answered, "I blush while I tell you that your fault is too general,
to stigmatize those who commit it; but I mistake your character, if you find in its frequency
an apology for repeating the crime."

Eustace retired; his dejected heart was warm with approbation of his excellent reprover; yet burning
with impatience to obliterate all remembrance of his error, by some brave action which should
prove that he was not unworthy the clemency and confidence which
his appearance had excited.

He told Monthault what had passed. "The old Prig worded it bravely," said he, "but in one respect
he is better than most of your precise moralists.

Come turn out the pieces--share and share alike you know; and just now they are quite convenient,
as there is not a single doit in my purse." Eustace hesitated, knowing that its contents had been
left at the billiard-table, but at length complied, with a secret determination that the partnership
should immediately terminate.


"In a few days, Miss Tracy, we shall be doomed to part," he said, "It may be that, compelled
by a cruel fate to wander over the world, I may never again meet you; but, believe me, the
time I have spent on board this ship I shall ever look upon as the happiest of my life."

"You are very good to say so," answered Norah, "though I should have supposed, from the account
you have given of yourself, that you would have met with many other opportunities of enjoying
life far more than you could have done on board the Ouzel Galley."

"It is not the place, Miss Tracy, but the person with whom one is associated, on which one's
happiness depends.  I speak from the depths of my heart--if I could hope to enjoy existence
with you, I would not exchange my lot for that of the proudest monarch on earth," said Mr Carnegan.

Before Norah could reply, the look-out from the mast-head shouted, "A sail on the larboard
bow!"  At that instant, as he spoke, the captain came on deck, followed by Owen.

"What course is she steering?" asked the former.

"About south-east, sir, close-hauled," was the answer.

While the captain was speaking Owen had gone forward, and was now making his way up the fore-rigging.
He quickly reached the mast-head; he had not been there many seconds before the breeze freshening
blew away the mist, disclosing to view a large ship under all sail, her hull already rising
above the horizon.  Unslinging his glass, he directed it towards her.

"What does she look like?" asked the captain.

"She is flush-decked, and I make out ten ports on a side, sir," answered Owen from aloft. 
Saying this, he quickly came down on deck, from whence the movements of the stranger, which
was standing directly across the course the Ouzel Galley was steering, could be discerned as
well as from the mast-head.

"If we hold on as we are now we shall be within range of her guns in less than an hour, and
I much fear that she is an enemy, sir," said Owen, as he came up to the captain.

"We'll do our best, then, to keep out of her way," was the answer. "Port the helm--man the
larboard braces--ease off the starboard braces and bowlines!  We'll stand away to the sou'-west
till we run her out of sight; it will cause us some delay, but it will be better than running
the risk of capture."

The two mates and Gerald, with all hands, went to the ropes, while the captain taking the helm,
the ship was brought on a wind, the mizen, which had hitherto been furled, being also set,
and the Ouzel Galley stood away on a bowline under all sail to the south-east.

"She has the look of a fast craft, and is probably strong-handed," observed the second mate.

"We shall soon see which has, notwithstanding, the faster pair of heels--the Ouzel Galley is
no sluggard, Mr Carnegan, and we may still hope to run the stranger out of sight.  Let her
go along, my lad," said the captain to the man at the helm; "she sails best two points off
the wind; we'll run on till dark, Owen, and if by that time the stranger isn't to be seen,
we'll tack, and may chance to give her the go-by."

"I trust we may, sir," said Owen, in a tone of some doubt; "we have the advantage of being
well to windward, though, as Mr Carnegan was observing, if she has a strong crew she can tack
in half the time we can, and we couldn't do better than to stand on till nightfall, as you
propose, and then try to give her the slip."

The eyes of all on board were naturally turned towards the stranger.  As yet, however, it was
difficult to say whether or not she was gaining on them.  Norah saw that her father and his
mates were anxious on the subject, but, being sure that they were acting for the best, restrained
her own feelings--yet, as may be supposed, she could not help reflecting what might be her
and her father's fate should the stranger prove to be an enemy and capture them.  She had often
heard of the cruelties to which the prisoners of privateers were exposed, and she was well
aware of her father's hatred to the system, although privateering was generally allowed to
be honourable and lawful.  The stranger, though an enemy, might be a king's ship; and, if so,
she might hope to receive courteous treatment from the French officers.  Though she had resolved
not to ask questions, she listened to her father's and Owen's opinions as to the character
of the stranger.  At noon, which soon arrived, the captain and his mates came on the poop to
take an observation in order to ascertain the ship's position.  They had before this run some
way to the northward of the latitude of Lisbon.

"Sure, it's enough to provoke a saint," exclaimed Gerald, who was accustomed to express himself
somewhat vehemently; "if it hadn't been for that fellow out there we should have been half
across the Bay of Biscay by this time or to-morrow.  I only hope, if he comes up with us, that
we'll be after giving him a good drubbing; it will serve him right if we send him to the bottom."

"What, do you think our father intends to fight the strange ship, should she prove to be an
enemy?" asked Norah, with some natural trepidation in her voice.

"I'm sure we're not going to be taken, and lose the ship and our cargo, and be made prisoners
and ruined without having a fight for it," answered Gerald, "especially as Owen says that he
feels pretty sure she is a privateer.  Why he thinks so, I can't quite make out, except that
her masts rake more than those of most men-of-war and her sails are cut somewhat differently--it
is impossible to be certain."

"Grant Heaven that, if there is a fight, our father and you and Owen may be preserved!" murmured
Norah.

"They wouldn't fight without a good hope of success--but we must run our chance," said Gerald,
laughing; "but, you know, we shall stow you down in the hold among the cargo safe enough."

"Oh no, no!  I hope if there is a fight that I may be allowed to remain on deck, or at least
in the cabin, where I may be ready to help any who are hurt," exclaimed Norah.

"That would never do," answered Gerald; "you might be hit as well as anybody else, and you
wouldn't like to have a leg or an arm shot off."

Poor Norah shuddered at the thoughtless remark of her brother.  Gerald observed the expression
of her countenance.

"I didn't intend to frighten you," he said; "I hope that none of us will be hurt--only of course
there's a risk, and we must save you from being exposed to it.  We shall only make a running
fight of it, and try to knock away some of the enemy's spars and prevent her from following
us. If she were to come up with us, she is so much bigger than we are, and so much more heavily
armed, with probably six times as many hands, that we should have no chance in a broadside fight."

"If we are captured what will happen?" asked Norah.

"I suppose we shall be carried into a French port, and be kept prisoners till the war is over,
and you and I must learn to talk French.  It won't be so very bad, after all, so you needn't
look so grave, Norah," answered Gerald.

"It will break our poor father's heart, I fear," answered Norah, "and Owen will be miserable."

"Well, then, though wishing it won't exactly help us, we'll hope to escape, and that none of
the dreadful things you expect will happen," said Gerald.

Though Gerald made light of the matter, others on board did not do so. From the first Owen
had had little doubt that the ship chasing them was French.  The captain differed from him,
but agreed that she was probably a privateer.  Though her masts raked, so did those of many
British ships, especially of those sailing from Jersey and Guernsey, while there was nothing
that he could see remarkable about the cut of her sails. The second mate expressed no opinion.
After a time, however, a cloud was seen to gather on his brow.

"I thought you boasted of this craft being remarkably fast," he observed to Owen.  "Now, as
far as I can judge, that ship yonder is sailing nearly two feet to our one, and will be within
hail of us before dark."

"She sails faster than we do, I acknowledge; but you over-estimate her speed," answered Owen.
"I still expect that we shall keep well ahead of her till dark, and we may then alter our course
and escape."

"I tell you your hopes are vain; yonder ship is as fast a craft as any out of a French port--we
haven't a chance of escaping her," replied Mr Carnegan.

"You know her, then?" answered Owen.

"I have seen her more than once--before the war broke out, of course-- and, from her size and
the weight of her metal, if we attempt to fight her we shall be sent to the bottom," was the
answer.

"The captain intends to try and knock her spars away, and thus to enable us to escape," said Owen.

"She is more likely to send our masts over the side than to suffer any harm our popguns can
do her," observed the second mate.

Captain Tracy, who had been watching the stranger for some time, now summoned them both and
asked their opinion.  They repeated what they had before said.  "Owen, we can trust our crew?"
he observed.

"Even the sick men would be ready to fight--we can depend on all of them," said Owen.

"Then we'll train two guns aft, and fight them as long as our own masts stand," exclaimed Captain
Tracy.  "Hoist our ensign, that there may be no mistake--though I own that I have now little
doubt of that fellow being a Frenchman.  We shall soon see--yes--there, up goes the white flag
with the lilies of France; it won't be long before she is within range."

"I think not, sir," observed the second mate, "and if you take my advice you will not attempt
to fight--even if we do knock away a spar or two, with her crew of not less than a hundred
and twenty men, I'll warrant she'll speedily repair her damages; and as she carries heavy metal,
if I mistake not, her first broadside will send us to the bottom."

The captain made no reply.  "Gerald," he said, "take your sister down to the hold--Dan Connor
and Tim will arrange a secure place for her, and I put her under your charge--remember, you're
to remain with her, and not to return on deck till I send for you."

Gerald looked very much disappointed, but he well knew that it would be vain to expostulate.
He had fully expected to engage in the fight, or to "take part in the fun," as he called it.
Norah had before this gone into the cabin, to which Gerald repaired, and with no very good
grace delivered their father's orders.  Without a murmur Norah prepared to obey them.  The
second mate and some of the men were engaged in dragging one of the guns aft.  As she came
on deck, Norah found her father standing near the companion-hatch.  Embracing her, he kissed
her brow and said, "Don't be alarmed, my child; we shall manage to escape the Frenchman, I
hope, and come off without damage.  Go into your nest, now, with Gerald, and I hope before
long I shall have a good report to give you."

As she went forwards towards the main hatchway she glanced at Owen; he sprang to her side and
without stopping to ask leave assisted her below. It was a dreary place which had been prepared
for her among sugar-hogsheads, rum casks, and packages of other West India produce. Dan Connor,
who had been till that moment busy in arranging it, appeared with a lantern to light them the
latter part of the way.  Norah looked with no little dismay at the dark recess in which she
and Gerald were to pass the period of the impending action.

"Shure, Miss Norah, you'll find it more aisy and pleasant than you think for," said Dan, who
observed the expression of her countenance, "when the lantern's hung up, as I'll be doing to
give you light; and I'd make bold to say that if you'd brought a book to read, or just some
work to amuse yourself, you'd be after finding the time pass pleasantly enough away."

Norah, as may be imagined, felt little disposed to read or work, or to fancy that the time
could pass pleasantly.  She almost smiled at the idea.  It appeared to her that it would be
the most dreadful period of her existence.  On entering, however, she found that Dan had arranged
a seat with some cushions and a grating to keep her feet off any moisture which might have
oozed out of the casks, Dan secured the lantern, as he proposed, to a sugar cask, while Owen
pressed Norah's hand.

"Hope for the best, dearest," he whispered.  "I'd have given worlds to save you from this;
but we can trust to One who rules all things for protection, and we may still escape the threatened
danger.  A calm may come on before the Frenchman gets up with us, or an English ship of superior
force may heave in sight--hope for the best; I must stay no longer.  Gerald, you heard the
captain's orders--let nothing induce you to quit your sister.  I know your spirit, and that
you'd rather be on deck; but your duty is to remain below, and by doing your duty, however
much against the grain it may be, you'll be showing truer courage than by going where round
shot and bullets may be flying round your head like hail."

"You are right, Mr Massey, and you may depend on my not quitting Norah, whatever happens;"
and Gerald sat himself down on a tub which Dan had placed for him, and resolutely folded his
arms as if he felt that in no other way could he keep his post.  The next moment Owen sprang
upon deck, followed by Dan.  Never before had Owen Massey been so anxious to avoid a fight--indeed,
all on board were, for various reasons, much of the same mind.  Captain Tracy was resolved
to escape if he could, and to fight only if it would enable him to do so.  The hope that a
British ship of war might heave in sight had only just occurred to Owen when below with Norah,
and as soon as he returned on deck he went up to the mast-head, almost expecting to see another
ship standing towards the enemy; but though he swept the whole horizon with his glass, not
a sail appeared in sight, and he had quickly to descend to attend to his duties.  The crew,
meantime, were bringing up powder and shot from below, and loading the guns.  Two of the longest
pieces had already been run out astern; they were of brass, and of small bore, but were able
to send a shot as far as most guns in use in those days.  The others were smaller pieces, carried
for the purpose of defending the ship, should she be attacked by any of the picaroons, at that
time the pest of the Caribbean Sea.  When Owen again looked out, he saw that the enemy had
considerably overhauled them since he went below.  Had he before entertained any doubt about
the character of the vessel chasing them, it completely vanished, and his experienced eye assured
him that she must be a French privateer.  The wind also continued as steady as at first, and
with deep regret he was convinced that the stranger was superior to the Ouzel Galley on any
point of sailing, whether before the wind, going free, or close-hauled; while her numerous
crew would give her every possible advantage in manoeuvring, or repairing damages should any
of her spars or rigging be knocked away.

Meantime, poor Norah and her brother remained in their dark cell far down in the hold of the
ship, listening anxiously for any sounds which might betoken the commencement of the action.
The air was close and redolent of unsavoury odours, and would of itself have been sufficient
to weigh down their young hearts; it might be a place of safety, but they would both of them
infinitely rather have been on deck and able to see what was going forward.  Norah sat with
her hands clasped on the couch Dan had arranged for her; while Gerald, soon losing patience,
got up, and, as there was no room to pace backwards and forwards, could only give vent to his
feelings by an occasional stamp of the foot, as he doubled his fists and struck out at an imaginary
Frenchman.

"Oh, I do hope we shall thrash that fellow," he exclaimed, "big as he looks.  I am glad our
father didn't determine to give in without fighting.  It wouldn't have been like him if he
had, though the second mate advised him to do so.  I should have thought Mr Carnegan was full
of pluck, but he appeared to me to show the white feather, and I'm not at all sure how he'll
behave--not that it much matters, for I am very certain that Owen will make the men stand to
their guns as long as there's a shot in the locker."

"I only hope that we may avoid fighting altogether," said Norah.  "Owen thought it possible
that an English man-of-war might appear in sight and put the enemy to flight, or that we may
keep ahead till nightfall, and then manage to escape."

"Depend upon it, the Frenchman is coming up much too fast to give us any chance of keeping
ahead till dark--we must not expect that.  I have more confidence in our knocking away some
of his spars; Owen is a first-rate shot, and if it can be done he'll do it.  Don't be cast
down, Norah; it would never have done for you to remain where you might have run the risk of
being hit.  Our father was right in sending you here, though I wish he had allowed me to stay
on deck--but then, you see, you couldn't be left alone; and if, after all, the Frenchmen do
take us, why, there would have been no one to protect you.  That consoles me for remaining
here, and if the worst happens I'll fight for you.  See, I've brought a cutlass, and a brace
of pistols, and it would be a hard matter for any one to get in here without my leave."

"Oh, it would be dreadful!" cried Norah, shuddering at the thought of the ship being captured--for
she could not conceal from herself that such might too probably be the case.  "Don't attempt
to fight if any of our enemies should find their way down here--it would be utterly useless,
and only exasperate them."

"Well, perhaps they won't find their way down here," said Gerald, who directly he had uttered
anything calculated to alarm his sister was anxious to remedy the mistake; "let us try and
talk of something else, and wait patiently for what may happen."

The proposal was not as easily carried out as made; in another minute Gerald was again talking
of what might or might not occur.  Some time went by.  "Hark! hark! what is that?" exclaimed
Norah suddenly, as the boom of a gun, which from its faintness showed that it must have been
fired at a distance, reached their ears.

"There comes the first shot, but it didn't strike us--the Frenchman is trying whether he has
got us within range," said Gerald.

"It shows, though, that the enemy must be very near," cried Norah.

"It will be the sooner over," said Gerald.  "We shall hear our guns go off soon--they'll make
a much greater noise; but don't be frightened, Norah dear--they, at all events, will not injure
you."

"I am not thinking of myself," answered Norah, "but for those on deck, and for our poor father--he
is still so ill and so little able to bear all this anxiety--and for Owen, should they be struck
by those dreadful cannon-balls."

"The round shot, you mean," said Gerald; "but they are not to be so much dreaded, after all.
They may fall pretty thickly aboard without doing any harm.  I've heard some of our men who
were in the last war say that they've known ships firing away at each other for an hour or
more without anybody being hit.  Hark! there's another gun; that came from the enemy, but the
shot missed us.  I wonder we don't begin to fire--we soon shall, though, no doubt about that.
I wish that I had brought down the boat's compass with us, to know how we were steering; we
are keeping, however, on the same tack as before--I can tell that by the heel of the ship."

Norah, while Gerald was talking, held her breath, expecting every moment to hear the guns go
off with a loud roar, not aware how much the sound would be deadened before it reached the
hold.  Neither she nor Gerald had at first observed the increased motion of the ship, or that
she was heeling over to larboard considerably more than at first.  Gerald now, however, remarked
it.

"The breeze has freshened," he exclaimed, "though I don't know if that will be in our favour.
I wish that our father had not told me to stay here without moving--I would run upon deck to
see how things are going on, and be back in a moment."

"Gerald, not for my sake but for your own, I earnestly pray you to remain--remember, our father
ordered you not to leave this, whatever might happen," exclaimed Norah.

"Yes, I know that; I was only saying what I should like to do," answered Gerald.

Nearly another minute elapsed, during which not a word was spoken; then came a much louder
report than had before been heard.

"That was one of our guns, I am sure of it," exclaimed Gerald; though, from its deadness, Norah
could scarcely believe that it was from one of the Ouzel Galley's guns.

"Hurrah! we've begun at last," cried Gerald, "no fear; I shouldn't be surprised to find that
the shot had knocked away one of the enemy's topsail yards."

Another and another gun followed in rapid succession; at intervals could be clearly distinguished
the firing of the enemy's guns, and every now and then a report succeeded by a loud thud, showing
that the shot had struck some part of the Ouzel Galley.

"Fire away, my boys, fire away!" shouted Gerald.  "I wish that I could be on deck, even if
I'd nothing better to do than hand up the powder!"

Norah again entreated him to remain.  For some time the firing continued, but from the sound
of the enemy's guns it was pretty clear that the ships had not yet got to close quarters.

"Sure, we must be giving it them," cried Gerald.  Scarcely had he spoken when there came a
loud crashing sound, as if one of the masts had been knocked away and had fallen on the deck.
Cries and shrieks of injured men writhing in pain penetrated even to the depths of the hold.

"Oh that some one would come and tell us what has happened!" exclaimed Norah.  "I wonder our
father or Owen don't send--it must be something dreadful."

"I've heard of ships holding out, even though a mast has been shot away," said Gerald; "we
don't know what has happened to the enemy-- perhaps she is worse off than we are."

Not another gun was fired from the deck of the Ouzel Galley; that was a bad sign, and presently
afterwards there came a violent concussion and a grating sound, as if one ship had run alongside
the other.

"Gerald, oh, what is taking place?" cried Norah, seizing her brother's hand.

"We are about to be boarded, or perhaps we are going to board the enemy," he answered; "I don't
see why one thing shouldn't happen as well as the other."

"I am afraid it is as you first suggested," said Norah.  "Hark to those loud shouts; they are
the voices of Frenchmen--they must have boarded us.  I hear their feet tramping on deck, and
there they come down below. Our people must have been quickly overpowered; what resistance
could such a mere handful offer to the numerous crew of the enemy?  Oh! our poor father and
Owen--can they wish us to remain here?  They may be wounded and bleeding to death, and may
require our help."

It was now Gerald's turn to insist on obeying orders.  "Norah, Norah! stay where you are,"
he exclaimed.  "Should the Frenchmen have boarded us, you might meet them, and we can't tell
how they might behave.  If any come here they'll have to repent their audacity," he added,
placing himself with a pistol in one hand and a cutlass in the other at the entrance of Norah's
retreat.

"I must fight for you if they come down here--it is my duty, and I'll do it," answered Gerald
to his sister's expostulations; for she dreaded lest, by offering resistance, he might induce
the enemy to kill him. He, however, would not listen to her entreaties.  "At all events, don't
speak, Norah," he said; "the Frenchmen may hear us and find us out-- whereas if we remain quiet
we may escape discovery till the boarders have gone back to their own ship and ours is left
in charge of a prize crew, and we may be very sure that neither our father nor Owen will be
induced to quit the Ouzel Galley without us."

Norah saw the prudence of this advice.  She wisely also put out the lantern, the light from
which would very certainly have betrayed their hiding-place.

We must now return on deck.  As soon as Norah and Gerald had gone below, the captain addressed
the crew and asked whether they would stick by him and assist in making every effort he could
devise for escaping.  They one and all declared that they were ready to fight to the last to
preserve the Ouzel Galley from capture and to escape a French prison.

"Then we'll make a running fight of it, my lads," he said.  "The enemy has probably much heavier
metal and many more men than we have, but our two guns will be of as much service as her twenty
if we can keep her as she now is, right astern--and that's what I intend to do."

The second mate had narrowly scanned the French ship.  "I can tell you what, Captain Tracy,"
he said at length, "you haven't a chance of escaping from her.  I know her and her commander
well, and not a better or more determined seaman ever walked the deck of a ship.  I have reason
to be grateful to you for the way I have been treated on board this vessel, and to your first
mate for saving my life; and for your own sake I would advise you to haul down your flag at
once and surrender--you will probably be far better treated than if you lead the Frenchman
a long chase and are taken at last."

"I am obliged to you for your good intentions in giving the advice you do," said Captain Tracy,
"but my principle is to hold out till the last hope of success has gone--and we haven't quite
arrived at that point yet.  If you don't wish to fight you can go below."

"You mistake me," answered the second mate, in a somewhat angry tone, and he walked away. 
The next instant a puff of smoke was seen to issue from the bows of the French ship, and a
shot came flying across the water; but it fell short of the Ouzel Galley.

"Stand by to fire our stern-chasers, Mr Massey," sang out the captain, "but we'll let the enemy
find out the range before we throw a shot away."

The captain did not fail to keep his eye on the canvas, to be ready to alter his course should
there be the slightest shift of wind.  The second mate continued walking the deck in sullen
silence, determined apparently to take no further part in defence of the ship.  Owen stood
ready, match in hand, to fire the stern-chasers.  In the course of a few minutes the Frenchman
fired another shot; it went ricocheting over the water, and passed the quarter of the Ouzel Galley.

"Our guns will carry as far as the Frenchman's," exclaimed the captain. "Now see what you can
do, Owen."

The first mate, looking along his gun, fired; the shot struck the enemy. The crew of the Ouzel
Galley watched eagerly for the effect of the shot.  It went through the Frenchman's fore-topsail.
A loud cheer showed their satisfaction.

"Well done, Owen--fire the other and try to wing him," cried the captain.  While the crew were
loading the first gun, Owen fired the second.  The captain, who had his glass turned towards
the enemy, shouted, "Hurrah! it's struck the fore-topsail yard."

The spar, however, remained standing, and some of the Frenchmen were seen running aloft to
fish it.  Owen sprang back to the first gun he had fired, and again discharged it; but the
enemy at that moment kept away, and before what damage it had effected could be seen, clouds
of smoke issued from her, and the shot from her whole broadside came rushing towards the chase.
They were mostly aimed high, and either went through the sails or passed by without doing any
injury; but two struck the quarter, and another glanced along the side, leaving a long white
furrow.

"Those shots were well aimed, but if she plays that trick often we shall have a better chance
of escaping," observed the captain, calmly; "try another shot, Owen."

The French ship quickly came up to the wind.  Owen again fired, and one of the Frenchmen was
seen to drop to the deck.  The enemy had now brought a gun on the forecastle, from which they
opened fire in return to the Ouzel Galley's stern-chasers.  Both vessels then fired away as
fast as the guns could be loaded and run out; but though most of Owen's shot told with some
effect, the damage he produced was speedily repaired, while several of the Frenchmen's shot
struck the Ouzel Galley, though as yet no one had been injured.  The former was, however, in
the mean time, creeping up nearer and nearer, and also, from sailing closer to the wind, weathering
on the chase.  The second mate, who had been walking the deck with as much calmness as if no
fight was going on, again came up to the captain.

"I before warned you that it would be useless to contend with yonder ship," he said, "and before
many minutes are over we shall have the shot from her broadside crashing on board us.  By holding
out you risk your own and your people's lives, and the lives of others dear to you--for it
is more than possible that another broadside will send the ship and all in her to the bottom.
We must--"

Before the captain could reply the enemy fired his two foremost guns, the shot from which shattering
the bulwarks sent pieces of splinter flying about, one of which struck Carnegan on the arm.

"It might have been worse," he observed; and after staggering a few paces he recovered himself. But
there gather other interests about them when we are told that these
compositions came from the son of a very eminent man, and were written
at an age at which we congratulate ourselves, if our college-boys
are not oppressively foolish.

For the rare instances of hereditary transmission of distinguished mental power are well worth
attention, and the maturity of thought and the subtile trains of
reflection in this youth now afford that large promise of genius which
may not be confounded with those specious precocities of talent the
world never lacks.

Yet it is not probable that even these attractions could give to the literary remains of young
Hallam that permanent place in letters which we have made bold to
promise them.

Only the inspirations of a great poet could wake the noblest sympathies of noblest hearts in perennial
tribute to this friend so early called from life.

The student of Shakspeare's sonnets--poems having much in common with those written in memory of Arthur
Hallam--is never tired of conjecturing the person to whom they were addressed. Who was the
"only begetter" of these passionate offerings of the poet's love?

Might he be recognized as he walked, a man among men? or was he the splendid idealization of genius
and friendship?

There are but faint answers to these questions. After the claims of Mr. Hart, Mr. Hughes,
and the Earls of Southampton and Pembroke have been duly examined, there comes the conclusion that we
may not know who and what he was towards whom the august soul of Shakspeare yearned with such
exceeding love. Future readers of the "In Memoriam" of Tennyson will be more favored in their knowledge
of the young man there given to fame. It will be known that he was worthy of the deep sorrow
breathed into exquisite verse,--worthy also of those noble half-lights flashing above the sombre
atmosphere, to show the instruction, the blessedness, the beauty, which grow from human grief.
We are compelled to confess that those keen poetic glimpses into the high regions of philosophy
and science, with which the memories of his friend inspired Tennyson, seem just dues to the brilliant
auguries of a future which this world was not permitted to see.

An outline of Arthur's life has already been given to the American public. Little can be added
to it from his father's touching preface to the unpublished edition of these writings in 1834,
which is now reprinted. The childhood of young Hallam exhibits facility in the acquisition of
knowledge, sweetness of temper, and scrupulous adherence to a sense of duty. At the age of nine
he reads Latin and Greek with tolerable facility, and achieves dramatic
compositions which excite the admiration of the father,--a thoroughly
competent, unless partial, critic.

This luxuriance of fancy is judiciously received; no display is made of it, and Arthur is sent
to school at Putney, where he remains for two years.

The common routine of English education is more than once broken by tours upon the Continent.
When the boy leaves Eton in 1827, his father pronounces him "a good, though not, perhaps,
first-rate scholar in the Latin and Greek languages." As certain Latin verses referred to
are, for some inscrutable reason, omitted in this American edition, the reader has no means of
deciding whether it is the modest reserve of the parent which pronounces them "good, without
being excellent," or the fond partiality of the father which discovers
them to be "good" at all.

In any case, we must consider Arthur's "comparative deficiency in classical learning," for
which the eminent historian seems almost to apologize, as one of his especial felicities. The liberalizing
effect of travel, and a varied contact with men and things, prevented
his powers from contracting themselves to a merely academical reputation.

When at Cambridge, he renounces all competition in the niceties of classical learning, and does
not attempt Latin or Greek composition during his stay at Trinity. Thus he escapes the fate
of many quick minds, which, running easily upon college grooves,
that end in the indorsement of a corporation, never make out to accept
their own individuality for better and for worse.

Arthur enters upon legal studies with acuteness, and not without interest. A few anonymous
writings occupy his leisure. He is now just rising upon the world,--a brilliant orb, as yet
seen only by a few watchers, who congratulate each other upon the light to be. A fatal tour to
Germany, and all ends in darkness and mystery.

Judging from the writings before us, we should say that this young man was destined to a greater
eminence in philosophy than in poetry. His father's opinion, in reverse of this, was perhaps
based upon average tendencies of character, instead of selected specimens
of production.

The best prose papers here printed, the "Essay on the Philosophical Writings of Cicero," and
the "Review of Professor Rossetti," are far more remarkable for the
ease with which accurate information is subjected to original, and
even profound thought, than are the poems for brilliancy of imagination
or mastery over the capacities of language.

Still, it must be confessed, that the sonnets are full of melody
and refinement,--indeed, we can recall no poet who has written much
better at the same age.

In all Arthur's compositions we recognize an exquisite delicacy of feeling, without any of the daintiness
of mind commonly found in intellectual youths. He seems to have acquired much of his father's command
of reading, and to have inherited those rarer faculties of selection and generalization which
give to learning its coherence and significance. In contrast to the precise and somewhat hard
literary style of the elder Hallam, the diction of the son glows with the sensitiveness of a highly
artistic nature.

Arthur's attainments in the modern languages appear to have been considerable. He is said to
have spoken French readily, and to have ranged its literature as familiarly as that of England.
His Italian sonnets are pronounced by competent authority to be very
remarkable for a foreigner.

They are certainly marvellous for a boy of seventeen after an eight months' visit to Italy.
In fine, upon the testimony presented in this volume, we think that
no considerate reader will hesitate to credit Arthur Hallam with a
rich and generous character, a wide sweep of thought rising from the
groundwork of solid knowledge, and the delicate aërial perceptions
of high imaginative genius.

Surely the life whose untimely end called forth "In Memoriam" was not lost to the world. Perhaps
it was by dying that the moral and intellectual gifts of this youth could most effectively
reach the hearts of men. He was not unworthy his noble monument. As we turn to the familiar
lyrics, they swell and deepen with a new harmony.

Again, the genius of Tennyson bears us onward through tenderest allegory
and subtlest analogy, until, breaking from cares and questionings
so melodiously uttered, his soul soars upward through thin philosophies
of the schools, and at length, in grandest spiritual repose, rests
beside the friend "who lives with God."

It is good to know that the "A.H.H." forever encircled by the halo of that matchless verse
does not live only as the idealization of the poet.

History of West Point, and its Military Importance during the American Revolution, and the Origin
and Progress of the United States Military Academy. By Captain EDWARD C. BOYNTON, A.M., Adjutant of the
Military Academy. New York: D. Van Nostrand.

In every country there must be localities the names of which are particularly associated with
the national history.

But in the United States there are few such places that are not portions of some one of the
States; and if they have been the scene of incidents sufficient in number and importance to furnish
material for an historical monograph, or so-called local history, it will probably derive its special
interest and coloring mainly from events of the Colonial period and the development of the
material prosperity of the particular State or section.

The associations of West Point, the seat of the United States Military Academy, are in this respect
remarkable, that they derive their interest exclusively from circumstances incidental to the
birth and progress of the nation. The history of the place is an important part of the nation's
history.

Compared with more comprehensive annals, wherein minute description of places and persons is impossible
from the breadth of view, local histories leave on the reader more
vivid impressions by affording a more microscopic and personal inspection.

Where the minor history, as we may call it, is thus connected with the greater story of the
body politic, it always enables the mind to combine, in the sequence of cause and effect, a
certain series of events in the course of the nation's life, leaving a more distinct apprehension
of the reality of that life in the past, by giving a rapid glance, under strong light, over a part,
than usually remains after the perusal of larger works which attempt the survey of the whole.

From
the beginning of the history of the United States, the administrative
power of the National Government has been continuously exercised at
West Point, to the exclusion of all other authority.

It was occupied by the Continental forces at the commencement of the Revolutionary contest,
as a place of the greatest strategic importance.

It was the objective point in that drama of Arnold's treason, which, by involving the fate of André,
is remembered as one of the most romantic incidents in the story of the war. In Captain Boynton's
new "History of West Point," the aspect of the place, in connection
with the events of that time, is given by that method of description
which always leaves the sense of historic verity.

The maps, plans, reports, letters, and accounts, with the spelling and types, though by no means with
the printing or the paper of past days, are reproduced; and the actors on the scene, not only those
of high position, whose names are household words, but those also
whose part was humbler and whose memory is obscure, are allowed to
present themselves to us as they appeared before the public of their
own day.

The first part of the volume gives the history of the place as it has been occupied for strategic
purposes. The second part is devoted to its history as the seat of the Military Academy, a history
which succeeds immediately to the former, and is intimately connected with the history of our
internal government from its first organization under the Constitution to the present hour;
so that the history of the locality presents itself as a brilliantly colored thread running through
the warp of the national history. In the composition of this portion, as of the other, the author has
presented his subject, not so much in his own narrative, as by a judicious combination of
extracts from documents and papers of original authority; although his own observations, by way
of connection and explanation, are given in good taste, and indicate a candid judgment, founded
upon a manifestly loving, but still essentially impartial, observation. It should be no wonder,
if the graduates of the Academy, who continue their connection with the army in mature years, should
always regard the place through a vista of memory and affection, shedding over it a brilliancy
to which others might be insensible. To most of them it has been as a home,--to many, probably,
the only home of their youth; and, in the unsettled life of the soldier,
we can conceive that to no other spot would their recollections recur
with like feeling.

We believe, that, in the society which gathers more or less permanently around the Academy, the
feeling of a home-circle towards its absent members follows the graduates during their military service;
and that they, on the other hand, are always conscious of a peculiar observation exercised from
the place over their conduct; so that each one, during an honorable career, may look forward
to revisiting it, from time to time, as a place associated by family-ties. This influence upon
the individual graduate must be a very powerful incentive. It must, in the nature of the case,
be unperceived by the public, but its value to the public will be
enhanced by the observation which they may extend to the Academy;
and it is eminently proper that such observation should be courted
by the Government, and by those who represent it on the spot; the
opportunity should be given to all, irrespectively of civil or military
place, to become acquainted with its general management, the principles
on which it is established, and the terms which the cadet makes with
the country on entering, and to see, from time to time, a general
résumé of its working and success.

A book which tells this, in its natural association with the narrative
of all that gives the locality its name in our history, promotes a
national interest and supplies a public want.

Captain Boynton's book should command the interest of those who know most of West Point, and
of those who know nothing about it. To some it will be a grateful source of reminiscence, and to others
of entertainment combined with information which has acquired an
increased interest for the citizen.

Not the least inviting portion of the book is that which relates to
the topography and scenery of the Point.

It is one of the singularities of our frame of government, that the nation is the lord of so little soil
in the inhabited portion of its own dominion: though it is well to remember that territorial
sovereignty is not, as many persons imagine, the only kind of sovereignty, nor, indeed, the
most important kind; for there is sovereignty over persons, which
may be held without eminent domain over the soil.

Allegiance is personal. It is not based on the feudal doctrine of tenures. The notion of many
persons respecting the right of the people of a State to carry themselves out of the nation is
connected with false conceptions on this subject. It is pleasant to think that one of the places
in which the nation is the land-owner and exclusive sovereign is celebrated for historic events,
and also preëminently distinguished for beauty of situation. This circumstance undoubtedly contributes
to the hold which the place has on the minds of those who have passed a portion of their youth
on the spot, and it has evidently been a source of inspiration to the author, and, we may say,
to the publisher, too, who have combined in making this a book of luxury as well as of useful reference,
a parlor-book. The pictorial illustrations they have given add greatly to its value; and in
this matter they might safely have gone even farther. This book is intended to make the spot
familiar to the minds of many in various parts of the national domain. Most persons of any leisure,
in this section of the country, have either themselves visited the banks of the Hudson or are familiar
with scenery somewhat similar in some part of the Eastern or Middle States.


"That depends on circumstances," said Gerald; "no one wishes to hurt a hair of their heads
if they behave themselves--if not, they must take the consequences."

The gale increasing, it taxed all the strength of the Frenchmen, and the few of the original
crew who remained, to shorten sail; but anxious as Lieutenant Vinoy was to get into port, he
refused to heave to, and continued beating the ship to windward.  At length, one day, soon
after noon, the wind began to decrease, and before dark a moderate breeze was blowing from
the southward.  Captain Tracy had every day taken an observation, the French officer not objecting
to his doing so, and Gerald always asked him whereabouts they were, noting the spot carefully
down on the chart when the lieutenant was on deck, so that his proceedings might not be remarked.
This day, according to Gerald's calculations, they were exactly a hundred and fifty miles to
the southward of Waterford.  The night was cloudy, and, as there was no moon, it was darker
than usual.  One-half of the Frenchmen had turned in, as had Lieutenant Vinoy; Jacques Busson
had the middle watch. Gerald had gone to his berth, but not to sleep; he merely pulled off
his shoes and jacket, and then, lying down, drew the blanket over him. After waiting for about
an hour he got up and groped his way to Lieutenant Vinoy's cabin; the door was partly open--the
sound which issued from within showed that the French officer was fast asleep. Gerald cautiously
entered and possessed himself of a brace of pistols which hung within reach of the lieutenant's
hand at the head of his cot, as also of a sword suspended to the bulkhead.  Carefully carrying
them out, he then, quietly closing the door, made his way to Owen Massey's cabin.

"We could not have a better opportunity than the present," he whispered. "If you will get ready,
I will call my father and warn Norah to keep quiet.  Here are the lieutenant's pistols--do
you take one of them, and I will carry the other and a sword to my father.  You will have no
difficulty in keeping the lieutenant shut up in his cabin, while I creep forward and get Pompey
and Dan to come aft and secure Jacques Busson. Just as they do so I will give a whistle loud
enough for you and my father to hear, and immediately you do so you both will spring on deck
and overpower the man at the helm.  The rest of our people are prepared to act as you have
arranged; one of them will knock down the look-out forward, while the others will throw themselves
upon the other Frenchmen and secure the hatches on those below.  You wished Tim and me to keep
ourselves free to act according to circumstances; Tim was to get into the boatswain's storeroom,
and to cut as many lengths of rope as we shall require.  He will have them in readiness for
the moment they are wanted.  There can be no mistake, I hope?"

"None, provided the Frenchmen don't take alarm," answered Owen.  "You, at all events, understand
the plan perfectly."

"We may carry it out, too, I trust, without bloodshed," said Gerald. "Shall I go forward and
give the signal?"

"Yes.  I feel well able to do my part, though my left arm may not be of as much use as I should
wish," answered Owen.  "Call your father and Norah, and then lose no time, or the lieutenant
may be waking and give us more trouble than is necessary."

Gerald then crept back into the state cabin.  He first went into Norah's berth, and uttered
a few words in her ear in a low voice.  She had not undressed, having been warned by Owen of
what was likely to happen, and she had resolved to give every assistance in her power; though
her arm was weak, she possessed nerve and courage, and might be able to keep watch over the
French officer, or even to turn the scale in favour of her friends, should any part of the
plan miscarry.

"Give me the pistol," she whispered; "I know that it is ready for use, as I saw the lieutenant
loading it this afternoon."

"Do you think he suspected anything?" asked Gerald.

"That was no sign of his doing so," answered Norah; "he has frequently withdrawn the charges
and reloaded his pistols since he came on board."

"All right, you shall have it," said Gerald; "but you mustn't mind shooting him if it is necessary.
Remember, if you don't we may possibly be overpowered, and shall be much worse off than we
are now."

"I hope that no such necessity may arise," answered Norah, and her voice trembled as she spoke.

"There, stay quiet till you're called, and I'll take the sword to our father," said Gerald.
The captain was awake, and prepared for the attempt to recapture the ship, he and Owen having
decided on the best plan for carrying it out.  He took the sword which his son brought him--
the lamp which swung from the deck above shed a feeble light throughout the cabin--he had just
quickly dressed, when Norah appeared.

"I had wished you to remain in your berth till we had secured the Frenchmen," he whispered.

"Pray do not insist on my doing so," she answered.  "I may be able to help you, and I cannot
bear the thoughts of hiding away while you are exposed to danger.  Do let me try to be of use,
father; I shall run no greater risk than I should by keeping in my berth.  See, Gerald has
given me a pistol, and I know how to use it.  It will serve, at all events, to frighten the
Frenchmen."

The captain, seeing Norah was determined, at length consented to do as she proposed.  Owen
now joined them, and he and the captain crept to the foot of the companion-ladder, up part
of which they mounted, to be in readiness to attack the man at the helm as soon as Gerald's
signal should be heard.  Meantime, Gerald had made his way on deck.  He had on a dark jacket
and trousers and dark worsted socks, and by creeping along close under the bulwarks he would
be able, he hoped, to get forward without much risk of being seen.  Jacques Busson, the officer
of the watch, was slowly pacing the deck, now looking up at the canvas which like a dark pyramid
seemed to tower into the sky, now addressing the man at the helm to keep the sails full or
else to steer rather closer to the wind, now shouting to the look-out forward to ascertain
that he was awake and attending to his duty.  Gerald stopped to observe what Jacques Busson
was about; he could distinguish the Frenchman's figure against the sky, as he paced backwards
and forwards on the raised poop, halting now and then to take a glance to windward, and again
taking a few steps towards the stern.  The moment Gerald thought that his back was turned he
again crept forward.  He had no fear of being discovered by the man at the helm, whose eyes,
dazzled by the binnacle lamp, were not likely to distinguish him.  Thus on he went, quickly
doubling round the guns, till he reached the fore hatchway, down which he slipped without being
perceived by either of the Frenchmen on deck, who were seated under the weather bulwarks, and,
as he rightly concluded, with their eyes shut.

"We shall have no difficulty in tackling those two fellows," he thought. The Frenchmen were
berthed on the starboard side of the forecastle, the Ouzel Galley's people on the larboard
side; Gerald was thus easily able to find his friends.  He had previously made all the arrangements
with Dan and Pompey--they had communicated them to the rest of the crew, who only waited his
arrival to carry them out.  Gerald and Dan had undertaken to get possession of the Frenchmen's
pistols.  It was the most perilous part of the work to be performed, for should they be awakened
they might give the alarm, and put the watch on deck on their guard.  Both Dan and the black
had noted accurately the places where the Frenchmen had put their weapons, who, instead of
depositing the pistols under their pillows, had hung them up just above their heads, within
reach of their hands, while their cutlasses lay by their sides.  To remove the latter might
be difficult without making a noise, and it was, besides, considered of less importance to
get hold of them.  Stealing silently across the fore-peak, Gerald and Dan reached one of the
bunks; Dan then leaning over, felt for the occupant's pistol, which he carefully unhooked and
handed to Gerald, who, almost breathless with eagerness, grasped it tightly.  They then went
to the next berth, and possessed themselves of the other weapons in the same manner.  The third
man turned as they approached, and uttered a few incoherent words; Dan and Gerald crouched
down out of sight lest he should awake, but a loud snore showed them that there was no great
fear of his doing that, and his pistols were successfully abstracted.  The fourth man seemed
restless, and at length raised himself on his shoulder, and looked out.

"Qui va la?" he asked in French.  Gerald and Dan were standing in deep shade, and remained
still as mice, scarcely daring to breathe.  The Frenchman, seeing no one, must have thought
that he had been dreaming, and again lying down composed himself to sleep.  They waited till
they heard him also begin to snore, and Dan then crept forward and got hold of his pistols.
They each took one, and gave the remainder to their shipmates.  Tim was then sent up, furnished
with a piece of line, with directions to conceal himself close to the hatchway, down which
he was to let the line hang, and his pulling it up was to be the signal that the Frenchmen
were off their guard.  On feeling it pulled all the party below were to spring up on deck and
overpower the crew forward.  Gerald accompanied by Dan and Pompey were, however, to make their
way aft in the same cautious manner in which he had come forward.  The black, in order to run
less risk of being discovered, had stripped himself naked, and oiled his body all over.  The
doing so was his own idea, and he grinned when he proposed it to Dan.

"I like one big eel, and if dey try to catch me I slip out of dere hands," he observed, chuckling.

"We could not hope for a better opportunity than the present," whispered Gerald into Dan's ear.

"All right, sir," answered Dan, touching Pompey and Tim.  The former, as agreed on, noiseless
as a cat, crept up on deck, when he immediately gave a tug to the string.  Gerald, with Dan
and Pompey, followed, and, crawling on all-fours, began to make their way aft.  The booms and
boats would have concealed them for some part of the distance from Jacques Busson even had
it been daylight; they therefore ran no risk of being discovered till they reached the after-part
of the quarter-deck.  Pompey had now to play the chief part in the drama.  Crawling up on the
lee side of the poop, he lay flat on the deck, while Gerald and Dan stole after him, ready
to spring up to his aid directly he had thrown himself on Busson, leaving the helmsman to be
dealt with by the captain and Owen.  Pompey had just reached the break of the poop, having
waited for the moment that Jacques Busson's back was towards him: a few seconds passed, when
the Frenchman again turned round, and, advancing a pace or two forward, shouted to the man
on the look-out.  No answer came. "Bete," he exclaimed, "he is asleep.  I must arouse him with
a rope's end."

As he spoke he advanced, about to descend the steps leading to the quarter-deck--at that moment
Pompey, who had been watching him as a serpent does its expected victim, springing to his feet,
threw his arms round the Frenchman's neck, while he at the same moment shoved a large lump
of oakum into his mouth before he could even utter a cry.  Dan, quick as lightning, joined
him, while Gerald whistled shrilly the promised signal to his father and Owen.  It was heard
too by Tim, who pulling the line, the rest of the Ouzel Galley's crew sprang up, some throwing
themselves on the two Frenchmen slumbering under the weather bulwarks before they had time
to draw their pistols.  The men on the forecastle, however, aroused by the noise, fired theirs
at their advancing opponents; but owing to the darkness and their hurry the bullets missed
their aim, and just as they got their hands on their cutlasses they were both knocked over
with well-planted blows in their faces, and brought to the deck, at the same instant that Tim,
to whom the duty had been confided, closed down the hatch on the watch below. The helmsman,
on hearing the scuffle, was turning his head to see what was the matter, when he found his
arms pinioned by the captain and Owen. On seeing this, Gerald ran forward to where Tim had
concealed the rope. He soon returned with a sufficient number of lengths to lash the arms of
Busson and the men, while Tim carried the rest of the rope to his shipmates forward, who were
not long securing the three Frenchmen.  The remaining four of the French crew, who had been
aroused by the scuffle, were now making desperate efforts to force their way up on deck, and
one on the top of the ladder had just succeeded in lifting up the hatch, when Tim saw his head
protruding above the combing.

"Bear a hand here, or shure the mounseers will be out of the trap," he shouted, at the same
time seizing a capstan-bar, which was close at hand, and dealing a blow with it at the head
of the Frenchman, who fell stunned off the ladder, back upon his companions following at his
heels. Notwithstanding this, immediately they had recovered themselves they again attempted
to get up, and another man had succeeded in raising half his body above the hatchway.  Tim
attacked him as he had done the first; the man, however, who was a powerful fellow, grasped
the capstan-bar, and getting his knee on the combing was about to deal a blow at Tim which
would have felled him to the deck, when one of the English crew, attracted by his cries, sprang
to his assistance, and, wrenching the weapon from the Frenchman's hands, struck him dead. 
Two more only had now to be disposed of; they, still in ignorance of the fate of their companions,
sprang up the hatchway, and before they had time to gain their feet were thrown down and secured.
The man who had fallen below was groaning heavily.

"He'll do no harm," observed Pat Casey.

"Arrah, don't be too shure of that," said Tim; "if he was to come to life, he'd be after letting
loose the others.  It will be wiser to lash him too; and unless the dead man is kilt entirely,
I'd advise that we prevent him from doing mischief."

Pat felt the Frenchman's head.  "Shure, I never knew a man come to life with a hole like this
in his skull," he remarked, "but to make shure in case of accidents, we'll heave him overboard;"
and without more ado the body of the Frenchman, who was undoubtedly dead, was shoved through
the foremost port.

Lieutenant Vinoy had not vainly boasted that he was a sound sleeper, for notwithstanding the
scuffle over his head, he did not awake; and happily Norah, who had been stationed at his cabin
door to keep him in check should he attempt to break out, was not called upon to exercise her
courage.  The two events which have been described were, it will be understood, taking place
at the same time.  During those exciting moments no one thought of what the ship was about;
the consequence was that she flew up into the wind, and it became necessary to box her off.
All hands were required for this purpose--the fore-yards had to be braced round, the after-yards
squared away.  Owen, from his wound, being the least able to exert himself, went to the helm,
the captain hauling away with the rest of the crew.

"Gerald, do you go forward and keep a look-out on our prisoners," cried the captain.  "If their
arms by chance are not securely lashed, one or more of them may be getting free and setting
the others at liberty. Call Tim Maloney to help you."

Gerald was about to obey this order, when the sound of loud knocking and Norah's voice came
from below, exclaiming, "The lieutenant is awake and trying to break out of his cabin."  Gerald
heard it, and shouting to Tim to look after the Frenchmen forward, he sprang down the companion-ladder.
He was not a moment too soon, for the French officer, awaking and believing from the sounds
which reached him that something was the matter, had leaped out of bed with the intention of
hastening on deck, when he found the door fastened on him--then, hearing the captain issuing
orders, he guessed truly what had occurred.  Supposing that there might yet be time to regain
possession of the ship, he frantically endeavoured to break open the door.  The only weapon
he could discover was the leg of a stool, which having wrenched off, he managed with it to
prise open the door.  The light from the state cabin fell on him as he appeared at the opening;
just at that moment Gerald sprang down from the deck.  Catching sight of the lieutenant, he
presented his pistol.

"Stay, monsieur," he exclaimed, "if you venture out of your cabin, I shall be under the disagreeable
necessity of shooting you."

The Frenchman hesitated, for, the light glancing on the pistol-barrel, he recognised his own
weapon, which he knew never missed fire, and showed him also that he was totally unarmed. 
Gerald saw his advantage. "Let me advise you, monsieur, to go back and sit down quietly, and
no harm will happen to you," he continued.  "The ship is ours, and we intend to keep her."

"Parbleu!" exclaimed the Frenchman, shrugging his shoulders; "you have indeed gained an advantage
over me."

"Very true--but not an unfair one," said Gerald, laughing, but still keeping his pistol pointed
at the officer, who now caught sight of Norah, also with a pistol in her hand, standing a little
behind her brother.  He might have made an attempt to spring upon Gerald and wrench the weapon
from his hand, but from the determined look of the young lady he thought, in all probability,
that she would fire over her brother's head should he do so.  He therefore stepped back and
sat down on the only remaining stool in the cabin, folding his arms with an air of resignation.

"I acknowledge myself defeated," he exclaimed; "but when I have a young lady as an opponent
my gallantry forbids me to resist."

"It all comes of being a sound sleeper, monsieur," said Gerald, "but if you had kept your weather
eye open it might not have happened.  However, you may turn in again now and sleep as soundly
as you like till we got into Waterford harbour, where we shall be, I hope, if the wind holds
fair, in another day or two.  But don't agitate yourself we'll treat you as politely as you
treated us, except that we shall be compelled to keep you a prisoner, in case you should try
again to turn the tables on us."

The ship had now been brought round; the head-yards were squared, and the course laid for Waterford.
Still there was a great deal to be done; it was necessary to secure the prisoners, so that
there might be no risk of their rising.  Jacques Busson was a powerful and determined fellow,
and he would to a certainty, if he had the opportunity, get free and try to set his countrymen
at liberty.  The lieutenant also, though addicted to sleeping soundly, was likely to be wide
enough awake for the future, and would in all probability try to regain possession of the ship.
He was therefore requested to confine himself to his cabin.

"I am sorry to treat you so inhospitably," said Captain Tracy, "but necessity compels me, and
I hope that it will be but for a short time. I must warn you, however, if you attempt to break
out, that we shall be obliged to secure you as we have done your men; but to save you from
temptation, we shall secure your cabin door on the outside in a way which will prevent you
from doing so.  If, however, you will give me your promise not to attempt to regain your liberty,
you will be treated with no further rigour."

"I must make a virtue of necessity," answered the lieutenant; "it is a very disagreeable one,
but I submit."  And without more ado he threw off his coat and quietly turned into his cot.

"Don't trust him, Gerald, whatever he may say," whispered Captain Tracy, "till we have the
door firmly secured."

"Ay, ay, father," answered Gerald; "if he shows his face at the door without leave, I'll make
him draw it back again pretty quickly."

Pompey had been left to watch over Jacques Busson and the man who had been serving at the wheel.
He had no pistol, but instead he held in his hand a sharp, long-bladed sheath-knife, which
effectually kept the prisoners from stirring.  He evidently took especial delight in his office,
and reluctantly consented to drag Jacques Busson into a cabin, where it was arranged that he
should be confined, but at the same time with his arms and legs firmly secured.  The rest of
the men were carried down into the forecastle, and were placed in their bunks, the captain
having examined each of them to be certain that they were lashed in a way from which they could
not liberate themselves.

Morning dawned soon after these arrangements had been made.  Jacques Busson grumbled greatly
at the treatment he had received.

"What for you make all dis fuss?" said Pompey, who was standing sentry over him.  "You want
to take us into French port--we take you into Irish port.  Waterford berry nice place, and
when we get dere we take you out of limbo, and you live like one gentleman."

"Sacre!" answered the Frenchman, who had only caught a word or two of what Pompey had said,
"if we fall in with a French ship before we get there, I'll pay you off, mon garcon, for nearly
strangling me with your greasy arms."

Pompey only grinned a reply.  There was no use wasting words, considering that neither understood
the other's language.  The lieutenant took matters more philosophically than his inferior.
He was, however, not to be trusted, and either Gerald or Dan kept watch at his door with a
loaded pistol.  The arms and legs of the other men were too securely lashed to afford much
risk of their getting loose; still, a trusty man was stationed over them, as there was no doubt
that they would make the attempt could they gain the opportunity, and if one could cast off
his lashings he might speedily set the others at liberty.

The sea was smooth; the sun shone brightly; and the Ouzel Galley made good way towards Waterford.
She was, however, upwards of a hundred miles from that port, and might before reaching it fall
in with another French ship.  She was, indeed, now in a part of the ocean in which privateers
were likely to be cruising, on the look-out for homeward-bound vessels.  It was necessary,
therefore, to avoid any strange sail till her character could be positively ascertained.  A
hand was accordingly stationed aloft to give timely notice should a sail appear in sight. 
This, of course, weakened the crew, who were already insufficient to work the ship; the wounded
men, though they had aided in overpowering the Frenchmen, were but little capable of performing
continuous work.  Owen felt his wound very painful, yet he persisted in attending to his duty,
and could scarcely be persuaded to lie down on the sofa for a short time to rest, while the
captain took his watch on deck.  Gerald was highly applauded by his father and Owen for his
courage and judgment, which had so much contributed to the recapture of the vessel; even the
French lieutenant expressed his admiration of the way he had behaved.

"If young English boys are so brave and cool, no wonder that we should have been overpowered,"
he observed.  "I only wish that we had had a French boy on board, and it is not impossible
that he might have discovered your plot and counteracted it.  The next time I have charge of
a prize, I will place a French boy to watch the English boys, and then we shall see which is
the sharpest."

"I don't know which may prove the sharpest, but I am ready to fight any two French boys of
my own age I have ever met in my life," answered Gerald, laughing; "first one come on, and
then the other, or both together, provided they'll keep in front, or let me have a wall at
my back, when they're welcome to do their worst."

"Ah, you are too boastful," said the lieutenant.

"Pardon me, monsieur, not at all. But it would be very false to infer because extensive bankruptcies,
and periods of severe pecuniary embarrassment, have accompanied,
if not indeed been caused by the development of the railway system,
that therefore that system must be an unsound and unremunerative one.

These monetary difficulties were in a great measure the consequence of over-speculation, and therefore
form no sounder evidence against the utility of railways, than does over-speculation in tea condemn
the prudent employment of capital in the tea-trade. Besides which, it must ever be remembered
that the judiciousness of an undertaking is not always to be judged of by its immediate results.
All investments of capital which are from their nature permanent, require time for the development
of their effects, and may, as regards many of their immediate results, prove rather injurious
than beneficial. To this class of speculations railways belong.

Introduced for the purpose of facilitating locomotion, and thus improving the industry of the
country, this new system of transit was calculated to produce rather
an eventual and permanent, than an immediate benefit to the empire.

So long as Great Britain retains and cultivates the resources of trade and manufactures now
at her disposal, and provided no new method of locomotion be invented which shall supersede railways,
there is every reason to believe that railways will continue to form an ever-increasing source
of wealth to the nation. That this is an opinion very generally entertained is proved from the
vast sums of money which are now lent out on the faith that this result will be realised.
The railway system has not only created a new field for speculation,
but likewise a new security for monetary investments.

At the close of 1848, upwards of L.43,000,000 was lent upon railways. There is every reason
to believe that debenture-holding is much greater now than it was then; but as no official
report of its amount, so far as we know, has been published since 1848, we, for accuracy's sake,
quote the return made in that year.

If railways have produced very important effects upon commercial affairs, they have exercised an
influence not less important in a social and intellectual point of
view.

They have been greatly instrumental in removing prejudices, in cementing
old and forming new friendships, in extending information, and in
sharpening ingenuity.

Prejudice has been one of the most formidable obstacles to the spread of civilisation. It has
for ages kept separate and at enmity nations born to bless and benefit each other; propped
up systems whose graver errors or weaker absurdities now form subjects
of regret and ridicule; and fomented among the members of smaller
societies and sects discords, strifes, and recriminations, which have
been based on no other foundation than wilful or accidental ignorance.

By bringing those in contact who otherwise would never have met, and improving the acquaintance
of those who have, railways have spread individual opinions, tastes, and information more equally
than before; and out of this mixture of the social and moral elements have collected and more
widely distributed just conclusions regarding men, manners, politics, and religion. By being
thus more frequently brought together, individuals have increased the number of their acquaintances,
and become to a greater extent than before 'citizens of the world.'
A mutual discharge of the good offices of life has augmented those
feelings of interest in our fellow-creatures, and kindness towards
them, which are not less in accordance with the spirit of Christianity
than conducive to the social wellbeing of communities.



The captain and Owen agreed that at all events it would be unnecessary to keep Lieutenant Vinoy
shut up in his cabin.  "As he has behaved like a gentleman," said the captain, "go and tell
him, Owen, that if he will give his word of honour not to interfere with the other prisoners,
I beg that he will come on deck, should he feel so disposed; and that I regret having been
under the necessity of confining him to his cabin for so many hours--but, Owen, keep an eye
on him, notwithstanding; it may be as well not to trust him too much, and if he were to release
that desperate fellow Busson, the two together might play us some trick we shouldn't like."

"No fear of that, sir," answered Owen, glad to show the French lieutenant an act of courtesy,
"but I'll keep my eyes about me."

He immediately went below and gave Monsieur Vinoy the captain's message.

"Certainly," answered the lieutenant; "I willingly accept the conditions.  I have nothing to
complain of--it was the fortune of war; you acted towards me as, under the same circumstances,
I should have behaved to you.  I will gladly come on deck."

Saying this, he preceded Owen up the companion-ladder, making a polite bow to Norah, who had
just before joined her father, and was looking out eagerly towards the land.  In a short time
the ship could be clearly discerned from the deck.  The squareness of her yards and the cut
of her canvas made it evident that she was not a merchant vessel; but whether an English or
French man-of-war, or a privateer, it was difficult at that distance to determine.  She was
making good way with the tide, which was then about half flood, running to the eastward; as
this was almost across the course of the Ouzel Galley, it was rather against than in favour
of the latter, whereas it added greatly to the rapid progress of the stranger.  Under ordinary
circumstances probably neither the captain nor Owen could have had much doubt about the character
of the vessel in sight; but having so narrowly escaped the loss of the ship, they both felt
more than usually anxious.  Every stitch of canvas the Ouzel Galley could carry was set on
her, the sails being wetted that they might the better hold the wind.  The captain kept his
glass constantly turned towards the approaching ship.  When first seen, she was about twelve
miles off, while the Ouzel Galley was supposed to be about eight miles from the Hook Tower.
At the rate she was going it would take her upwards of an hour to get off it; whereas, should
the wind hold, the stranger, with the advantage of the tide, would get her within range of
her guns before that time.  No flag had as yet been seen flying from her peak; but even should
she show British colours it would be no proof that she was not an enemy, as she would be certain
to hoist them for the sake of deceiving any merchant vessels she might meet with.

"I very much fear that she is a privateer," observed Owen, after carefully examining the stranger
through his glass; "still the wind may fall light and prevent her reaching us--or, better still,
shift to the eastward and throw her to leeward, and we may then soon run up the harbour, and
got under shelter of Duncannon Fort before she can reach us."

Lieutenant Vinoy had been eagerly gazing at the stranger--a look of perplexity appeared in
his face.

"What do you think of yonder ship?" asked Owen.

"I will not disguise my belief from you that she is the Coquille," answered the lieutenant.
"I know her too well to be mistaken, even at this distance; but remain tranquil--should she
recapture your vessel, of which I entertain, I confess, very little doubt, Captain Thurot will
treat you with the same courtesy he did before, notwithstanding what has occurred.  I am the
person he will chiefly blame; and I must beg you to inform him how long I had been on watch
and how fatigued I was when I retired to my cabin.  Morbleu! to tell you the truth, I am as
anxious as you can be to keep out of his way, but don't tell him that I said so."

"You may rest assured that we will do our best to avoid an encounter," answered the captain,
"and, should we be recaptured, that we will say all that we can in your favour; but I trust
that we shall escape--it would be cruel to be caught after all."

The wind was becoming lighter and lighter, and thus their anxiety was prolonged.  Still the
Coquille--for that such she was very little doubt existed--kept creeping up.  The sea became
much calmer.

"I will send a boat away with Norah and Gerald; it were better to save her from the annoyance
to which she would be exposed should we again fall into the Frenchmen's hands," said Captain
Tracy.  "I should wish to let you go too, Owen; suffering from your wound, you are but ill
able to stand the confinement of a French prison."

"I am grateful to you, captain; and thankfully would I escort your daughter, but she will be
safe with her brother, and I cannot bring myself to desert the ship," answered Owen.

"That is like you, Owen," replied the captain; "perhaps I might have said the same were I in
your place.  It is my principle that every officer should stick to his ship as long as a plank
holds together; but we shall have hands enough to take her in, should yonder stranger prove
not to be the Coquille, but a friend--or should we be recaptured, the fewer people there are
on board, the fewer will there be to suffer.  I have therefore made up my mind that you shall
go.  I will send Dan Connor or Pompey, and Tim and Gerald can pull an oar and you can steer;
you'll not have more than ten or twelve miles to row before you can get fresh hands, either
at Duncannon Fort or at Passage, to take you up to Waterford.  See, we are scarcely making
three knots an hour; the boat can pull nearly twice as fast as that, and you will be able to
keep well ahead of the enemy.  Come, I wanted to see what you would say, but I have resolved
you should go; so order the boat to be got ready, and the sooner you are off the better."

Owen was, of course, willing enough to go for the sake of Norah; he had no choice but to obey
his commander.

"Norah," said the captain, turning to his daughter, to whom the French officer was endeavouring
to make himself agreeable, and who had not heard the conversation between her father and the
mate, "go and get your traps together, my girl; I am going to send you and Gerald with the
mate on shore, and I hope that we shall be soon after you."

Norah was too well accustomed to obey her father to question the command, and immediately went
below.

"Gerald!" shouted the captain to his son, who had some time before come down from the mast-head,
"go and help your sister; you must be smart about it--the boat will be in the water in less
than five minutes."

In a short time Dan and Tim, who had been sent into the cabin, appeared with Norah's trunks.
She quickly followed.  Having learned from Gerald the reason of her being sent on shore, she
addressed her father.  "Oh, father, I must not, I ought not to leave you," she exclaimed; "you
think that the Ouzel Galley will after all be recaptured, and you will be carried off to France,
and perhaps ill-treated by those men from whom you have retaken the ship, while I shall be left."

"Far better that it should be so than that we should both be made prisoners and ill-treated,"
replied the captain; "so be, as you always have been, an obedient girl--and now, my child,
may Heaven bless and protect you!" and the captain, giving his daughter an affectionate kiss,
led her to the gangway.  The boat was already alongside, and Owen in her ready to help Norah
down.  She was soon seated in the boat; Gerald followed her.  Just then the captain took another
glance at the stranger, which was about three miles off; as he did so, the French flag was
seen to fly out at her peak.  At the same moment the sails of the Ouzel Galley gave a loud
flap; the captain looked round.

"Praise Heaven! here comes the breeze from the eastward," he exclaimed. "Hold fast with the
boat; come on deck again, Norah--we'll not part with you yet;" and, leaning down, he took her
arm as she quickly climbed up the side.  The rest of the party followed; and to save time the
boat was dropped astern.  All hands were busily engaged in bracing up the yards. The Ouzel
Galley was now well to windward; the French ship tacked, but was still able to steer a course
which would bring her within gunshot. The two vessels stood on; the Ouzel Galley was rapidly
approaching the land, while the Coquille was getting further from it.  Another tack would,
however, place her astern, and it would then be a question whether she could overtake the Ouzel
Galley before the latter could run up the harbour.  Much would depend upon the way the wind
blew when she got inside; it might come down the harbour, and in that case the Frenchman might
overtake her before she could get up to Credda Head, within which it was not likely even Thurot
himself would venture.  The breeze held firm; the captain looked over the side.

"The good ship seems to know her danger, and is slipping along famously," he observed to Owen.
"We shall be up to Waterford Quay before nightfall, I hope; we have still a good part of the
flood, and when Captain Thurot finds that there is no chance of taking us, he'll give up the
chase."

"He'll not do so till the last moment, captain," observed Lieutenant Vinoy.  "There is no man
like him; and should the wind fail us when we are inside the harbour, he will, or I am much
mistaken, send in the boats to cut your vessel out."

"We'll hope, then, that the wind will not fail us," answered the captain--and he much doubted
whether the Frenchman would venture on so bold an act.  "If your friends come, we'll give them
a warm reception, and we shall be under the necessity of shutting you up in your cabin again."

"I shall be ready to submit to your orders," said the lieutenant, shrugging his shoulders.

Poor Norah naturally felt very anxious, even though Owen endeavoured to reassure her by pointing
out the position of the French ship, which could not tack with advantage till a considerable
way astern.  The breeze was every moment freshening, and the tall lighthouse on the east side
of Waterford harbour became more and more distinct.

"No fear now," cried Gerald at length, as the very beach on it stood, with the water rippling
on it, could be clearly discerned, and the harbour up to Duncannon Fort opened out to view.
The Ouzel Galley was just abreast of Hook Tower when the French ship was seen to tack and boldly
to stand after her.

"That looks as if the lieutenant were right in his notion; and should we get becalmed inside,
or find the wind drawing down the harbour, Thurot will send in his boats after us," observed
Owen to the captain.

"I have no fear of being becalmed till we get inside of Credda Head, and still less of the
wind, as it is outside, drawing down the harbour," answered the captain.  "Should the boats
get up with us, we must try and beat them off; we were not afraid of the ship herself, and
those Frenchmen, though brave enough, are not like our own fellows in cutting-out affairs.
See to the guns, however, and get ammunition up on deck, for, should they come, we mayn't have
much time to spare."

The Ouzel Galley stood on in mid-channel; the well-known landmarks, church steeples, country-seats,
and castles on either side were recognised; Credda Head, a long, high point at the entrance
of the harbour, was neared, when Duncannon Fort came into view.  Still the daring privateer
followed as if her bold captain did not yet despair of overtaking the chase.  The wind, as
the captain had hoped it would do, held fair, blowing over the low land on the east side of
the harbour; once up with Duncannon Fort the Ouzel Galley would be safe, both from the privateer
herself and from an attack by her boats.  At length Credda Head was rounded.

"Hurrah!" cried Gerald, who, not having to attend to the navigation of the ship, was watching
the privateer, "she's afraid of standing on further--she's about; but, hillo!--she has hoisted
English colours."

"No proof that she is not French, though," answered the captain; "it is simply to deceive the
people on shore."

"At all events, she's standing out of the harbour again, and won't do us any mischief," cried
Gerald.

"Thank Heaven!" exclaimed the captain, "we're safe at last."  And the long breath he drew clearly
showed how anxious he had been.

"A boat coming off from under the Head!" sang out Dan from forward.  The topsail sheets were
let fly, the courses trailed up to allow the boat to come alongside, and a river pilot stopped
on deck.

"Welcome back to Old Ireland!" he exclaimed, as he shook the captain's hand.  "Shure, it's
a pleasure to see the Ouzel Galley again, for it's long we've been looking for her, and many
began to say that she was lost, or taken by the French."

"We very nearly were so, but we managed to take some of these same gentlemen instead," answered
the captain with a laugh, to which he could now give vent; "and only just now we had a narrow
squeak for it.  What do you think of yonder ship, Pat?"

"Of course, she's an English man-of-war," answered the pilot; "we've been expecting one in
here for some days past, and we thought that craft was her.  To say the truth, we were going
on board her; for, shure, the Ouzel Galley knows her way up to George's Quay by herself."

"Had you done so, Pat, you'd have been carried off, and made to serve as pilot on board a French
ship till the end of the war," answered Captain Tracy.

"Maybe you're right, captain; but see, she carries the English flag, and no Frenchman would
have the impudence to come into our harbour," said the pilot.

"That gentleman says she is French, and he ought to know, for he belonged to her," observed
the captain, pointing to Lieutenant Vinoy. Pat Monaghan, however, was not convinced; though,
as the stranger was rapidly running out of the harbour again, he had no opportunity of ascertaining
for himself.  Under Pat's pilotage the Ouzel Galley stood on up the harbour, which now narrowed
considerably.  At length she rounded Cheek Point, when with a fair wind she ran up the Suir,
on the south bank of which Waterford is situated.  It was late in the evening when at last
she dropped her anchor off George's Quay.  Before her canvas was furled, Mr Ferris, the senior
partner of her owners, Ferris, Twigg, and Cash, came on board, and warmly congratulated the
captain on his safe return.  On hearing of the gallant way in which possession of the Ouzel
Galley had been regained, Mr Ferris invited Norah and Gerald to his house.

"My daughter Ellen will be delighted to see her old schoolfellow, Miss Tracy, who was a great
favourite of hers," he said; "and many of my friends will be glad to see your son, who from
your account was the principal actor in your adventure."

"I must not praise Gerald too much," said Captain Tracy, after he had accepted the invitation;
"my mate, Owen Massey, was the chief concoctor of the plot, and had I not a high opinion of
his judgment and courage, I should not have ventured to give my consent to it."

Before leaving the ship, Captain Tracy was anxious to be relieved of his prisoners.  Mr Ferris
hurried back to the chief magistrate of the town, who at once sent down a guard to march them
off to the jail.  The lieutenant, however, on being brought before him, was more courteously
treated, and on giving his parole not to leave the town or to communicate with the enemy, he
was allowed to be at large.  As soon as he was set at liberty he received an invitation from
Mr Ferris to take up his abode at his house in King Street.

Thankful indeed was Owen Massey when, the prisoners having been carried off, he was able to
give up charge of the ship and go on shore.  He had a home to go to, though an humble one,
with his mother, who resided in a pretty little cottage in the outskirts of the town.  She
had seen better days, for both she and her husband were of ancient lineage; but he had been
engaged in a long-protracted lawsuit, which he ultimately lost, and died, leaving her very
limited means with which to support herself and their only child Owen.  Captain Tracy, an old
friend, offered to take Owen to sea; and the lad was delighted with the thoughts of the life
in prospect.  His mother had not only given him the best education the place afforded, but
had sent him to Trinity College, Dublin, to complete his education.  Here his means, however,
did not allow him to remain long; but, being clever and diligent, he was better prepared than
most lads were at that time for his future calling.  He knew nothing about the Royal Navy,
or he would certainly have desired to enter it, which he might easily have done had he possessed
any friend able to get him placed on the deck of a man-of-war.  He had, like other youths,
read accounts of the voyages of the old explorers, of the adventures of the buccaneers, and
other works; he was scarcely aware of the difference which then existed between the officers
of the Royal Navy and merchant service.  Captain Tracy, though anxious to promote his interests,
did not think fit to enlighten him, as he fully believed that during the "piping times of peace"
he would be far more likely to succeed in the latter than in the former service; and belonging
to it himself, he rightly looked upon it as an honourable one.

Mrs Massey was struck by her son's pale face and languid manner.  The voyage over, the effects
of his severe wound, and the long-continued anxiety he had suffered, at once told on him. 
She immediately sent for the best surgeon in the place.  Dr Roach quickly arrived; he had a
great respect for Widow Massey, and had known Owen, from his boyhood. On examining his wound
he put on a grave face.

"It surprises me, my dear boy, that you could have managed to move about with so fearful a
laceration," he said; "it has been well and carefully dressed, I will allow, or you would not
have been alive at this moment. Many a poor fellow has died from a less hurt than this.  However,
you will do well now, if you follow my directions; but you must lie by and get your mother
to nurse you.  Come, turn into bed at once; you are not fit to be about--you'll get well the
sooner."

Owen expostulated; he had been on his legs for several days, and why should he now lie by?
he asked.

"For the very reason that you have done more than you have strength for," answered the doctor.

"But the duty of the ship must be attended to, and I am anxious to see my captain," urged Owen.

"And your captain's daughter, eh, my young friend--is it not so?" said Dr Roach.  "Well, I
will let her know your wishes; I have been called in to attend on Captain Tracy, who requires
some doctoring, though not as much as you do--and as to the ship, there are others whose duty
it is to look after her; it was yours to bring her safely into port, and you did that in a
very gallant way, I hear. What route did he take from the first to the second-named town, and
what was the object of his visit?

PRESTONIENSIS.

[Upon reference to the Introduction to the Patent Rolls, it appears that John was at Lancaster
from Monday the 21st to Sunday 27th, from Monday 28th to Wednesday 1st March at Chester, on Thursday
2nd at Middlewich, Friday the 3rd at Newcastle-under-Lyne, and from the 4th to the 8th at Milburn.]

*
* * * *

Replies.

HAS EXECUTION BY HANGING BEEN SURVIVED?

(Vol. ix., pp. 174. 280.)

The copious Notes of your correspondents on this subject have only left the opportunity for a
few stray gleanings in the field of their researches, which may,
however, not prove uninteresting.

The compiler of a curious 12mo. (A Memorial for the Learned, by J. D., Gent., London, 1686) records,
among "Notable Events in the Reign of Henry VI.," that,--

"Soon after the good Duke of Gloucester was secretly murthered, five of his menial servants, viz.
Sir Roger Chamberlain, Knt., Middleton, Herber, {454} Artzis, Esq.,
and John Needham, Gent., were condemned to be hanged, drawn, and quartered;
and hanged they were at Tyburn, let down quick, stript naked, marked
with a knife to be quartered; and then the Marquess of Suffolk brought
their pardon, and delivered it at the place of execution, and so their
lives were saved."--P. 77.

The following document from the Patent Rolls of the forty-eighth year of the reign of King Henry III. (skin
5.) affords conclusive evidence of the affirmative:

"Rex omnibus, etc. salutem. Quia Inetta de Balsham pro receptamento latronum et imposito nuper
per considerationem curie nostre suspendio adjudicata, et ab horâ nonâ diei Iune usque post ortum
solis diei martis sequen. suspensa, viva evasit, sicut ex testimonio fide dignorum accipimus.
Nos, divinæ charitatis intuitu, pardonavimus eidem Inetta sectam pacis nostre que ad nos pertinet
pro receptamento predicto, et firmam pacem nostrum ei inde concedimus. In cujus, etc. Teste
Rege apud Cantuar. XVI^o. die Augusti.

"Convenit cum recordo LAUR. HALSTED, Deput. Algern. May. mil."

Plot, in his Natural History of Staffordshire, p. 292., quotes this pardon, and suggests that
possibly

"She could not be hanged, upon account that the larynx, or upper part
of her windpipe, was turned to bone, as Fallopius (Oper., tom. i.,
Obs.

Anat., tract. 6.) tells us he has sometimes found it, which possibly might be so strong, that
the weight of her body could not compress it, as it happened in the case of a Swiss, who, as
I am told by the Rev. Mr. Obadiah Walker, Master of University College, was attempted to be
hanged no less than thirteen times, yet lived notwithstanding, by
the benefit of his windpipe, that after his death was found to have
turned into a bone; which yet is still wonderful, since the circulation
of the blood must be stopt, however, unless his veins and arteries
were likewise turned to bone, or the rope not slipt close."

Besides the account of Anne Green, Denham, in the 4th book of his
Physico-Theology, quotes the following instance from Rechelin (De
Aere et Alim. defect., cap. vii.),--

"Of a certain woman hang'd,
and in all appearance dead, who was nevertheless restored to life
by a physician accidentally coming in, and ordering a plentiful administration
of the spirit of sal ammoniac."

(See also The Uncertainty of the Signs of Death, and the Danger of precipitate Interments and
Dissections demonstrated, 12mo., London, 1751.)

A paragraph, stating that Fauntleroy, the notorious forger, had survived his execution, and was
living abroad, has more than once gone the round of the newspapers. It is sometimes added that
his evidence was required in a Chancery suit,--absurdly enough, as, if not actually, he was at least legally
dead.

The story of Brodie, executed October, 1788, for an excise robbery at Edinburgh, is probably familiar
to most. The self-possession and firmness with which he met his fate was the result of a belief
in the possibility of his resuscitation:

"It is a curious fact, that an attempt was made to resuscitate Brodie immediately after the
execution. The operator was Degravers, whom Brodie himself had employed. His efforts, however,
were utterly abortive. A person who witnessed the scene, accounted for the failure by saying that
the hangman, having been bargained with for a short fall, his excess of caution made him shorten
the rope too much at first, and when he afterwards lengthened it, he made it too long, which
consequently proved fatal to the experiment."--Curiosities of Biography, 8vo., Glasgow, 1845.

There
is a powerfully-written story in Blackwood's Magazine, April, 1827, entitled "Le Revenant,"
in which a resuscitated felon is supposed to describe his feelings and experience. The author, in
his motto, makes a sweeping division of mankind:--"There are but two classes in the world--those
who are hanged, and those who are not hanged; and it has been my lot to belong to the former."
Many well-authenticated cases might still be adduced; but enough at least has now probably been
said upon the subject, to show the possibility of surviving the tender mercies of Professor
Calcraft and his fraternity.

WILLIAM BATES.

Birmingham.

In Atkinson's Medical Bibliography, A. and B., under the head "Bathurst Rodolphus," is the
following:

"Nuremberg, 4to., 1655. On a maid who recovered after being hanged.

"This is the remarkable case of Elizabeth Gren, whom Bathurst and
Dr. Willis restored after being executed, i. e. hanged, for infanticide.

'Vena incisa refocillata est.'

"These poor creatures are seldom considered as maids, after being hanged for infanticide. A similar
recovery also happened to a man who had been executed for murder
at York.

My father had the body for public dissection. Whether the law then required the body to be hung
for one hour or not, I cannot say; but I well remember my father's observation, that it was a
pity the wretch had ever been restored, as his morals were by no means improved. Hanging is
therefore by no means a cure for immorality, and it will be needless (in any of us) trying the experiment'--P.
255.

H. J.

Sheffield.

There is a record of a person being alive immediately after hanging, in the Local Historian's Table-book,
vol. ii. pp. 43, 44., and under the date May 23, 1752.

It is there stated, Ewan Macdonald, a recruit in General Guise's regiment of {455} Highlanders,
then quartered in Newcastle-upon-Tyne, murdered a cooper named Parker, and was executed on
September 28, pursuant to his sentence.

He was only nineteen years of age, and at the gallows endeavoured to throw the executioner
off the ladder. The statement concludes with--"his body was taken to the surgeons' hall and
there dissected;" and the following is appended as a foot-note:

"It was said that, after the body was taken to the surgeons' hall,
and placed ready for dissection, the surgeons were called to attend
a case at the infirmary, who, on their return, found Macdonald so
far recovered as to be sitting up.

He immediately begged for mercy; but a young surgeon, not wishing to be disappointed of the
dissection, seized a wooden mall, with which he deprived him of life. It was farther reported,
as the just vengeance of God, that this young man was soon after
killed in the stable by his own horse.

They used to show a mall at the surgeons' hall, as the identical one used by the surgeon."

ROBERT
S. SALMON.

Newcastle-on-Tyne.

The case of Anne Green is attested by a third witness:

"In December,
1650, he was one of the persons concerned in recovering Anne Green
to life, who was hanged at Oxford on the 14th, for the supposed murther
of her bastard child."--"Memoir of Sir William Petty, Knt.," prefixed
to Several Essays on Political Arithmetic, p. 3., 4th edit., London,
1755.

CPL.

* * * * *

COLERIDGE'S CHRISTABEL.

(Vol. vii., pp. 206. 292; Vol. viii., pp. 11. 111.)

MR. J. S. WARDEN might well express astonishment at the rash and groundless statement in "Blackwood"
(Dec. 1839), that the third part of Christabel which Dr. Maginn sent to that magazine in 1820
"perplexed the public, and pleased even Coleridge." How far the "discerning public" were imposed
upon I know not; the following extract will show how far the poet-philosopher was "pleased"
with the parody.

"If I should finish 'Christabel,' I shall certainly extend it, and give new characters, and
a greater number of incidents. This the 'reading public' require, and this is the reason that
Sir Walter Scott's poems, though so loosely written, are pleasing, and interest us by their
picturesqueness. If a genial recurrence of the ray divine should occur for a few weeks, I shall
certainly attempt it. I had the whole of the two cantos in my mind before I began it; certainly
the first canto is more perfect, has more of the true wild weird spirit than the last. I laughed
heartily at the continuation in 'Blackwood,' which I have been told is by Maginn. It is in appearance,
and in appearance only, a good imitation. I do not doubt but that it gave more pleasure, and to
a greater number, than a continuation by myself in the spirit of the two first (sic) cantos (qu. would
give)."--Letters, &c., Moxon, 1836, vol. i. pp. 94-5.

C. MANSFIELD INGLEBY.

Birmingham.

* * * * *

GENERAL WHITELOCKE.

(Vol. ix., p. 201.)

General Whitelocke being on a visit to Aboyne Castle, in this county, the seat of the late Marquis
of Huntley, then Earl of Aboyne, and a public market being held in the neighbourhood, the Earl,
the General, and some other visitors, were seen sauntering amongst the cattle and the tents of the
fair. Amongst the attenders of the country markets at that period was a woman of the name of Tibby
Masson, well known in this city for her masculine character and deeds of fearlessness. Tibby had
accompanied her husband, who was a soldier, to South America; and, along with him, had been
present at the unfortunate siege of Buenos Ayres; and, as a trophy of her valour, she brought with
her an enormous-sized silver watch, which she declared she had taken from the person of a Spanish
officer who lay wounded in the neighbourhood of the city after the engagement. Tibby was standing
by her "sweetie" (confectionary) stall in the Aboyne Market when the Earl and Whitelocke, and the
other gentlemen, were passing, and she at once recognised her old commander. They stopped, and
the General tasted some of her "sweeties," and saucily declared that they were abominably bad.
Upon which Tibby immediately retorted: "They are a great deal better than the timmer (wooden) flints
that you gave our soldiers at Bonny's Airs." On hearing this, the consternation of Whitelocke
and his friends can more easily be imagined than described. They all fled from the field with
the utmost rapidity, leaving Tibby completely victorious; and the General, so far as is known,
never again visited Aberdeenshire.

B. B.

Aberdeen.

I have not access to a file of newspapers, but have
been frequently told by an old pensioner, who served under General
Whitelocke: "We marched into Bowsan Arrys (as he pronounced Buenos
Ayres) without ere a flint in our muskets."

L. G.

The subjoined
charade, which I have seen years ago, is perhaps preferable:

"My
first is an emblem of purity, My next against knaves a security; My
whole is a shame To an Englishman's name And branded will be to futurity."

{456}

I
have also seen a sort of parody upon the above applied to Waterloo:

"My
first, tho' it's clear, Will oft troubl'd appear, My next's an amusement
so clever; My whole is a name, Recorded by fame, To the glory of England
for ever."

M. J. C.

If the jeu d'esprit on the above name be worthy
of preservation, the more correct version of it is as follows:

"My
first is the emblem of purity, My second is used for security; My
whole is a name, Which, if I had the same, I should blush to hand
down to futurity."

The authorship was ascribed (I believe with truth)
to a lady of the name of Belson.

M. (2)

The following is the correct
version:

"My first is an emblem of purity, My second the means of
security; My whole is a name, Which, if mine were the same, I should
blush to hand down to futurity."

N. L. J.

General Whitelocke died
at Clifton, in his house in Princes Buildings.

ANON.

* * * * *

PHOTOGRAPHIC
CORRESPONDENCE.

Gravelly Wax Negatives.--The only remedy I am acquainted
with is to use the paper within twenty-four hours after excitement.
I have tried the methods of Messrs. Crookes, Fenton, and How; in every
case I was equally annoyed with gravel, if excited beyond that time;
in fact, I believe all the good wax negatives have been taken within
twelve hours. The Rev. Wm. Collings, who has produced such excellent
wax negatives, 24 in. × 18 (several were sent to the late Exhibition
of the Photographic Society), informs me the above is quite his experience,
and that he excites his papers for the day early in the morning. The
cause lies, I believe, in the fault of homogeneity of the waxed paper,
arising from unevenness in the structure of the paper exaggerated
by the transparency of the wax, partly, perhaps, from a semi-crystallizing
of the wax in cooling, and also from its being adulterated with tallow,
resin, &c. As a consequence of this, the paper is filled with innumerable
hard points; the iodizing and exciting solutions are unequally absorbed,
and the actinic influence acting more on the weak points, produces
under gallic acid a speckled appearance, if decomposition has gone
to any length in the exciting nitrate by keeping. The céroléine process,
by its power of penetrating, will, I hope, produce an homogeneous
paper, and go far to remove this annoyance.

In answer to a former
Query by MR. HELE, Whatman's paper of 1849 is lightly sized, and not
hard rolled, so that twenty minutes' washing in repeated water sufficed
to remove the iodide of potassium, and if long soaked the paper became
porous, often letting the gallic acid through in the development.
I have lately been trying Turner's and Sandford's papers; they require
three or four hours' repeated washing to get rid of the salts, being
very hard rolled. Many negatives on Turner's paper, especially if
weak, exhibit a structural appearance like linen, the unequal density
gives almost exactly the same gravelly character as wax, as the positive
I inclose, taken from such a negative, shows. Not only ought collodion
to be "structureless," as MR. SHADBOLT well expresses it, but likewise
all the other substrata of iodide of silver.

T. L. MANSELL.

Guernsey.

Photographic
Experience.--The plan proposed by DR. MANSELL, in the last Number
of "N. & Q.," for comparison of photographic experiences, will, I
am sure, prove of much practical advantage and I therefore lose no
time in filling up the table published in your paper:

1. Eight minutes'
exposure. 2. South Wales. 3. Mr. Talbot's original receipt. 4. Turner.
5. 3/8 inch. 6. 2 inches. 7. 3 inches. Focal length, 17 inches.  He here described what had occurred, and
it was at once guessed that the vessel in the bay was the one for which the authorities had
been directed to be on the watch.  A despatch was immediately sent off to Bantry; before the
morning a party of soldiers arrived, and, procuring boats, boarded the ship and captured all
found in her.  The ringleader, however, Brian O'Harrall, was on shore, and though strict search
was made for him he was nowhere to be discovered.  He had friends in the neighbourhood, and
it was only sufficient for them to know that the officers of justice were after him to induce
them to assist in his escape.  My son happened to be in Bantry at the time, just before he
went to sea; to save the boy, who was carried there, from the vengeance of O'Harrall, he took
him back to Waterford, and Captain Tracy received him on board the Ouzel Galley.  It was from
Pompey I heard all the particulars I have narrated.  The five other men on board the Saint
Peter were tried and condemned to death, and after their execution their heads were set up
at Waterford, Youghal, Cork, Kinsale, and Blantyre.  The ship and cargo being restored to the
owners, O'Harrall was outlawed, and a price set on his head; but though, from time to time,
he was heard of in connection with various desperate acts, he never failed to escape the grasp
of justice.  It was supposed that he at length joined a band of smugglers, though he has not
for a year or more been heard of.  He has, I should have said, a younger brother remarkably
like him in character and appearance, who greatly assisted in his escape.  This brother, Michael,
made his appearance now in one part of the country, now in another, letting it be supposed
that he was Brian; thus distracting the attention of those in search of the culprit.  He is
himself, from what I have heard, fully as determined a ruffian as Brian, and has long followed
the same lawless pursuits."

"What a fearful character!" exclaimed Ellen, shuddering; "and yet you say that Brian was at
one time at college, mixing with young men of education and refinement."

"Yes, and, with the talents and advantages he possessed, might have gained an honourable position
in the county," replied Mrs Massey; "for, his elder brother having no children, he would probably
have succeeded to the estate.  I should have been more reconciled to the loss of Tramore had
it been in possession of honourable people, who would have attended to the property and watched
over the interests of the tenantry; and it is sad to see the place going to ruin, and the unfortunate
people who might look up to the owner for assistance becoming every day more degraded and wretched."

"But perhaps, Mrs Massey, if the present owner should die, and as the wretched men you have
been describing cannot succeed, you, or rather your son, may recover the property," observed Ellen.

"I fear not," answered the widow, with a sigh.  "I do not understand legal matters, but the
youngest brother might, I fancy, succeed in spite of his crimes, and without ample pecuniary
means I believe that it would be impossible to regain the estate.  I have long been reconciled
to my lot, though I should be thankful could Owen avoid the necessity of going to sea, and
enjoy a sufficient fortune to enable him to marry our dear Norah in the course of a year or two."

"Now you have told me the particulars of this strange history, I shall not despair of success,"
said Ellen.  "The want of money must, at all events, not be a hindrance; there are, I am sure,
those who would be ready to assist your son."

Ellen sat on, readily listening to all the widow's conversation; for, heartily sympathising
with Norah, she was in no hurry to break in upon her and Owen's tete-a-tete.  However, the
length of the shadows stretching across the lawn at last warned her that the evening was approaching,
and she remembered that it would be disagreeable, if not dangerous, to be compelled to walk
home in the dark.  Norah, however, had not noted how time had gone by; but when she looked
out of the window and saw that the sun was on the point of setting, she expressed her readiness
to return home without delay.  Ellen, wishing Mr Massey good-bye, and hoping that he would
soon recover, hurried to the door, leaving Norah, who was putting on her cloak and hat, to
follow and pay her parting adieux in the way she might think proper.  Had Owen not been absolutely
forbidden, in spite of his weakness he would have accompanied them--though Ellen laughed at
the idea of there being any cause for apprehending danger during the short walk into the town.

CHAPTER FIVE.

ARRIVAL OF A JERSEY PRIVATEER--AN INVITATION SENT TO THE OFFICERS--NORAH AND ELLEN MEET A STRANGER
ON THEIR WALK HOME--ATTEMPT TO CARRY OFF NORAH--SHE IS RESCUED--FRUITLESS SEARCH FOR THE RUFFIANS--ARRIVAL
OF THE CAPTAIN AND LIEUTENANTS OF THE PRIVATEER--THE MERCHANT'S HOUSE AND GROUNDS--A BANQUET--CAPTAIN
DUPIN REQUESTS THE PLEASURE OF A VISIT FROM HIS WATERFORD FRIENDS--A DANCE ON BOARD THE PRIVATEER--AN
UNPLEASANT SURPRISE.

Just after the young ladies had set off on their walk to visit Mrs Massey, a Dungarvon hooker
arrived at the quay, and her skipper brought the intelligence that a sloop of war had anchored
that morning in the mouth of the harbour.  She carried eighteen guns, for he had counted nine
on a side; having boarded her to dispose of some of his fish, he was sure that he could not
be mistaken.  When he was more than half-way up the river, he added, the wind being light,
a gig had passed him; but though he looked everywhere, he had not again seen her.  He believed
that she belonged to the sloop, as an officer was seated in the stern, and she had the appearance
of a man-of-war's boat; but of that he could not be certain.

Mr Ferris had invited a party to dinner, and as he always wished to pay attention to naval
officers, he immediately despatched a letter by a fast rowing-boat, requesting the company
of the commander and officers of the sloop at the intended banquet.  Mr Ferris received a letter
in reply, signed "Jean Dupin, commander of the Orestes, private ship of war," observing that
Mr Ferris had been misinformed as to the character of the vessel he had the honour to command,
she not being a king's ship, but belonging to Jersey, and the property of a firm with which
he was probably well acquainted, Messrs. Saint Croix and Cie; and he was unwilling to sail
under false colours--but that if Mr Ferris still desired his company, he and his officers would
have infinite pleasure in availing themselves of his hospitable invitation.  Mr Ferris immediately
sent back the boat, assuring Captain Dupin that it would afford him the greatest possible satisfaction
to receive him, and any of his lieutenants and junior officers who might be able to accompany him.

"Ellen will be disappointed when she finds that the ship is not a man-of-war," he said to himself.
"She takes much interest in the navy; she saw a good specimen of the naval officer in that
gentlemanly and pleasing young lieutenant, Norman Foley, who was occasionally at our house
in Dublin when his ship lay off Kingstown, and she has consequently an idea that all naval
officers are like him.  However, many of the Jersey privateers are commanded and officered
by gentlemen of good family in the island, and I doubt not that Captain Dupin will prove an
agreeable addition to our party.  I wish that Captain Tracy were well enough to be present;
he and Captain Dupin might find that they were old acquaintances, and would, at all events,
have many subjects in common to talk about."

We must now return to Norah and Ellen.  They hastened their steps, for the sun had set, and
darkness was stealing over the landscape, and unless they hurried on they would scarcely have
light sufficient to see their way through the narrow and dimly illuminated street, and might
perhaps meet with drunken men who would cause them annoyance.

"I am pretty well known here, so that it is not likely any one will insult us; but it would
be unpleasant to encounter strangers," said Ellen.  "I am very sorry, Norah, for it was my
fault remaining so long listening to Mrs Massey's dreadful accounts of the O'Harrall family.
I was much interested, and I have taken it into my head that Mr Massey may be able to regain
his ancestral property.  You know I am somewhat romantic, and I should be so delighted to see
you mistress of Tramore Castle."

"I am afraid there is very little hope of that," said Norah; "nor am I ambitious, but shall
be content to enjoy with my dear Owen the limited fortune we shall be able to muster."

They had just reached the most secluded part of the road, when they heard footsteps behind
them; and Norah, looking round, saw a man following, his figure shrouded in a Spanish cloak,
a broad-brimmed hat ornamented with a feather drawn down over his brow, partly concealing his
countenance.  The end of a scabbard which appeared beneath his cloak showed that he was a gentleman,
while his firm though hurried step gave proof of what was of still more consequence, that he
was perfectly sober.  As he passed them he lifted his hat, an act which served rather to conceal
further than to show his features.  After going on a short distance he stopped; then, facing
about, walked rapidly towards them.

"Miss Tracy," he exclaimed, "I have been impelled by an irresistible power to endeavour to
see you, and I am more fortunate than I expected. Will your fair friend favour me by going
on a few paces before us, while I speak what I wish to reach no other ear but yours?"

"Who is this gentleman?" exclaimed Ellen.  "Is it your wish that I should do as he requests?"

"Oh no, no! do not leave me on any account," whispered Norah, tightly grasping Ellen's arm.
"Surely you must be under a mistake, sir, and take me for some one else," she continued, turning
to the stranger.

"Miss Tracy, your features, your voice, your figure, are all too indelibly impressed upon my
mind," he replied.  "Do not you remember the last words I spoke to you ere we parted?"

Norah, on hearing this, was still more convinced than at first that the stranger was under
a mistake.  And yet the stranger had addressed her by name!  Could he be out of his senses?

"Know you not that you have inspired the deepest and most devoted affection, which death alone
can destroy?" he continued.  "To meet you again I have gone through difficulties and dangers
which would otherwise have appeared insuperable; and can you be so cold-hearted as to regard
with indifference a love so ardent and true?"

His voice as he spoke had more of a tone of anger than affection in it.

"I must not listen to such language as this," answered Norah, the idea of who the person was
now flashing across her mind; "I beg that you will not stop my friend and me, as we are anxious
to return home without delay."

"I must and will be heard," exclaimed the stranger, attempting to grasp Norah's hand.  "Come
with me; I offer you a heart which loves you to desperation, and mine you must be.  I have
the means of enforcing my request--if your friend interferes, she must take the consequences,
and will be compelled to accompany you."

"You are mad, sir, to suppose for a moment that I would consent to such a proposal; let me
and my friend go, I entreat you."

"For your refusal I was prepared," exclaimed the stranger, "but it will not avail you;" and
putting a silver whistle to his mouth, he blew it shrilly.  It was answered from a distance,
and Ellen, looking in the direction from which the sound came, saw two mounted men, each with
a led horse, approaching.  Ellen now gave way to her fears, and uttered loud shrieks for help.
Norah felt all her energies paralysed by the threatened act of violence, and could only cling
to Ellen's arm and murmur, "Don't leave me! don't leave me!"

A wall rather too high to be leaped over intervened between them and the horsemen.  They had
to make a circuit to reach a gate which opened into the road before they gained it.  The rattle
of wheels was heard, and loud shouts of laughter between snatches of song.  Just then Ellen
saw a line of cars, the horses at full speed, coming along the road; the stranger saw them
too, and seizing Norah round the waist, endeavoured to drag her to the wall; but Ellen and
she clung frantically to each other, Ellen again and again shrieking loudly for help.  On came
the cars; some men in seamen's dresses sprang from the first, one of them shouting out, "Shure,
it's the young mistress!  Be alive, and dale smartly with the outrageous thief of the world
who's dared to lay hands on her;" and, joined by a dozen or more men from the other cars, armed
with stout shillelaghs, Dan Connor dashed forward at headlong speed.  The stranger glanced
round to see how far off their horses still were from him, and finding that they had not yet
passed through the gate, and that all hope of carrying off Norah must be abandoned, vaulted
over the wall and ran towards them.  His companions, seeing what had occurred, hurried up to
his assistance.  Just as the party of seamen had got close upon his heels, he threw himself
upon one of the led horses and galloped off, followed by the shouts and execrations of the
seamen, who were, fortunately for him, without firearms.

"Shure, Miss Norah, jewel, you're all safe now, and that mighty big blackguard, whoever he
may be, will do you no harm," exclaimed Dan.  "If you and the young lady will just mount on
the car, we'll escort you safe into Waterford; and if he and a score of Rapparees like himself
were to come back, we'd bate them all off before they could come near you."

"Let us get up on the car, as the sailor advises us," said Ellen; and she mounted and helped
Norah up, when the seamen running on each side, they set off at a brisk pace, followed by the
other cars.

"It's at the wake of poor Pat Casey we've been, Miss Norah.  He niver was himself after the
wound he got when we fought the privateer--and shure, we were coming home at daybreak; but
somehow or other, what with the potheen, and the friends we met, and a scrimmage or two, we
made a long morning of it; and bedad, good luck it was, or we wouldn't have come up in time
to put that fellow to flight."

Ellen, who had somewhat recovered from her alarm, assured Dan how thankful she felt to him
and his shipmates and friends for the service they had rendered Norah and herself.

"Service, Misthress Ferris! it was the greatest pleasure I've had since I was born, and I only
wish I'd the same every day of my life.  What would Mr Massey have been after doing if that
thundering villain had got you and Miss Norah upon his horses and galloped off through the
country wid ye!--but he'd betther not be showing his face again in these parts, whoever he
is," answered Dan.  "As soon as we've seen you both safe home, we'll go in chase of him, and
it will be hard if we don't catch him, too."

Norah did not say whom she suspected the ruffian to be who had attempted the outrage; indeed,
she was far too nervous to speak, and it was not till, escorted by Dan and his friends, they
arrived safely at home, that she mentioned her suspicions to Ellen.  She begged her to make
as light as possible of the matter, for fear of agitating Captain Tracy in a way which might
be injurious to him in his present state of health.  Still, the circumstance could not be altogether
concealed from him.  Abduction was at that time too common in Ireland for what had occurred
to create much surprise.  The only difficulty was to ascertain who the man could be, though
it was generally believed that his intention was to carry off Miss Ferris, who was known to
be an heiress.  At that time there actually existed in the neighbourhood an association known
as the Abduction Club, all the members of which had sworn to assist each other in carrying
off such young ladies as either of them fixed upon.  By means of their spies, they made themselves
acquainted with the fortunes of every marriageable girl and the domestic arrangements of the
family. Sometimes, when she had not been claimed by any particular member, they drew lots to
whom she should belong, and the rest were then bound to assist the fortunate winner.  No class
of society, from the highest to the opulent farmer or tradesman, was exempt from the depredations
of the associates.  They themselves were mostly the younger sons or relations of families of
some standing, who, looking upon commerce as beneath them, with too little education to succeed
in the learned professions, if they could not obtain a commission in the army, spent their
lives in idleness, and were known as squireens.  Generally being able to borrow good horses
from their rich friends, they rode about the country habited in red waistcoats lined with narrow
gold or silver lace or fur, tight leather breeches, and top-boots; making themselves conspicuous
at fairs, markets, races, and assizes, and in other places where people congregated.  They
excelled in athletic sports, especially in the game of hurling, when they took the lead among
the young men of the peasant class who engaged in it, and thus became identified with them,
and could on all occasions rely on their support.  Though the crime of abduction was punishable
with death, as the girls who were thus carried off were in most instances immediately married,
few were found willing to prosecute their husbands.  The law was consequently almost inoperative,
and the abominable practice up to this day had continued unchecked.

Mr Ferris was of course highly indignant.  He at once took steps to discover the offender,
though, as he had not succeeded in his attempt, there was little probability that he would
be captured, or if so, punished.  The annoyance, also, to which his daughter and her friend
must in future be subjected, from being unable to venture outside the garden without a strong
guard, was provoking in the extreme; still, the daring characters of the men who were known
to be combined for the purpose rendered it unsafe for the young ladies to go abroad unless
thus protected.

Dan and Pompey, with the other seamen of the Ouzel Galley, and several friends who joined them,
as soon as they had left Norah and Ellen safe at home, set off in chase of the ruffians, armed
with such weapons as they could hastily obtain, in addition to the shillelaghs they had before
possessed.  Following in the direction they had seen the horsemen going, they made their way
over all impediments, inquiring of every one they met, and hoping by perseverance to overtake
them.  They learnt, however, after proceeding a considerable distance, that the men had separated,
one going off with the led horses in the direction of the mountains to the westward, another
turning southward towards Tramore Bay, while the third followed a road which would conduct
him to Passage, near the mouth of the river, whence he could cross into Wexford.  The parties
accordingly divided, but had not gone far when they lost all trace of the fugitives, and as
Dan observed, "They might as well be looking for a needle in a bottle of hay, as hope to find
the spalpeen." Late at night they returned to Kingscourt House, the residence of Mr Ferris,
to report the ill-success of their expedition.

"Bedad, your honour, we'll be after keeping a sharp look-out on the fellows, and if any one
of them shows his ugly face in the neighbourhood, we'll be down upon him as quick as lightning,"
said Dan.

"But if you don't know the men--and from what I understand, you only saw their backs in the
gloom--you will find a considerable difficulty in recognising them," observed Mr Ferris, "and
may chance to lay hands on the wrong persons."

"Shure, your honour, we'll ask them if they're the right ones before we give them a taste of
the shillelagh," answered Dan.

"At all events, Connor, I wish you, and a dozen stout fellows you may pick out, to act as a
guard at my house, to protect my daughter and her friend, should any yet more daring attempt
be made to carry them off," replied Mr Ferris.

"I'll do that same with all the pleasure in life," answered Dan, "though it may be a hard matter
to keep our eyes open to-night, seeing we were waking Pat Casey till a late hour this morning,
and then, after seeing him laid dacently under the turf, had to drink long life and success
to his sperrit and a short stay in purgatory, where the praste told us he had gone--though,
being a kind-hearted man, he'd do his best to pray him out of it."

"I have no fear of any fresh attempt being made to-night, so you may all sleep soundly in your
beds," said Mr Ferris; "but I shall require you to-morrow, and for some time to come after
that, while I remain at Waterford." 

The only way, it appears to me, is to fit them for entering into competition with others above
them in the social scale by means of instruction, which shall enable them to give a greater
value to the services which they render, and thus entitle them to command a greater value of
services in return. We need entertain no fear lest, by this letting in competition upon the class
above them, we shall lower these latter in the scale of society. So long as the capital in the country
shall continue to increase in a greater proportion than its population, there must always be
found additional employment and better remuneration for those whose labour is capable of adding
to the national wealth.  His first lieutenant, whom he
introduced as Mr Macarthy, was a man of a very different mould.  His well-bronzed features
were concealed by a large beard and moustache, while a black patch over one eye, and another
down his cheek, showing that he had suffered in the fight, did not add to the attractiveness
of his appearance.

"As he is a countryman of yours, he was anxious to avail himself of your invitation, though
scarcely recovered from wounds he received is our last action with a French ship, which we
captured after a determined resistance," observed the captain.  "He was shot through the mouth,
which considerably impedes his speech; but he will be able notwithstanding to do justice to
your good fare, as I have no doubt you will perceive."

Mr Macarthy shook hands with Mr Ferris, and expressed his satisfaction at finding himself once
more on his native soil.

"It is many a long year since I left the old country, and from that time till I landed a few
months ago in Jersey I have been knocking about in distant seas," said the lieutenant.  "Although
Ballyadare, in Sligo, is my native place, I have more than once in my younger days visited
Waterford, and this is not the first time I have been on shore at your beautiful town.  Faith,
sir, it is a place to boast of; so fine a river, such magnificent quays, and that old tower
I see there--I forget its name--where will you find the like?"

Mr Ferris, pleased with the compliment paid to his city, was ready to overlook the somewhat
rough manner and exterior of his guest.

"Indeed, sir," he said, "we are apt to boast of our virgin city and its quays, a mile long
as you will perceive, at which sixty sail of vessels can unload at a time; of our dry dock,
lately built by our townsman Mr Congreve; of our conduits, which supply both our houses and
the shipping with water; of the privileges enjoyed by our citizens; and of our militia, mustering
five hundred men, and capable of giving a good account of any enemy who may dare to invade
our shores.  You will, I hope, meet some of the officers at dinner to-day."

"By my soul, it is a city you may well be proud of," answered the lieutenant; "and it is to
be hoped that no enemy for their own sakes will ever venture within gunshot of your redoubtable
militia."

The second lieutenant was introduced as a young Jersey man, Mr Latrobe. He spoke with more
French accent than his chief, who accounted for his so doing by remarking that he had not come
to sea till he was nearly grown up, and had during peace time served on board a French merchant
vessel.  "We Jersey men," he added, "though our sympathies are thoroughly English, yet retain,
as you know, the language and customs of our Breton ancestors."

"Come, gentlemen, I must conduct you to my humble residence," said Mr Ferris, and, leading
his guests up Hanover Street, so called by the loyal inhabitants in compliment to the reigning
royal family, they entered King Street, towards the west end of which was situated Mr Ferris's
house, overlooking the river.  On reaching the house, as there was time to spare, Mr Ferris
took them round his grounds, of which they were loud in their compliments.  So pleased did
they declare themselves that they begged to go round them a second time, when the lieutenant
might have been seen narrowly observing the localities.  As they paced round the outer circuit
on their walk, they met Ellen and Norah, to whom of course Mr Ferris introduced his guests.
The officers bowed, and Captain Dupin, addressing Ellen, expressed his admiration of her beautiful
garden and the taste with which it was laid out.

"Surely I need not inquire whether you were the chief designer of these lovely terraces and
sparkling fountains, and that picturesque rockwork," said the captain, bowing as he spoke.

"No, I can claim no merit for the beauties you admire," answered Ellen; "my father purchased
the property from the former owner.  I should have liked it better had it been left more to
nature."

"Ah, if you could see Jersey!  How you would delight in my own native island!" exclaimed Captain
Dupin; "it contains just the scenery you would appreciate."

"I can assure you that in Ireland we have most romantic and beautiful scenery," answered Ellen;
"and in the county of Kerry are the lovely Lakes of Killarney, such as I believe all strangers
consider the most romantic in the world."

"Ah, I know nothing of Ireland, though I may hope some day to be better acquainted with it,"
said the captain.

The other two stood aloof, as if they did not consider themselves of sufficient consequence
to address the young ladies to whom their commander was speaking.  Ellen, offering to show
Captain Dupin the aviary, led the way along the terrace.  Norah followed by herself, leaving
the two lieutenants in conversation with Mr Ferris.  The elder of the two after a little time
stepped forward, and Norah, looking round, found him walking by her side.

"Is this spot as attractive as some of the scenes you have visited in the West Indies, Miss
Tracy?" he asked, speaking low.

Norah started as she heard the voice; but looking at the speaker, whose countenance she failed
to recognise, she asked, "How do you know that I have been in the West Indies, Mr Macarthy?"

"I heard from a seaman who came on board the Orestes that you had accompanied your father on
board the Ouzel Galley," he answered quietly.  "Irishmen are wonderfully communicative, you
know.  It is an unusual thing for young ladies to take such a voyage in time of war."

"I sailed before war had broken out, or I am very sure my father would not have taken me,"
she replied, banishing the idea which had flashed across her mind.  "He probably heard from
the seaman that a young lady was staying with Miss Ferris, and thus guessed who I was," she
thought to herself.

After again going round the grounds, the party returned to the house, where the other guests
had begun to assemble.  Captain Dupin and his officers were duly introduced and cordially welcomed
to Waterford. Among others, Lieutenant Vinoy was brought up by the host.

"Though you gentlemen would look upon each other as enemies were you to meet on the ocean,
here, I trust, you will be friends," said Mr Ferris. The officers bowed politely.

"I ave moche plaisir to meet Monsieur le Capitaine Dupin in dis hospitable maison," said the
French lieutenant; "if ve evare encounter vis one anodare on de sea, den ve fight like des
braves hommes--n'est-ce pas, Monsieur le Capitaine?"

"I could not desire a greater honour," answered the Jersey man.  "Nor, by my faith, could I,"
exclaimed the first lieutenant of the Orestes.

"Ah, I moche fear I remain prisonare here to do end of de war," sighed Monsieur Vinoy; "but,
ma foi, I am too happy in dis charmante ville vid dese aimable young ladies to vish to leave.
It was de fortune de la guerre vich brought me here, and I vill not complain."

"You might certainly have been much worse off," observed Captain Dupin. "I have no doubt you
fought your ship, like a brave man, till all hope of victory was gone."

"Ve vill not talk of dat," answered the lieutenant, turning away, probably not quite relishing
the remark, recollecting how he had been caught napping.

Three of the officers of the city militia were next introduced to the naval guests.  Judged
by their uniform, they were remarkably fine fellows, for their coats were blue, with scarlet
linings and gilt buttons, their waistcoats and breeches being also of scarlet, and their hats
richly adorned with gold lace.  They had evidently, as was natural, a decidedly good opinion
of themselves, and were somewhat inclined to look down upon the more simply dressed tars. 
The first lieutenant of the Orestes eyed them askance from under his shaggy eyebrows, apparently
regarding them, for some reason or other, with no friendly feeling.  After exchanging salutations,
he at once turned aside and addressed himself to some of the civilians.

"We are expecting a king's ship every day to visit our harbour--the Champion, 18-gun sloop
of war, Commander Olding," observed one of the gentlemen.  "Contrary winds may have detained
her, or perhaps she has fallen in with a Frenchman; and I will venture to say, if such is the
case, that she has taken him, for the navy does not possess a more gallant and resolute officer
than my friend."

Captain Dupin involuntarily shrugged his shoulders and bowed.  "I have no doubt of the gallantry
of the officers of the Royal Navy," he observed.  An opportunity occurring, he stepped back
and spoke a few words to his two lieutenants. "But she is so young."

"If you will believe me, Magdalen, such a home as that Dearport Sisterhood is a precious thing--I
have not been worthy of it. I have been a wild colt, carried about by all manner of passing
excitements. Oh, dear! love of sheer fun and daring enterprise, and amusement, in shocking every one,
even my very dearest, whom I loved best. I have done things too dreadful to think of, and been
utterly unreasonable and unmanageable, and proud of it; but always that Sisterhood has been like a cord
drawing me! I never quite got free of it, even when I sent back my medal, and fancied it had
been playing at superstition. I was there for a month as almost a baby, and the atmosphere has brought
peace ever since. That, and my brother, and Sister Constance, and Bishop Fulmort, have been
the saving of me, if anything has. I mean, if they will have me, to spend a little time at Dearport
after all this perplexity is over, and I know how it is with Lena,
and I could see how it is with Paula if you liked."

Magdalen accepted the suggestion, perhaps the more readily because of a fleeting visit from Hubert
Delrio, who had finished his frescoes at the American Vale Leston, and came for a day or two
to Mr. Flight's. She had sometimes doubted whether the supposed love of Vera had not been
a good deal diffused among the young ladies, and might not so far awaken in Paulina as to render
her vocation doubtful; but there were no such symptoms. Paula was quiet and cheerful, with
a friendly welcome, but no excitement; but it was Thekla, now fifteen, who was all blushes whenever
Hubert looked or spoke to her, all her forwardness gone; and shyness,
or decidedly awkwardness, set in, resulting chiefly in giggle.

Hubert looked more manly and substantial, and he had just had an order
for an important London church, which pleased him much, and involved
another journey to Italy to study some of the designs in the Lombardic
churches.

Not that there was any chance of meeting Vera.

Mr. and Mrs. White had spent the last summer at Baden; and Vera, who had many pretty little drawing-room
talents, and was always obliging, had been very acceptable there. This winter an attack of rheumatism
had made them decide on trying Algiers, with a view to the Atlas marbles, and then German baths
again might claim them for the summer.

In fact, the fear of infection had rendered Rock Quay a deserted place during the Easter vacation.
Fergus Merrifield might not come near Primrose and Lily, and was charmed to accept an invitation
from his friend and admirer, Adrian Vanderkist, to Vale Leston, where he would be able to explore
the geology of Penbeacon, to say nothing of the coast; while his sister Felicia, who had been one
of the victims, remained to be disinfected with Miss Mohun. Dolores was at Vale Leston Priory,
and Agatha Prescott with her, so as to have a clean bill of health
for her return to Oxford for her last term.

The Holy Week was calm and grave; and the two girls, with Anna Vanderkist and her little sisters,
were very happy over their primroses and anemones on Easter Eve, with the beautiful Altar Cross
that no one could manage like Aunt Cherry, whose work was confined to that, and to the two crosses
on the graves.

Another notion soon occupied them.

There was a vague idea that a sort of convalescent or children's hospital might be established
for the training of women intending to study medicine or nursing, chiefly at Miss Arthuret's
expense, and Dolores was anxious to consider the possibility of placing it in the sweet mountain
air, tempered by the sea breezes of Penbeacon.

It was an idea to make Mrs. Grinstead shudder; but neither she nor her niece, Anna Vanderkist,
could forget Gerald's view that Penbeacon was not only to be the playground of Vale Leston,
and they always felt as if Dolores had a certain widow's right to
influence any decision.

So she cheerfully acquiesced in what, in her secret heart, seemed only a feeble echo of the past,
though, to the young generations it was a very happy hopeful present when all the youthful
party, under the steerage of Mary and Anna, and the escort of Sir Adrian and Fergus, started off
with ponies, donkeys, cycles and sturdy feet to picnic on Penbeacon, if possible in the March winds--
well out of the way of the clay works.

How Fergus divided his cares between the strata and Dolores' kodak, how even his photography
could not spoil Aunt Alda; how charming a group of sisters Dolores contrived to produce; how
Adrian was the proud pioneer into a coach adorned with stalactites and antediluvian bones;
how Anna collected milkwort and violets for Aunt Cherry; how a sly
push sent little Joan in a headlong career down a slope that might
have resulted in a terrible fall, but did only cause a tumble and
great fright, and a severe reprimand from the elder sisters; how Agatha
was entranced by the glorious view in the clearness of spring, how
they ate their sandwiches and tried to think it was not cold; how
grey east wind mist came over the distance and warned them it was
time to trot down,--all this must belong to the annals of later Vale
Leston; and of those years of youth which in each generation leave
impressions as of sunbeams for life.

And on their return, Dolores found a letter which filled her with a fresh idea. It was from
her father in New Zealand, telling her that there was an opening for her to come and give a
course of lectures on electricity at Canterbury, Auckland and the other towns, and proposing
to her to come out with her lady assistant, when she might very probably extend her tour to
Australia.

"Would you come, Naggie?" asked Dolores.

"Oh! I should like nothing half so well. If you could only wait till my turn is over, and the exam!"

"Of
course! Why, we shall not have finished the correspondence till after the examination! How capital
it will be! My father will like your bright face, and you will think him like Fergus grown older. Will
your sister consent?"

"Oh! Magdalen will be glad enough to have me off on a career. We will write and prepare her mind. I
believe I am not to go home, so as to bring a clean bill of health
to St. Robert's."

"I really think," added Dolores, "that Magdalen would make an admirable head matron, or whatever
you call it!"

"Dear old thing!

She is very fond of her Goyle."

"True, but Sophy's engineer husband tells us that a new line is projected
to Rock Quay, through the very heart of the Goyle, Act of Parliament,
compulsory sale and all."

"Well! work might console her for being uprooted, and she is quite youthful enough to take to
it with spirit."

"Besides that she would greatly console Clement and Cherry for the profanation of their Penbeacon.
I declare I will suggest it to Arthurine!"

So the two young people resolved, not without a consciousness that
what was to them a fresh and inspiring gale, to the elder generation
was "winds have rent thy sheltering bowers."

CHAPTER XXVII--A SENTENCE

"What should we give for our beloved?" - E. B. BROWNING.

No sooner had the visitors departed than the others now out of quarantine
appeared at Vale Leston.

Angela was anxious to spend a little time there, and likewise to have Lena overhauled by Tom
May. The child had never really recovered, and was always weakly; and whereas on the journey,
Lily, now in high health, was delighted with all she saw, though she could not compare Penbeacon
to Adam's Peak, Lena lay back in Sister Angela's arms, almost a dead weight, hardly enduring
the bustle of the train, though she tried not to whine, as long as she saw her pink Ben looking
happy in his cage.

Angela was an experienced nurse, and was alarmed at some of the symptoms that others made light
of. Mrs. Grinstead had thought things might be made easier to her if the Miss Merrifields
came to meet her and hear the doctor's opinion; and Elizabeth accepted her invitation, arriving
to see the lovely peaceful world in the sweet blossoming of an early
May, the hedges spangled with primroses, and the hawthorns showing
sheets of snow; while the pear trees lifted their snowy pyramids,
and Lily in her white frock darted about the lawn in joyous play with
her father under the tree, and the grey cloister was gay with wisteria.

Angela

was sitting in the boat, safely moored, with a book in her hand, the pink cockatoo on the gunwale,
nibbling at a stick, and the girl lying on a rug, partly on her lap. Phyllis and Anna, who had
come out on the lawn, made Elizabeth pause.

"That's the way they go on!" said Phyllis. "All day long Angela is reading to the child either
the 'Water Babies' or the history of Joseph."

"Or crooning to her the story of the Cross," said Anna; "and as soon
as one is ended she begins it again, and Lena will not let her miss
or alter a single word."

"They go on more than half the night," added Phyllis.

"Bear sat up long over his letters and accounts, and as he went up he heard the crooning,
and looked in; and the very moment Angela paused, there came the little plaintive voice, 'Go
on, please.' 'Women are following'--"

"But is not that spoiling her?" asked Bessie.

A look of sad meaning passed between her two companions. Phyllis shook her head slightly, and,
instead of answering, conducted Bessie on to the bank, when Angela
looked up and made a sign that she could not move or speak, for the
child was asleep.

The yellow head was shaded by Angela's parasol, the thin hair lying ruffled on the black dress,
and the small face looked more pinched than when the aunt had last
seen it, nearly a year previously.

She had watched the decay of aged folks, but she was unused to the illnesses of children; and
she recoiled with a little shock, as she looked down at the little wasted face, with a slight
flush of sleep. "Recovery from measles," she said.

Phyllis smiled a little pitifully as her own little girl, all radiant with health and joy, came
skipping up, performing antics over her father's hand. "Take care, Lily, don't wake poor little
Lena," was murmured quietly.

"Northern breezes--" began Bessie, but the voices had broken the light slumber; and as Angela began,
"See, Lena, here is Aunt Bessie," the effect was to make her throw herself over Angela's shoulder
and hide her face; and when her protector tried to turn her round and reason her into courtesy,
she began to cry in a feeble manner.

"She has had a bad night," said motherly Phyllis; "let her alone."

"May not I get down into the boat?" asked Lily. "I'll be very good."

There would have been a little hesitation, but at the voice Lena looked up and called "Lily,
Lily!" Bernard lifted his small daughter down, Elizabeth was not sorry to be led away for
the present, and when, after a turn in the rose garden, she came
back, the two children were sitting with arms round one another, holding
a conversation with Ben, the cockatoo, and making him dance on one
of the benches of the boat, under Angela's supervision, lest he should
end by dancing overboard.

The rich fair hair, shining dark blue eyes, and plump glowing cheeks of Lily were a contrast
to the wan wasted colouring of her little cousin; but Lena was more
herself now than when just awake, and let Lily lead her up and introduce
her, as it might be called, to Cousin Bessie as Lily called her, a
less formidable sound than "Aunt Elizabeth."

They were both kissed, and she endured it. Angela was, as her brothers and sisters said, "very
good," and scrupulously abstained from absorbing the child all the evening, letting Elizabeth show
her pictures and tell her stories, to which, by Lily's example, she listened quietly enough and
with interest.

When the two children went off, hand in hand, to their beds, Elizabeth
said, "Really, Magdalen is improved.

If you leave Lily with her, Phyllis, I think we should get on beautifully. The bracing air will do
wonders for them both."

"Thank you," said poor Phyllis forbearingly; "we have not made our plans about Lily yet."

But Elizabeth thought out a beautiful scheme of discipline and study in the long light hours
of the morning, and began to feel herself drawn towards her delicate little niece, feeling sure that
the little thing would soon be Susan's darling, if Susan could be brought to endure the cockatoo
walking loose about the house.

Early in the day Professor May appeared, and was hailed as an old friend by all the Underwoods.
He rejoiced to see Clement looking well and active; and "as to this fellow," he said, looking at
Bernard, "it shows what development will do."

"Not quite the young Bear of Stoneborough," said Clement, leaning affectionately on his broad
shoulder; "our skittish pair are grown very sober-minded. But you have not told us of your
father."

"My father is very well. He walks down every day to sit with my wife, and visits a selection
of his old patients, who are getting few enough now. This is not my patient, I suppose?"

"Unless you are ready to prescribe only laughing and good Jersey cows' milk," said Bernard, pulling
the long silky brown hair. "Where's mother, little one?"

"Mother sent me to say Aunt Angel is ready, if Dr. May will come up
to Aunt Cherry's room.

Lena is frightened, and they did not like to leave her."

It was a long visit, after Phyllis had come down; and, walking up
and down the cloister with Bessie Merrifield, listened to her schemes
of education for the little maidens.

Lily she liked and admired, and she was convinced that Magdalen's weak health and spirits were
the result of the spoiling system.

Phyllis trembled a little as she heard of the knocking about, out-of-doors ways that had certainly
produced fine strong healthy frames and upright characters, but she
forbore to say that if her little girl had to be left, it would be
to her mother and Mysie.

By and by Tom came down, and finding Geraldine alone in the drawing- room, he answered her inquiry
with a very grave look. "Poor little thing! You do not think well of her! Is it as Angel feared?"

"Confirmed
disease, from original want of development of heart. Measles accelerated it. I doubt her lasting
six months, though it may be longer or less."

"Have you told Angel?"

"She knew it, more or less. She is ready to bear it, though one can see how her soul is wrapped
up in the child, and the child in her."

"One thing, Tom, will you tell Miss Merrifield yourself, and alone, and make her feel that it is an
independent opinion? It may save both the poor child and Angel a great deal."

"Are you prepared to keep her here?"

"Of course we are. It is Angel's natural home. Clement and I could think of nothing else"

"I knew you would say so. If I understand rightly there is something like a jealousy of her case
in the Merrifields, prompted greatly by their wish to expiate any neglect of her father."

"That is what I gather from what Phyllis tells me."

"What a lovely countenance hers is in expression! No wonder Bernard has softened down. There
is strength and solidity as well as sweetness in her face. Ah, there they are!"

"I will call Phyllis in. Bessie Merrifield has almost walked her to
death by this time."

So Phyllis was called and told. What she said was, "I only hope he will make her understand that
it could not be helped, and it was not Angela's fault."

Tom May had wisdom enough to make this clear in what was a greater shock to Elizabeth than it
was to Angela, who had suspected enough to be prepared for the sentence, and had besides a good
deal of hospital experience, which enabled her thoroughly to understand the Professor's explanations.
So, indeed, did it seem to Elizabeth at the time he was speaking; but she had lived a good
deal in London, and had a great idea that a London physician must be superior to a man who had
lived in the country, and, moreover, whom all the household called Tom, and she asked Mrs. Grinstead
if he were really so clever.

"Indeed, I think he is; and I have seen a great deal of his treatment. You may quite trust
him. He lives down here at Stoneborough for his father's sake, or he would be quite at the
head of his profession."

"Superior to the two Doctors Brownlow?"

"I should not say superior, but quite equal."

"The Brownlows," said Clement, looking up from his paper, "helped me through an ordinary malarial
fever. John Lucas is a brilliant specialist in such cases, but certifying an affection of
the heart. Tom May latterly has treated me better. As far as I understand the case of your
little niece, I should say both that it was more in the line of Tom May, and likewise that it would
be very hurtful to her to take her about and subject her to more examinations."

"Poor little thing! no doubt it would be a terrible distress," acquiesced Bessie; "but still,
if it is bracing that she needs-- northern air might make all the difference."

Clement sighed a little hopelessly over making a woman understand or give way, and returned to
his newspaper; while Geraldine tried to argue that air could not make much difference, speaking
in the interest of the child herself and of her sister. Elizabeth listened and agreed; but there was
in the Merrifield family a fervour of almost jealous expiation of
their neglect of Henry, inattention to his daughter, and desire to
appropriate her, and to restore her to health, strength, and wisdom,
in spite of her would-be stepmother.

"They hate me as much as if I were her stepmother!" cried Angela.
"I wish I was, to have a right to protect her! No, Clem; I'll not
break out, if I can help it, as long as they don't worry her; and
I think Bessie does see the rights of it."

Yes; the peaceful, thoughtful
atmosphere of Vale Leston, unlike the active bustle of Coalham, had
an insensible influence on Elizabeth's mind; and she saw that Angela's
treatment of the child, always cheerful though tender, was right,
and that it would be sheer cruelty to separate them. She promised
to use all her power to prevent any such step, and finally left Vale
Leston, perfectly satisfied that it was impossible to take Lena with
her.

But her family did not see it thus, especially Mrs. Samuel Merrifield,
the child's guardian. She insisted that it was her husband's duty
to bring the little one to London for advice, and to remove her from
all the weakening, morbid influences of Vale Leston.

CHAPTER XXVIII--SUMMONED

"What
would we give to our beloved?" - E. B. BROWNING.

"I wish they all
would not go so very fast," said little Lena, hiding her face against
him from the whirl of cabs and omnibuses.

"They bewilder us savages,"
said Angela, smiling. "Remember we are from the wilds."

"She shall
have her tea, and a good rest," said Marilda; "and then I have asked
her uncle and aunts to meet you at dinner, and Fernan hopes to bring
home another old friend. Whom do you think, Angel?"

"Oh! Not our
Bishop?"

"Yes, the Bishop of Albertstown! He is actually in town;
Fernan saw him yesterday at the Church House."

"Oh! that is joy!"
cried Angela; and Lena raised her head, with, "Is it mine--mine own
Bishop?"

"Mine own, mine own Bishop and godfather, my sweet!" said
Angela; "more to us in our own way than any one else. Oh! it is joy!
How happy Clement will be!"

It was with much feeling, almost akin
to shame, that Bessie wrote to Angela this decision of her brother,
that a London authority must be consulted--not Dr. Brownlow, but one
whom Mrs. Sam had heard highly spoken of.

"That man!" cried Angela.
"I have heard of him! He is a regular mealy-mouthed old woman of a
doctor! And she is so well just now! How horrid to shake her up again!
Oh, Bear! if I could only sail away with her to Queensland!"

"You
would if it was ten years ago," said Bernard.

"Yes! Is it the way
of the world, or learning resignation, that makes one know one must
submit? Giving up an idol is a worse thing when the idol is made of
flesh and blood."

Bernard wanted to see Sir Ferdinand, so made it
an excuse for helping his sister on the way; and he did so effectively,
for his knee and broad breast were Lena's great resting-place; and
his stories of monkeys and elephants were almost as good as kangaroos.
Was there not a kangaroo to be seen in London, which she apparently
thought would be a place of about the size of Albertstown?

Lady Underwood
had insisted on receiving the travellers from Vale Leston in her house
in Kensington; and there was her broad, kindly face looking out for
them at the station, and her likewise broad and kindly carriage ready
to carry them from it. How natural all looked to Angela, with all
her associations of being a naughty, wild, mischievous schoolgirl,
the general plague and problem!

"But always a dear," said Marilda,
with her habit of forgetting everybody's faults. "Why didn't you bring
your wife, Bernard, and your little girl for this darling's playfellow?"

"She
is her best playfellow," said Angela; "Adela's Joan is too rough,
and fitter for Adrian's companion."

"She is my playfellow," said
Bernard, holding her up. "Look out, Lena. Here's Father Thames to
go over."

"And Fernan is so glad," added Marilda.

For Bishop Robert
Fulmort had, when Vicar of St. Wulstan's, been the guide and helper
of Ferdinand Travis's time of trial and disappointment, as well as
the spiritual father of Clement Underwood; he had known and dealt
with Angela in her wayward girlhood, and aided her bitter repentance;
and in these later days in Australia had been her true fatherly friend,
counsellor and comforter in the trials and perplexities that had befallen
her. Bernard read, in her lifted head and brightened eye, that she
felt the meeting him almost a compensation for the distress and perplexity
of this journey to London.

Bernard carried the little girl up to
the room and laid her down to sleep off her fatigue, while Marilda
waited on her and Angela with her wonted bustling affection, extremely
happy to have two of her best beloved cousins under her roof.

Bernard
went off to find Sir Ferdinand at his office, and quiet prevailed
till nearly dinner time, when Lena awoke and would not be denied one
sight of her godfather. So Angela dressed her in her white frock,
and smoothed her thin yellow hair, and took her down to the great
stiff handsome room that all Emilia's efforts had never made to look
liveable. Emilia Brown was there, very fashionably attired, but eager
for news of Vale Leston, and the Merrifields soon arrived with, "Oh!
here she is!" from the Captain, "Well! she looks better than I expected!"

"Poor
little dear!" observed his wife, dressed in a low dress and thin fringe
on her forehead in honour of what, to the country mind, was a grand
dinner party, at which Angela's plain black dress and tight white
cap were an unbecoming sight. Instead of proceeding direct to Limerick, we put in to the Isle of Man,
where, not wishing to remain longer with my cousin, I took the liberty of deserting the vessel,
and, running away inland, I hid myself in the barn of a farmhouse till I thought she would
have sailed.  On coming out of my place of concealment, the first person I met was the owner
of the property.  He addressed me in English, of which language I could not, as I have said,
then understand a word.  On my telling him in French that the vessel to which I belonged had
sailed away without me, he spoke to me in my native tongue, and asked if I was hungry--for
I suppose I looked so.  I replied that I was, and should be thankful for a loaf of bread and
a bottle of wine.  He laughed and said that wine was not the liquor of the country, but that,
if I would accompany him, he would give me some bread and cheese and beer.  I did not refuse
his offer--and, ma foi, very excellent I found his viands.  I asked him if he had anything
for me to do, as I should be glad to serve him in return for his hospitality.  He laughed again,
telling me that I was a sharp boy, and that, if I wished it, he would take me into his employment.
He did so, when I found that he was the owner of several luggers which ran between France and
the English and Irish coasts to land contraband goods.  After I had remained on shore for some
time, he asked me if I would like to take a trip to sea.  I was perfectly ready to do as he
proposed, and the next day I went on board one of his vessels.  We were never idle; sometimes
bringing cargoes from France to the Isle of Man, and at others running the goods across from
France to Ireland.  I thus gained a fair knowledge of the trade.  My employer was pleased with
me, and after I had served him for some time he sent me over to Carlingford, where I remained
for a year managing his business, which was to dispose of the goods landed from the luggers.
It was here that, by constantly associating with the people of the country, and seldom meeting
Frenchmen, I learned to speak English with considerable fluency.  On my return to the Isle
of Man I resolved to put into execution an idea I had long entertained, of discovering my paternal
relations.  On telling my employer, he advised me, should I fail in my object, to come back
to him without delay.  Finding a vessel bound for Dublin, I took my passage on board her. 
Great was my disappointment on my arrival to discover that, although there was no end of O'Farrels,
none of them would own me or acknowledge themselves related to the ci-devant captain of King
James's army.  Still, I was not to be beaten, and with a dozen shillings in my pocket I set
off for Galway, where I heard that some of my family resided.  I was not disowned--for the
reason that I could find no one to disown me--and with my last shilling gone, I returned, footsore
and weary, to Dublin.

"Well, gentlemen, I was now in an unfortunate plight, when I had the good luck to meet with
the French valet of a certain noble lord whose name I will not mention.  He was pleased to
fall in with a person who could speak the language of la belle France, and on hearing that
I was of gentle birth, he offered to obtain for me the situation of my lord's page.  It suited
my fancy, and, according to my notion, there was nothing in it derogatory; so I accepted his
offer, and for two years enjoyed a pleasant and easy life--especially as her ladyship's waiting-woman
was a very amiable and agreeable person.  An unfortunate circumstance brought my connection
with the family to a close, and I was compelled to take service with a noble earl whose residence
was on the sea-coast of Antrim.  I accompanied the earl on his shooting excursions, more as
a companion than as a servant; but he was frequently absent from home, and I should have found
the place very triste had I not fallen in with some of my old smuggling acquaintances.  With
them I occasionally made trips, to keep up my knowledge of the sea, and by their means I was
able to supply my friends with pieces of Indian stuff, a few yards of muslin, or tea, or any
other articles in request.  As many other persons wished to possess these things, and were
willing to pay for them, I commenced a regular commerce, which quickly filled my pockets with
gold pieces.  Leaving the earl's service, in which I could not conscientiously remain, I again
took regularly to the sea, and having so many friends along the coast, I was able without difficulty
to dispose of my cargoes.  A lady of some consideration in the county was one of my chief purchasers.
Some one giving information to the officers of excise that her house was full of smuggled goods,
it was searched, and they were discovered, when I was accused of having brought them over.
The officers accordingly laid their plans to entrap me.  I had come across from the Isle of
Man with three other boats in company; they were seized, but I managed to make my escape, and
sailed over to the coast of Scotland.  Here we landed our cargo, which we hid in a cave-- but
how to sell it now that we had got it safely on shore was the question.  I proposed that three
of us should assume the character of pedlars, and dispose of it piecemeal throughout the country.
My plan was adopted; a pleasant time I had of it, travelling from place to place and visiting
the lord's castle and the farmer's cottage.  So successful were we that my share amounted to
a hundred and fifty pounds.  With this sum in my pocket I travelled across to Edinburgh, where,
dressing myself as a gentleman, I took lodgings, intending after seeing the city and enjoying
myself for a brief space to return to France.  I happened, however, to meet a Frenchman long
settled in Edinburgh, and the owner of several vessels which ran between Leith and London.
Happening to require a master for one of these vessels, he asked if I would take charge of
her.  To this I agreed, and carried her safely into the Thames; but, unhappily, a fire breaking
out in a large warehouse near which she was moored, she with several other vessels was burnt,
and I with some difficulty escaped on shore with the property I possessed. Assuming my Irish
name, I took lodgings in Carey Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, for the sake of being near a Mr
Donnell, an Irish gentleman famous for his knowledge of mathematics, from whom I received instruction
in navigation.  Through his recommendation I obtained the command of a vessel, in which I made
frequent trips backwards and forwards between the English and French coasts, greatly increasing
my nautical knowledge and adding largely to my circle of friends.  I conceived a warm admiration
for the English, for though they have their faults, they are a brave and generous people, and
my wish on all occasions has been to acknowledge their bravery and generosity.  It was while
I was in London that I used to visit a club held every Monday evening in the Seven Dials, and
frequented almost exclusively by foreigners, mostly Frenchmen.  One evening, after they had
imbibed more than their usual quantity of wine, some of them began to abuse the English and
Irish, speaking of them in the most contemptuous manner.  I listened without uttering a word
for some time, till my patience gradually evaporated, when, jumping up, I seized the two persons
seated close to me by their noses, and, holding them fast, dragged them to the door, and then
kicking them out, bolted it behind them.  Returning to my seat, I said quietly, `Come, gentlemen,
fill your glasses and let us change the subject.'  Not one of the rest uttered a word, or ventured
again to speak ill of the nation among whom we were living.

"I shortly after this obtained the command of a vessel which ran between Dunkirk and London,
occasionally putting part of our cargo on shore in any convenient spot where our agents were
ready to receive it without troubling the revenue.  For some years I carried on a free trade
between various French ports and the English coast, my chief place of residence being London,
where I had to go to settle my accounts; and then, wishing once more to see my father, I went
to Boulogne, where he still lived.  I was now, in consequence of my successful voyages, looked
upon as the king of the smugglers.  I was proud of the title--but pride is often, as you know,
doomed to have a fall.  I may venture to say that during that period I did not import and export
less than twenty thousand pounds' worth of goods every year.  It happened, however, that the
French Government did not quite approve of my proceedings, and the president of the province,
who happened to be the son of my old friend, Madame Tallard, received orders to put a stop
to our commerce.  Monsieur Tallard had been my friend and playmate in our youth, but duty compelled
him to be vigilant, and I and several of my associates were arrested. Some of them were hanged,
but through his interference my life was spared, though I was thrown into prison, where I languished
for many a long day.  At length, however, the French Government requiring the services of persons
well acquainted with the English coast, I was sent for to Paris, where I was desired to give
such information as I possessed.  I now expected to obtain my liberty, but, instead of that,
those official gentlemen considered it prudent to keep me shut up till they wanted me.  My
friend Monsieur Tallard again interfered, and I was suddenly transferred from prison to the
command of a fine sloop of war. It was a pleasant change, I can assure you, gentlemen; but
the intention of invading England having been abandoned by the Government, I found that my
ship was not likely to be employed.  I accordingly obtained leave to resign my commission,
and to take the command of the Coquille privateer, the ship on board which I have had the pleasure
of receiving you as my guests."

Whatever might have been the opinion held by the Irish merchants as to the career of their
host, they did not think fit to express them.

"I congratulate you, Captain Thurot, on having at length attained a position suited to your
courage and talents," said Mr Ferris; "and as you have thought fit to play a trick on us, we
have to thank you for the courteous way in which you have carried it out.  I hope your wants
will be supplied, and that we shall stand exonerated with our Government for having furnished
an enemy with stores."

"I will give you a certificate to the effect that you are under compulsion," said the captain;
"and if you in any way suffer, I will do my best to make good the loss."

"That would be a difficult matter," observed Captain O'Brien, "though I hope that our known
loyalty will prevent our being subject to any unjust suspicions.  Now, gentlemen," he continued,
turning to friends, "we should be wishing our entertainer farewell, or we shall lose the flood."

The party rose.  "I am sorry that, if you do go, you will yourselves have to pull the boats
up the river, unless some of you gentlemen and Mr Ferris like to remain as hostages instead
of your men," said Captain Thurot.  "Pray understand that I do not doubt the word of any one
of you, but were I to allow all to return, the authorities on shore might not consider themselves
bound by your promises, and might withhold the stores I require, as well as the men, I am somewhat
anxious also about my first lieutenant, who remained on shore about some business of his own.
I will not, however, make you answerable for him, unless he is taken prisoner, and then I shall
expect you to return him safe on board; and I must have a promise from you that you will do
so.  Perhaps, in order to induce those same authorities, who are collectively at times somewhat
stubborn, to act more promptly, it might be convenient if Mr Ferris and his daughter and you,
Captain O'Brien, would consent to remain on board my ship until my people are sent back.  Monsieur
Vinoy came on board with your full sanction, so that I consider myself at liberty to detain
him.  In the case of Mr Ferris and Captain O'Brien complying with my wish, you can take your
men to row the boats up the river.  The plan will, I should think, greatly facilitate matters."

"Not a bad plan," exclaimed two or three of the other gentlemen who were to obtain their liberty.
"Ferris, you will not object to remain? nor you, O'Brien?  Without our men we shall be hours
getting up to Waterford."

Mr Ferris was always ready to sacrifice himself for the public good, though he would have preferred
returning home.

"I must hear what my daughter says on the subject," he answered; "I will not detain her against
her wish.  At the same time, having perfect confidence in the honour of Captain Thurot, I am
ready to remain on board, in order, my friends, to save you and your families from inconvenience
or anxiety."

"In that case, so am I," exclaimed Captain O'Brien.  "I had my suspicions from the first that
all was not right, and I deserve some punishment for allowing myself and you to be entrapped."

"Very kind!"

"Very generous!"

"Very public-spirited!" cried the other gentlemen, who were eager to get out of the scrape
as soon as possible.  It became necessary at last to let the party on deck know the true state
of the case, and to desire them to prepare for their departure.  Some would not even now believe
that they had been deceived; others were very indignant.  The militia officers pulled their
moustaches, swearing that they would return with their men and capture the pirate, although
they could not help acknowledging that they had been politely treated by the Frenchmen. Ellen
was perfectly ready to remain with her father; she had a thorough confidence in sailors of
every nation, and as it now wanted but two or three hours only to daylight, she could have
the enjoyment of a row up the river in the morning instead of during the night.  She sent a
message to Norah begging that she would not be anxious on her account.

Nothing could exceed the politeness of Captain Thurot and his officers as they handed their
visitors into the boats, now manned by their proper crews, who swore that the Jersey men were
broths of boys, and it was just a pity that they couldn't speak a little better Irish.  Though
still able to pull, the boatmen gave undoubted proofs that they had not been stinted in their
liquor.

"Now, bhoys," cried one of the men, standing up and pulling off his hat, "three cheers for
the Jerseyman, and may good luck go with her on her cruise--hip! hip! hurrah!" and their voices
sounded far and wide across the waters of the harbour.  The boats were soon lost to sight in
the darkness.  Mr Ferris and Ellen, with Captain O'Brien, having stood watching them to the
last, Lieutenant Vinoy drew near and expressed a hope that Mr Ferris would not accuse him of
breaking his parole.  "For had I done so, I should not have been worthy of addressing you,"
he remarked.

"Certainly not, my friend," said Mr Ferris; "we brought you on board, and your captain tells
me that he has detained you."

"Ah, that is indeed a satisfaction," exclaimed the lieutenant.  "I may now give a message from
the captain, who begs that you will take possession of his cabin, which is entirely at your
service; you must consider it yours till the return of the boats with our men.  They will soon,
I hope, for your sakes, make their appearance."

Mr Ferris felt satisfied at having sacrificed himself for the benefit of his friends.  Not
that he experienced the slightest apprehension of having to suffer any inconvenience.  Ellen
declared that she liked the fun, and only hoped that Norah would not be anxious about her.
Still the time went by; the grey dawn was breaking, and no boats had appeared. Captain O'Brien,
who was much more fidgety than his friend, frequently went on deck to take a look-out.  Ellen,
who was reclining on a sofa, had fallen asleep, while her father sat by her side.  A stream
of bright light coming through the cabin windows awoke her.  Just then Captain O'Brien came down.

"By my faith, I believe our friend is going to carry us off to sea!" he exclaimed; "I suspected
there was something in the wind, and, going aloft, I discovered a large ship in the offing;
so did the Frenchmen, and they immediately commenced hauling on their spring and letting fall
the canvas ready to make sail in a moment.  They don't like going without their men and the
promised provisions; but they will have to do it if the boats don't return quickly, for I'm
much mistaken if the vessel I saw isn't the Champion, which we have so long been looking for."

Ellen, who had hitherto been asleep, started as she heard Captain O'Brien speak.  "The Champion,
do you say?" she asked.

"I think it more than probable that she is," said the captain.  Ellen did not reply, but the
thought--and to her it was an agitating one-- immediately occurred to her mind, "The Champion
will surely attack the French ship."  It was confirmed by the next remark her father made.

"If so, the Frenchman will have to fight for it, for Captain Olding is not likely to let him
go without questioning him," said Mr Ferris.

"But where do you think, my friend, we shall be in that case?" asked Captain O'Brien.  "Thurot
will scarcely send us on shore first in one of his boats, and I see no signs of our own."

"Could we not get him to make a signal for a boat from the shore?  He surely will not detain
my daughter, with the prospect of having to fight his ship," exclaimed Mr Ferris, becoming
anxious.  "How mad I was to allow her to remain!"

"Do not be alarmed about me.  I trust that we shall have no difficulty in getting on board
the Champion should she enter the harbour," said Ellen.

"We may be confident that Thurot will not wait for her here," said Captain O'Brien; "but I
will go on deck and get him without delay to make a signal for a boat from the shore, if ours
are not in sight.  If they are, he will probably wait for them."

On going on deck Captain O'Brien found that the corvette had slipped her cable, that the topsails
were set, and that the crew were aloft loosing the other sails.  Still, in spite of the wide
folds of canvas which were rapidly spread on the ship, the wind was so light that she made
but little way.  There was yet time for a boat to come off from the shore, and Captain Thurot
without hesitation made a signal as he was requested, firing a gun to draw attention.  No boat
however, appeared.

"Captain Thurot," exclaimed Captain O'Brien, going up to him, "I must beg that you will send
Miss Ferris and her father on shore before you leave the harbour.  It would be terrible to
expose her to all the risks of a battle--and that you will be engaged in one with yonder ship,
I have no doubt.  She is a British ship of war, and is sure to attack you when she finds out
your character."

"But I intend to avoid her if I possibly can, and if compelled to fight, I will place Miss
Ferris and you two gentlemen in as safe a position as we can find on board," said Captain Thurot.

"The safest, however, would not be satisfactory under the circumstances," replied Captain O'Brien.
Captain Thurot looked greatly annoyed.

"I know that," he said, "but it is necessary to send the boats ahead to tow.  Were I to run
the risk of losing the ship, the crew, and even the officers, would mutiny--these privateersmen
are difficult characters to deal with; as it is, they will be discontented at not obtaining
the stores and recovering their shipmates.  My first lieutenant, also, is on shore.  If I send
you away, I have no guarantee that the stores will be delivered, or that my people will be
restored to me."

"You shall have the word of honour of two Irish gentlemen," answered Captain O'Brien, "that
should yonder vessel not prove to be the Champion, or any other man-of-war, everything shall
be arranged as you wish; the stores and men shall be sent off to you, and your first lieutenant
restored, if we can find him."

Still Captain Thurot hesitated.  "You believe that ship out there to be a British sloop of
war?" he asked.

"I feel almost certain that she is the Champion; that she is a large vessel of your own class,
and carries eighteen guns of heavy metal; and, moreover, I believe that if you venture to engage
her she will take you. If you follow my advice you will do your best to escape from her."

While this conversation was going on, the larger boats were being lowered, and were now sent
ahead to tow.  There was a light air from the westward; the stranger's courses were rising
above the horizon in the south-east, just clear of Hook Tower.  Could the Coquille once got
out to sea, she might either by running before the wind round the south-eastern point of Ireland,
or by keeping close-hauled stand along the southern coast towards Cape Clear.

"I confess that I am unwilling to part with you till the last moment," said Captain Thurot,
"but my courtesy will not allow me to detain the young lady and to expose her to the risk she
would have to run.  I will therefore give you my small boat, if you will take charge of her
and convey Miss Ferris and her father to the shore."

"With all my heart, and I am much obliged to you," exclaimed Captain O'Brien.  "If you will
order the boat to be lowered, I will get them up on deck.  The sooner we are off the better;
the tide is sweeping out of the harbour, and we shall have a hard pull of it, at all events."

He hurried below, and conveyed the satisfactory intelligence to his friends.  By the time that
they were on deck the dinghy was alongside, the courses were hauled up, and the men ahead ordered
to cease pulling. Captain O'Brien stepped into the boat; Mr and Miss Ferris descended the accommodation
ladder.  After a brief farewell to Captain Thurot, who with his officers bowed them politely
out of the ship, the dinghy shoved off.

CHAPTER SEVEN.

ELLEN AND HER FATHER, WITH CAPTAIN O'BRIEN, WATCH THE CHAMPION AND COQUILLE FROM PORTALA HEAD--THE
FIGHT--THE SHIPS DISAPPEAR IN THE DISTANCE--RETURN TO WATERFORD--NEWS OF THE CAPTURE OF O'HARRALL--ELLEN'S
ANXIETIES--GERALD SENT TO MRS. MASSEY--DURING THE WIDOW'S ABSENCE OWEN RECEIVES A VISIT FROM
O'HARRALL--CONCEALS HIM--THE PURSUERS COME TO THE COTTAGE--THE WIDOW'S ALARM--OWEN ENABLES
O'HARRALL TO ESCAPE.

The worthy captain had not handled a pair of oars for many a year, but he seized the sculls
and pulled away lustily towards the western side of the harbour.  As to rowing up it against
the strong tide then running out, that, he saw, was hopeless, Mr Ferris being no oarsman. 
The Coquille's sails were let fall, and the men in the boats giving way, she in a short time
was clear of the harbour, and was seen to stand close-hauled towards the south-west, the tide
being in her favour.  The stranger had by this time made her out, and was steering on the opposite
tack towards the harbour's mouth.  Being far to leeward, there appeared but little chance,
unless the breeze should freshen, of the two ships meeting.

"I only hope they may," said the captain, as he tugged away at the oars. "Thurot is a fine
fellow, no doubt about that; but he deserves to be punished for his impudence, and if the Champion
gets alongside him, he'll find that he's caught a Tartar.  Olding isn't the man to part company
with an enemy till she strikes, or one or the other goes to the bottom.  His officers are like
him, I hear, and I shouldn't be astonished to see the Coquille brought in a prize before many
hours are over."

Ellen looked pale and anxious while the captain was speaking.

"We knew Mr Foley, the second lieutenant of the Champion, very well in Dublin, when she lay
at Kingstown," observed Mr Ferris--"a fine young fellow.  I am sure also that you have described
Captain Olding truly."

The captain was all the time pulling away with might and main, now looking ahead to judge of
the direction to take, and now watching the two ships.

"Thurot hasn't calculated on getting becalmed under the land; if he does that, he'll find the
Champion soon walk up to him," he observed. "Pulling is harder work than I thought for, or
my arms have grown stiffer than they used to be.  The sooner we can get on shore the better,
and we can wait there till the tide turns, when perhaps we shall find some hooker running up
to Waterford which will take us in tow. I'll pull in for Portala Bay, which you see just inside
Red Head."

"As you please," said Mr Ferris.  "By climbing to the top of the Head we shall, I fancy, be
able to watch the proceedings of the two ships."

The captain pulling on, the boat soon reached a small bay just to the northward of a headland
at the western side of the entrance of Waterford harbour.  Ellen was eager at once to climb
to the summit of the height. The captain and Mr Ferris having drawn up the boat, they set off,
and were not long in gaining it.  From thence they could command a view of the whole coast
of Waterford as far as Youghal Bay, towards which the Coquille was standing.  Her boats had
been hoisted up, but she was still, even with a favourable tide, making but slow progress.
The ship to the eastward had now come completely into view.  The captain took a steady look at her.

"She is a sloop of war--I thought so from the first," he exclaimed, "and from the cut of her
canvas I have little doubt that she is English."

As he spoke, the stranger's ensign blew out from her peak.

"Yes, I knew I was right--she is the Champion, depend on it.  If the breeze favours her, far
as she is to leeward, she'll be up to Captain Thurot before noon," he continued.  "If she once
gets him within range of her guns, she'll not let him go till he cries peccavi."

Ellen was seated on a rock which formed the highest part of the headland.  Even under ordinary
circumstances she would have watched the two vessels with much interest, but the intensity
of her feelings may be supposed, as she thought of one who was on board the British ship; for
although the gallant lieutenant had not yet spoken, she fully believed that he had given her
his heart, and she could not avoid confessing to herself that she had bestowed hers in return.
In a few short hours he might be engaged in a deadly strife with a ship equal in size and the
number of her crew to the Champion; and though she could not doubt that the British would come
off victorious, yet she well knew the risk to which each of her gallant crew would be exposed.
The Champion had stood within a mile of the mouth of the harbour, when she tacked and steered
for the French ship.  The breeze, as Captain O'Brien had foretold would be the case, gradually
favouring her, enabled her to go much faster through the water than the other.  The captain
several times pulled his watch, resembling a big turnip in size, out of his fob.

"The tide will soon be on the turn, and if we are to get home to-night we must take advantage
of it," he observed, "though I should mightily like to see the end of this."

"Oh, do remain, I pray you," said Ellen; "we can have no difficulty in getting back to Waterford,
for the weather promises to be so fine.  Do you think it possible that Monsieur Thurot can escape?"

"The chances are against him, Miss Ellen, but it is hard to say what may happen," answered
Captain O'Brien.  "Captain Olding is not the man, as I have observed before, to let an enemy
slip through his fingers; in less than half an hour he will get near enough to the Frenchman
to send his shot on board, and he'll stick tightly to him, no fear of that."

Ellen held her breath, as she at length saw the ships approaching each other.  A puff of white
smoke issued from the starboard bow of the Champion.  The Coquille returned it from her stern-chasers,
but the shot fell harmlessly into the water.  Again and again the Champion fired; it was evident
that she could only bring her foremost gun to bear, unless by keeping away and thereby losing
ground.

"Thurot knows the coast as well as, or better than, Olding, and is unwilling to lose the advantage
of being to windward," exclaimed Captain O'Brien.  "See, he keeps his luff, and the Champion
is compelled to do the same; I thought it would be so.  The Champion is losing the breeze,
which has hitherto been in her favour, and if she doesn't manage to wing the Frenchman, the
fellow, who has evidently a fast pair of heels, will slip by between her and the land.  See,
she's not going to let him do that.  Hurrah! she's kept away; there go her broadside guns.
They'll have told, I hope, with effect on the Frenchman.  No, by George! every spar is standing,"
exclaimed the captain, as the smoke from the Champion's broadside cleared away.  She immediately
again came to the wind.  The ships were still too far apart for the shot to do much damage;
they both stood on for some time longer without firing, and were now so greatly increasing
their distance from Red Head that the three spectators could but imperfectly discern what took
place.  Again wreaths of smoke circled above the side of the Champion, and flashes were seen
to issue from that of the Coquille, as, imitating the English ship, she put up her helm and
kept away across the bows of the latter.

"Thurot has made up his mind to run for it," cried the captain; "he's squaring away his yards,
and Olding's after him.  The Frenchman has no stomach for a fight, that's very certain; those
privateersmen prefer plunder to glory.  If Olding doesn't ply him briskly with his guns, the
chase will get away after all.  I had hopes of seeing the Coquille brought in here as a prize;
we could then have afforded to forgive her captain the trick he played us."

In vain the captain and his companions waited for any event to show them which ship was likely
to be the victor.  They were both at length hull down, their masts and spars standing apparently
uninjured.  Poor Ellen had watched them with intense interest.  How long it might be before
her anxiety could be removed, she could not tell; that the Champion would be taken, she did
not believe possible.  But, alas! many of those on board might be killed or wounded; several
days might pass before the Champion could come into Cork harbour.  With straining eyes she
gazed towards the two ships gradually become less and less distinct.

"Come, Ferris--come, Miss Ellen, my dear--we must be on our homeward voyage, or our friends
will become alarmed, and it will be reported that we have been carried off by the Frenchman,"
said Captain O'Brien.

Very unwillingly Ellen left the height and accompanied her father and the captain to the boat.
He had still some distance to pull, though he kept a look-out for a larger boat or a sailing
hooker on her way up to Waterford.  At length a little high-sterned craft was seen standing
out of one of the many small bays which indent the western shore of the harbour.  The captain
stood up, and shouted and waved, and the hooker, hauling her wind, hove to to await their coming.
The skipper, knowing he should be amply recompensed, was delighted to receive them on board
and to take their boat in tow; and Ellen, seated on a sail, was wafted up the river in a very
different style to that of Cleopatra in her barge, as far as the mouth of the Suir; when, the
wind failing, Captain O'Brien, with the assistance of one of the crew of the hooker, pulled
up the remainder of the distance to Waterford in the Coquille's dinghy.

It was late in the evening.  As they approached the quay they were warmly cheered by a number
of the townspeople who had heard of their adventure, information of the departure of the French
privateer having already been brought up to Waterford.  It was soon evident to Mr Ferris that
some other event of importance had occurred.

"What has happened, my friends?" he inquired.

"Shure, yer honour, one of the French officers has been caught hiding away in your garden,"
answered Dan Connor, who was one of the nearest to him among the crowd.  "The thief of the
world! he made a mighty fine fight of it; but we ran in on him, after he had cut down three
or four of us, two being kilt entirely--but we knocked his sword out of his hand and seized
him, and he's lodged comfortably in the Ring Tower, out of which he isn't likely to get in
a hurry."

"Of which French officer do you speak?" asked Mr Ferris; "we left our late prisoner on board
the Coquille."

"It wasn't him, yer honour, but a big fellow with, a patch on his cheek and another over his
eye," answered Dan.  "He isn't a Frenchman at all at all, but from the oaths he swore he's
Irish all the world over--the thunderin' big villain--no other than Brian O'Harrall, who has
a price on his head.  It cost us pretty dear to take him too."

Further inquiries convinced Mr Ferris that the supposed French officer was the outlaw who had
so long evaded the grasp of justice.  The prisoner, he understood, was under a strong guard.
Ellen being much fatigued, he accompanied her home before going to ascertain particulars. Norah,
who greeted her affectionately, looked pale and agitated.

"I have had a dreadful fright," she said.  "My father had insisted on my taking a turn in the
garden, and as I reached the rocky walk at the end of the terrace, out of sight of the house,
who should appear before me but the first lieutenant of the privateer, who had dined with us
yesterday.  I had then an undefined suspicion of him, and no sooner did he speak than I was
convinced that he was the very person whom we met the other evening, and who attempted to carry
me off, and who, notwithstanding his disguise, was, I am sure, the man who was picked up at
sea by the Ouzel Galley, and acted as second mate on board her.  I knew that I had had the
misfortune to excite his admiration, but I hoped when he was taken on board the privateer which
captured us that I should never again see him.  He, however, it appears, was well known to
Captain Thurot, who had appointed him his first lieutenant.  He made the most outrageous professions
of affection; I, of course, would not listen to him; and dreading his violence, before he was
aware of what I was about to do, I darted from him and ran, faster than I had ever run before
in my life, towards the house.  He pursued, entreating me to stop and hear what he had to say.
Feeling that he was not to be trusted, I continued my flight, and providentially just then
caught sight of Dan Connor and some of the crew of the Ouzel Galley, who had come up to see
my father, and while waiting to do so had been allowed to stroll into the garden.  Several
of the workmen and two of the gardeners, who happened to be close at hand, joined the seamen,
and the whole party rushed at the stranger, who had by this time reached the bottom of the
hill and found retreat impossible.  On this, I understand, he drew his sword and made a desperate
defence, and though unhappily he wounded two of the men, the rest boldly threw themselves upon
him, and wrenching his sword from his hand held him fast.  During his violent struggles to
free himself the patch over his eye fell off, as did his heavy moustache, and some of the men,
as they examined his features, recognised the pirate O'Harrall, the very man of whom Mrs Massey
gave you the account.  I had rushed into my room, too much frightened and agitated to watch
what was taking place.  He was carried off to prison, and will of course be brought to trial,
in which case I fear that I shall have to appear as a witness against him.  I was afraid for
some time to tell my father, for the same reason that I did not before inform him of the attack
made on us.  However, he now knows all that has happened, and he tells me that he is well acquainted
with O'Harrall's history, and believes him capable of the most desperate acts of violence."

Ellen had forgotten her own anxiety in listening to Norah's recital. She now described to her
friend what had occurred, and the feeling which had agitated her while watching the two ships.
Norah offered such comfort as one young lady under the circumstances could give another.

"I have heard my father say that ships of war often meet and fire many shot without doing each
other any harm," she remarked; "and you know, my dear Ellen, that even though some of the crew
of the Champion may be killed or wounded, there is no especial reason that Lieutenant Foley
should be among the sufferers; and it is the lot of naval officers to be constantly exposed
to the risk of battle in war time."

"I know it too truly," replied Ellen; "but it was dreadful to see the ship on board which I
knew him to be sailing away to attack so renowned and skilful a captain as Monsieur Thurot--then,
to have to wait so long for the issue of the battle."

"Perhaps we shall have tidings of the arrival of the Champion to-morrow," remarked Norah; "and,
from what you tell me, Monsieur Thurot was more anxious to escape than, to fight."

"So I at first thought," said Ellen; "but I heard Captain O'Brien tell my father that he suspected
Thurot's object was to draw the English ship away from the Irish coast, that should he come
off victorious he might have the better chance of securing his prize.  It was a relief to me
to hear Captain O'Brien say he did not for a moment believe that the Champion would be beaten;
on the contrary, that it would be much more likely that she would take the Coquille.  Still,
there must inevitably have been a fierce battle; and oh, Norah, if you knew how I feel for
Norman Foley, you would understand my anxiety."

"I can fully understand it," said Norah, "and I often think how sad it must be for poor women
left at home, to know that those they love are exposed to dangers and hardships of all sorts
which they are utterly powerless to relieve.  Such must be the lot of all sailors' wives and
those who have engaged their hearts to sailors--and yet it would be cruel to the poor men if
on that account they could get no one to love them."

"Yes, indeed," said Ellen, sighing; "but then, remember, we can pray for them, and we can do
our best to make them happy when they return home."

Norah at length persuaded Ellen, who had had but little rest on the previous night, to lie
down and try to forget her anxiety in sleep. Soon afterwards Gerald came in.  He had been rather
indignant at not having been taken when the party visited the supposed Jersey privateer.

"Had I seen Monsieur Thurot, I should have recognised him at once, for I marked him well when
he came on board the Ouzel Galley; and I suspect, too, I should have detected his first lieutenant,
in spite of his disguise," he exclaimed.  "I wonder you did not find out that he was our mate
Carnegan."

"I did more than once fancy that I knew his voice, but it seemed so improbable that he should
be on board a Jersey privateer that I banished the idea," answered Norah.  "Now, Gerald, I
want you to go and inquire after Mrs Massey and Owen; they may hear rumours of what has occurred,
and will wish to know the truth.  You will have time to go there and be back again before dark."

Gerald, who was always good-natured and anxious to please Norah, undertook to go and deliver
any message, written or oral, she might wish to send.  She had already a note prepared for
Owen, and with it Gerald set off.  He found Owen much better, and ready, if the doctor would
let him, to walk into Waterford to see Norah; but Mrs Massey was sure that he overrated his
strength, and told Gerald that Norah must not expect him for some days.  She was much interested
at hearing the account which Gerald gave of the various occurrences of the last two days.

"And can that unhappy man have really been captured?  What a sad ending to a once respected
family!" she exclaimed.  "He cannot expect pardon. I bear him no ill-will, though his family
has been the ruin of ours; and even now, in the hope that he may have time for repentance,
I would thankfully hear that he had escaped rather than suffer the death his crimes deserve."

"I should certainly not have suspected that the Carnegan we had as second mate on board the
Ouzel Galley could have been a murderer and pirate," said Gerald.  "The men, however, were
inclined to believe from the way he was saved that he was in league with the Evil One, and
they will now be convinced that such was the case."

"Satan would rather have let him drown," said Mrs Massey, "unless indeed he wished to employ
him in some still more wicked deed.  He undoubtedly mates use of those who willingly yield
to him as his tools to work out his designs."

While Mrs Massey had been talking to Gerald, Owen had been inditing an answer to Norah's note,
with which, rather later than he had intended, Gerald set off to return home.  It was quite
dark before he reached the town.  He was proceeding along a narrow lane which offered a shorter
cut than the high road, when he heard the footsteps of a person running at full speed, and
directly afterwards a man rushed by him whose countenance he could not see; but it struck him
at the time that the figure greatly resembled that of Carnegan, the second mate of the Ouzel
Galley.  He was doubtful for a moment whether he should follow: though brave enough under ordinary
circumstances, he felt pretty certain that if such was the case O'Harrall would not scruple
to knock him on the head or to blow his brains out; and so he did the next best thing which
occurred to him--he ran on, intending to make his way to the Ring Tower to give information
that the prisoner had escaped; though he fully expected to meet a party in hot pursuit of the
fugitive.

Mrs Massey was at supper with her son, when there came a knock at the door, and a bare-headed
damsel appeared.

"Mrs Massey, my mother's taken mighty bad entirely, and will it plaze ye to come and see what
ye can do for her?" she exclaimed, in a petitioning tone.  Mrs Massey, who was proud of the
medical knowledge she exercised for the benefit of her neighbours, immediately arose.

"Indeed, and I'll come, Molly," she answered.  "Just wait till I put on my hood and fill my
basket with such things as I may require."

She speedily getting ready, told Owen that she would soon be back, and that Mrs Hogan would
know that she could not leave him all alone for any length of time; and off she set, with Molly
Hogan carrying a lantern before her.

Owen trimmed the lamp which burnt on the table, and sat down to read till his mother's return.
He had not long been thus occupied, when hearing the door open he looked up, expecting that
Mrs Massey had returned for something she had omitted to take with her.  Instead of his mother,
he saw standing before him the second mate of the Ouzel Galley.  For a moment he thought that
he must be dreaming.

"You know me, Owen Massey," exclaimed his visitor, "You saved my life once, when the devil
well-nigh had me in his clutches, and I come to throw myself on your generosity--to ask you
to render me a further service.  Should I be recaptured, I should be doomed to the gallows,
and I have no fancy for that fate.  Conceal me for a few hours, and I shall be able to get
off in safety; refuse to do so, and I shall fall into the hands of my pursuers."

Owen hesitated, not because he was aware that the man before him was O'Harrall, the enemy of
his family, but because he was unwilling to expose his mother to the penalty of harbouring
a fugitive from justice. He rose from his seat and said, "I now know you to be Brian O'Harrall."
His visitor started, and drew back a pace, as if about to leave the cottage, believing that
all hope of assistance must be abandoned. "Stay," continued Owen, his generous feelings getting
the better of him, "I do not on that account the less desire to save you if I can.  Should
you not have been traced here, I may yet be able to do so."

"I am not likely to have been traced, for my flight can scarcely yet have been discovered,"
answered O'Harrall.  "You will run no risk, and I will be grateful if I can find an opportunity.
I have proved that I am not destitute of gratitude.  When on board the Ouzel Galley, I obtained
better terms for you from Thurot than you would otherwise have enjoyed."

"Follow me, then," said Owen, "and I will conceal you till you have an opportunity of escaping;
but promise me that you will not again return to this part of the country."

"I have no hesitation in doing that, for I intend to do my best to escape from Ireland, never
with my own free will to come back," answered O'Harrall.

"That is sufficient," said Owen; and he led the way through the cottage to an outbuilding at
some short distance, over which there was a loft, long disused.  Owen found a ladder, by which
the fugitive mounted to it.

"You can easily leap to the ground when you think fit to continue your flight," said Owen,
who had followed him up.  "I will bring you some food, to afford you support both for the present
and on your journey; and if you want money, I will supply you."

"I give you my thanks, but I have a purse full of gold.  Be quick, however, with the food,
or my pursuers may be here and prevent you from bringing it to me," replied O'Harrall.

Owen on descending removed the ladder, and, hurrying into the pantry, collected such provisions
as he could most easily find, and for the disappearance of which he could account the next
day to his mother.  He carried them to the fugitive, and then again replaced the ladder in
the spot from which he had taken it.  Having done this, he returned to the sitting-room and
threw himself into a chair, resting his head on his hand.  He had performed a generous action,
but still he questioned himself whether it was a right one.  He was attempting to conceal from
justice an undoubted malefactor; it was an act then, as now, too common in Ireland, and was
sure to meet with the sympathy of the people should it be discovered.  Owen possibly might
have partaken somewhat in the feeling general among all classes, that it was a right thing
to protect those in distress, whatever their crimes against society.  A more generous motive
had influenced him, and he might have been less inclined to act as he had done should a person
indifferent to him, and equally criminal in the sight of the law, have thrown himself upon
his mercy. Owen did not know the full wrong O'Harrall had attempted to inflict upon him; even
had he been aware of this, it might not have altered his conduct.

Some time passed before his mother returned; during it, he did his best to calm his feelings,
for he had determined not to tell her what had occurred, hoping that before the next morning
O'Harrall would have disappeared.  Shortly after she entered the cottage the old lady urged
Owen to go to bed.

"You look somewhat pale, my son," she said, holding the light to his face, "and late hours
do not suit an invalid."

"When you set me the example, I will go and turn in," answered Owen, laughing.  As he was speaking,
loud shouts were heard, and several people came running up and knocking loudly at the door.

"Who is it?" asked Mrs Massey.

"Shure, it's Pat Magragh.  Are ye safe inside, Mrs Massey, honey?" inquired one of the men
from the outside.

"And where else should I be?" answered the widow, recognising the voice and going to the door.
Owen felt very uncomfortable, for he fully expected that inquiries would be made for the fugitive.

"Shure, it's no matther at all, thin," exclaimed the man.  "As we got to Molly Hogan's, she
told us that ye'd just left the cottage, and it might be the big villain we were hunting might
have fallen in wid ye and done ye harm; but if ye didn't see him, it's all right, and we must
be joining the rest of the bhoys who ran after him."

"Whom do you mean?" asked Mrs Massey.

"Brian O'Harrall, to be shure," was the answer; "he's broken out of the Ring Tower, nobody
knows how--except he got the help of the devil and his imps."

"Thank Heaven I did not meet him! it would have well-nigh driven me out of my wits," said the
widow, trembling at the thoughts of the supposed danger she had escaped.

"Good night, Mrs Massey; keep your door closed, lest he should turn like a fox and bolt in,"
cried Pat Magragh, as he and his companions hurried away in pursuit, as they believed, of the
escaped criminal. Mrs Massey did as she was advised, and sat down, endeavouring to calm her
agitation, and feeling but little inclined to go to bed.

"It is useless to sit up, mother," observed Owen, after Mrs Massey had been talking for some
time about the escape of O'Harrall.  "The man, if he has got away, is certain not to return.
At all events, you will be as safe in bed as anywhere else."

After some persuasion Mrs Massey consented to retire to bed, and after listening for some time
at last fell asleep.  The window of Owen's room looked directly down upon the outbuilding in
which the fugitive was concealed.  Owen felt much relieved, from believing that those who had
gone on were not likely to think of examining the place; still, he could not go to sleep, and
putting out his candle he sat down at the window to watch, hoping that O'Harrall would take
the opportunity of slipping out and getting off to a distance, no watched in vain.  After some
hours he heard the tramp of feet along the road and the voices of men shouting to each other.
They were the people who had gone in chase of O'Harrall. Could the outlaw have continued his
flight and, after all, have been captured?  Owen listened attentively, and felt convinced that
they were returning to the city without having overtaken the fugitive, he could no longer restrain
his wish to ascertain whether O'Harrall was still in the loft, and cautiously descending the
stair, he lighted a lantern and went out.  To place the ladder so as to reach the trap was
the work of a moment.  He ascended to the loft, and throwing the light towards the further
end, he saw the man he came to look for sleeping soundly.

Before Owen had advanced a step O'Harrall awoke and, springing to his feet, saw who it was.

"I came to tell you," said Owen, "that the men who had gone in pursuit of you have, to the
best of my belief, returned to the city, and now would be a favourable time to make your escape."

O'Harrall hesitated.  "What o'clock is it?" he asked.

"Just past midnight," refilled Owen.

"Are you certain that the men who are hunting for me have returned to the city?" asked O'Harrall.

"Judging from what I heard, and the direction in which their voices died away, I am confident
of it," said Owen.

"Then I will follow your advice," answered O'Harrall.  "You have increased the debt of gratitude
I owe you.  I have no means of showing that I am grateful; but do me one favour more--accept
this ring; it belonged to your family.  It has a curious device on it, which is its chief value.
I wish you to believe that, reckless as I am, I still retain some of the feelings I possessed
when you knew me in days gone by.  Come, take it; I cannot leave this place till you have done
so. There, man, take the ring; it might have been yours by right."

Owen took the ring and placed it on his finger.

"If we ever again meet, however much changed you may be, I shall know you by that," said O'Harrall.
"Now, farewell--may a happier fate be yours than will probably be my lot!"

"Stay a moment, and I will ascertain that no one is near," said Owen, as O'Harrall was about
to descend the ladder.  He hid the lantern, and went out into the open part of the garden and
round to the front of the house.  Clouds obscured the stars; not a sound was to be heard, except
the voice of some bird of night, which came from a distance.  By some it might have been thought
of ill omen, but Owen was above the superstitions of the ignorant.  He returned to the outhouse,
and in a low voice called to O'Harrall, who immediately descended the ladder.

"I feel sure that no one is on the watch," said Owen, "and it may be most prudent for you to
get away at once."

"You are right," answered O'Harrall.  "Again farewell, Massey; though we may never more see
each other, I shall always remember that I have met with one honest and generous man."

He did not, however, put out his hand, perhaps supposing that Massey would consider himself
contaminated by touching it.

"Go into your house," he continued, "and let me follow my own course, that you may not even
know what direction I have taken."

Owen did as he was advised, leaving O'Harrall standing beneath the shelter of the buildings.
Closing the door he returned to his room, when on looking out of his window, he found that
O'Harrall had disappeared.  His mind felt greatly relieved at the thought that he was no longer
harbouring a fugitive from justice.  On going into the garden the next morning, he could perceive
no traces by which it might perchance be discovered that O'Harrall had been there, and he determined
that the occurrence should be known only to his mother and himself.  He considered that it
would be wrong to conceal it from her, and, sitting down, he told her what he had done.  She
did not speak for a minute or more.

"You acted rightly, my son," she said at length.  "The O'Harralls have been our bitter enemies,
but our holy religion teaches us that we should not only forgive our foes, but do good to those
who most cruelly ill-treat and abuse us; whatever man may say, God will approve of your act,
for he knows the motive which prompted you."

CHAPTER EIGHT.

ARRIVAL OF THE CHAMPION--MR. FERRIS GOES ON BOARD--BRINGS BACK LIEUTENANT FOLEY WOUNDED--GERALD
JOINS THE CHAMPION AS MIDSHIPMAN--AN ACCOUNT OF HIS SHIPMATES--THE CHAMPION SAILS--CAPTAIN
TRACY AND NORAH AT HOME--THE OUZEL GALLEY PREPARING FOR SEA--RETURN OF THE CHAMPION--SAILS
AGAIN--OWEN APPOINTED TO THE COMMAND OF THE OUZEL GALLEY--MR. FERRIS AND ELLEN GO TO DUBLIN--THE
OUZEL GALLEY SAILS--NORAH'S LIFE AT HOME--MR. FERRIS INTENDS TO GO TO JAMAICA--THE OUZEL GALLEY
COMES BACK, AND CAPTAIN TRACY RESOLVES TO GO ROUND IN HER TO DUBLIN.

"News, Norah!  I bring you news, Miss Ellen," cried Gerald, rushing into the drawing-room where
his sister and her friend were seated.  "I have just heard that a man-of-war has brought up
inside the harbour, with her main-topmast gone and her sails riddled with shot.  They say that
she is the Champion, and that she has had a desperate action with a French ship, which she
sent to the bottom, or which got away from her.  Which was the case, I can't exactly make out,
but she has lost I don't know how many officers and seamen, for there hasn't been such a bloody
fight since the war began.  The wounded, I hear, are to be sent on shore, and we shall thus,
I suppose, know all about the matter."

Ellen turned pale as Gerald was speaking.  "Have you heard who the killed and wounded are?"
she asked, in a trembling voice.

"No; I could only learn the name of the ship, and that there has been a sharp action there
can be no doubt," answered Gerald.

"Perhaps Gerald's account is exaggerated," remarked Norah, observing Ellen's agitation.  "If
the ship is the Champion, Mr Ferris is sure to go down and visit her; he will ascertain the
truth of the report."

"I must--I must go and tell him what has happened, in case he should not have heard it," said
Ellen, rising.  She found Mr Ferris in his counting-house, on the ground-floor.  He immediately
ordered his boat, and telling Ellen that, should he find any wounded officers who might require
to be cared for on shore, he would bring them up, he desired her to make preparations for their
reception.  Gerald, who was on the look-out for him, begged that he might accompany him on
board.  The boat, with six stout hands, rapidly made her way down the river.

Ellen and Norah, like good housewives, lost no time in seeing the spare rooms got ready for
their expected guests.  The occupation tended to relieve Ellen's mind.

"Perhaps, after all, there may be no wounded officers," said Norah. "Gerald's account was very
vague--people nearly always exaggerate disasters."

"But I saw the beginning of the battle, and heard the dreadful guns firing--and some of those
on board may have been killed," said Ellen, scarcely able to restrain her feelings.

The young ladies had some time to wait after the rooms had been got ready.  Ellen was constantly
going to the window, from which she could see the river and watch for the return of the boat.
Norah, like a faithful friend, did not quit her.

"There comes the boat," exclaimed Ellen, at length.  "Oh, see, Norah! there is a person wrapped
up in blankets lying in the stern-sheets; my heart told me that he would be wounded."

"It is better so than had your heart told you he would be killed, and it had proved a true
prophet," said Norah, smiling and trying to cheer up her friend.  Ellen would have hurried
down to the quay, but Norah persuaded her to remain at home.  "He may not be Lieutenant Foley,
remember," observed Norah, quietly; "and if he is, you are more likely to agitate him than
to do him any good by rushing down to the quay. Think how odd it would look were you to exhibit
your feelings in public, or, still more so, should the wounded man prove to be a stranger."

Norah's sensible remarks prevailed in inducing Ellen to remain quiet till the arrival of the
party in the boat.  Mr Ferris was the first person who appeared.

"You must not be alarmed, my dear child," he said.  "There has been a fierce engagement, in
which two officers and several men were killed--"

"Oh, father, who were they?" cried Ellen.

"A master's mate and a midshipman," answered Mr Ferris; "but I am sorry to say that Mr Foley
was among the most severely wounded, and he gladly accepted my offer to take him on shore;
so I brought him up here, and you and Norah will, I am sure, do your best to look after him."

While Mr Ferris was speaking, the men bearing the wounded lieutenant arrived.  Ellen, restraining
her feelings, received him with becoming propriety, though his pale lips and wan cheek made
her heart sink.  He was forthwith conveyed to the room which, had been prepared for him. Dr
Roach, who had been an army surgeon, and knew well how to treat gunshot wounds of every description,
was immediately sent for, and the young officer was placed under his charge.

"We'll pull him through, young lady," he observed, after he had visited his patient.  "You
will naturally wish to know what I think of the case of this fine young officer, who has been
bleeding for his country.  You need be under no serious apprehensions; he will be fit for duty
again shortly.  You saw how quickly I doctored up Mr Massey, in whom, if I am not wrongly informed,
Miss Norah here takes an interest."

Norah looked conscious.  "Young people have hearts, and small blame to them if they fall in
love now and then," remarked the doctor; "and now, my pretty maidens, good-bye to you, for
I want to hear more about the battle.  I could not let my patient tell me.  Remember, I leave
him under your charge, but I must lay an embargo on your tongues; talking, or listening to
talking, isn't good for wounded men, though you may sing him to sleep with your sweet voices."

Owen was well enough to accompany Mrs Massey when she returned Norah's visit, and, moreover,
to stroll with her into the garden.  He now first heard of O'Harrall's conduct; his brow flushed
as she told him, but he restrained his feelings, and did not let even her know that he had
assisted his rival's escape.

"Could the fellow have been aware that she was my betrothed wife, and yet, after such conduct,
ventured to claim my protection?  I am thankful I did not then know of his behaviour; I might
have been tempted to refuse him my aid."  Such were the thoughts which passed through Owen's
mind.  "However, bold as he is, he is not likely again to appear in this neighbourhood."

Owen and Norah, having each other's society, forgot how the time went by, till Gerald came
hurrying up to call them into the house.  He had just returned from his visit to the Champion;
he was full of what he had heard of her engagement with the Coquille.  Two officers had been
killed, and two, besides Mr Foley, wounded; three men had been killed, and several wounded.
The Frenchman, instead of being sent to the bottom, having knocked away the Champion's main-topmast
and cut up her rigging, had managed to get off and run out of sight before her damages could
be repaired.  Captain Olding had chased in the direction the Coquille had last been seen, but
had failed to come up with her, and was compelled to steer for Waterford.

"And, do you know, Norah," continued Gerald, "I've made up my mind to go on board a man-of-war.
They all say that Captain Olding will take me, and place me on the quarter-deck, if Mr Ferris
introduces me and would say a word in my favour; so if our father approves of it, I hope to
go at once, instead of waiting for the Ouzel Galley."

"If it would better promote your fortune to serve on board a man-of-war, I will not hinder
you," said Owen, as they walked towards the house.

"I would rather you should remain on board the dear old ship, to act as Owen's mate," observed
Norah; "but if our father allows you to go on board the Champion, neither will I try to alter
your determination."

Captain Olding had come up to the house to inquire after his lieutenant. He and Captain Tracy
had been shipmates in their younger days.  He was well pleased, he said, to be able to forward
the views of his friend's son.  It was therefore settled that Gerald should join the Champion
at once, and Norah was busy from morning till night in preparing his outfit.  Captain Tracy
was now able to get about, and even to superintend the repairs of the Ouzel Galley.  He secretly
was somewhat proud of having a son belonging to the Royal Navy.  It was the road to honour
and fame; Gerald might some day become one of England's admirals. Still, had the captain intended
to continue at sea himself, he would have wished to keep his boy with him, and he would also
gladly have had him accompany Owen Massey.  Gerald himself was in high glee; he made frequent
trips down to the Champion, and always came back with some fresh account of what she had done,
and of what his future messmates, the midshipmen, fully expected she would do.  He described
them to Norah as first-rate, jolly fellows, up to all sorts of fun.

"And you may tell Miss Ferris, if you like," he added, "that they all say there isn't a more
gallant officer in the service than Lieutenant Foley, and they hope that he'll soon get well
and rejoin the ship.  They don't speak quite so favourably of her first lieutenant, Jonah Tarwig,
who seems as if he had swallowed the mizen-royal-mast as he was looking aloft one stormy night
when the ship was taken aback and it was carried away.  He is six feet two in height--how he
manages to stow himself in his berth it is hard to say, but it is supposed that he doubles
his legs back, for as to coiling away his body, that would be impossible.  The master, old
Billhook, is a rough diamond, but he understands navigation, and spins tough yarns by the score;
I'll tell you some of them one of these days.  The purser, Simon Cheeseparings--that isn't
his real name-- was a slopseller in Wapping, but outran his creditors and had to come to sea
to escape from Newgate; and the doctor's a Scotchman whose name begins with Mac, and for brevity's
sake Mac he is always called.  Now you know all about the gun-room officers; but the best fellows,
out and out, are in our berth.  We've got two old mates, Beater and Crowhurst-- at least, they
are old compared to the rest of us, and they are always complaining that they are not port-admirals.
Their characters answer to their names, for Beater is never without a cob in his hand, and
he uses it pretty freely; and Crowhurst is always boasting of his own mighty deeds or those
of his ancestors--and if you are to take his word for it, they (his ancestors, I mean) came
over with William the Conqueror, and ought to be dukes at the least.  However, putting their
peculiarities aside, they're capital fellows, and, if they have an opportunity, will show that
they have the true metal in them--so my chum, Nat Kiddle, says.  He doesn't pretend to be anybody,
though I can tell you he's a broth of a boy, and it's a pity he wasn't an Irishman, for he'd
do honour to the old country; but he happens to be the tenth son of an English farmer, whose
brother was a lieutenant in the navy, and took him to sea, but his uncle having been killed
at the end of the last war, Nat has to shift for himself.  Though he has tumbled into a good
many scrapes, he has always managed to fall on his feet.  Then we've got a young lord, Mountstephen;
he is always called Molly, but he doesn't at all mind, and declares that he'll some day show
the Frenchmen what an English Molly can do.  In reality, he is the pet of the mess--not because
he's a lord, but because he's a very nice little fellow, who looks as if he ought to be in
the nursery instead of knocking about in a sloop of war.  But I don't know, Norah, whether
you'll care to hear about the rest of us."

"Oh yes," answered Norah; "I am very much interested, especially in the little lord.  I hope
you'll help to take care of him."

"Yes, that you may depend on it I will," said Gerald; "if I get into scrapes, I'll take care
he doesn't--though I don't intend to get into any myself, notwithstanding that they say Irishmen
always do.  They've dubbed me Paddy already, but of course I'm proud of that, and shall always
stick up for old Ireland, and sing `Erin-go-bragh' on all occasions.  Well, I'll tell you about
the rest of our mess another day, and something about the warrant officers.  We've three of
them, the gunner, boatswain, and carpenter--and as chance will have it, the first is a Scotchman,
the second an Englishman, and the third an Irishman; and though they're mighty good friends,
they are always wrangling about their respective countries, each one declaring his own to be
superior to the others in every respect.  Barney O'Rourke hailed me at once as a countryman,
and was mighty pleased to see one young gentleman, at least, from the Emerald Isle who would
stick up for our country's honour. `And, by my faith, that's what I intend to do,' I answered--and
we became sworn friends.  There now, Norah, I think you know a good deal about our ship already,
and when Lieutenant Foley gets about again, which I hope he'll do in a few days, you will learn
a good deal more; and when we're away, you'll be able to fancy me on board among my shipmates."

Norah sighed as she thought how soon her young brother, who had never before been parted from
her, would be away, with the chance of not coming back for three or four years, for the Champion
had only lately been commissioned, and might before long be sent to a foreign station. At length
Captain Olding, the Champion being ready for sea, ordered Gerald on board to perform, duty
as a midshipman.  He intended, however, to return in the course of two or three weeks, expecting
by that time that his second lieutenant would be sufficiently recovered to resume his duties.
Norah accompanied her father and Owen down the river to wish Gerald good-bye, and to see the
ship sail.  She felt rather sad as the boat shoved off, when the anchor was apeak and the white
canvas let fall, and the ship began to glide majestically away through the calm waters of the
harbour--for, besides that she grieved to part with her young brother, the thought occurred
to her that the Ouzel Galley would be the next ship she should see taking her departure from
port.  Owen, who was now able to be constantly with her, offered, not unsuccessfully, all the
consolation in his power.  Captain Tracy, being now well enough to go about, removed with her
to their own cottage, situated a short distance from Waterford, and within a mile of Mrs Massey's
abode.  It was a pretty spot.  The cottage, with its porch covered with clematis and eglantine,
stood in a good garden in which the captain delighted to work during his leisure hours.  From
the windows could be seen the broad, shining river and the shipping in the distance on one
side, and from the other the mountainous regions to the westward.  Altogether, no young lady
could have desired a more romantic bower.

The captain, by his successful voyages, had been able to save a sufficient sum to live in comfort,
with a handmaiden, Biddy O'Halloran, to attend on him and his daughter, and a gessoon to look
after the cows and pigs and to work in the garden.  Still, notwithstanding her present happiness,
it was but natural that poor Norah should reflect that in a short time Owen must sail away
in command of the Ouzel Galley, and be subject to all the dangers of the sea, increased in
war time by the chance of being captured by the enemy.  He and her father were now absent all
day long, attending to the fitting out of the ship, which was making rapid progress.  Her owners
had decided on sending her back to the West Indies, and Owen assured Norah that, as he should
probably find a cargo waiting for him, he should not be long absent.  She paid frequent visits
to Ellen, who could heartily sympathise with her. Lieutenant Foley had entirely recovered from
his wound, and would have to rejoin the Champion as soon as she arrived in the harbour, in
which she was every day expected.  Norah thought that the lieutenant deserved all the praises
bestowed on him by Gerald, though of course he was not equal, in her estimation, to Owen. 
Still, she could not be surprised that her friend had given him her heart, especially as he
had owned that he had given his to Ellen; and they were now regularly betrothed with the full
approval of Mr Ferris, and were to marry as soon as Mr Foley had obtained the rank of commander.

The days and weeks went rapidly by.  Mr Ferris intended, as soon as Lieutenant Foley had joined
his ship, to return with his daughter to Dublin.  This would be a great loss to Norah, as she
was acquainted with but few other young ladies in the neighbourhood; indeed, from having been
at school with Ellen, they were more like sisters than ordinary friends.  Ellen had begged
that she would visit her in Dublin, but she could not leave her father, and still less did
she wish to quit Waterford till the Ouzel Galley had sailed; after that, she felt that she
should have no spirit to enjoy the gay society of the metropolis, even should her father insist
on her accepting Ellen's invitation.

The arrival of the Champion was announced at last by Gerald, who early one morning rushed into
the house.

"We came in last night, and are to sail again this evening, so I obtained leave to run up to
see you," cried Gerald.  "I've got lots to tell you," he continued, after he had exchanged
greetings with his father and sister, and was seated at the breakfast-table.  "We haven't had
any actual fight, but we've taken several prizes, one of them, as big as the Champion, cut
out in gallant style.  She was seen at anchor in Saint Martin's Roads, and the captain determined
to have her.  We stood away, and the Frenchman must have supposed we had gone; but at night,
when it was very dark, we stood back again.  Three boats were then lowered, and I had the good
luck to be sent in one of them.  We at once pulled away for the roads with muffled oars.  There
lay the ship right ahead of us; we could just see her masts against the sky.  The Frenchmen
must have been all asleep, or keeping a very bad look-out, for we were alongside and our fellows
almost on her deck before we were discovered.  The Frenchmen, thus taken by surprise, made
but a very feeble resistance, and though a few of them were knocked over, we didn't lose a
man.  The cable was cut and the topsails sheeted home before the fort began to fire, and as
the wind was off shore, we got out of range with very little damage.  We earned our prize into
Plymouth, and our captain, I believe, gained some credit for his exploit; though except that
he designed it, he took no part, for old Tarwig commanded one boat, and the master, Billhook,
another, and one of our mates and I went in the third.  Had half of us been killed, I suppose
more would have been thought of the affair.  While at Plymouth we heard from the bumboat women,
who have always the most correct intelligence, that we were to be sent to the West Indies,
and we soon found that they were right; but the captain got leave to come in here first, to
take Lieutenant Foley on board, and to obtain fresh provisions; so I shall be visiting the
old scenes again, and, I hope, fall in with Owen.  That will be good fun; perhaps we shall
have to convoy him home, or maybe, should the Ouzel Galley fall into the hands of the enemy,
retake the ship.  Faith, shouldn't I be delighted."

"Oh, don't talk of such a dreadful thing!" exclaimed Norah.  "I hope that you may have to convoy
him home, and that we may see you both back here in five or six months."

Gerald could stay but a very short time, as he had been ordered to return on board with Lieutenant
Foley.  Norah and Captain Tracy accompanied him into Waterford.  They found the lieutenant
ready to start, and Norah remained with Ellen, who had just taken farewell of her intended
husband.  Owen, having joined the captain and Norah, went down to the quay to see Gerald off.

"We shall meet, I hope, soon, Owen," said the young midshipman.  "I feel half ashamed of myself
for deserting you; but if you knew the life we lead on board the Champion, you wouldn't be
surprised at my preferring her to the dear old Galley."

"The time may come when you may think differently.  But good-bye, my lad; I hope you will enjoy
yourself and come back safe," answered Owen, as Gerald sprang on board.

The lieutenant gazed with eager eyes towards the windows of the large house overlooking the
river, where he could see a white handkerchief waving to him.  Two or three more years might
pass before he could again press the hand lately clasped in his, and it was a hard matter for
him just then to keep up his spirits.  Soon after the boat returned on board, the anchor was
hove up, and the Champion, under all sail, stood to the south-west.

In the evening Mr Ferris desired to see Owen.  "My partners and I have given you charge of
the Ouzel Galley, Captain Massey, and we trust that you will be as devoted to our interests
as your predecessor has been," he said, giving Owen for the first time the title of captain.
"Having undergone a thorough refit, we hope that she will require no fresh repairs for some
time to come.  We intend to insure her among our friends in Dublin, and they, knowing her good
qualities and your careful character, would be ready to underwrite her at a moderate premium
considering the war risk."

"You may rely on my taking the best care I possibly can of the ship," answered Owen, "and,
as she has (I may say it without fear) a fair pair of heels, on my keeping clear of every enemy
I may sight."

"That is what we wish, Mr Massey," said Mr Ferris.  "We don't want men who will run their noses
into danger; and true courage and seamanship will best be shown in your case by cleverly escaping
from your foes. You will get the ship ready for sea as soon as possible, and take your cargo
on board, and we will then send you further directions from Dublin."

Owen took leave of his employer and returned home.  The next day Mr Ferris, accompanied by
Ellen, proceeded to Dublin.

Norah's day of trial came at length.  She ought not to have complained, as she had enjoyed
Owen's society for some months.  The Ouzel Galley having shipped her cargo, chiefly of salt
provisions, and other produce of the fertile south of Ireland, hauled out into the stream.
Her old captain, with Norah and Mrs Massey, went on board to bid farewell to Owen, and proceeded
down the river till she had crossed the bar, when Captain Tracy took Owen by the hand.

"Heaven speed you, my boy!" he said.  "May He who guarded me through the many dangers of the
ocean take care of you, and bring you back in safety to those who will ever give you a loving
welcome!  And now, the shorter you cut the parting with those two the better."

Mrs Massey saw that the time had come; she threw her amis round the young captain's neck, and
asked God again and again to protect him. Then she let Norah take her place, while Captain
Tracy helped her down into the boat alongside, in which Owen soon afterwards placed Norah.
They had said their last words of farewell; Norah's had been whispered, for her heart was too
full to allow her to utter them aloud.  Captain Tracy took his seat in the stern-sheets.  "Cast
off!" he cried to the bowman.  The boat dropped astern; Owen was seen standing aft and looking
over the taffrail; the pilot, who had still the command, ordered the courses to be let fall,
and the Ouzel Galley glided onward.  As long as the boat was in sight, there stood Owen gazing
at Norah and his mother, as again and again they waved.  More than once the old captain turned
round to take another look at the ship whose keel he had seen laid, each timber and plank of
which he had carefully watched as the shipwrights had fixed them in their destined positions--that
ship on the deck of which he had stood when she glided into the water for the first time, and
which he had since navigated with watchful care on every voyage she had made, amid rocks and
shoals, and over many a league of ocean.

Mrs Massey had consented to spend a few days with Norah.  Though her own heart was heavy, she
knew that she could console that of the young girl, so unused to the trials of life; while
the old captain himself, she saw, required cheering, and thus in benefiting others she forgot
her own anxieties.  The captain had out his chart: he had marked the way the wind blew, and
knew to a nicety the rate at which the ship was sailing, and could thus calculate from hour
to hour the exact spot on which she floated--always provided, as he observed, if the wind holds
as it did when she quitted port.

At length Mrs Massey returned home, and Norah settled down to her daily occupations.  Norah
was not free from some anxiety on her own account, for she could not forget the attempt which
had been made to carry her off, or divest herself altogether of the fear that she might be
subjected to a similar outrage.  She therefore never ventured abroad without her father's escort,
while he at home ever kept his firearms ready for her defence.  Still, as week after week went
by, her hope that O'Harrall had quitted the country, and that he would not again venture to
molest her, increased.  She heard occasionally from Ellen, though letters were long in coming,
and more than once the mail had been stopped on the road and plundered--a too frequent occurrence
to be thought much of in those days.

Norah, notwithstanding her fears, was unmolested.  The captain had given out that if any one
should venture to run off with his daughter he would not obtain a farthing of his property--a
wise precaution, for it probably prevented any of the squireens in the neighbourhood from making
the attempt--added to the fact, which was pretty generally known, that she was engaged to marry
Owen Massey.

Month after month went by.  Ellen at first wrote her word that she was going much into society--more,
indeed, than she liked--while she had an abundance of occupation at home in attending to her
father's household. Latterly, from her letters, she appeared to be living a more quiet life
than at first.  She mentioned her father, who seemed to be much out of spirits, though she
could not divine the cause.  She again invited Norah to come up to Dublin and help to cheer him up.

"You are a great favourite of his, you know," she wrote.  "He delights in hearing you sing,
and your merry laugh and conversation will do him good."

But Norah could not be induced to leave her father; besides which, she confessed to Ellen,
she was looking forward in a short time to the return of the Ouzel Galley, and she would be
sorry if Owen should not find her at home on his arrival.  Ellen, in reply, told her that the
Ouzel Galley, after calling at Waterford, would probably have to come on to Dublin, and she
continued--"And my father, finding it necessary to go out to Jamaica, intends taking a passage
in her; and I have determined to obtain leave to accompany him.  I fear that he will object
to my doing so, on account of the danger to which I may be exposed; but, you know, as I generally
manage to have my own way, I hope to overcome his objections.  The ship also will form one
of a large fleet of merchantmen under convoy of two or three men-of-war, and as the Ouzel Galley
sails well, even should the convoy be attacked by the enemy, we shall have every chance of
getting off.  You must not be jealous of me, my dear Norah; indeed, I heartily wish that your
father could spare you to bear me company; and I dare say that the young captain would wish
the same, did he know of the proposed plan.  Pray tell him of it when he comes into Waterford,
and I have an idea that he will join his persuasions with mine."

This letter made Norah's heart beat quickly.  She was much surprised, too, at hearing of the
intention of Mr Ferris to go out to the West Indies; but, much as she would have liked to accompany
her friend, she felt that it would be impossible to leave her father.

"I was afraid that things were not going on straight," observed Captain Tracy, when she told
him of the news she had received.  "However, Mr Ferris is the man to set them to rights, and
he'll do it; but I wish that Miss Ellen, instead of going out with him, would come and stay
here.  She expects to meet the lieutenant, but he'll be here, there, and everywhere, and she
mayn't see him all the time she is there."

Norah, in reply, told Ellen what Captain Tracy had said; but Miss Ferris had made up her mind
to go if she could, and was not to be deterred from her purpose.  One evening Norah was seated
at the open window with her work before her, while her father occupied his usual armchair,
smoking his pipe, when a rapid step was heard approaching the house.  Norah uttered a cry of
delight, and, hurrying to the door, the next moment was in Owen Massey's arms.

"I am glad to see you back, my lad," cried the old captain, grasping his hand; "you've made
a quick voyage, and a prosperous one, I hope?"

"As prosperous as I could desire," answered Owen.  "We have had two or three narrow escapes
from the enemy's cruisers, but the Ouzel Galley is in good trim, and never sailed better. 
I heard in Waterford that I am to proceed to Dublin," he continued; "so I paid my mother a
visit, and she bade me hurry on here.  I can remain but a short time, for I must be on board
again early to-morrow."

"We'll make the most of you, then, my lad," said Captain Tracy, "and Norah looks as if she
intended to do so."

She was the first to tell Owen of the intention of Mr Ferris to go out in the Ouzel Galley
to Jamaica, and that Ellen had made up her mind to accompany him.  "She has asked me to pay
her a visit before she goes," she added, "and I should much like to do so could I leave my
father, but that I cannot do."

"Nor shall you, my girl, for I will go with you," said the captain, who had overheard her remark.
"We'll go in the Ouzel Galley--to my mind there's less danger at sea than from those land pirates,
the highwaymen--and if you can pack up your traps in time, we'll go aboard to-morrow morning.
What say you, Owen?  Will you take us as passengers?"

Owen expressed his pleasure at the proposal, and Norah had no doubt that she could pack up
in time.  Owen put aside all fears of capture by the enemy; indeed, the Channel was so well
guarded by British ships of war that there was little danger, he thought, on that score.  He
had too much confidence in his own seamanship to think of shipwreck.  After all arrangements
had been made, he went back to spend the rest of the evening with his mother, while Norah and
the captain, with Biddy's help, prepared for their departure.

CHAPTER NINE.

THE OUZEL GALLEY SAILS FOR DUBLIN--A STRANGE SAIL TO THE SOUTHWARD-- FOLLOWS THE OUZEL GALLEY--THE
CHAMPION SENDS MR. FOLEY AND GERALD TO PRESS SOME OF HER MEN--NORAH IN DUBLIN--MR. FOLEY AND
GERALD IN COMMAND OF A PRESSGANG--AN ADVENTURE ON THE LIBERTIES--A SUSPICIOUS CHARACTER CAPTURED--PRESSED
MEN CARRIED OFF--ELLEN AND MR. FERRIS SAIL IN THE OUZEL GALLEY--CAPTAIN TRACY AND NORAH RETURN
TO WATERFORD--THE OUZEL GALLEY WITH THE CONVOY BOUND FOR THE WEST INDIES--SHARP ACTION WITH
FRENCH FRIGATES--THE ENEMY BEATEN OFF.

Norah and Captain Tracy were on board the Ouzel Galley before noon the next day, accompanied
by Owen.  They had gone round to bid Mrs Massey good-bye; it cost her much to part again so
soon with her son, but she was proud of seeing him captain of so fine a ship, and had learnt
to bear many trials with fortitude.

As the breeze blew up the harbour, the Ouzel Galley had to beat out, which, with a favourable
tide, she succeeded in doing in a few tacks, after which she had a fair wind for Dublin.  Dan,
coming aft, hat in hand, welcomed Miss Norah, and wished she was going to sail with them the
next voyage--Pompey, who presumed on long service with Captain Massey, imitating his example,
and making an appropriate speech.  Norah thanked them, and, it is just possible, secretly wished
that she was to remain on board.

A bright look-out was kept for any sail which might heave in sight; for, though Owen believed
that there was no risk of encountering an enemy, it was still possible that a French privateer
might be on the watch to pick up any merchant vessel which might come within her grasp.  The
wind fell, and the Ouzel Galley made but little progress during the night. Whatever others
might have done, Norah did not complain; she was in no hurry to have the trip over.  Dawn had
just broken, when, as a mist which had for some hours hung over the ocean began to clear away,
a hand who had been sent aloft shouted out, "A sail to the southward!"  Owen, who was on deck,
at once went to the mast-head to take a look at the stranger.  She was a large ship under all
sail, but the mist prevented him from making out very clearly what she was.

"She is bringing up the breeze," observed Captain Massey, when he returned on deck; "but as
we shall probably get it before long, we may keep ahead of her."

"We'll try our best to do that same," said the old captain; "it would be hard to be trapped
just as we are going into port."

"I should never forgive myself for having allowed you and Norah to come on board," said Owen,
feeling much more anxious than he would have done had he been alone.

"Don't trouble yourself about that, lad," answered the captain; "she is more likely to be a
British ship than a Frenchman, and she hasn't got up to us yet, nor will she, I trust, before
we are safe in the Liffey.  I shall be glad, however, when we get the breeze."

They had not long to wait before cat's-paws were seen playing over the surface of the ocean.
The sails were trimmed, and the ship began to glide through the water; faster and faster she
moved, but the stranger astern still gained on her.  Norah soon followed her father on deck,
and the rising sun shining on the white canvas of the ship astern revealed her more clearly
to view.

"Is that ship chasing us?" she asked, with a little trepidation in her voice.

"She is following in our wake, but she may be a friend for all that," answered Owen, anxious
not to alarm Norah.  "Should she prove to be a foe, we'll do our best to keep ahead of her.
Fortunately, we have a port to run for, and have every chance of gaining it before she comes
up with us.  See, we have the Wicklow mountains already in sight, and it will not take us many
hours to reach Dublin if the wind holds as it does now."

"I quite agree with you, Owen; we have very little cause to fear, go we'll go below and take
our breakfasts with good appetite," said the captain, the steward having just announced that
the meal was ready.

On returning on deck they could perceive no change in the relative position of the vessels;
but as the day drew on the wind dropped, and the stranger appeared to gain on them.  Still
they made some way, and could distinguish the Round Tower and ruined house on Dalkey Island,
off the Wicklow coast, when it fell perfectly calm, and though the Bay of Dublin was almost
in sight, they were unable to reach it.  The old captain took many a glance through his spy-glass
at the ship astern.

"She looks more like an English man-of-war than a Frenchman," he said to Owen; "see what you
make of her."

"I agree with you, sir," said Owen.  "She is standing after us simply because she is bound
to the same port, and if so, we need not trouble ourselves further about her; anyway, we shall
be safe at anchor before long, and an enemy would scarcely venture into the bay to cut us out."

Still Owen, not being altogether free from anxiety, walked the deck the greater part of the
night, waiting for a breeze.  It came at length, towards the end of the middle watch, and as
before, astern.  He had lost sight of the stranger during the hours of darkness, but when dawn
broke, as the Ouzel Galley was off Kingstown, he saw her coming up rapidly not a mile away.
With the increasing daylight he made her out, however, to be undoubtedly a British man-of-war.

"No mistake as to that point," observed Captain Tracy, who joined him on deck; "I thought so
from the first."

What was their astonishment, therefore, when the corvette fired a gun towards them.  The Ouzel
Galley still stood on, when the sound of another gun came booming over the calm sea.

"It is the signal to us to heave to.  We must obey," said Owen; "though they perhaps think
that we are too strong-handed, and wish to press some of our men."

"There's no help for it," observed the old captain; "better at the end of a voyage than the
beginning of one, as far as the owners are concerned; but it is a cruel thing for the poor
men to be carried away from their families just as they are expecting to get home."

The yards were braced up, and the ship hove to.  In a short time the corvette, getting abreast
of her, lowered a boat and quickly pulled alongside, with a lieutenant and midshipman in her.
As they sprang on deck, the latter came running aft.

"Don't you know me, father?" he exclaimed, as he got up to Captain Tracy.

"What, Gerald, my boy!  You've grown so tall and brown that, thinking you away in the West
Indies, I didn't till this moment," answered Captain Tracy.

"But I thought it was he," cried Norah, as Gerald bestowed on her a brotherly embrace.  He
then shook hands with Owen, to whom Lieutenant Foley, who was the other officer, had at first
addressed himself; but, seeing Norah, he advanced and paid his respects, inquiring for her
friend Miss Ferris.

"She is well, and about to sail for Jamaica on board this vessel," answered Norah.  "You will,
if you land at Dublin, have an opportunity of seeing her."

"I hope, then, that the Ouzel Galley will form one of the next fleet which we have received
orders to convoy to the West Indies," said Lieutenant Foley.  "Having been sent home with despatches,
we landed at Plymouth, and were on our way round here when we ran out of our course in chase
of a strange sail.  She, however, escaped us, and we are now bound into Dublin Bay.  Are you
going to remain on board?" he asked.

"I am afraid not," said Norah; "but I am sure that it will be satisfactory to Mr Ferris to
learn that your ship will convoy them. Should I see them before you do, I will tell them so."

Thereon the lieutenant sent several messages to Ellen, which Norah promised to deliver, as
duty might possibly delay him from going on shore.  He then turned to Owen.

"I was sent to press some of the hands out of your ship," he said, "but if you are about again
to sail, I feel authorised to take only those who have not agreed to return with you; and I
must beg you to muster your crew."

Whatever might have been the intentions of the men, they one and all agreed to re-enter for
the next voyage on board the Ouzel Galley, and Owen thus secured an experienced crew instead
of the untried hands he might afterwards have picked up.

"It is fortunate that you fell in with us instead of any other man-of-war, or you would have
lost your best hands," said Gerald; "and we, I suspect, shall have to send pressgangs on shore
to pick up all the fellows we can find.  You had better give a hint to your men not to trust
themselves out of the ship, for all would be fish who come to our net, they may depend on that."

Gerald had to return with Lieutenant Foley to the Champion, while the Ouzel Galley, having
taken a pilot on board, at once ran up the harbour, when Norah and her father proceeded to
Mr Ferris's.  The arrival of the Ouzel Galley was hailed with great satisfaction by Mr Ferris;
still more so was the news Norah gave Ellen, that the Champion was one of the ships of war
appointed to convoy the Ouzel Galley and the other merchant vessels to the West Indies.  All
diligence was used in discharging her cargo and taking a fresh one on board; and in shorter
time than usual, thanks to the assistance rendered by her old captain, she was ready for sea.
Owen had the happiness of spending the evenings with Norah, and Ellen was the better able to
dispense with her society as Lieutenant Foley managed frequently to get on shore, bringing
Gerald with him.  Their time, however, was not always passed so agreeably, as they had on several
occasions to take charge of the pressgangs sent on shore to pick up men, and more than once
they were engaged in pretty severe encounters with the unwilling seamen whom it was their duty
to capture.

Mr Foley and the young midshipman were spending the evening at Mr Ferris's, when they were
summoned out.

"We must wish you good night," said the lieutenant to Ellen, returning; "we have some duty
to attend to, and shall afterwards have to go on board our ship."

The ladies came into the hall, and were somewhat astonished at the garb which the two officers
quickly assumed.  Over their neat uniforms they put on large Flushing trousers, thick coats
of the same material buttoned up to their throats, round which they tied large comforters,
while on their heads they wore weather-beaten sou'-westers.  A cutlass, buckled on by a leathern
belt in which a brace of pistols were stuck, showed that they were about to proceed on an expedition
in which rough play might be expected.

"Where are you going?" asked Ellen, in some trepidation.

"Only to obtain a few loyal seamen to serve his Majesty," answered the lieutenant.  "The fellows
don't know their true interests, and may perhaps offer some opposition; but don't be alarmed--we
hope to be on shore to-morrow to give a good account of ourselves."

The lieutenant and midshipman set off under the guidance of the captain's coxswain, a Dublin
man, who had come for them.  Proceeding to a public-house on one of the lower quays, they found
a dozen seamen dressed and armed as they were.  The lieutenant having given them directions,
they followed him and his guide to that part of Dublin known as the "Liberties," inhabited
by the dregs of the population.  The night was dark; no lamps illumined that part of the town.
The lantern carried by Larry Flynn, the coxswain, enabled the party to thread their way through
several narrow streets till they reached a house, at the door of which he stopped.

"This is it, yer honour," said Larry; "but we must be mighty quick, or they'll be after escaping
along the tiles."

On this he gave a gentle knock at the door.  "Hist!  Mother O'Flanigan, open the door, or I'll
be taken hold of by the watchmen," he whispered through the keyhole, as he heard a step within.

"Who is it?" asked the voice.

"Shure, it's Dennis Donovan, whom ye'll be after knowing, I'm thinking; but quick, quick, mother
dear, or it'll be too late and I'll be caught."

As he spoke the bars were withdrawn, and the lock turned, and the old woman, forgetting her
usual caution, slowly opened the door.  On this Larry sprang in, and before she had time to
shriek out thrust a woollen comforter into her mouth.

"Hold her fast, Bill!" he exclaimed to one of the men who had been directed to guard the door,
while the lieutenant and Gerald, with the rest, rushed along a narrow passage, at the end of
which another female, a stout, sturdy-looking Amazon, appeared with a light in one hand and
a poker in the other.

"Who are ye, ye brutes?" she exclaimed, "coming to disturb a dacent household at this time
of night?  Shure, the childher are in bed, and ye'll be waking them up and sending them into
fits, the darlints."

"It's joking ye are, Misthress Milligan, for divil a child have ye got in the house, barring
a score of bhoys with big whiskers on their faces," answered Larry; "so just keep a dacent
tongue in your mouth, and be quiet with that poker."

Mrs Milligan, finding that she was known, and as it would be useless to deny that she had guests
in the house, shrieked out at the top of her voice, "Run, bhoys, run--the pressgang are on
ye!" at the same time attempting, with her formidable weapon, to prevent the seamen from opening
the door before which she stood.  Larry, however, dashing forward, wrenched it from her hand,
and giving her a shove which sent her reeling into the arms of those behind him, burst open
the door with his cudgel; and, the harridan having been handed along to those in the rear,
the rest of the men followed him into the room.  It was an apartment of some size.  At one
end was a table covered with mugs, a jug or two, and several bottles of large proportions,
and surrounded by benches; while at the other end were four beds, each with a couple of occupants,
who had endeavoured to conceal their features by the coverlets. Absolute: it can admit no modification
of this; it can make no room within its province for generosity, or for any action of man's
soul, without forfeiting, so far, its claim to the character of a science. Put a dollar, with
all honor, liberal justice, and humane attraction, on the one hand;
put a dollar and one cent, with mere legal right and consequent safety,
on the other hand; and Political Economy must assume that every man
will gravitate to the latter by the same necessity which makes the
balance incline toward the heavier weight.

Or, conceding the contrary, it yields also its claim to the character of a perfect science, and
takes rank among those half-sciences which partly expound necessary
laws and partly contingent effects.

Now this assumed sovereignty of pecuniary interest seems to us not a final account of human beings.
There is honor among thieves; is there none among merchants?

Does not every man put some generous consideration for others into his business-transactions?
Has an honorable publisher no aim but to print that which will sell best? Has he no regard to the
character of his house? Has he no desire to furnish a nourishing pabulum and a healthful inspiration
to the mind of his country?

In the employment of labor and the giving of wages do men generally quite forget the workman, and think
only of the work and its profit?

This does not happen to accord with our observation of human nature. We think there is a large
element of honorable human feeling incessantly playing into the economies of the world; and
we think it might be yet larger without any injurious perturbation of these economies.

Again, as a science, Political Economy considers wealth only as related
to wealth, to itself, not to man.

It assumes wealth, as absolute, and regards man as an instrument for its production and distribution.
But this attitude must be reversed.

Wealth cannot be treated of in a wholly healthful way until it is considered simply as instrumental
toward the higher riches which are contained in man himself.

And here we reach the peculiar virtue of Mr. Mill's book.

In the first place, he accepts the science as such, accepts it cordially and almost with enthusiasm,--in
fact, has a degree of faith in its completeness and of confidence in its uses, greater, perhaps,
than our own final thought will justify; for the reader will already have perceived that we incline
in some measure to the opposition, with Carlyle, Ruskin, and others.

Proceeding upon this basis, Mr. Mill expounds the orthodox theories with that definiteness
of thought, with that precision of statement, and that calmness and breadth of survey, which never
fail to characterize his literary labor. Any one who assumes, and wishes to study the science,
will find in this writer a guide through its intricacies, whom it were hardly an exaggeration
to name as perfect. Always sound-hearted, always clear, candid, and logical, always maintaining
a certain judicial superiority, he is a thinker in whose company one likes to go on his mental
travels, and whose thought one will be inclined to trust rather too
much than too little.

In the second place, Mr. Mill discerns the limitations of the science more clearly, and acknowledges
them more frankly, than, to the extent of our somewhat narrow conversance with such writers,
has ever been done before by any one who regarded it with equal affection and reposed in its
theories a like faith. This, too, is thoroughly characteristic of him. He is one of the sanest
and sincerest of men.

Thirdly, his inspiring and generative purpose is to lift the science into serviceable relation to the
broad interests of man. Here we come to the real soul of the book. He accepts its customary limits
chiefly that he may transcend them. He treats of wealth with a philosophical and cordial perception
of its uses; but beyond and above this he is thinking of man, always of man,--and of man not
merely as an eater and drinker, but as an intelligence and a candidate for moral or personal
upbuilding. A reader would regard the work with a dull eye, who should miss this commanding
feature.

Sometimes by special discussions, as in his defence of peasant-properties in land,--sometimes
only by an aroma pervading his pages, or bypassing expressions,--and
always by the general ordering and culminating tendency of his thought,--one
reads this perpetual question, the true and final question of all
politics and economies:--How shall we secure the greatest number of
intelligent and worthy men and women?

But while Mr. Mill's sympathy is with the people, the many, the whole
of humanity, and while his desire for men is that they may attain
the mental elevation which shall make them really human beings, yet
a marked feature of his book is the mild Malthusian element which
pervades it.

Let no stigma be therefore fixed upon him. Let honor be rendered to the courage which steadily
inquires, not what representation of the facts will win applause,
but simply what the facts are.

And undoubtedly it is true that all considerate men in England have been compelled to contemplate
the possibility of over-population, of an insupportable pauperism, of a burden of helpless numbers
which shall sink the whole nation into abysses of starvation with all its horrible accompaniments.
It is but a few years since Ireland escaped unexampled death by famine
only by an unexampled exodus.

The New World opened its arms to the misery of the Old, and fed its famine to fatness,--and
has got few thanks. But this rescue cannot be repeated without limit.

And therefore forelooking men in England find the problem of their future one not too easy to solve.
Mr. Carlyle, among others, has grappled with it. His brow has long been beaded with the sweat
of this great wrestling; and if he seem to some of us a little abrupt and peculiar in his movements,
we must at least do him the justice to remember that he, after the
manner of ancient Jacob, is struggling with the angel of England's
destiny.

Mr. Mill, too, with an earnestness less passionate indeed, but perhaps not less real, is toiling
at the same work.

And, by the way, an instructive comparison might be drawn between these two writers. Mr. Mill, not
highly vitalized by belief, not nourished by any grand spiritual imaginations, hampered by a
hard and poor philosophy, and with limited access to absolute truth, nevertheless, not only
belongs fully to the opening modern epoch, but through a certain entireness of moral health and sanity
is leading the time steadily forward into its great believing and builded future; though it
may follow from his limitations that into this future he cannot accompany it very far. Mr. Carlyle,
with a poetic profundity of nature and a force of insight which entitle him not merely to a
high place among the men of our time, but to a name among the men of all time, standing face to
face with the divine reality and wonder of existence, conversing with the heights and depths
of being, and appreciating the significance of personality, as Mr. Mill never can, will accompany
our epoch into its future farther than one can foresee, but to its
present must render a mixed and imperfect service; for a sickness
runs in his veins, and he is trying to force the age into a half-way
house, which is built equally by his hope and his despair.

Were this not merely a general characterization, but a review, of Mr. Mill's powerful work,
we should venture to take issue on some matters both general and
special,--as an example of the latter, on the possible utility of
protective duties.

The reasoning by which he, in common with his class, proves these
to be necessarily futile for good, is indeed faultless so far as it
goes, but, in our clear judgment, fails to cover the whole case; so
that the question, whether as one of general polity or of industrial
economy, is still open to consideration.

Especially it may be urged, that the infancy of human industries,
like the infancy of human beings, may require protection, even though
their adult vigor could be safely left to take care of itself.

Suppose it conceded that this protection is at first costly.

So are the cradle and the nursery. Yet it may be that they "pay"
in the end.

Nay, as the cradle may enrich the household through the new incentives
to labor and frugality which it supplies, so protections of industry
may evoke new industrial powers, and thus at once begin to enrich
the nation, though the capital which supports these fresh industries
could not at first hold its own, as against other capital, without
the motherly cares it receives.

But enough. Here is a book on a matter of large and immediate importance, put forth by one of
the amplest and soundest minds of our time,--a man so long-headed
and clear-hearted, so able and intrepid to think, to speak, and to
hear correction, so intent upon high ends and so calmly patient upon
the way, that the public can neglect his thought only by a criminal
neglect of its own interests.

A Critical History of the Doctrine of a Future Life. With a Complete Bibliography of the Subject. By
WILLIAM ROUNSEVILLE ALGER. Philadelphia: Geo. W. Childs.

Few "signs of the times" are more significant than the disposition shown on all sides to scrutinize
and interpret the spiritual history of mankind. Lessing, Schlegel, Herder, Hegel, Guizot, Buckle,
and others, endeavor, with various degrees of ambition and success, to estimate history considered
as a progress; Carlyle in his "Heroes" and Emerson in the "Representative Men" regard it rather
as a permanence, and seek to present its value in typical forms; meanwhile the Bibles and
mythologies of the old world are collected, translated, subjected to interpretative study;
and the critical scholarship of our time is almost wholly engaged in an endeavor either to
arrive at the exact text or at the precise value of all the ancient literatures.

All men have at length discovered that the history of mankind means something, and are naturally
intent on learning what it means. No one now regards it as a mere Devil's phantasmagoria, significant
of nothing but Adam's sin in the Garden. However differing on other points, we all now perceive
that the history of the mind of man is a more interior history of the universe,--that it must
be studied, in the most earnest and reverential spirit of science,--that what Astronomy seeks
to do in the heavens and Geology on the earth must be done in the realms of the mind itself,--and
that, till we have found our Copernicus and our Newton of the human soul, modern science lingers
in the porch, and does not find access to the temple. We all see that this history, not indeed
as to the succession of its outward events, but as to its interior reality, must be grounded
in the eternal truth and necessity of the universe. What wonder, that, having been so fully
penetrated by the scientific spirit, modern minds should look with great longing toward these
earths and skies of human history, coveting some knowledge of the
law by which the thoughts and faiths of man perform their courses?

Nor any longer can "negative criticism" enlist the utmost interest. It is construction that is
now desired; and he who studies history only that he may vanquish belief in the interest of
knowledge cannot command the attention of those whose attention is best worth having. That fable
is fable and mythus mythus no one need now plume himself on informing us, provided he has nothing
further to say. Of course, we raise no childish and sentimental objection to what is called "negative
criticism." It may not be the best possible policy to build the new house in the form of certain
stories superimposed upon the old one, which, perhaps, is even now
hardly strong enough to sustain its own weight.

Let there be due clearing away; let us find foundations.

But the essence of the new point of view in the contemplation of history consists in this, that we
no longer seek these foundations in the mere outward and literal history of man; we look, on the
contrary, to his inward history, to perennial hopes and imaginations,
to the evidence of his spiritual impulses and attractions, and just
here find not only his real history, but also the basis for theoretical
construction.

We see, indeed, as clearly as any Niebuhr or Strauss of them all, that the imagination so pours
itself into history as to supersede, or to disguise by transfiguration, the literal facts. The
incessant domination of man's inward over his outward history is apparent enough. What then?
Does that make history worthless? Nay, it infinitely enhances the value of history. Who are more
deserving of pity than the distracted critics that discriminate the imaginative element in
the story of man's existence only to cast it away? "Facts" do they desire? These are the facts.
What is the use of always mousing about for coprolites? Give us in the present form the product
of man's spirit, and this to us shall constitute his history. Let us know what pictures he painted
on the skies over his head, and he who desires shall be welcome to
the relics which he left in the dust under his feet.

In our own country some worthy efforts have been made to set forth certain grand provinces in
the spiritual history of the human race.

Such was Mrs. Child's most readable book,--does she ever write anything which is not readable?--"The
Progress of Religious Ideas." We have seen also some fine lectures on "Eastern Religions,"[53] which
ought to go into print. And now Mr. Alger comes forward with his large and laborious work, seeking
to contribute his portion to these new and precious constructions.

Mr. Alger's book is a real work. It is the result of no light nor trivial labor, of no timid
nor indolent essay of thought. His aim has been to pass in judicial review the thoughts and imaginations
of mankind concerning the destiny of the human soul. It is an instruction to the jury from the
bench, summing up and passing continuous judgment upon the evidence on this subject contributed
by the consciousness of the human race.

Mr. Alger is a brave man. He does not hesitate to grapple with the greatest thinkers, nor to measure
the subtlest imaginations of all time. In the opening chapter, for example, which is appropriately
devoted to a consideration of theories of the soul's origin, he lays hold of the boldest speculative
imaginations to which the world has given birth, with no hesitating nor trembling hand. Occasionally
the reader may, perhaps, be more inclined to tremble for him than he for himself. One remembers
Goldsmith's line,--

"The dog it was that died";

but our author comes forth from the trial in ruddy health, and does
not seem at all out of breath.

And all through the book he delivers his sentence like a man who has earned the right to speak.

And has he not earned it? For some years Mr. Alger has been known to scholars and others as
a most indefatigable and heroic worker. This book justifies that
reputation.

The amount of reading that has gone to it is almost portentous. To us, who can hardly manage
twelve books, big and little, in as many months, this mountainous reading furnishes matter for
wonder.

Neither has this reading been chiefly a work of memorizing, nor has it been expended chiefly
upon works of history commonly so called. A product of man's spiritual consciousness being
under consideration, it is works of thought and imagination, rather
than works of narration, which claim our author's critical attention;
and his reading has been reflective and deliberative, involving a
judgment upon speculative more than upon historical data.

And it may fairly be said, though it be much to say, that he has shrunk from nothing which a
perfect performance of his task required.

Whether we consider the formation or the expression of his judgments, it may still be affirmed
that he has met his great theme fairly, and given to its exposition
the utmost exercise of his powers and the unstinted devotion of his
labor.

We can accordingly pass upon his work this rare commendation, that it is thoroughly honest. This
may, indeed, seem to many no very high approval.

But it is one of the very highest. For we mean by it not merely that he has refrained from
conscious misrepresentation of fact,--that he has not lied, as Kingsley
did about Hypatia in the novel wherein he borrowed, only to befoul,
the name of that spotless woman, knowing all the while that his representation
was contrary to the recorded facts of history.

To say so much only of this book would be not to attribute to it
a positive merit, but only to acquit it of damning demerit.

But what we affirm is that Mr. Alger has fairly looked his facts in the face, and come to some
understanding with himself about them. When he speaks, therefore, it is about facts, about realities,
not merely about words; and what he offers is the result of genuine
processes of production which have gone on in his own mind.

If he speak of life, it is not life in the dictionary, but in the universe. If he profess
to offer thoughts, he really gives the results of his thinking. He does not cant; he does not merely
recite verbal formulas; he does not play the part of attorney, first determining what to advocate,
and then seeking plausible reasons: everywhere one perceives that
he has really brought his mind to bear upon facts, and so has come
to real mental fruit.

And it is this verity, this reality and genuineness, to which we give the name of intellectual
honesty.

It is a rare quality; and always the rarer in proportion to the depth
of the matters treated of, on the one hand, and to their expression
in customs and institutions, on the other.

Institutions are masks. The thinker must have both earnestness and penetration, if he is to get behind
them.

And just in proportion as any element of man's spiritual consciousness has come to institutional
expression, it is the easier to talk about it and the harder to think upon it,--to talk about
it without talking of it.

But our author has made the distinction, and to the extent of his power looks facts in the
face.

Having come to an understanding with himself, he honestly tries, again, to come to an understanding
with the reader. He honestly imparts his mind.

We find the book in this respect worthy of especial admiration.

Mr. Alger always writes well when he is not overmuch trying to write well. If he forbear to
covet striking effect, his style has perspicuity, directness, and
vigor,--the essentials of all excellent writing,--and to these adds
verbal affluence and occasional felicity.

But if he be tempted of the Devil to become eloquent, and the father of all rhetorical evil
strives hard to bring the soul of his style to perdition, then he begins to write badly. Let
him, since he is capable of heroic things, imitate Luther, and fling
his ink-pot.

Even though it light upon the page, let him not be inconsolable, but remember that no blots
are so bad as those made by ambitious inflation.

We have not that horror of "fine writing" which leads The Saturday Review and Company to such obstreperous
exclamation, and can endure the worst that Americans are guilty of in this matter quite as well
as that affectation of off-hand ease and nonchalance which enhances the native clumsiness of
many among the later English writers, and, to our mind, mars extremely the poetry of Browning.
But if a writer has some propensity to rhetorical Babel-building, it were well for him to make
an effort in the opposite direction, and try to build his sentences underground, like the houses
of the Esquimaux.

Mr. Alger's book has minor faults and major excellences. But let him be content. He has faithfully
performed a great labor, and we give him cordial approval.

To a great theme he has brought great industry, a just appreciation, a fine spirit, and much
of intellectual courage and activity.

Add that he is a man whose soul is in sympathy with the best thought, hope, and heart of the time.
Brave, just, and humane, he is always on the right side, and always as direct and unflinching
in the utterance of his faith as he is intrepid and right-natured in its adoption. Opinions
are expressed in his work which do not accord with those of ecclesiastical
majorities; nevertheless we think that those will thank him who least
agree with him.

It were, indeed, a shame that the people which sets the highest price upon political liberty should
be the last to welcome the higher freedoms of thought; but it is a shame, we trust, which will
not befall our country.

We ourselves have, it is true, as little affection as most men for that sort of "free thinking"
which consists in pouring out upon the public the mere wash and cerebral excretion of unclean
spirits; but when any man has brought to a consideration of the greatest
facts a pure and reverent spirit, he is entitled to present the results
of his meditations with manly directness and vigor, as Mr. Alger has
done in the work before us.

The "Complete Bibliography of the Subject" is an admirable piece of work. We present our respects
to Mr. Ezra Abbot, Jr., and wish that many an earnest literary laborer had such a "friend."

Dream Children. By the Author of "Seven Little People and their Friends." Cambridge: Seaver &
Francis.

The children seem to have found their Dickens at last. But, of course, it was to be expected that
the child's Dickens would be different, in some important respects, from the Dickens of grown-up
men and women. And so he is. Children do with the world in their thoughts pretty much as they will;
and the genuine artist, working for children, must recognize this, or he will utterly fail. The
author of "Dream Children," who made his introduction to the reading
public as the author of "Seven Little People and their Friends," has
the rare faculty of realizing for himself the exact position and attitude
of the child.

This position he takes so earnestly that he has nowhere the air of assumption or arbitrary
fiction. The child lives so much in pictures! But the pictures must not betray one single feature
of unreality, or the whole effect is spoiled; a moral may be pointed or a tale adorned, but the
child has lost his natural food. We need such works as that under present notice to keep children from
starving,--works that are not mechanically adapted to children, but which come to them as
their own fresh, pure thoughts come, bringing them pictures like those which their own untrammelled
fancy paints for them.

We have no space to enter into any details here. The children must do that for themselves;
but not the children alone. For, as now and then we come upon a piece of Art, a painting or
a statue, which from its subject would seem to belong peculiarly to the child's world, but which,
because it is genuine Art, as to its manner and execution, rises out of this confinement to
a single class, becoming universal, so it is with books of a similar character. This is true
of the present work more emphatically than of the former work by the same author. The more
external features of the work--its exquisite getting-up, in paper,
binding, and especially in illustration--are only fitting to the inherent
gracefulness of the writer's thought.

The subject is inviting, but we can only add that these short stories exhibit the rarest freshness
and purity of imagination, the richest humor, and the most striking suggestion of an exhaustless
fertility of invention which we remember ever to have seen in any child's book before. There
is nowhere a careless execution; and the reason of this is probably that the characters have had
a leisurely growth in the author's own mind. Generally it is supposed, that, to suit a subject to
children, it is only necessary to go through some outward manifestations and to give the thing
an air of novelty; but in this treatment there is no freshness, and no very great or very permanent
moral expression. The writer of "Dream Children" will have a select audience, but he will have it pretty
much to himself, and, as the best of all rewards which he could have, he will educate the thoughts
of his juvenile readers imperceptibly into a greater love and reverence
for the very heart of truth and beauty.

Remains in Verse and Prose
of Arthur Henry Hallam; with a Preface and Memoir. Boston. Ticknor
& Fields.

A permanent, though modest, place in the literature of
the English language will be accorded to this little volume.  Her rigging, however,
escaping much damage, she was able to haul her wind and come about.  Notwithstanding the severe
punishment she was receiving, the French frigate gave no signs of surrendering.

"We can tackle her now, I think, by ourselves," observed Captain Olding to his first lieutenant.
The commodore, however, had no intention of allowing his small consort to do that.  His first
broadside had cut away many of the braces of the French ship, and severely wounded her mainyard.
He now, consequently, having come about, was able to range up on her starboard quarter directly
after the Champion had passed on. Again pouring in his broadside, he shot away the French frigate's
mizen-mast, which came crashing down on deck.  Shouts rose from the decks of the English ships
as what had occurred was seen.  Both the English frigates had now to engage the two Frenchmen--one
following the other, they were quickly exchanging broadsides.  The Thisbe then addressed herself
especially to the second French frigate, while the Druid took the third in hand, the commodore
ordering the Champion to continue her attack on the first till he could come to her assistance.

All three of the English ships had by this time lost a number of men, though they had inflicted
still greater damage on the French frigates. Captain Olding fought the corvette bravely, manoeuvring
to keep ahead of his antagonist.  The great object had already been gained, the escape of the
merchant fleet, the topgallantsails of the rearmost vessels of which had long since disappeared
beneath the horizon.  Though the Champion's rigging remained uninjured, with the exception
of a brace or two cut through, she had received some severe damages in her hull.  Three men
had been killed, and six, including her gunner, wounded.

"We are succeeding better than might have been expected, Tarwig," observed Captain Olding.
"If we can't make this fellow strike, we can keep him from running away or joining his consorts.
See, there goes the Druid's mainmast, and there comes her foremast.  Blowhard must take care
not to have both the enemy on him at once, or he may fare no better."

For a few minutes it was difficult to see what the four ships were about, so close were they
together, and enveloped in smoke; for the fall of the English frigate's masts had encouraged
the Frenchmen (whose fire had somewhat slackened) to fresh exertions, and their fire was renewed
with greater vigour than before.  Lieutenant Foley turned his eye towards them, for it was
very evident that the corvette, unless she could knock away another of her antagonist's masts,
was not likely to gain the victory.  He anxiously looked for the commodore's promised assistance.
Presently, one of the combatants was seen issuing from the smoke, followed closely by the other,
and standing towards the corvette. Unless she could make good her escape, her capture or destruction
was scarcely problematical.  The Thisbe was following, firing her guns as they could be brought
to bear; but she could not arrive in time to save the corvette.  Captain Olding had no intention
of deserting his consorts; he hauled up, therefore, to the southward in order to tack and stand
down towards the Druid.  He now saw that the hulls of the French frigates were sorely battered.
One of them threw out signals, when their leading frigate, coming round on the starboard tack,
made all sail to the northward, as did both the others, apparently having had enough of fighting.
The commodore now signalled to the Champion to stand after the convoy, and he himself was soon
afterwards seen following, having sent a party of his hand on board the Druid to assist her
in repairing damages.

CHAPTER TEN.

THE CHAMPION STEERS AFTER THE MERCHANTMEN--THE MERCHANTMEN SIGHTED-- SHOTS HEARD--TWO VESSELS
SEEN ENGAGED--THE CHAMPION RUNS ALONGSIDE THE OUZEL GALLEY--HER CREW DRIVES BACK THE PIRATES--SHE
GOES IN CHASE OF THE PIRATE--NORMAN AND GERALD LEFT ON BOARD THE OUZEL GALLEY--DAMAGES REPAIRED--PROCEED
ON TO JAMAICA--TWO FRESH FOES SIGHTED--THE CHAMPION ENGAGES THEM--THE THISBE AND DRUID APPEAR--THE
ENEMY FLIES--THE CONVOY ENTERS PORT ROYAL HARBOUR--GERALD RETURNS ON BOARD THE CHAMPION--HIS
ANNOUNCEMENT DISAPPOINTS CROWHURST--LIEUTENANT FOLEY AT EAST MOUNT-- ELLEN AND HER FATHER GO
TO BELLEVUE.

The Champion, under all sail, ran on to overtake the convoy and announce the satisfactory intelligence
that the enemy, severely shattered, had been beaten off.  A look-out was kept from the mast-head,
but as yet no sail were in sight, and as the sun was sinking low, there was no hope of coming
up with them before dark.  Still, it was possible that the corvette might do so before the
next morning.  By that time they would be approaching the Bahama or Windward Channel, a short
way to the southward of Saint Salvador, as the Spaniards called it, or Cat Island, as it was
named by the English buccaneers--the first land belonging to America discovered by Columbus
on his voyage in search of the Indies.

"They are not likely to attempt running through the passage without waiting for our convoy,"
observed the first lieutenant to Norman Foley. "Besides the French, the Bahamas still swarm
with picarooning rascals, who are ever on the look-out for merchant craft, and would not scruple
to lay aboard any they fancy they can overcome."

"Even the most daring would scarcely venture, I hope, to attack a fleet among which are so
many armed vessels, well able either to defend themselves or to retaliate on an intruder,"
answered Lieutenant Foley, whose thoughts immediately flew to the Ouzel Galley.

"They would run the chance of getting off scot free in the confusion their sudden appearance
would make," said Mr Tarwig.  "There is no exploit, however hazardous, they would not undertake
with the chance of obtaining a good booty.  I took part in the capture of several notorious
pirates a few years ago.  One fellow blew up his ship rather than surrender, and all died hardened
villains, as they had lived."

"The greater need for us to overtake our friends without delay," answered the second lieutenant,
who shortly afterwards went forward to take a look through his night-glass, in the hope of
distinguishing some of the lights which the merchant vessels had been directed to hang over
the sterns.  In vain, however, he swept the horizon with his telescope; had the lights been
there, he must have seen them.  The commander was almost as anxious as the second lieutenant
to overtake the fleet of merchantmen, though he was influenced simply by the desire to do his
duty.  The watch below had turned in, but most of the officers kept the deck; even old Crowhurst
was continually on the forecastle in the hope of seeing the looked-for lights.

"I fancied that they would have shortened sail and waited for our coming," said Gerald.  "What
can have induced them to run on?"

"The fear that the Frenchmen would thrash us and overtake them," answered old Beater; "they
judge of us by themselves."

"There are as brave fellows in the merchant service as in the Royal Navy," said Gerald, who
was piqued at the old mate's remark.  "When I was on board the Ouzel Galley, we held out as
long as any ship of war of similar force would have done.  Depend on it, had the merchant vessels
been allowed, they would have come to our assistance if we had wanted them."

"A pretty pass we should have come to, to require their aid," exclaimed Crowhurst, in a scornful
tone.

"We may require it some day, and you'd be the first to shout for help," answered Gerald.  "I
took a fancy to the navy, but I'm not going to stand by and hear the merchant service abused."

"Cock-a-doodle-doo!  What dunghill have you got to the top of, youngster?" cried the old mate.

"One from which I can crow as loud as you do," said Gerald--at which a chuckle was heard from
several of the men standing within earshot. Crowhurst's anger was rising; he was considering
what punishment he should inflict on the audacious youngster, when the cry was heard of "A
light ahead!" and presently afterwards several others were seen.  There could be little doubt,
from their position, that they were shown by merchant vessels, though the darkness prevented
the vessels themselves from being distinguished.  A sharp look-out was kept that the corvette
might not run foul of any stragglers who were neglecting to show their lights.  Presently the
sound of a shot was heard, followed by several others coming up faintly against the wind.

"Those sounds come from the north-west," observed the master.

"One of the merchantmen on shore, I fear," said the commander.

"Those guns we hear are nearer to us than any land.  The leading vessels are not up to Atwood
Quay yet," answered the master.  "Depend on it, some of the convoy are attacked and are defending
themselves."

"Let us hope that they may do so successfully till we can get up to assist them, and turn the
tables on the Frenchmen," answered the commander.

"Little doubt about our doing that," said the master.  "Judging by the reports, the enemy's
ship is not a heavy one--a brig or sloop at the most--or she may be one of those picarooning
craft often found cruising in these seas."

The last remark was heard by Norman Foley, who had just then joined the speakers.  An indefinite
apprehension seized him that the Ouzel Galley might be the vessel engaged, but from what Ellen
had told him he felt sure that Captain Massey, if attacked, would not yield as long as he could
keep his ship afloat.  The breeze, which had fallen light at sundown, now freshened up, and
the corvette made good way through the water.  At length the rearmost merchantman was overtaken.
Commander Olding hailed, and her master, in reply, gave her name.

"What do those guns mean?" asked Captain Olding.

"Can't say, sir," was the answer.

"Whereabouts in the fleet is the Ouzel Galley?" inquired Norman Foley.

"She was among the leading vessels at sundown, and to the northward of most of them," answered
the master.  Before any other questions could be put or replies received, the Champion glided
by the slow-sailing merchant ship.  Several other vessels were passed, generally too far off
for any exchange of words.  Now even the flashes of the guns could be seen, and the exact position
of the combatants observed.  They were but a short distance from each other, one to the northward,
hanging on the quarter of the other.  The drum beat to quarters, and the watch below came tumbling
up on deck, hurrying to the guns.  It was impossible in the darkness to distinguish the nationality
of the two vessels, which appeared to be about the same size.  Captain Olding, addressing the
crew, ordered them on no account to fire, lest they might injure a friend instead of a foe.
As the Champion stood on, he kept a sharp watch through his telescope on the combatants, neither
of which seemed aware of his approach.  Presently the sternmost was seen to put down her helm
and lay the other aboard on the lee side.

"The sternmost fellow is an enemy, we may depend on that," observed the captain; "we can't
use our guns without the risk of injuring our friends."

As the Champion drew near, loud shouts and cries could be heard, and the flashes of muskets
and pistols seen.  It was evident that a fierce combat was taking place; the boarders were
called away ready for action.

"Shorten sail!" shouted the captain, "see the grappling-irons ready! up with the helm!"

The next instant the two ships came in contact.  Norman Foley and Gerald were the first to
spring on board; the dreadful idea had taken hold of both of them that the vessel attacked
was the Ouzel Galley.  Of this, the moment they reached her deck, they were convinced when
they caught sight of Owen Massey's figure, cutlass in hand, backed by Dan and Pompey, combating
with an overwhelming number of enemies, who appeared already to have gained possession of the
greater part of the ship. Among those who formed the boarding-party was Dillon, who showed
as much alacrity as any one.  He was soon in the midst of the fight, attacking the boarders
of the other ship with desperate fury.  The leader of the latter was dressed in a fantastic
manner, to give ferocity to his appearance.  He was soon crossing blades with Dillon.

"These fellows are pirates!" shouted Captain Olding.  "Cut them down; give them no quarter--a
reward for the man who gets hold of their leader!"

Dillon and his antagonist had made several cuts at each other, which had been parried with
equal skill by both, when the pirate, hearing what Captain Olding shouted out, sprang back
apparently to regain his own ship.  Dillon, instead of attempting to stop him, warded off a
blow aimed at him by another man, and thus enabled the pirate, with a considerable number of
his followers, to leap on board his own vessel. The lashings which held her to the Ouzel Galley
were at the same moment cut, and before the British seamen could follow she dropped from alongside.
Her helm was then put up, and her head-sails filling, she ran off before the wind.

Gerald grasped Owen's hand.  "Faith, you've had a narrow escape!" he exclaimed.

"Indeed, we have," answered Owen; "and, I fear, have lost a large number of our crew.  Had
you not come up, we should every one of us been killed."

"Where are Miss Ferris and her father?" asked Norman Foley, turning round to Owen, whom he
now recognised.

"They are safe, I trust, below, and will be glad to see you and hear that they have no longer
cause for apprehension," answered Owen.  "I have too many duties on deck to go."

The lieutenant sprang below, just at the moment that Captain Olding ordered the crew of the
corvette to return on board and the grappling-irons to be cast loose.

"We must chase the pirate and punish him for his audacity," he exclaimed.

It was some time, however, before the order could be obeyed and the corvette got clear of the
merchantman.  Gerald had remained on board. "I ought to tell Mr Foley, or he will be left with
you," he said; and he followed his lieutenant below.  Before he returned on deck the ships
were clear, and the corvette was making sail to go in chase of the pirate.

Owen had persuaded Mr Ferris and Ellen to go into the hold, to which they had been hurried
when the first shot had been fired by the pirate. Owen had for some time before been suspicious
of the strange sail, which he saw standing up on his starboard quarter, and, thinking that
she was very probably an enemy's privateer, was not taken altogether unprepared. He had ordered
his powder and shot to be brought on deck, and the guns to be loaded and run out ready for
action; when, therefore, a shot from the stranger came flying close to his stern, he fired
in return, and at the same time making all sail, endeavoured to keep ahead of her.  She now
fired shot after shot from her foremost guns, and he had no longer any doubt that she was an
enemy which had borne down on the fleet, hoping to pick up one or two of the merchant vessels
and be off with them before morning.

"The fellow has made a mistake in attacking us," observed Owen to his first mate.  "His greediness
tempted him to attack a big ship--he might have succeeded had he run alongside some of the
brigs astern."

Pompey, who had accompanied Mr Ferris and his daughter below, returned to report that he had
seen them safe in the hold.  "De gentlemen want to come back and fight, but de young lady no
let him--she cry so, and hold his hand, and say he get kill; so at last he sit down and stay
quiet," remarked Pompey.

"I am very glad to hear it," observed Owen; "he could be of no use in working the guns, and
it would be a sad thing to have him injured."

These remarks were made in the intervals of firing.  The enemy, however, did not leave them
long at rest; their shot soon began to tell with fearful effect; several of the crew fell killed
or wounded, and the sails and rigging were much cut about.  Still Owen's men were staunch,
and stood manfully to their guns, running them in and out so rapidly, and pointing them so
well, that they inflicted as much damage as they received; and by the way he manoeuvred his
ship he kept the stranger at a distance, and prevented her from running up alongside, which
it was evidently her intention to do.  She, however, it appeared, by possessing a numerous
crew, had an immense advantage in being able to repair her damages far more rapidly than could
the people of the Ouzel Galley those their ship received.  At length, however, the rigging
of his ship was so much cut up that Owen could no longer manoeuvre her as he had done, and
the pirate, taking advantage of his condition, ran alongside him.

"The enemy are about to board us!" cried Owen; "be ready to repel him-- they'll give no quarter!"

The crew, leaving their guns, seized the boarding pikes which had been placed round the mainmast
for their use, and, drawing their cutlasses, stood prepared to defend their ship against the
fearful odds opposed to them.  So occupied had been the combatants that neither of them had
perceived the approach of another ship.  Uttering wild shouts and shrieks, a number of dark
forms were seen scrambling on board the Ouzel Galley.  The moment they appeared they were attacked
vigorously by her crew, led on by Owen and his mates, and many were hurled into the sea or
driven back on board their own ship.  His success encouraged him to attempt cutting his ship
free from the enemy, but while he and his men were thus engaged, a loud voice from the deck
of his opponent was heard shouting, "At them again, lads!  We mustn't be beaten in this way.
I'll lead you; follow me!" and the next moment, another party of boarders appearing, the crew
of the Ouzel Galley were compelled again to stand on the defensive.  And now, in overwhelming
numbers, the enemy came leaping down on the deck, and Owen, with anguish, saw that his chance
of opposing them successfully was small indeed.  Still, like a brave man, he determined to
fight till the last, urging his mates and crow not to yield as long as one remained alive.
At this juncture a loud crashing sound was heard, and a large ship was seen gliding up on his
larboard side.  The hearty British cheer which greeted his ears assured him that succour had
arrived, and the next instant the crew of the Champion came pouring on board.  The subsequent
events have already been narrated.

Norman Foley, on going below, soon made his way into the after hold, where he found Miss Ferris
and her father.  The crashing of the ships together, the shouts and shrieks of the combatants,
had greatly alarmed them both.  Mr Ferris had been desirous of going on deck to ascertain the
state of affairs, and, indeed, had it not been for his daughter, he would have taken a part
in the fight.  He had done his utmost to calm her terror, but believed that she had too much
cause for it, and had found it a difficult task.  On hearing Norman Foley approach, she was
seized with a not unnatural dread that some of the enemy had made their way below; but on recognising
him, forgetting in her joy the reserve she generally exhibited, she sprang forward and threw
herself into his arms.

"We are safe--we are safe, father!" she exclaimed; "and you, Norman, have been the means of
preserving us.  Oh, how we have been longing for you!  We thought you were far away, and that
that fearful ship would capture us."

Norman, of course, expressed his happiness at having arrived in time to save the Ouzel Galley
from the enemy, and in a few words explained what had happened.

"You may now with safety come into the cabin," he said, "for the pirate--such I suspect she
is--will not again venture to fire.  I must there, however, leave you, to return to the Champion,
as we shall certainly pursue the fellow and punish him for his audacity."

"We shall be glad to get out of this dark place," said Mr Ferris.  "Do you help my daughter,
and I will follow."

Just as Norman and Ellen were about to enter the cabin, Gerald appeared to summon him on board
the Champion.  After a hasty farewell, he sprang on deck, just in time to see his ship separated
from the Ouzel Galley and making sail in chase of the pirate.  Not, however, unhappy at the
occurrence, he returned to the cabin.

"I am very glad we shall have your assistance in getting the ship to rights," said Mr Ferris,
"for I fear she is sadly short-handed."

"Tracy and I will give all the aid we can.  I wish we had a few of the Champion's hands with
us," answered the lieutenant.

"Tell me what to do and I will assist you," said Mr Ferris.

"Oh, then I too will come on deck--though I am afraid I cannot help you much," exclaimed Ellen.

Her father would not have prevented her, but Norman begged that he would be content to remain
below.

"I regret to say that the deck of the ship presents a scene too dreadful for Miss Ferris to
contemplate; and the rigging has been so much cut about that there is still danger from falling
blocks or ropes--you might at any moment meet with a serious accident."

Ellen was at length persuaded to retire to her cabin, Norman promising not to leave the ship
without coming to bid her farewell.  The deck of the Ouzel Galley did indeed present a fearful
scene.  Several of the pirates lay dead between the guns, while five of her own crew had been
killed, and many more badly wounded; every plank was slippery with gore, the rigging hung in
festoons, the sails were rent and full of holes. Here and there the bulwarks appeared shattered
by the shot, which had also damaged the boats and caboose, the masts and spars.

As now and then other vessels of the fleet came passing by, inquiries were made as to what
had occurred.  "Attacked by a pirate--beaten off--Champion gone in chase," was the only answer
Owen had time to give.

"No thanks to those who, by clapping on more sail, might have come to our aid, but did not,"
he could not help remarking to Mr Ferris.

The first thing to be done was to attend to the wounded, who were carried to their berths,
where Mr Ferris offered to assist in binding up their hurts and watching them; the next was
to heave the dead overboard.  This sad office was quickly performed, as there was no time for
even the pretence of a service; the dead would not be the worse for going without it, and the
attention of the living was too much occupied to listen to a word spoken.  Before committing
the bodies of the pirates to the deep, however, they were examined by the light of a lantern,
to be sure that no spark of life existed in them, and to ascertain to what country they belonged.
Two were men of colour, and the others white men, rough, savage-looking fellows; but it was
difficult to decide as to their nationality.

"It matters little what they were," said the second mate, who was attending to that duty; "they
were pirates, and have escaped the rope they deserved--of that there's no doubt.  Heave them
overboard."

Not a moment was to be lost in repairing damages.  All hands now set to work to fish the masts
and spars, and repair and splice the standing and running rigging.  Scarcely had they commenced
than day broke, and as the light increased the Champion could be seen in chase of their late
opponent, who was running under all sail to the north-west.

"That fellow is well acquainted with these seas, or he wouldn't be steering as he now is. 
Reefs and rocks abound in that direction, but he knows his way among them, and intends, if
he can, to lead his pursuer into a scrape," observed Owen.

"Our master is too wide awake to be so caught," answered Gerald, "and the chances are that
the pirate escapes.  She must be a fast craft; for see, she continues well ahead of our ship,
if she isn't gaining on her."

A look-out was now kept for the two islands which are found on either side of the Windward
Passage--that known as Long Island being to the west, Crooked Island to the east, both thickly
surrounded with rocks and reefs, so that it is necessary to avoid hugging the shores of either
one or the other.  Crooked Island was first sighted, on the larboard hand. It being some time,
however, before the Ouzel Galley could again make sail, the greater part of the fleet passed
by her, though no one offered to send assistance.  The Champion could still be seen, hull down,
but the chase was lost sight of.  Norman Foley and Gerald were frequently watching their ship
through the glass.

"The fellow has escaped, after all," cried the former, as he handed the telescope to Gerald;
"our ship has kept away, and is steering for the passage."

"Can the commander suppose that we were killed, that he doesn't come back to inquire for us?"
observe Gerald.

"I conclude that such must be the case," said the lieutenant.

"Then, sir, I suspect old Crowhurst will be bitterly disappointed when he finds that he isn't
to step into your shoes," said Gerald; "he'll complain that he has lost another chance of getting
promoted."

"I hope that he may obtain his promotion some other way," answered Mr Foley, laughing.  "It
is so commonly the wish of old mates, that lieutenants should not find fault with them, as
they don't wish us any ill."

"I should think, sir, that that was the worst they could wish a man," said Gerald.

"Not at all, provided they don't take any steps to carry out their wishes," answered the lieutenant.
"However, your messmate will not long be allowed to indulge in his dream."

The Ouzel Galley was now one of the last of the fleet, most of the other vessels having passed
her.  The corvette was seen making signals to them to keep together; and now that they were
so near their destination, they were all eager to hurry on, in spite of the risk of capture
from any of the enemy's men-of-war or privateers which might be lying in wait for them off
the coasts of Cuba and Saint Domingo.  Mr Foley had fully expected that by this time the Thisbe
and Druid would have come up with them, but neither of the frigates had yet appeared.  He took
many an anxious glance astern; but the day drew on, and yet they were not in sight.

"I wish we could see them," he observed to Owen; "for, though the Champion will give a good
account of any ship of her own size, if more than one of the enemy's cruisers were to get in
among the fleet, some of them would be pretty sure to be carried off, as all, I fear, would
not fight as well as you have done, Captain Massey."

"We must run the chance, sir; it won't do to be waiting for the frigates, and we may hope to
get into Port Royal without another brush," answered Owen.

By crowding on all the sail she could carry, the Ouzel Galley soon got again into the body
of the fleet, which was now steering south in pretty compact order.  When the next morning
broke, the east end of Cuba was in sight, while the Champion was a short distance ahead, leading
the fleet.  A bright look-out was kept, but no strangers were seen.  Some hours' run brought
the north-west end of Hispaniola in view.  Ellen came on deck to enjoy her first sight of West
Indian scenery.  Lieutenant Foley was, as may be supposed, very happy in her society, and was
in no hurry to make known his existence to his friends on board the Champion.  He had as yet
had no opportunity of signalling the corvette; he therefore entertained the hope that he might
be able to remain on board till their arrival at Port Royal.

The fleet was about half-way across the broad bay of Gonaves, formed by two headlands which
stretch out on the western side of Hispaniola, when two sail were seen standing out from the
north-eastern corner.  They were large ships, but whether friends or foes it was difficult
to determine.  Soon after they were discovered they spread more canvas. This circumstance was
suspicious; signals were made by the Champion and some of the nearer ships, and she hauling
her wind stood back towards the strangers.  They, however, pressed on as before.  Mr Foley
and Gerald were now wishing that they were on board.

"If those are either French or Spaniards, the Champion will have a brush with them, sir; big
as they are, she'll beat them off too," exclaimed Gerald.  "I wish we could go and help her.
What do you say, Captain Massey?"

"That, with our diminished crew, we could be of no real assistance; besides which, it is our
duty to get into harbour as quickly as possible," answered Owen.  "I am sure Lieutenant Foley
will agree with me."

"There is no doubt about it," said the lieutenant, who would have been very unwilling, on Ellen's
account, to run the ship into danger, even had he not seen the folly of so doing.  The Champion
having placed herself between the strangers and the fleet, again kept away.  She apparently
was satisfied that they were enemies, and too large to attack with any hope of success.

"Captain Olding is doing his duty, as he always does," observed Norman Foley to Owen; "in spite
of the great disparity of force, he will do his best to defend the convoy.  See, he is signalling;
what does he say, captain?"

Owen examined the signal-book.  "`Fleet to make all sail and steer for Jamaica'--that is what
we are doing, though, and few of the vessels can carry more canvas than at present," he answered.

Some, however, were seen setting royals and studding-sails.  Every ship in the fleet pressed
forward over the calm blue waters with all the sail she could carry.  The sight was a beautiful
one, as the canvas shone in the rays of the bright sun darting from a cloudless sky and Ellen
likened them to swans of snowy plumage gliding over some inland lake. She felt less anxiety
than did either Mr Foley or Owen, who saw more clearly the danger to which the Champion was
exposed.  Already the guns of the enemy were heard as they opened on their small antagonist,
while she returned them with her stern-chasers.

"By the way the enemy are firing, their aim is to wing the Champion, and she'll then, they
hope, become an easy prey," said the lieutenant to Owen.  "They may be mistaken.  Captain Olding
is not the man to strike while he has a stick standing."

Some time more passed by.  The French gunnery may not have been very good.  Still the Champion
sailed on, not a mast nor a spar knocked away, though her canvas was riddled with shot.  Should
she be disabled, it was pretty evident that several of the merchantmen must be captured, and
that the Ouzel Galley, crippled as she was, would be among the number.  The proceedings of
the Champion and the enemy were therefore watched with intense anxiety.

"There goes her main-topmast," cried Owen, almost with a groan.

"I ought to be on board," said Lieutenant Foley.  "I must ask for one of your boats, Captain
Massey."

"You should be welcome, but not one of them can swim, nor could I spare you any of my hands;
so I am afraid, sir, you must be content to remain on board the Ouzel Galley," answered Owen.
"Your presence could not change the fate of the day, and you would be made a prisoner by the
French, instead of having a chance of escaping."

The fire of the enemy now became hotter than ever, when Gerald, who had gone aloft, shouted,
"Two ships in sight to the northward!"

"What are they like?" asked Owen.

"One looks to me as if one were under jury-masts; the other's all ataunto," answered Gerald.

"I trust so," ejaculated Owen; "if so, they must be the Thisbe and Druid."

Lieutenant Foley immediately joined the midshipman at the mast-head, carrying his spy-glass.
"I have no doubt that they are friends," he shouted, after inspecting them narrowly; "the enemy
have made them out, and are signalling each other."

The eyes of many on board the merchant fleet were turned in the direction of the two ships,
which in a short time could be descried from the deck.  Shouts arose from many a throat when
the Frenchmen were seen, having hauled to the wind, standing back up the bay; while the gallant
little Champion continued her course after the convoy she had so bravely defended.  The frigates,
instead of following her, stood into the bay in pursuit of the Frenchmen.  At nightfall, however,
they were again descried running out, having apparently either missed the vessels they were
in chase of, or found that the latter had got into harbour for shelter.  The convoy now stood
on till the end of Jamaica was rounded.

The following day, as soon as the sea breeze set in, the merchantmen approached Port Royal
harbour, the Ouzel Galley being among the leading vessels.  Ellen stood on the deck admiring
the magnificent and, to her, so novel scenery, with Norman by her side to point out its varied
features.  Stretching away east and west appeared lofty blue mountains rising above a stratum
of clouds which rolled along their precipitous sides; in some directions the rugged hills were
seen furrowed by ravines, while in others steep cliffs descended abruptly to the sea; in many
places appeared the richest vegetation, covering the sides of the slopes, and here and there
patches of bright emerald green, with the white residences of the managers just visible amid
them.  At length, right ahead could be seen the town of Port Royal, at the end of a narrow
spit of land known as the Palisades, composed of sand and overgrown with mangroves, which sweeps
round from the east and runs for several miles directly west, the town being at the western
end.  The new town has risen above the ruins of its wealthy, iniquitous predecessor, suddenly
overwhelmed by an earthquake, and in a few seconds sunk many fathoms deep beneath the ocean.
The spit forms a natural breakwater to the magnificent harbour of Port Royal, or Kingston,
capable of containing in its spacious basin the fleets of all the world.  The batteries of
Port Royal completely command its entrance, aided by the guns of Fort Augusta and the Rock
Fort on the opposite side.  The Ouzel Galley, as she ran in, passed close under the ramparts
of Fort Charles, thickly studded with heavy ordnance which would have effectually prevented
the entrance of a hostile fleet.  This passed, she stood on up the extensive lagoon, towards
the further end of which, on the northern shore, could be seen the city of Kingston, a wide
plain extending for a considerable distance inland, backed by a series of irregular mountains
rising one beyond another, hills piled upon hills of various elevations, with picturesque valleys,
dark chasms, and numerous trees.  Far off, on the top of the declivity on which the city stands,
were visible the barracks of Hope Park Camp, and nearer, on a still more conspicuous spot,
the well-known Admiral's Pen, the residence of the naval commander-in-chief on the station.

The Ouzel Galley and most of the merchantmen ran up the lagoon till they came to an anchor
off Kingston.  As the Champion had not yet entered the harbour, Lieutenant Foley undertook
to escort Mr and Miss Ferris on shore, intending as soon as he had done so to engage a shore
boat and return on board his own ship.  Gerald begged to be allowed to remain on board, and
his lieutenant promised to call for him on his way down the harbour.  No sooner, however, had
the party left the ship than, seeing a passage boat on her way down to Port Royal, Gerald hailed
her and desired to be put on board the Champion, which, he calculated, would by that time have
come into port.  Very soon, greatly to his delight, he saw her come to an anchor, just before
the boat reached Port Royal; and as he climbed up on one side, the captain in his gig shoved
off on the other.  As he stepped through the gangway he discovered by the countenances of those
who observed him that his appearance created considerable astonishment; but, without answering
any of the questions put to him, he went aft to the first lieutenant, and reported himself
as come on board.

"Why, Tracy, it was supposed you were killed!" exclaimed Mr Tarwig. "Has Mr Foley escaped as
well as you?"

"Yes, sir, I am happy to say so," answered Gerald; and he briefly recounted what had happened.

"The captain will be glad to hear this," observed Mr Tarwig, who having no time for talking,
resumed the duty he was carrying on; and Gerald hurried away to try the effect the news he
had brought would produce on his older messmates.  He looked out for old Beater, who was not
to be seen, and he observed Crowhurst on the forecastle.

"There he is, crowing as loud as ever," thought Gerald, as he remarked the consequential air
with which the old mate walked the deck and shouted to the men.  The lately trim corvette was
much knocked about; besides the loss of her main-topmast, many of her other spars had been
wounded, her sails riddled with shot, while her bulwarks and deck had been torn open in several
places, one of her guns disabled, and most of her boats damaged.

The first person he met who had time to exchange a word with him was the purser.  "What, Tracy,"
he exclaimed, "you still in the land of the living!  I had written D at the end of your name;
I shall have the trouble of crossing it out again.  We were going to put up your effects for
sale to-morrow."

"Much obliged to you, sir," answered Gerald, "and must apologise for giving you so much trouble.
Were Mr Foley's effects to be sold at the same time?  I suppose Beater or Crowhurst expect
to get promoted in his place."

"Beater has got all the promotion he ever will, poor fellow," answered Mr Cheeseparings; "he
was the only officer killed in our late action, though we had six men wounded.  But Crowhurst
is looking forward to get his lieutenancy to a certainty."

"I concluded that he would do so; but as Mr Foley happens to be alive, he will be rather disappointed,"
said Gerald.

"Dear me! has he escaped too?" exclaimed the purser.  "Well, though I haven't to sell his effects,
I really am glad; and so, I am sure, will be Billhook and Mac."

"If you'll excuse me, sir, I'll go and communicate the pleasing intelligence to Crowhurst,
who will, I hope, rejoice as much as the gun-room officers," said Gerald.  Directly afterwards
he met Nat Kiddle. "Come along," he said, "and see me pull old Crowhurst down a peg or two."

The two midshipmen met Crowhurst coming aft.  "What, youngster, are you alive?" he exclaimed.
"I shall have some work for you and Kiddle directly."

"Yes, old fellow, I'm alive and well," answered Gerald, "and will return to my duty as soon
as the commander or one of the lieutenants orders me."

"Let me tell you, youngster, I don't choose to be called old fellow, and as I am acting lieutenant,
you will obey my orders."

"Certainly," said Gerald, "till Mr Foley returns, which I expect he will do this evening."

"What--you don't mean to say so!--did Mr Foley escape with you?" exclaimed the old mate, his
countenance falling, and his whole air changing in a moment.  Gerald then, with infinite satisfaction,
described the way he and the lieutenant had been left on board the Ouzel Galley.  Not being
required just then, he dived into the berth to recount his adventures to the rest of his messmates.

In a short time the two frigates came in, and anchored near the Champion, where already lay
several other large ships of war forming the Jamaica fleet, under the command of Admiral Cotes.
Gerald found his messmates not very much out of spirits at the loss of Beater.  The old mate's
body lay between two guns, covered by an ensign; and it, with that of two other men who had
been killed, was carried on shore and buried in the graveyard of Port Royal, where so many
gallant British seamen sleep their last.

Meantime Mr Ferris and Ellen had gone on shore, escorted by Lieutenant Foley.  Those were the
palmy days of Kingston.  Men-of-war and privateers were constantly coming in with rich prizes,
whose cargoes added greatly to the wealth of the city; the streets were crowded with blacks
carrying bales of all descriptions to the stores; merchants' clerks were hurrying to the quays
to superintend the unloading of vessels, and naval and military officers were moving about
in all directions; the seamen on leave were rolling here and there, shouting forth their sea
ditties; while black and brown women with baskets of fruit and vegetables were standing at
the corners of the streets, often surrounded by a party of Jack-tars, who quickly emptied them
of their contents.

A short walk soon brought the lieutenant and his friends to the counting-house of Mr Thomas
Twigg, the agent of the firm, and a relative of one of the partners.  They were at once shown
to a large airy room over the office, looking out on the harbour, containing a table spread
for luncheon, consisting of numerous West Indian delicacies.  Mr Twigg, of course, pressed
the lieutenant to remain.

"You don't know whether your ship has come in, and even if she has, they've got on very well
without you, and an hour more or less can make no difference," he observed.  Norman Foley was
in no hurry to take his departure.  "Mr and Miss Ferris are coming to my pen, about five miles
off," continued Mr Twigg, "and I hope you will accompany them.  We shall start in about a couple
of hours, when there will be more shade on the road than there is at present."

The lieutenant, very unwillingly, was compelled to decline the invitation, but agreed to remain
to see his friends off.  On hearing of Gerald, Mr Twigg insisted on sending on board the Ouzel
Galley to invite him, and Gerald afterwards found that in his eagerness to witness the disappointment
of his messmate he had thereby lost a pleasant expedition, he having left the ship before the
message arrived on board; but, soon afterwards, who should come in but Captain Olding, who
was so delighted to find that his lieutenant and midshipman had escaped, that he at once gave
them both leave to accept Mr Twigg's invitation. Norman Foley had the happiness of accompanying
Ellen in one carriage, while Mr Ferris and his friend, who had much to talk about, went in
another.  Ellen was, of course, delighted with the scenery and the tropical vegetation, so
new to her, though she possibly did not examine them as minutely as she might have done under
other circumstances: Norman would have to leave her in a day or two, and he might not return
for a long time.  She had heard her father say that he expected shortly to accompany Mr Twigg
to an estate on the other side of the island, and even should Norman's ship come into Port
Royal, he might not be able to pay her a visit.  Of course he promised to come if he could,
even though he might be able to remain only a few hours.  Bellevue was a beautiful spot about
fifty miles off, on the other side of the Blue Mountains, a short distance from Saint Ann's
Bay, and Norman hoped that his ship might be cruising off the north coast, and that he would
then have an opportunity of seeing her.  At all events, they neither of them were more unhappy
than was necessary at the thoughts of their approaching separation.

On their arrival at East Mount, Mr Twigg's country house, Ellen was amused by the number of
black slaves who rushed out to receive them, chattering and laughing, and doing their best
to welcome the strangers. The house was a one-storied building, with a broad verandah round
it, standing on the summit of a hill of considerable elevation overlooking the plain, with
Kingston and the harbour in the distance; it was thus exposed to the sea breeze, so necessary
to anything like enjoyment in the tropics.  Mrs Twigg, a buxom little lady--a fitting partner
to her sprightly, jovial spouse--received Ellen with a hearty welcome to Jamaica.  She evidently
saw how matters stood between her and the young lieutenant, and, as far as her sense of the
duties of a hostess would allow her, left them together as much as they could desire, while
Mr Ferris and her husband were for the greater part of the day absent at Kingston.  Those two
days while Norman remained at East Mount were among the brightest they had hitherto enjoyed.
The place seemed a perfect Eden, with its green lawn kept ever verdant by the sparkling stream
which flowed down on one side from the hill above, bordered by the graceful and variously shaped
trees of the tropics--the tall maple arrow, surrounded by its flowering crown of yellow; the
Spanish needle, with its dagger-like leaves; the quilled pimploe, a species of cactus; and
numberless others, from the branches of which hung lilac and purple wreaths in rich festoons--while
the sweet notes of the feathered songsters ever and anon burst forth, and here and there could
be seen tiny humming-birds flitting from flower to flower, fluttering for a moment and then
darting off with the speed of lightning, their gem-like plumage glittering in the sun.

Ellen and Norman, though they often talked of the past, spoke most of the future, when he should
have gained his promotion, and, the war being over, might quit the service without dishonour
and live on shore.

After arranging his affairs in Jamaica, which he believed would occupy some months, Mr Ferris
proposed returning to Ireland.  He intended to make the voyage in the Ouzel Galley when she
could sail under safe convoy.  In the mean time he expected to spend two or three months at
Bellevue, and Norman hoped that they might there again meet.  Happily for themselves, they
were ignorant of the dark storm which was brewing over the island.

At length Norman's leave expired, and he had to return on board the Champion.  A few days afterwards
Mr Ferris and Ellen, accompanied by Mr and Mrs Twigg and their family, set off across the island
for Bellevue.

CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE OUZEL GALLEY ORDERED ROUND TO MONTEGO BAY--FRESH GUNS AND STORES TAKEN ON BOARD--A CRIMP
BRINGS OFF SOME MEN IN NO UNUSUAL CONDITION--TWO VOLUNTEERS--VISIT FROM GERALD--THE OUZEL GALLEY
SAILS--SUSPICIONS AS TO ONE OF THE VOLUNTEERS--MONTEGO BAY REACHED--A DINNER ON SHORE-- WARNINGS--LAST
SIGHT OF THE OUZEL GALLEY FROM THE SHORE--BELLEVUE AND ITS INHABITANTS--ARCHIE SANDYS--DESCRIBES
A JUMBY DANCE--SIGNS OF A COMING STORM--A HURRICANE--ANXIETY REGARDING THE OUZEL GALLEY--EFFECTS
OF THE HURRICANE.

The Ouzel Galley was soon unloaded.  Some time, however, was spent in repairing the damages
she had received from the pirate, after which Owen was preparing to take on board a fresh cargo,
when he received orders to proceed round to Montego Bay, where a large amount of produce, which
the firm had purchased from a neighbouring estate, was awaiting shipment.

"You will run but little risk, I hope, from the enemy's cruisers, and against them we have
at all events insured, though not to the full amount, for we know that we can trust to the
sailing qualities of the Ouzel Galley, and to your courage, judgment, and seamanship," wrote
Mr Ferris.  "If a convoy can be procured, you will of course take advantage of it; but if not,
so great is the importance of getting the produce home without delay, that we leave it to your
discretion to sail alone, should you judge that to be most to our interest.  You are also at
liberty to increase your armament by two or four guns, if you can carry them, and not only
to replace the men you lost in your action with the pirate, but to add ten or a dozen more
hands if you can obtain them. You will thus, we hope, be able to beat off any of the enemy's
smaller cruisers or such a piratical craft as attacked us coming out; though you will, of course,
use all the means in your power to avoid a contest and to make the best of your way home."

Owen was naturally flattered with the letter, though he considered that the dangers he would
have to encounter were much greater than those he was likely to meet with in a run home under
a sufficient convoy. Gerald, who had been to Kingston, was paying him a visit on board on his
way down.

"I wish that I could go with you," he exclaimed, "and so, I dare say, will our second lieutenant.
It isn't far off, I fancy, from where Mr Ferris is staying.  I'll tell Foley--though I don't
think there's much chance of his getting leave, and we shall be sent to sea as soon as we are
ready, for the admiral isn't the man to let the grass grow on the bottom of any of his ships."

"I wish that you could come, for I shall find it rather solitary," said Owen.  "However, I
see no chance of that, and I will now go on shore to get the guns--I'll have the four of them--to
order some of the stores I require, and to do what I can to pick up men."

"I'll try to pay you another visit," said Gerald, as he was about to step into the boat alongside.
"If I don't see you again, remember to give my love to my father and Norah--and may you have
a prosperous trip home."

While Gerald went down the harbour, Owen landed, taking with him Dan and Pompey.  The purchase
of the guns was an easy matter, as there were plenty to be had, taken out of prizes.  He chose
two long brass guns, 9-pounders, and two short ones of heavier calibre.  The stores were quickly
ordered, too; but to procure the men was more difficult.  It would be hopeless to expect to
get them at all, were he particular as to how he got them or what class of men he got.  Still,
if he could have his choice, he would take a smaller number of good men rather than his complement
of inferior hands.  There were, of course, crimps who would be ready to supply him, and he
was compelled to apply to one of these personages, who promised to send him on board six or
eight hands before next morning.  In the mean time Pompey met two old shipmates, blacks like
himself, for whom he could answer; and Dan fortunately found a countryman of his own, also
a trusty fellow.  With these three hands Owen returned to the ship, and the following day the
guns and stores were received on board, the former mounted on their carriages and the latter
stowed away.  Sufficient hands only were wanting to enable him to sail.  His friend, the crimp,
was as good as his word; which was not surprising, considering that he was to be well paid
for it.  Towards evening a boat came alongside with the crimp and six men, two of whom only
were sitting upright, while the rest were lying along the thwarts.

"Dere dey are, cappen," he said, "prime seamen when dey come to demself, and only just a little
drunkee now.  Dese two will answer for dem. Here, you come up, Sam Tar, and you, Jack Noddin."

The two men summoned managed to get up the side, though it was very evident that they were
half-seas over.  Still they answered for themselves in a tolerably satisfactory manner, and
assured the captain that they knew the others, who were as good seamen as ever stepped-- only,
when they could get a drop of liquor, they would.  "There's no denying of it," said Sam Tar,
"and so do I--only I knows when to stop, and they don't;" and Sam gave a lurch against Mr Jobson,
which called forth an angry rebuke from that gentleman.  Owen was not, as may be supposed,
altogether satisfied, however. It is mounted in silver, and the well-known lines, written by
Byron, are engraved on the rim. "Having it made" was, as he said
himself, "one of his foolish freaks, of which he was ashamed."

The cup, however, bears little resemblance to a skull. Colonel Wildman preserved the furniture
of Byron's dining-room, and other apartments, (very simple it is,) without alteration, in the hope
that he might return from Greece and revisit the halls of his fathers.

Had Fate so willed, he would have found how kindly and faithfully his early friend had associated
him with Newstead, and preserved every memorial of past history connected with the place. Yet
thoughts of bitterness would even then have mingled with these familiar scenes, for it was not
the heir of the Byrons who had restored Newstead Abbey to beauty
and order.

Quitting the Abbey, and passing into the gardens, we followed the gardener through the deepening
gloom to the wood, where, in former days, an ancestor of the Byrons set up leaden statues of satyrs,
which the country-people called "the old lord's devils"; and very much like demons they looked.
The tree was pointed out upon which Byron cut the names of "Augusta" and "Byron," with the date,
during a last walk the brother and sister took together at Newstead. It is a double tree, springing
from one root, which he chose as emblematical of themselves. The dim light barely enabled us
to discern letters deeply carved, but growing less visible with the expanding bark. One of the
trees has withered under that spell which seems to have blasted all
connected with the name, and is cut off just above the inscription.

The oak planted by Byron in his youth in a different part of the
grounds was also shown to us.

It is yet strong and vigorous. We picked up a yellow leaf, which the wind bore to our feet, as
a fitting memorial of the place and the hour.

Passing again through the old Abbey church, the chill of the evening met us, cold and damp,--fit
atmosphere for the place.

The rooks were all asleep in their high nests; silence, darkness, and mist were fast casting
their mantle over old Newstead; and the only cheerful sign came from the distant window of
the Colonel's library, whence shot out a generous gleam of household
fire,--emblem of that warm heart which had shed light upon the once
desolate abode of its early friend.

Since our visit to Newstead, (seven years ago,) the Abbey has passed into other hands, and
even a royal owner is now reported to possess the poet's ancestral home. We shall ever deem
ourselves fortunate that our destiny led us to make this pilgrimage during the lifetime of Colonel
Wildman and while the place was under his enlightened and generous ownership.

A few miles from Newstead Abbey is Hucknall, a poor, desolate-looking village, at the end of
whose street stands an old church, beneath which is the burial-place of the Byrons. The building
is ancient and gray, but dreary rather than venerable. Standing in its comfortless interior,
we remembered that Byron once asked to be buried under the green, grassy floor of the roofless
church at Newstead Abbey, with his faithful dog at his feet. The poet, whose rapid glance seized
every glory and beauty of Nature, whose memory, wax to receive, and marble to retain, transferred
the vision through the medium of his rare command of language, should have had a grave over which
winds sweep, birds sing, and stars watch. Not so. A white marble tablet let into the wall above
the family-vault was erected to Byron's memory by his sister.

The inscription upon the tablet, after his name and title, designates
him as the Author of "Childe Harold's Pilgrimage," who died while
aiding the cause of Liberty in Greece: thus striking the noblest notes
in a powerful, eccentric, blotted score, as the fundamental chord
of Byron's requiem.

* * * * *

NORTHERN INVASIONS.

Northern Invasions, when successful, advance the civilization of the world.

It would not be difficult to present from all history a mass of illustrations of this thesis wellnigh
sufficient in themselves to establish it. And there is no doubt that the principles of human nature,
which appear in those illustrations, can be set in such order as to prove the thesis beyond
a question. The softness of Southern climates produces, in the long run, gentleness, effeminacy,
and indolence, or passionate rather than persevering effort. It produces, again, the palliatives
or disguises of these traits which are found in formal religions,
and in institutions of caste or slavery.

The rigor of Northern climates produces, on the other hand, in the long run, hardy physical
constitutions among men, with determined individuality of character. It produces, therefore,
freedom even to democracy in politics, protestantism even to rationalism in religion, and grim
perseverance even to the bitter end in war. A certain stern morality, often amounting to asceticism,
is imposed on Northern constitutions. So superficial is it, so much a creature of circumstance,
that Norman, Scandinavian, Goth, or Icelander, deserves no sort of credit for it. All history
shows that it vanishes before the temptations of any Vinland which
the frozen barbarians stumble upon.

None the less does it give them vigor of muscle, and power to endure hardship, which, in the end,
tells, over the accomplishments of the most warlike Romans, Greeks, Persians, or other Southrons.
"Fight us, if you like," said Ariovistus to Cæsar; "but remember
that none of us have slept under a roof for fourteen years."

That sort of people are apt to succeed in the long run.

When they succeed, as we have said, they advance civilization. To begin with the farthest East,
all such strength as the Chinese Empire has to-day is due to the Tartar cross in its blood;
that is, it results from the conquest of imbecile China by Northern Tartar tribes. One or two
more such invasions, followed by colonization of Northern emigrants, would have made China a
much stronger power this day than she is, and a nation of higher
grade.

The history of Indian civilization, again, is a history of Northern conquests. They tell us,
indeed, that the Indian castes may be resolved into so many beach-marks of the waves of successive
invasions from the North, the highest caste representing the last innovation. When Abraham
crossed from Ur of the Chaldees into Canaan, when Cambyses broke
open the secrets of Egyptian civilization, when Alexander first opened
to the world Egyptian science, these were illustrations of the same
thing,--Canaan, Egypt, and the world were all improved by those processes.

Greece died out, and has never yet reëstablished herself, because she never had a complete infusion
of Gothic blood in her worn-out system. Italy, on the other hand, had a new birth, and at this
moment has a magnificent future, because Goths and Lombards did sweep in upon her with their up-country
virtues and wilderness moralities. What the Ostrogoths did for Spain, what the Franks did for
Gaul, what the Northmen did for England, are so many more illustrations. What Gustavus Adolphus
would have done for Germany, if he had succeeded, would have been another.

What we are to do in the South, when we succeed, will be another. It makes the subject of this
paper.

* * * * *

Nobody pretends, of course, that War itself does anything final in the advance of civilization.
War itself is, what the poets call it, a terrible piece of ploughing. With us, just now, it is
subsoil-ploughing, very deep at that. Stumps and stones have to be heaved out, which had on them
the moss and lichens and superficial soil of centuries, and which had fancied, in that heavy
semi-consciousness which belongs to stumps and stones, that they were fixed forever. As the teams
and the ploughshares pass over the ground which has lain fallow so long, they leave, God knows,
and millions of bleeding hearts know, a very desolate prospect in the upheaved furrows behind
them. It is very black, very rough, very desert to the eye, and in spots it is very bloody.
This is what war does. So desolate the prospect, that we of the Northern States have certainly
a right to thank God that it was not we who called out the ploughmen.

War, in itself, does nothing but plough,--but immediately on the end
of the war, in any locality, he who succeeds begins on the harrowing
and the planting.

And because God is, and directs all such affairs, it is wonderful to see how short is the June which
in His world covers all such furrows as His ploughmen make with new beauty. It is to the methods
of that new harvest that the President has boldly led our attention in his admirable Proclamation
of Amnesty. It is to the details of it that each loyal man has to look already. It is but a few
weeks since we heard a sentimental grumbler, at a public meeting, lamenting over the discomforts
of the freed slaves in the Southwest, as he compared them with their lost paradise. Men of his
type, to whom the present is always worse than the past, succeed in persuading themselves that the
incidental hardships of transition are to be taken as the type of a whole future. And so this
apostle of discontent really believed that the condition of the fifty
thousand freed slaves of the Mississippi, in the hands of such men
as Grant, and Eliot, and Yeatman, and Wheelock, and Forman, and Fiske,
and Howard, was really going to be worse than it was under the lashes
of Legree, or at the auction-block of New Orleans.

The more manly, as the more philosophical way of looking at the transition,
is to discover the shortest path leading to that future, which, without
such a transition, cannot come.

The President, with courage which does him infinite honor, leads the way to this future. His Proclamation
is really a rallying-cry to all true men and women, whether they are living at the North or
at the South, to take hold and work for its accomplishment. With an army posted in each of
the revolted States, with more than one of them completely under National control, he considers
that the time for planting has come. He is no such idealist or sentimentalist as to leave these
new-made furrows, so terribly torn up in three years of war, to renew their own verdure by any
mere spontaneous vegetation.

Practical as the President always is, he is sublimely practical in the Proclamation. "Let us
make good out of this evil as quickly as we can," he says; "let peace bring in plenty as quickly
as she can." To bring this about, he promises the strong arm of the nation to protect anything
which shall show itself worth protecting, in the way of social institutions of republican liberty.
He does not ask, like a conqueror, for the keys of a capital. He does not ask, like a Girondist,
for the vote of a majority. He knows, it is true, as all the world knows, that, if the vote
of all the men of the South could ever be obtained, the majority would utterly overshadow
the handful of gentry who have been lording it over white trash and
black slaves together.

But the President has no wish to prolong martial law to that indefinite future when this handful
of gentlemen shall let the majority of their own people pronounce
upon their claims to rule them.

Waiving the requisitions of the theorists, and at the same time relieving
himself from the necessity of employing military power a moment longer
than is necessary, he announces, in advance, what will be his policy
in extending protection to loyal governments formed in Rebel States.

If there can be found in any State enough righteous men willing to take the oath of allegiance
and to sustain the nation in its determination for emancipation,--if there can be found only enough
to be counted up as the tenth part of those who voted in the election of 1860, though their State
should have sinned like Gomorrah, even though its name should be
South Carolina, they shall be permitted to reconstruct its government,
and that government shall be recognized by the government of the nation.

It

is true that this gift is vastly more than any of the Rebel States has any right to claim. When
the King of Oude rebels against England, he does not find, at the
end of the war, that, because he is utterly defeated, things are to
go on upon their old agreeable footing.

Rebellion is not, in its nature, one of those pretty plays of little
children, which can stop when either party is tired, because he asks
for it to stop, so gently that both parties shall walk on hand in
hand till either has got breath enough to begin the game again.

If the nation were contending against real and permanent enemies, in reducing to order the States
of the Confederacy, or if the national feeling towards the people
of those States were the bitter feeling which their leaders profess
towards our people, the nation would, of course, offer no such easy
terms.

The nation would say, "When you threw off the Constitution, you did it for better for worse.
It guarantied to you your State governments.

You spurned the guaranty. Let it be so. Let the guaranty be withdrawn. You cannot sustain them.
Let them go, then. You have destroyed them. And the nation governs
you by proconsuls."

But the nation has no such desire to deal harshly with these people. The nation knows that more
than half of them were never regarded as people at home,--that they had no more to do with the Rebellion
than had the oxen with which they labored. The nation knows that of the rest of the Southern
people literally only a handful professed power in the State.

The nation knows, therefore, that what pretended to be a union of republics was, really, to take
Gouverneur Morris's phrase, a union of republics with oligarchies,--seventeen republics united
to fourteen oligarchies, when this thing began.

The nation knows that the fourteen will be happier, stronger, more prosperous than ever, when
their people have the rights of which they are partly conscious,--when they also become republics.
The nation means to carry out the constitutional guaranty, and give
them the republican government which under the Constitution belongs
to every State in the Union.

The nation looks forward to prosperous centuries, in which these States, with these people and
the descendants of these people, shall be united in one nation with the republics which have been
true to the nation. For all these reasons the nation has no thought of insisting on its rights
as against Rebel States. It has no thunders of vengeance except for those who have led in
these iniquities. For the people who have been misled it has pardon, protection, encouragement,
and hope. It can afford to be generous. And at the President's hands it makes the offer which
will be received.

* * * * *

We say this offer will be received. We know very well the difficulty with which an opinion long branded
with ignominy makes head in countries where there is no press, where there is no free speech,
where there are no large cities. Excepting Louisiana, the Southern States have none of these.
And the "peculiar institutions" throw the control of what is called opinion more completely into
the hands of a very small class of men, we might almost say a very small knot of men, than in
any other oligarchy which we remember in modern history. It is in considering this very difficulty
that we recognize the wisdom of the President's Proclamation. He is conscious of the difficulty,
and has placed his minimum of loyal inhabitants at a very low point, that, even in the hardest
cases, there may be a possibility of meeting his requisition.

It is not true, on the other hand, that he has placed his minimum so low as to involve the government
in any difficulty in sustaining the State governments which will be framed at his call. It
must be remembered that this "tenth part" of righteous men will have very strong allies in
every Southern State. It is confessed, on all hands, that they will be supported by all the negroes
in every State.

Just in proportion to what was the strength of the planting interest is its weakness in the
new order of things.

Given such physical force, given the moral and physical strength which comes with national protection,
and given the immense power which belongs to the wish for peace,
and the "tenth part" will soon find its fraction becoming larger and
more respectable by accretions at home and by emigration from other
States.

We shall soon learn that there is next to nobody who really favored this thing in the beginning.
They will tell us that they all stood for their old State flag, and
that they will be glad to stand for it in its new hands.

It will be only the first step that will cost. Everybody sees this. The President sees it. Mr.
Davis sees it. He hopes nobody will take it. We hope a good many people will. The merit of
the President's plan is that this step can be promptly taken. And so many are the openings by
which national feeling now addresses the people of the States in
revolt, and national men can call on them to express their real opinions
and to act in their real interest, that we hope to see it taken in
many places at the same time.

When Constantine made Christianity the religion of the Roman Empire, he supposed that one-thirteenth
part of his people were Christians.

He was statesman enough to know that a minority of one-thirteenth, united together because
they had one cause, would be omnipotent over a majority of twelve-thirteenths, without a cause
and disunited. So, if any one asks for an example in our history,--the Territory of Kansas was thrown
open to emigration with every facility given to the Southern emigrant, and every discouragement
offered to the Northerner. But forty men, organized together by a cause, settled Lawrence, and
it was rumored that there was to be some organization of the other
Northern settlers, and at that word the Northern hive emptied itself
into Kansas, and the Atchisons and Bufords and Stringfellows abandoned
their new territory, badly stung.

These are illustrations, one of them on the largest scale, and the other belonging wholly to our
own time and country, of the worth even of a very small minority,
in such an initiative as is demanded now.

What was done in Kansas can be done again in Florida, in Texas, if Texas do not take care for
herself, in either Carolina, in any Southern State where the "righteous men" do not themselves
appear to take this first step on which the President relies.

Take, for instance, this magnificent Florida, our own Italy,--if one
can conceive of an Italy where till now men have been content to live
a half-civilized life, only because the oranges grew to their hands,
and there was no necessity for toil.

The vote of Florida in 1860 was 14,347. So soon as in Florida one-tenth part of this number,
or 1,435 men, take the oath of allegiance to the National Government,
so soon, if they have the qualifications of electors under Florida
law, shall we have a loyal State in Florida.

It will be a Free State, offering the privileges of a Free State to the eager eyes of the North
and of Europe.

That valley of the St. John's, with its wealth of lumber,--the even climate of the western shore,--the
navy-yard to be reëstablished at Pensacola,--the commerce to be resumed at Jacksonville,--the Nice
which we will build up for our invalids at St. Augustine,--the orange-groves
which are wasting their sweetness at this moment, on the plantations
and the islands,--will all be so many temptations to the emigrant,
as soon as work is honorable in Florida.

If the people who gave 5,437 votes for Bell and 367 for Douglas cannot furnish 1,435 men to
establish this new State government, we here know who can.

"Armies composed of freemen conquer for themselves, not for their
leaders."

This is the happy phrase of Robertson, as he describes the reëstablishment of society in Europe
after the great Northern invasions, which gave new life to Roman
effeminacy, and new strength to Roman corruption.

The phrase is perfectly true. It is as true of the armies of freemen who have been called to
the South now to keep the peace as it was of the armies of freemen
who were called South then by the imbecility of Roman emperors or
their mutual contentions.

The lumbermen from Maine and New Hampshire who have seen the virgin riches of the St. John's,
like the Massachusetts volunteers who have picked out their farms in the valley of the Shenandoah
or established in prospect their forges on the falls of the Potomac, or like the Illinois regiments
who have been introduced to the valleys of Tennessee or of Arkansas,
will furnish men enough, well skilled in political systems, to start
the new republics, in regions which have never known what a true republic
was till now.

To carry out the President's plan, and to give us once more working State governments in the
States which have rebelled,--to give them, indeed, the first true republican governments they
have ever known,--would require for Virginia about 12,000 voters. They can be counted, we suppose,
at this moment, in the counties under our military control. Indeed, the loyal State government
of Virginia is at this moment organized. In North Carolina it would require 9,500 voters. The
loyal North Carolina regiments are an evidence that that number of home-grown men will readily appear.
In South Carolina, to give a generous estimate, we need 5,000 voters. It is the only State which
we never heard my man wish to emigrate to. It is the hardest region, therefore, of any to redeem.
At the worst, till the 5,000 appear, the new Georgia will be glad to govern all the country south
of the Santee, and the new North Carolina what is north thereof.
Georgia will need 10,000 loyal voters.

There are more than that number now encamped upon her soil, willing to stay there. Of Florida
we have spoken. Alabama requires 9,000. They have been hiding away from conscription; they have
been fleeing into Kentucky and Ohio: they will not be unwilling to reappear when the inevitable
"first step" is taken. For Mississippi we want 7,000. Mr. Reverdy Johnson has told us where they
are. For Louisiana, one tenth is 5,000. More than that number voted in the elections which returned
the sitting members to Congress. For Texas, the proportion is 6,200; for Arkansas, 5,400. Those
States are already giving account of themselves. In Tennessee the fraction required is 14,500.
And as the people of Knoxville said, "They could do that in the mountains alone."

We have no suspicion of a want of latent Southern loyalty.

But we have brought together these figures to show how inevitable is a reconstruction on the
President's plan, even if Southern loyalty were as abject and timid
as some men try to persuade us.

These figures show us, that, if, of the million Northern men who have "prospected" the Southern country,
in the march of victorious armies, only seventy-three thousand determine to take up their future
lot there, and to establish there free institutions, they would be enough, without the help
of one native, to establish these republican institutions in all the Rebel States. The deserted
plantations, the farms offered for sale, almost for nothing, all the attractions of a softer climate,
and all the just pride which makes the American fond of founding empires, are so many incentives
to the undertaking of the great initiative proposed. In the cases of Virginia and Tennessee,
and, as we suppose, of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Texas, the beginning has already been made at
home. In Florida a recent meeting at Fernandina gave promise for a like beginning. If it do not begin
there, the Emigrant Aid Company must act at once to give the beginning.[52] There will remain
the Carolinas and three of the Gulf States.


"We found upwards of a hundred negroes, mostly men, though there were some women among them,
all decked out in strange and uncouth ornaments, snakes' heads, dried frogs, various coloured
beads forming necklaces round their throats; their garments were otherwise scanty in the extreme.
They looked surprised and not very well pleased at seeing us, and Rob had some difficulty in
persuading them that I only came for curiosity and was far too good-natured to say anything
about what I might see which might get them into trouble.  The assembly being pacified agreed
to our remaining.  I observed that there was a great deal of talking among them, but as they
spoke their native African, neither Rob nor I could understand what was said.  The hut was
of considerable size, though low and thatched merely with palm-leaves. There were no windows,
and only one door; this was now thrown open, when what looked to me like a huge skeleton appeared
at the entrance, and waved its bony arms wildly about, beckoning the people to enter.  They
started to their feet, for they had hitherto been squatting round, and rushed eagerly to the
door.  Rob and I followed, when we discovered that the seeming skeleton was the Obeah man,
Cudjoe, who had thus painted his black body from head to foot.  The hut was lighted by some
twenty small lamps, hung from the roof, and in the centre was a figure intended to represent
a human being, with an enormous cock's head.  Master Cudjoe, if he was the artist, had contrived
to produce as hideous-looking a monster as could well be imagined.  `That's the fetish,' whispered
Rob; `they worship it as if it were a god.'

"Cudjoe, on seeing us, asked in an angry tone what we wanted, and Rob spoke to him as he had
done to the other people.  `Den you keep quiet, buccra,' he said, turning to me; `I no hab
laffee or talkee.'  I assured him that I would remain as still as a mouse; and with a growl
he retired again inside the hut, where he seated himself in front of a huge tom-tom, the African
drum, and began slowly to beat it, chanting at the same time one of his native songs, I concluded.
Gradually he beat faster and faster, accompanying the music, if such it could be called, with
his voice.  The spectators sat listening in rapt attention, when suddenly one of the women
started up and began dancing, keeping capital time to the music.  The faster Cudjoe played
the faster she danced, till every limb and muscle seemed in movement.  Round and round she
went in front of the hideous fetish: no dervish of the East could have danced more furiously.
Presently she was joined by a man, who danced in the same manner round and round her.  One
after the other, the whole of the women, with partners, took a part in the performance; I could
scarcely follow their dark figures, except by the ornaments they wore, as they moved in eccentric
courses within the hut, the tom-tom beating louder and louder, and the people moving faster.
The spectators had hitherto sat quiet; they at length rose, and were, I saw, apparently about
to join in the saturnalia.  Just then Rob touched me on the arm and whispered, `Come away,
sir; I heard something which told me it will not be safe to remain here longer.'  As I had
no wish to be offered up as a sacrifice to the fetish I followed his advice, and as fast as
we could move along we made our way back to the open.  On inquiring of Rob what he had heard,
he told me that the negroes were cursing the white men, and were praying to the fetish to assist
them in some design or other they had on foot.  Rob even thought that in their excitement they
might seize us and put us to death.  He was so earnest in the matter that he convinced me he
did not speak without sufficient cause.  I don't wish to alarm you, Miss Ferris, but I want
you to try and induce your father to take precautions against any sudden outbreak of the blacks.
Our manager holds them in such supreme contempt that he wouldn't listen to what I have to say,
and would only laugh at me and call me a second-sight Scotchman.  Even the hundred negroes
I saw assembled might commit a great deal of mischief; and there may be many hundreds more
united with them: numbers arrived while we were there, and others were coming in as we made
our escape."

"I certainly think you are right, Mr Sandys, in not despising the warning given by the overseer,"
said Ellen.  "I will tell my father what you have said to me, and ask him to speak to you on
the subject, and he will probably examine Rob Kerlie.  It will surely be wise to be on our
guard, even should the negroes not really be meditating mischief.  I confess that what you
have told me has made me somewhat anxious; this hot evening is not calculated to rise one's
spirits.  Tell me, Mr Sandys, is the air often as oppressive as it is at present?"

"No, certainly.  It is very hot indeed; I suspect that we are going to have a storm," answered
Archie.  "I observed this morning curiously shaped clouds high up in the sky, which suddenly
dispersed from every point of the compass.  I have been for some minutes, watching a bank of
clouds rising above the horizon in the north-west, and it has gained a considerable height
since we were speaking; it seems to have swept round the western end of the island."

Ellen looked in the direction indicated; just then a vivid flash of lightning burst from the
dark bank of clouds in the west, followed almost without interval by several others, and in
a few minutes the tops of the tall palms bent before a sudden blast which came rushing from
the westward.  Every instant it increased in fury; the leaves torn from the trees filled the
air, succeeded by branches, many of considerable size.

"I must advise you, Miss Ferris, to take shelter within the house," said Archie, "for one of
those branches might injure you severely.  Even the verandah itself may be blown away.  You
have little conception of the power of a West Indian hurricane."

As Ellen was hurrying into the house she met her father coming to look for her.

"I am afraid we are going to have a violent storm, of which this wind is only the precursor,"
he said.  "We must seek for safety in the strongest part of the house; it will not be safe
to remain in the open air, or even near the window, through which a branch or any other object
may be blown."

Ellen had accompanied her father to the dining-hall, which, being in the centre of the house,
was less exposed to danger than any other part of the building.  So loudly did the wind roar
that even there it was necessary to speak in a high tone to be heard.

"Oh, what will become of the Ouzel Galley if she is caught in this fearful gale!" exclaimed Ellen.

"She has by this time, I hope, gained a good offing; if the wind holds as it now does, she
will be able to run before it till she is out of danger," answered Mr Ferris.

As the evening was now drawing rapidly on, the manager and book-keepers came in from the works
in the different parts of the estate.  They all looked somewhat anxious, though no damage had
yet been done, and a hope was entertained that it was not going to be anything serious after
all. Their spirits revived when suddenly the wind ceased and the atmosphere became as clear
as usual.  Two or three of them had, however, again to go out; and on their return they reported
that the sky was once more overcast, and that it was lightening in all quarters.  Presently
the rain came down in true tropical fashion, again to stop and again to go on with greater
energy than before.  Sometimes it was perfectly calm, but the lightning continued darting forth
from the sky with awful grandeur; sometimes the whole upper regions of the air were illuminated
by incessant flashes, but the quivering sheet of blazing fire was far surpassed in brilliancy
by the electric fluid which was exploding in every direction.  Ellen and her father and young
Sandys were standing as near one of the windows as they could venture, when they saw a meteor
of deep red hue and globular form descending perpendicularly from an enormous height.  As it
approached the earth its motion appeared to be accelerated, and it then became of dazzling
whiteness, elongating in form till, dashing on the ground, it splashed around like molten lead
or quicksilver and disappeared.  The next instant the hurricane again burst forth, rushing
amid the trees with the sound of a heartrending and piercing scream, so loud as entirely to
drown the human voice.  The whole building shook and trembled as if an earthquake was taking
place and it was about to be hurled to the ground.  Mr Ferris, seizing Ellen's arm, dragged
her into a doorway.

"Should the house not withstand this furious blast, we shall be safer here than anywhere else,"
he said.

Young Sandys followed them.  Mr Twigg, with his wife and children, was at the time in another
room.  Ellen naturally felt anxious for her friends, and young Sandys offered to go and ascertain
how they were getting on.  He quickly returned with the report that they were all safe, and
that the children were clinging round their parents, overcome with terror, and shrieking piteously.
No thunder was at any time heard, and all agreed that even if the whole battery of a line-of-battle
ship had been going off, the sound would not have been distinguished above the horrible roar
and yelling of the wind and the noise of the ocean, as its tumultuous waves dashed on the shore,
threatening every instant to sweep over the land and engulf all within their reach.  The wind
continually shifted, now blowing from one quarter, now from another. Suddenly the deafening
noise sank into a solemn murmur, and the lightning, which had hitherto played in flashes and
forked darts, hovered for a few seconds between the clouds and the earth, circling round and
round, causing the whole heavens to appear on fire, when a similar luminous appearance seemed
to burst from the ground, and, rising, the mass rushed upwards to the sky.  After a short interval,
again was felt the breath of the whirlwind with even greater fury than before, and it seemed
as if everything on the face of the earth would be swept away into the boiling ocean.  Again
the earth was shaken, and the house vibrated with a violence which threatened its instant destruction.
Mr Ferris kept a firm hold of his daughter's arm, and she, in a way which surprised him as
well as herself, maintained her composure during the whole of this fearful strife of the elements.
Not till daylight returned did the fury of the tempest altogether cease; sometimes it abated,
again to burst forth with almost the same power as before.  The house itself, having been strongly
built and the roof fixed on with the greatest care, withstood the hurricane, a portion only
at one end having been blown off; but the out-buildings were materially damaged.  Mr Ferris
and his managers waited anxiously to hear a report of the damage which had been done to the
estate.  Round the house many trees had been torn from their roots, others snapped short off,
and all had more or less suffered.  The ocean still continued to rage with unabated fury, even
after the wind itself had ceased Ellen naturally looked along the horizon, but not a sail was
in sight, and again and again she asked what could have become of the Ouzel Galley.  Her affection
for Norah made her feel as if she was herself personally interested in the fate of the brave
young commander, as much as Mr Ferris was in reality in that of the ship.  He could no longer
conceal his anxiety about the Ouzel Galley.  How she had fared was the subject of earnest discussion
between him and Mr Twigg.  The latter thought it just possible that she might have got beyond
the influence of the hurricane before it burst with its full fury; and if not, might have weathered
it out, as many a stout ship with plenty of sea room had weathered similar hurricanes before.
He acknowledged, however, that she might have been caught by it, and if so, while the wind
blew from the northward, might have been driven on shore.  The latter point would in time be
ascertained, and as soon as possible a messenger was despatched along the coast, who, though
he reported several shipwrecks, had ascertained that the Ouzel Galley was not among them.

"She was well found and not overladen, and as well able to keep afloat, even in such a sea
as we saw running, as any ship which ever sailed the ocean," observed Mr Ferris.  "We shall
hear, I trust, in due course of her arrival."

Dreadful as the hurricane had appeared, the damage done was not as great as might have been
expected.  It was the opinion of many that only the tail of the hurricane had passed over the
island.  It was bad enough as it was.  In some places the country appeared as if scorched by
fire, in others the crops were totally destroyed; numerous buildings were levelled with the
ground, and the trees and shrubs uprooted; a number of people had been killed, and many more
seriously injured, by being struck by shingles from the roofs or branches from the trees, and
by other hard substances which went hurtling like cannon-shot through the air.  So rapid, however,
is vegetation in the tropics that nature herself would repair much of the damage produced,
and the industry of man the remainder--although the proprietors had to suffer severely in their
pockets, while there was no power to restore to life the unhappy beings who had been killed.

CHAPTER TWELVE.

CAPTAIN TRACY AND NORAH AT HOME--A LETTER FROM GERALD--HIS ADVENTURES--A CRUISE OFF HISPANIOLA--ENGAGEMENT
WITH A FRENCH SQUADRON--THE ENEMY PUT TO FLIGHT--DEATH OF A YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN--RETURN TO PORT
ROYAL--A SECOND CRUISE, AND CAPTURE OF SEVERAL RICH MERCHANTMEN--GERALD IN COMMAND OF THE FLORA--HIS
STEWARD PETER--MORE TIDINGS OF THE PIRATES--THE CHAMPION SENT WITH DESPATCHES TO THE LEEWARD
ISLANDS--JOINS THE BUCKINGHAM IN ATTACKING A FORT AT MARTINICO--GENEROUS CONDUCT OF CAPTAIN
TYRRELL-- PETER'S NARRATIVE--HIS CAPTURE BY PIRATES, AND ESCAPE.

Norah and her father had for many months been living an uneventful life in their pretty little
cottage near Waterford.  She was his constant companion; indeed, she never ventured out without
him.  Things had come to a pretty pass, as he observed, when a young lady couldn't take a walk
by herself without the risk of being carried off by a party of filibustering squireens, quite
as bad in their way as the picarooning rascals in the West Indies and on the Spanish Main,
who had often in days of yore given him so much anxiety--not that they ever had caught him,
for he was too much on his guard, though he had been chased well-nigh a score of times; and
he intended to be on his guard now, and, as he hoped, with the same success.

This state of things, therefore, did not much concern him, as he was glad of Norah's society,
and was always as ready to walk with her as she was with him.  Their walks, indeed, seldom
extended much beyond Waterford, or the often-trod road to Widow Massey's house.  Norah never
passed many days without paying her a visit.  They were now looking forward to receiving news
of Owen, or indeed, as they hoped, seeing him himself, as the Ouzel Galley, unless detained
longer than was expected, would some time since have commenced her homeward voyage.  A letter
had come from Gerald saying that he had just seen her on her way round to Montego Bay, and
giving an account of himself and what he had seen and done up to that time.  He promised to
write a longer letter when he had more to say.  A couple of months or more after the arrival
of Gerald's first letter another was received from him.

"Dear sister Norah," it ran, "I promised to spin you a long yarn, so here goes, and I hope
that you'll get it some day.  I told you in my last that I had seen the Ouzel Galley under
way from Montego Bay, and I suppose Owen has long before this delivered all the messages I
sent by him; and if not, I dare say he will before long, if he hasn't forgotten them.  No matter;
they were not very important, so you needn't scold him for his negligence.

"I forget if I told you that, while our ship was undergoing repairs in dock at Port Royal,
Lieutenant Foley, Molly--I mean Lord Mountstephen-- with Nat Kiddle and me, and about twenty
of our hands, were turned over to the Augusta, 60-gun ship, commanded by Captain Forrest; and
immediately afterwards were ordered to proceed to sea, accompanied by two other ships under
his orders, the Edinburgh, of sixty-four guns, Captain Langdon, and the Dreadnought, of sixty
guns, Captain Morris Suckling.  We soon found that we were to cruise off Cape Francois, on
the north coast of Saint Domingo, to watch a French squadron under Commodore De Kearsaint,
who was collecting a large number of merchantmen which he was to convoy from that port to Europe.
The admiral had been informed that the French had only three line-of-battle ships, which, although
somewhat larger than we were, he knew very well that we should thrash if we could come up with
them.  We gained intelligence, however, from a French despatch vessel which we captured, that
the enemy's squadron had lately been increased by four other ships, one of which, by-the-by,
was a ship of ours--the Greenwich--of fifty guns, captured a few months ago, when commanded
by Captain Roddam, off this very island.  He had nothing to be ashamed of, for with his single
ship he bravely faced five sail of the line and several frigates, and wasn't taken till he
had lost all chance of escaping except by going to the bottom.  Thus, you see, the French had
seven ships to our three, and we heard besides that they had been strongly manned by volunteers
from the garrison and merchant vessels, and made sure that they should either drive us away
or capture us.

"Notwithstanding the superiority of the enemy, we were not to be put to flight, but kept our
ground as if no Frenchmen were in the neighbourhood.  We had been for some days cruising off
the cape, always near enough to keep the port in sight, so that no vessel could steal out without
our knowing it, when early in the morning the Dreadnought, which was inshore of us, made the
signal that the enemy was in sight, and before noon we could see the whole French squadron
standing out in line towards us, the wind being about north-east--if you get the chart, father
will explain matters to you.  We were to windward of them, keeping close together, though not
so close as the Frenchmen, who seemed very anxious to be backing up each other.  Our captain
now made the signal for the other two captains to come on board the Augusta.  As soon as they
stepped on the quarter-deck, Captain Forrest, after shaking hands, said, `Well, gentlemen,
you see the Frenchmen are come out to engage us.'  On which Captain Suckling quickly replied,
`I think it would be a pity to disappoint them.'  `And what do you say?' asked our captain,
turning to Captain Langdon.  `I heartily agree with Captain Suckling,' was the answer.  `If
we disable them, we shall do good service by preventing them from convoying the merchant vessels,
and maybe we shall take one or two of them.  Of one thing I feel very sure, that they won't
take us.'

"The three captains being agreed, the other two went back to their ships, and we hoisted the
signal to make all sail and to close the enemy.  The Dreadnought led in our line; the Intrepide,
the French commodore's ship, led in that of the enemy, followed by the Greenwich. The wind
was light, and it seemed to me that we should never get into action.  Though I've seen a good
deal of fighting on a small scale, yet this affair was likely to prove more serious than any
I had yet engaged in.  I was stationed on the main-deck, and the scene was very different to
what I had been accustomed to on board the Champion where we've no deck above us and can see
everything that is going forward.  Here, it was only by looking through a port that I could
get a glimpse of the enemy's ships, as they stood on in a long line, one closely following
the other--so closely, indeed, that the leading ship had the jibboom end of the one next her
in line almost over her taffrail.  Molly, Kiddle, and I had charge of the guns manned by the
Champion's people.  We reminded them that they must show what they were made of, and maintain
the honour of the little ship; they one and all answered that they would; and they looked as
if they intended to keep to their word, as they stood with their shirts off, handkerchiefs
bound round their heads, and belts round their waists, ready to fire as soon as the order should
be given.  In a line behind where we stood were the powder-boys seated on their tubs, cracking
jokes, and seeming altogether to forget that we should have, in a few minutes, showers of round
shot rattling about our ears.  Though we used to call Mountstephen Molly, he didn't look a
bit like a Molly now, for he walked the deck as calm and composed as if nothing particular
was going to happen.  I asked him what o'clock it was.  He said, `Twenty minutes past three.'
Just then the Dreadnought opened her fire on the French commodore; and didn't Captain Suckling
pound him--knocking away in a few minutes several of his spars, and so wounding his rigging
that he fell on board the Greenwich, which, as I said, was close astern of him.  As the Dreadnought
stood on, we got up, and the word to fire was passed along our decks; and you may be sure we
quickly obeyed it, blazing away at the two French ships already foul of each other, when they
drove down upon the third astern, and there all three lay, unable to get clear one of the other.

"The French had a 64 and a 44 gun ship, besides two 32-gun frigates, which were able to manoeuvre,
and these, as you may suppose, did not remain quiet while the Augusta and Edinburgh were blazing
away at the three ships, which still lay jammed together.  It made the fight, however, more
equal than it would otherwise have been.  Their shot came on board us pretty thickly, and not
a few of our men were struck down. Among them was our first lieutenant, who raised his hand
for a moment, and then fell back, dead.  Soon afterwards I saw poor Mountstephen fall; I ran
to help him, when I found that one of his legs had been shot away and the other fearfully injured.
I ordered a couple of men to carry him below; I should have liked to go with him, poor fellow,
but I couldn't leave the deck.  I had returned to my station, when I found myself suddenly
splashed all over with what I thought was water, though it was rather warm.

"`What, Paddy Tracy, are you wounded?'  I heard Nat Kiddle sing out.

"`Not that I know of,' I answered; `I don't feel like it.'  Then I saw what had happened--a
man standing close to me had been cut right in two by a round shot, which came through the
port, wounding a couple of men besides.

"Much as the enemy were knocked about, we were already in a pretty bad condition, having all
our masts, sails, rigging, and boats considerably damaged, eight or ten men killed, and nearly
thirty wounded.  If it hadn't been for the four ships of the enemy still able to manoeuvre,
we should have taken or sunk the other three, for they couldn't manage to get free of each
other, while they could only now and then fire a few shot at us.  At length, to our infinite
satisfaction, we saw the masts of the 64 engaged with the Dreadnought go over the side, while
all the line-of-battle ships were evidently tremendously knocked about both in hull and rigging.
We had been engaged for upwards of two hours, when the French commodore made a signal to one
of the frigates, which, coming up, took him in tow and carried him out of action; and his example
was followed by the whole of the French squadron, which made sail for Cape Francois, then to
leeward of them.

"The Edinburgh had been as much damaged in her masts, yards, and sails as we were, and Captain
Langdon signalled that she had also several shot in her hull.  The Dreadnought, we saw, had
lost her main and mizen topmasts, while nearly all her other masts and yards were greatly injured,
and she also had received many shot in her hull, besides having lost as many men as we had.
This made Captain Forrest refrain from following the Frenchmen.

"I was very glad to find Mr Foley all right, for his own sake, for I like him very much--and
still more for that of Miss Ferris, for it would be a terrible thing for her were he to be
killed, and I hope he won't, though we all run the risk of losing the number of our mess. 
As soon as I could leave my station I ran down below to see how poor Mountstephen was getting
on.  He was perfectly sensible, though pale as a sheet.  He said he felt no pain.  His first
question was, `What are the enemy about?'

"`They're running,' I replied.

"`What, all seven of them?' he asked.

"`Yes, every one,' I answered.

"`Hurrah!' he exclaimed, waving his hand above his head, `we've gained the victory.'

"Scarcely were the words out of his mouth than he fell back, and before the doctor could come
to him he was dead.

"When I got on deck again--and I can tell you I was very glad to breathe some fresh air, after
being down in that dreadful cockpit, full of poor fellows groaning with pain, some having their
legs and arms cut off, others with their sides torn open or heads fearfully smashed--I found
that the enemy were out of our reach, and that not one of our three ships was in a condition
to follow them.  This was very provoking, though we had fought a right gallant action, of that
there can be no doubt.  Captain Forrest seeing that, if we got to leeward, we should be unable
to beat off, and very likely be driven on shore and lost, ordered a course to be steered for
Jamaica, where we arrived in a couple of days.  The admiral highly approved of what had been
done, and Captain Forrest received orders to get his ship repaired with all despatch and return
as soon as possible in search of the enemy.  The hands were taken off our sloop for this purpose,
and there seemed every probability of our remaining some time longer on board the Augusta.
Still, things are not done so quickly out here as they are in the dockyards at home. At last
we got to sea and sailed for Cape Francois.  On looking into that port we found that the Frenchmen
had put their best legs foremost, and that Monsieur De Kearsaint, having repaired his ships,
had some days before sailed with the convoy for Europe, and we should have no chance of overtaking
him.  We had accordingly to come back, when we again sailed with the admiral, whose flag was
flying on board the Marlborough, for a cruise off Cape Tiberon.  I should make my letter too
long if I were to describe all that took place.  We had not been many days on the station before
we captured two French privateers, and from their crows learned that a rich convoy was preparing
at Port au Prince to sail for Europe, under the protection of two large armed private ships.
The admiral on this sent in his tender to ascertain if such was the fact.  Her commander, who
speaks French, managed to gain all the intelligence he required; he soon returned, having ascertained
that the information received was correct.  The admiral accordingly directed us to proceed
off the island of Golave, to cruise there for two days, and, should we see anything of the
convoy at the expiration of that time, to return and join him.  Golave, you will understand,
is in the middle of the large bay which occupies nearly the whole western coast of Saint Domingo,
to the northward of Cape Tiberon.

"The afternoon of the day following our arrival, we had got well up into the bay, when we caught
sight of two sloops.  To prevent them from taking us for what we were, we hoisted Dutch colours
and stood away from them.  In the evening we sighted seven more sail steering out of the bay.
On this, to deceive the enemy, we hung tarpaulins over the sides of the ship, set the sails
in lubberly fashion, and, hauling our wind, stood away from the strangers till dark.  We then
again made sail and followed them.  At ten o'clock we saw two more sail, one of which fired
a gun, and the other then parted company and steered for Leogane.  Soon afterwards eight more
sail were seen to leeward.  We had not lost sight of the ship which had fired a gun; though
she might have suspected our character, she did not stand away from us.  We accordingly soon
ran up alongside, when Captain Forrest shouted out to him in French to strike, adding, `If
you alarm the other ships, or let them discover by any means what we are, we'll send you forthwith
to the bottom.'

"The French commander, fully believing that our captain would put his threat into execution,
immediately gave in; and one of our lieutenants, with thirty-five men, went on board the prize
with orders to proceed off Petit Guave, a small port to leeward, to prevent any of the other
vessels from escaping into it.  The vessel we had captured was the Mars, of twenty-two guns
and 108 men, all of whom we had now aboard us, stowed away below lest they should be making
signals to the enemy. We stood on during the remainder of the night, and at daylight found
ourselves in the midst of the convoy, which, on our hoisting our colours and showing what we
were about, began firing at us; but we quickly silenced them one after the other, and in the
course of a few minutes the whole struck, one small vessel alone managing to get away.  There
were altogether eight vessels, richly laden, each carrying from eight to ten guns.  We had
to take out their crews and man them from our ship. The captain, sending for me, greatly to
my satisfaction, ordered me to take charge of one of them, called the Flora.  Tumbling into
one of the boats with ten hands, I quickly pulled aboard, and found that she carried twelve
guns and a crew of thirty-five men.  The Frenchmen looked very glum when I told them that they
were to get into the boat and go aboard our ship.  I kept one of them, a black, Pierre by name,
who spoke English and had been the captain's steward.  The first service he did me was to act
as interpreter, and as he knew where everything was stowed, I thought he would be useful in
other respects.  Through him I made a polite speech to the captain, and told him that I was
sorry to turn him out of his ship, but that I was obeying orders.  He shrugged his shoulders,
observing that it was the fortune of war, when, bowing, he followed his men over the side.
I wasn't sorry to get rid of the Frenchmen, for it would have been a hard matter to keep them
in order and navigate the ship with the few hands I had.

"As soon as we had transferred the prisoners, the prizes were ordered to make sail, and together
we stood out of the bay.  A very pretty sight we presented as we ran on under all sail, keeping,
according to orders, close to the Augusta.  Our prizes were richly laden, and the admiral,
as may be supposed, was highly pleased when we sighted him off Cape Tiberon and Captain Forrest
told him what we had done, as his share of the prize would be something considerable.  Mine,
as a midshipman, would be a couple of hundred pounds; Mr Foley, as a lieutenant, will get two
or three thousand; so you may fancy what the shares of the captain and admiral will be.

"Pierre was, I found, an excellent cook as well as steward.  I now called him Peter, by-the-by,
at his own request, for as he observed, `Now, massa, I come among Englishmen I take English
name, please;' and so Peter he is now always called.  He was especially fond of keeping his
tongue wagging; he seemed not at all sorry to have changed masters, and to have got on board
a man-of-war instead of a merchantman.  He said that on their voyage out, when coming through
the Windward Passage, the Flora and another vessel, the Cerf, of smaller size, carrying only
eight guns, had been attacked by a piratical craft.  They fought for some time, when the Flora
made off, leaving the Cerf to her fate-- that the pirates boarded her, and that he had seen
her go down--that the pirate ship then made chase after the Flora, but by carrying all sail,
and night coming on, she escaped.  By Peter's account, I suspect that she must be the same
craft which attacked the Ouzel Galley.  Peter says she has a crew of a hundred men and carries
twenty guns.  She is known to have captured several merchantmen; some she sends to the bottom,
and others she takes into one of the numerous keys among the Bahamas, where they are hidden
away as securely as they would be among the unknown islands of the Pacific or Indian Ocean.
From various things which Peter said, I had an idea that he knew more about the pirate than
he had hitherto communicated, and I determined, when I had more completely gained his confidence,
to try and obtain all the information he possessed.

"The weather continued fine, and our little squadron making good way, we were all soon safely
at anchor in Port Royal harbour.  It was a jovial sight, let me tell you, as we sailed in with
English colours above the French on board the prizes, the guns firing, the flags flying, and
the people on shore cheering.  We at once carried the prizes up to Kingston, where they were
quickly sold for good round sums, for they were all richly laden.  As soon as I get my prize-money,
I intend to send it home to father.  Tell him to do as he thinks best with it; I don't want
to spend it here, as many of our men probably will before long.  The Jamaica people seldom
get so good a haul as this, though prizes are being brought in almost every week.  Where the
money all goes to, I don't know; it makes somebody rich, I suppose.

"I was disappointed at not seeing Mr and Miss Ferris, and so, I have no doubt, was Mr Foley,
for we thought that they would be back here by this time; but they are still away on the other
side of the island.  I don't think I told you that there had been a hurricane here, while we
were cruising off Cape Francois, before our action with the Frenchmen. It was not felt very
severely at this end of the island, as they only got the whisk of its tail; but at the west
end it did a great deal of damage, and a number of people were killed and wounded, though I
am happy to say that our friends escaped any injury.  The Ouzel Galley, I understand, had sailed,
and, I hope, had got well to the eastward before it came on.  I dare say that Owen Massey will
have told you all about it long before you get this.  The worst news I have to give you is
respecting the slaves, who are in a very rebellious state.  It is rumoured that in one or two
places they have attacked the whites' houses and killed several people; but this is not believed,
and it is said that they know too well what a fearful punishment would overtake them were they
to do anything of the sort.

"To return to my own proceedings.  As soon as I had handed the Flora over to the prize agent,
I had to turn again into a midshipman and to go on board our own tight little sloop, which
had just come out of dock and was now all ataunto, ready for sea.  I got leave to take Peter
with me, as he wished to enter on board a British ship of war; he was at once appointed midshipmen's
steward, and a better one we never had.

"Mr Foley was hoping that we should be sent to cruise off the north coast of the island, but
instead of that we were ordered to carry despatches to Commodore Moore, who commands on the
Leeward Islands station.  Having delivered them, we were on our way back, when we fell in with
the Buckingham, Captain Tyrrell.  While in company with her we captured a French merchantman,
and her crew being brought on board our ship, Peter heard from some of them that four privateers
had run in for shelter under a strong battery in Grand Anar Bay, on the island of Martinico.
He having told me, I at once gave information to our commander, who forthwith went on board
the Buckingham to communicate it to Captain Tyrrell, and he at once resolved to stand in and
destroy the privateers and the fort.  Our prisoners, who had no idea that what they had been
talking about had been understood, were very much astonished at seeing us suddenly alter our
course and steer in for the bay.  There, sure enough, were the four privateers with springs
on their cables, and their guns run out, anchored under a strong-looking fort, mounting ten
guns at least.  The Buckingham ran in as close as she could venture, when she dropped her anchor,
and we brought up under her stern and immediately began blazing away at the vessels, which,
as well as the fort, opened fire on us.  Though the privateers each mounted not less than twenty
guns, they could not long stand the Buckingham's heavy shot; indeed, had we been alone we should
have taken them.  Still, thinking that the fort would drive us away, they held out longer than
we had expected.  Though we were struck several times, and a good many round shot passed between
our masts, not a man on board was hit.  We were wondering when they would give in, when, as
a puff of air cleared the smoke off for a few seconds, we observed that one of them had a list
to starboard.  Her next broadside again concealed her from view, and in a couple of minutes,
when the wind again blew away the smoke, all we could see were her masts as she slowly went
to the bottom.  I was expecting that the rest would share the same fate; one of them was to
meet with a more terrible disaster--almost the next instant a thundering sound was heard, flames
burst out of her deck, her masts shot upwards like sky-rockets, and the whole air seemed filled
with fragments of wreck, which came hissing down into the water, several portions, whizzing
through the air, reaching almost to where we lay.  The other two, seeing the hopelessness of
further resistance, after firing their broadsides, hauled down their colours.  On this the
Buckingham made a signal to us to take possession of the two vessels.  `Out boats!' was the
order; and in another minute three of our boats, I having charge of one of them, were dashing
through the calm water, while the Buckingham continued engaging the fort, which still held
out.  Two or three of its guns, however, had been disabled, and its fire began to slacken.
We pulled away as fast as the crews could lay their backs to the oars, fearing that the Frenchmen
would set fire to the ships and deprive us of our prizes.  Their boats were already in the
water, and the men were tumbling into them, evidently in a hurry to make their escape.  `Look
out, lads; that the rascals play no tricks, and lose no time in seeing that all's safe below!'
sang out Mr Foley, as he dashed by in the gig towards the northernmost of the vessels.  I was
making for the one to the southward, the farthest from the fort.  We were soon up to her, and
as we scrambled up on one side we saw several of her crew toppling over on the other.  Just
then I caught sight of a man coming up the companion-hatchway; it struck me that he had been
about some mischief, and leaping on him, I tumbled him down to the foot of the ladder.  He
had a slow-match in his hand, which, hissing and spluttering, set his clothes on fire.

"`What have you been about, you rascal?'  I exclaimed, though I don't suppose he understood
the question.  He pointed to the door of a cabin from which smoke was issuing.  I burst it
open, and found a match lighted, leading to a suspicious-looking cask in the corner.  I, as
you may suppose, pulled it out in pretty quick time; and, throwing it into the middle of the
main cabin, sang out for buckets of water.  A couple were quickly handed down, and the fire
was extinguished.  In another moment, however, we should all have been blown into the air.
The Frenchman, who proved to be the mate of the vessel, was severely burnt, but little compassion
was felt for him.  We secured him, and two other men, who were caught by the legs as they were
leaping overboard.

"Our men had begun to fire at the boats which had shoved off, but I ordered them to desist,
as the Frenchmen had hauled down their flag, and were perfectly right in trying to make their
escape.

"As soon as the garrison of the fort saw that we had possession of the vessels, they opened
fire at us with one of their guns.  On this, Mr Foley ordered me to cut the cable of my prize,
and make sail out of harm's way, as the wind was sufficiently off shore to enable us to do
so.  He at the same time, I saw, was setting the canvas of the ship he had taken.

"The Buckingham and Champion having now only the fort to attend to, poured in so hot a fire
on it that the gun which was annoying us was dismounted before we had been under way more than
four or five minutes. So we again brought up and turned our guns at the fort, which was gradually
crumbling away before the iron shower thrown into it.  As the Frenchmen still kept up a hot
fire from four or five guns, which considerably annoyed the Buckingham, Captain Tyrrell ordered
the boats away to storm the fort and put an end to the conflict.  I immediately jumped into
my boat, leaving the prize at anchor to take care of herself, and joined the others, which
were pulling to the shore on that side of the fort where the chief breach had been effected,
and where none of the remaining guns could reach us and out of range of musket-shot.  Captain
Tyrrell himself, I found, was heading the party. We mustered altogether upwards of a hundred
and fifty men, about forty of whom belonged to our ship, with Mr Foley and other officers.
The marines quickly formed, flanked by our blue jackets, armed with muskets, cutlasses, and
pistols.  The instant the last man leaped on shore, the order to advance was given, and up
the hill we went at double quick march, in spite of a shower of musket balls which came whizzing
about our ears. It was a peculiar difficulty of his nature which led him to insist, on the occasions
of the London and provincial exhibitions of his pictures, that the borrowers were to make all
arrangements with his frame-maker, that he should not be called upon to act in any way, and
that no personal reference should be introduced. Watts always considered himself a private
person; he disliked public functions and fled from them if there were any attempt to draw attention
to him. His habits of work were consistent with these unusual traits. At sunrise he was at his
easel. During the hot months of summer he was hard at work in his London studio, leaving for
the country only for a few weeks during foggy weather.

At the age of sixty-nine Watts married Miss Mary Fraser-Tytler, with whom he journeyed to Egypt,
painting there a study of the "Sphinx," one of the cleverest of his landscapes. Three years
after his return, he settled at Limnerslease, Compton, in Surrey, where he took great interest
in the attempt to revive industrial art among the rural population.

Twice, in 1885 and 1894, the artist refused, for private reasons, the baronetcy that other artists
had accepted. He lived henceforth and died the untitled patriot and artist, George Frederick
Watts.

II

THE MAN AND THE MESSENGER

Having given in the preceding pages the briefest possible outline of the life of Watts as a man amongst
men, we are now able to come to closer quarters. He was essentially a messenger--a teacher,
delivering to the world, in such a manner that his genius and temperament made possible, ideas which
had found their place in his mind. He would have been the first to admit that without these ideas he
would be less than nothing.

If it were possible to bring together all the external acts of the painter's life, his journeyings
to and fro, his making and his losing friends, we should have insufficient data to enable us
to understand Watts' message; his great ambitions, his constant failures, his intimate experiences,
his reflections and determinations--known to none but himself--surely these, the internal life
of Watts, are the real sources of his message? True, he was in the midst of the nineteenth
century, breathing its atmosphere, familiar with the ideals of its great men, doubting, questioning,
and hoping with the rest. To him, as to many a contemporary stoic, the world was in a certain
sense an alien ground, and mortal life was to be stoically endured and made the best of. It
is impossible to believe, however, that this inspiring and prophetic painter reproduced and handed
on merely that which his time and society gave him. His day and his associates truly gave him
much; the past and his heredity made their contributions; but we must believe that the purest
gold was fired in the crucible of his inner experience, his joys
and his sufferings.

In him was accomplished that great discovery which the philosophers have called Pessimism; he
not only saw in other men (as depicted in his memorable canvas of 1849), but he experienced in
himself the transitory life's illusions. To Watts, the serious man of fifty years, Love and
Death, Faith and Hope, Aspiration, Suffering, and Remorse, were not, as to the eighteenth-century
rhymester, merely Greek ladies draped in flowing raiment; to him they were realities, intensely
focussed in himself. Watts was giving of himself, of his knowledge and observation of what
Love is and does, and how Death appears so variously; and who but a man who knew the melancholy
of despair could paint that picture "Hope"?

Immediately after the central crisis of his personal life appeared the canvas entitled "Fata
Morgana," illustrative of a knight in vain pursuit of a phantom maiden;
and before long there was from his brush the pictured story of a lost
love, "Orpheus and Eurydice," one of the saddest of all myths, but,
one feels, no old myth to him.

By a more careful analysis of the artist's work we hope to learn the teaching Watts set himself
to give, and to ascertain the means that he adopted; but one point
needs to be made clear at this stage, namely, that although Watts
was a great teacher, yet he was not a revolutionary.

The ideals he held up were not new or strange, but old, well-tried,
one might almost say conventional.

They represent the ideals which, in the friction and turmoil of ages, have emerged as definite,
clear, final.

They are not disputed or dubious notions, but accepted truisms forgotten and neglected, waiting
for the day when men shall live by them.

Furthermore, Watts was not in any sense a mystic--neither personally or as an artist. "The Dweller
in the Innermost" is not the transcendental self known to a few rare souls, but is merely conscience,
known to all. The biblical paintings have no secret meaning assigned to them. The inhabitants of
Eden, the hero of the Deluge, the Hebrew patriarchs, Samson and Satan--all these are the familiar
figures of the evangelical's Bible. "Eve Repentant" is the woman Eve, the mother of the race; "Jacob
and Esau" are the brothers come to reconciliation; "Jonah" is the prophet denouncing the Nineveh
of his day and the Babylon of this. The teaching--and there is teaching in every one of them--is
plain and ethical. So also, with the Greek myths; they teach plainly--they hold no esoteric
interpretations. Watts is no Neo-Platonist weaving mystical doctrines from the ancient hero tales;
he is rather a stoic, a moralist, a teacher of earthly things.

But we must be careful to guard against the impression of Watts as a lofty philosopher consciously
issuing proclamations by means of his art. Really he was not aware of being a philosopher at
all; he was simply an artist, an exquisitely delicate and sensitive medium, who, when once before
his canvas, suddenly filled with his idea, was compelled to say his word. If there be any synthesis
about his finished work--and no one can deny this--it was not because Watts gave days and nights
and years to "thinking things out." His paintings are, as he used to call them, "anthems,"
brought forth by the intuitive man, the musician. This was the fundamental Watts. Whatever unity
there be, is due rather to unity of inspiration than to strength or definiteness of character
and accomplishment, and this was sometimes referred to by Watts as a golden thread passing
through his life--a thread of good intention--which he felt would
guide him through the labyrinth of distractions, mistakes, irritations,
ill health, and failures.

One of the striking incidents in the life of Watts was his offer to decorate Euston Railway
Station with frescoes entitled "The Progress of Cosmos."

"Chaos" we have in the Tate Gallery, full of suggestiveness and interest. We see a deep blue
sky above the distant mountains, gloriously calm and everlasting; in the middle distance to the
left is a nebulous haze of light, while in the foreground the rocks
are bursting open and the flames rush through.

Figures of men, possessed by the energy and agony of creation, are seen wrestling with the elements
of fire and earth.

One of these figures, having done his work, floats away from the glow of the fire across the
transparent water, while others of his creative family have quite passed the struggling stage
of movement and are reclining permanent and gigantic to the right
of the picture.

The same idea is repeated in the chain of draped women who are emerging
from the watery deep; at first they are swept along in isolation,
then they fly in closer company, next they dance and finally walk
in orderly procession.

But Chaos, for all this, is a unity; of all material forms it is
the most ancient form; Cosmos however is the long-drawn tale beginning
with the day when "The Spirit of God brooded on the face of the waters."

Cosmos might have been Watts' synthetic pictorial philosophy; Herbert Spencer with his pen,
and he with his brush, as it were, should labour side by side. But this was not to be; the Directors
of the North-Western Railway declined the artist's generous offer, and he had to get his "Cosmos"
painted by degrees. On the whole, perhaps, we should be thankful that the railway company liberated
Watts from this self-imposed task. We remember that Dante in his exile set out to write "Il
Convivio," a Banquet of so many courses that one might tremble at the prospect of sitting down
to it; the four treatises we have are interesting, though dry as dust; but if Dante had finished
his Banquet, he might never have had time for his "Divine Comedy"; so perhaps, after all, we
shall be well content to be without Watts' "Cosmos," remembering what we have gained thereby. Besides,
the continuous and spontaneous self-revelation of an artist or a
poet is sometimes truer than a rigid predetermined plan.

A few words from the pen of the artist, appearing by way of preface to a book, "A Plain Handicraft,"
may here be quoted to indicate the strong views Watts took on the "Condition-of-England Question."
His interest in art was not centred in painting, or sculpture, or himself, or his fellow artists.
He believed in the sacred mission of art as applied to profane things. We see how closely he
adheres to the point of view made so famous by Ruskin. Both Watts and Ruskin, one feels, belong
rather to the days of Pericles, when everything was best in the state because the citizens
gave themselves up to it and to each other. Writing of the necessity and utility of reviving Plain
Handicrafts among the mass of the people, the painter of "Mammon"
says:

"... When the object is to vitalise and develop faculties--the
especial inheritance of the human race, but strangely dormant in our
time among the largest section of the community--the claim becomes
one that cannot be ignored.

Looking at the subject from a point of view commanding a wide horizon,
it seems to be nothing less than a social demand, rising into a religious
duty, to make every endeavour in the direction of supplying all possible
compensating consolation for the routine of daily work, become so
mechanical and dreary.

When home is without charm, and country without attaching bonds, the existence of a nation
is rudely shaken; dull discontent leading to sullen discontent, may readily become active animosity.
There will not be men interested in the maintenance of law and order, who feel that law and
order bring them no perceptible formal advantage. In the race for wealth, it has been forgotten
that wealth alone can offer neither dignity nor permanent safety; no dignity, if the man of the
population is degraded by dull toil and disgraceful competition; no safety, if large numbers
drag on a discontented existence, while the more active and intelligent leave our shores.

"Whether
or not our material wealth is to be increased or diminished, it is certain that a more general
well-being and contentment must be striven for. A happy nation will be a wealthy nation, wealthy
in the best sense, in the assurance that its children can be depended upon in case of need,
wealth above the fortune of war, and safety above the reach of fortune.

The rush of interest in the direction of what are understood as worldly advantages, has trampled
out the sense of pleasure in the beautiful, and the need of its presence
as an element essential to the satisfaction of daily life, which must
have been unconsciously felt in ages less absorbed in acquiring wealth
for itself alone.

In olden times our art congresses would have been as needless as congresses to impress on the general
mind the advantages of money-making would be in these." (Plain Handicraft, 1892.)

In G.F. Watts, however, we have an instance of a man who, although he sees and is attracted
by abstract principles of ethics, does not perceive the manner of their final application; he is
not really scientific. It might be thought that the painter of "Greed and Toil," "The Sempstress,"
"Mammon," "The Dweller of the Innermost," and "Love Triumphant," would be able to indicate, in that
sphere of social activity called "practical politics," how these principles could find their
expression and realisation. It is interesting, however, to know, and to have it authoritatively
from his own pen, that Watts at least could not discern either the time or the application of
these ethical principles to the affairs of the great world; for in 1901 there appeared from
his hand a quasi-philosophical defence of the South African War, entitled "Our Race as Pioneers."
He said:

"Inevitable social and political measures claim obedience, which may be at variance with the
spiritual and ethical conscience; but there comes in the question of necessity, apparent laws
that contest with pure right and wrong; ... and as we must live, nothing remains but commerce;
and commerce cannot be carried on without competition, and pushing the limits of our interests.
The result of competition can only be conflict--war, unless some other outlet can be found.
Commerce will not supply this; its very activity, which is its health and life, will produce the
ambition, envy, and jarring interests that will be fatal to peace.... The principle, Movement,
must have its outlet, its safety valve. This has always been war.... The goddess Trade, the modern
Pandora, has in her box all the evils that afflict mankind.... How can Commerce, as understood
by the principles of trade, abolish war?"

"The simple principles of right and wrong are easily defined," and perhaps easily painted; "but
the complexity of human affairs and legitimate interests, conducing to the activity demanded
by the great law, Movement, makes some elasticity necessary, even where there is the most
honest desire to be just."

Thus, from his own words, we see how the painter transcends the politician; he is a stimulator,
he gives hints, not instructions; he is commanding, imperative, but he does not show how,
nor stay to devise ways and means. He even perceives, as he thinks, that though the commands
of his pictures, "Faith," "Conscience," and "Love Triumphant," be given, yet they cannot be obeyed
fully because of "Evolution" and "Destiny," or as he calls it "Movement."

To his intimate friends Watts, who was so introspective, often complained of "the duality of my
nature." In the midst of affairs, financial or worldly, on questions of criticism, personal
conduct and the like, the great artist was variable and uncertain. Though humble and self-deprecatory
to an extreme degree, he made mistakes from which he could escape only with great difficulty;
and he suffered much from depression and melancholy.

This man, however, never appears in the pictures; when once in his studio, alone facing his
canvas, Watts is final, absolute, an undisturbed and undistracted unity, conscious of that
overwhelming "rightness" known to a Hebrew prophet. Whatever Time or Death may have in store
for him or any man, there riding swiftly above them is Judgment the Absolute One; whatever theories
may be spun from the perplexed mind of the magazine writer about Expansion and Necessity, there sits
the terrible "Mammon" pilloried for all time. Indeed, he said his pictures were "for all time";
they were from the mind and hand of the seer, who, rising from his personality, transcended it;
and as the personality of dual nature gradually fades away into the forgotten past, the Messenger
emerges ever more and more clearly, leaving his graphic testimonies spread out upon a hundred
canvases. It might be said as a final estimate that the value and sincerity of Watts' work becomes
intensified a hundred-fold when we remember that its grandeur and dignity, its unity and its
calm, was the work of a man who seldom, if ever, attained internal peace. Like some who speak
wiser than they know, so Watts gave himself as an instrument to inspirations of which he was
not able, through adverse circumstances, to make full use. Thus was the Man divided from the
Messenger.

III

A REVIEW OF WATTS' WORK

Failing the "Progress of the Cosmos," we
have from the mind and brush of Watts a great number of paintings,
which may be grouped according to their character.

Such divisions must not be regarded as rigid or official, for often
enough a picture may belong to several groups at the same time.

For the purpose of our survey, however, we divide them as follows:

1.

Monumental or Historical Paintings and Frescoes.

2.

Humanitarian or Social Paintings. 3. Portraits, private and public. 4. Biblical Paintings. 5.
Mythical Paintings. 6. "Pessimistic" Paintings. 7. The Great Realities. 8. The Love Series. 9. The Death
Series. 10. Landscapes. 11. Unclassified Paintings. 12. Paintings of Warriors.

"Caractacus" was the first of the monumental paintings; by them Watts appears as a citizen and a patriot,
whose insular enthusiasm extends backward to the time when the British chief Caractacus fought
and was subdued by the Romans. He enters also into the spirit of the resistance offered to the
Danes by King Alfred. George and the Dragon are included by him in
the historical though mythical events of our race.

Undoubtedly the most remarkable of Watts' monumental paintings is the fresco entitled "Justice;
a Hemicycle of Lawgivers," painted for the Benchers' Hall in Lincoln's Inn. It is 45 x 40
feet. Here Watts, taking the conventional and theoretical attitude, identifies law-making with
justice, and in his fresco we see thirty-three figures, representing Moses, Zoroaster, Pythagoras,
Confucius, Lycurgus and his fellow-Greeks, Numa Pompilius and other Romans. Here figures also
Justinian, the maker of the great Code; Mahomet, King Alfred, and even Attila the Hun. The painting
represents the close of this phase of Watts' work; he received a gift of £500 and a gold cup
in memory of its achievement.

In England, at least, no one has ever attempted or accomplished anything in fresco of so great
dimensions. Watts' monumental genius drove him to sculpture on the
grand scale also.

"Hugh Lupus" for the Duke of Westminster, and "Physical Energy," upon which he laboured at
intervals during twenty-five years of his life, are his great triumphs in this direction. It
is not the first time that an artist deficient in health and strength has made physical energy into
a demigod. Men often, perhaps always, idealise what they have not. It was the wish of the sculptor
to place a cast of "Physical Energy" on the grave of Cecil Rhodes on the Matoppo Hills in
South Africa, indicating how Watts found it possible (by idealising
what he wished to idealise), to include within the scope and patronage
of his art, the activities, aims, and interests of modern Colonial
Enterprise.

Humanitarian Paintings.--The earliest of these, "The Wounded Heron," asks our pity for the
injured bird, and forbids us to join in the enthusiasm of the huntsman who hurries for his
suffering prize. The same thought is expressed in the beautiful "Shuddering Angel," who is covering
his face with his hands at the sight of the mangled plumage scattered on the altar of fashion.
In the large canvases, "A Patient Life of Unrequited Toil," and "Midday Rest," we have paintings
of horses, both of them designed to teach us consideration for the "friend of man." "The Sempstress"
sings us Tom Hood's "Song of the Shirt."

"The Good Samaritan" (see Plate VII.) properly belongs to this series. It was presented by
the artist to the citizens of Manchester, as an expression of his admiration of Thomas Wright,
the prison philanthropist, whose work was at that time (1852) creating a sensation in the north
of England. If we compare this painting with other Biblical subjects executed at a later date, we
see how much Watts' work has gained since then. The almost smooth texture and the dark shadows
of the Manchester picture have given way to ruggedness and transparency.
Still, "The Good Samaritan" is simple and excellent in purpose and
composition.

A little known painting entitled "Cruel Vengeance,"
seems to be a forecast of "Mammon"; a creature with human form and
vulture's head presses under his hand a figure like the maiden whose
head rests on Mammon's knee. In "Greed and Labour" the seer's eye
pierces through the relations between the worker and his master; Labour
is a fine strong figure loaded with the implements of his toil, with
no feeling of subjection in his manly face; on the other hand, the
miser creeping behind him, clutching the money bags, represents that
Greed who, as Mammon, is seen sitting on his throne of death.  On this, Mr Thompson,
one of the underwriters, entreated them to desist, and proposed that the matter should be placed
in the hands of arbitrators.  Mr Twigg and Mr Cash agreed accordingly to postpone proceedings
till they could hear from their principal partner, Mr Ferris, who was still in Jamaica; and
finally consented, subject to his approval, to submit the matter to arbitration.

"Then let us forthwith proceed to select a dozen good men and true between us--you shall choose
six and we'll choose six, and we'll bind ourselves to abide by the decision to which they may
come," said Mr Thompson.  As it was considered in Ireland, as well as across the Channel, that
a good dinner enjoyed by sensible people produces good feeling and good fellowship, it was
agreed by the contending parties that they should invite the twelve arbitrators and lay the
matter of the supposed loss of the Ouzel Galley before them on that occasion.  As Captain Tracy
was rightly considered to be able to offer an enlightened opinion on the subject, he was requested
to come up to Dublin to afford them all the information he possessed.  Though he hated the
land journey, and looked upon it as a more dangerous adventure than he would a voyage round
the world, he could not refuse to comply with their request.  He therefore arranged to leave
Norah with Mrs Massey, to whom, though her own heart was well-nigh broken, she could afford
comfort and sympathy during his absence.  Packing up his valise, girding his sword to his side,
and sticking a brace of pistols in his belt under his cloak, he set off by the stage, fully
expecting to have to fight his way through half a score of highwaymen and footpads at the least.
Still, thinking it possible that the Ouzel Galley might arrive, he sent a boat down the harbour
the evening before his departure, which returned only just as he was about to start with the
information that no Ouzel Galley was in sight.

Notwithstanding his expectation of being attacked by Rapparees or other robbers, he reached
Dublin in safety, and was welcomed by Mr Twigg, who took him to his own house that they might
discuss together the subject in hand.

"A sad affair this, the loss of our good ship.  We expected to realise a fine percentage by
her cargo, and now we not only lose that, but our friends refuse to pay the insurance," observed
the merchant.  "You surely, Captain Tracy, must be convinced that she went down in the hurricane,
or has been captured and destroyed by the enemy."

"I am not at all convinced of either one or the other," answered Captain Tracy, bluntly.  "She
was, or, I may venture to say, she is, as stout-built a ship ever floated, and I hold to the
opinion that she would not have foundered while any other craft could keep above water. I hear,
indeed, that two or three vessels which were caught in that same hurricane, though severely
damaged, got at last safely into port.  Mr Ferris wrote word, as you are aware, sir, that,
after a thorough examination of the coast, no signs were discovered of her having been driven
on shore, as all the vessels wrecked were identified and she was not among them.  If she had
been captured by the enemy, her master, Owen Massey, would have found means to communicate
with us and let us know that he and his people were prisoners.  By a letter from my son, I
hear that there are still some picarooning villains infesting those seas, but they generally
attack smaller fry than the Ouzel Galley.  She was, as you are aware, well armed and well manned,
and I can answer for it that Owen Massey would not have been taken by surprise, and would have
beaten off in a fair fight any such craft, as he would any privateer of equal or, I may venture
to say, of considerably superior force.  His orders were to avoid fighting if he could do so
with due regard to his safety-- and I never knew him disobey orders from the time he first
came to sea with me."

"Then, from what you say, Captain Tracy, your opinion is opposed to the interests of the firm,"
observed Mr Twigg, in a tone which showed that he was somewhat annoyed.

"I express the opinion I hold, sir, and you never found Gerald Tracy say or do anything contrary
to the interests of his employers," answered the captain firmly.  "What you want to obtain,
sir, is a rightful decision; and my belief and hope is that, if the insurance money were paid
to you, you would have to refund it."

"You only say what is true, captain, and you will pardon me for my remark," exclaimed the merchant,
who was really an upright and generous-hearted man.  "Nothing would give me greater satisfaction
than to see the Ouzel Galley coming in under charge of her young master, with or without her
cargo, however much thereby Ferris, Twigg, and Cash might be out of pocket.  We'll now go and
join our friends--and I beg you to believe that nothing you may say will alter the respect
in which I hold you."

The matter on which the party had been assembled was soon discussed. Some were of opinion that
the Ouzel Galley had been lost; others, that she had been captured; while several held with
Captain Tracy that she was still afloat, perhaps dismasted or waterlogged, but that she would
in time find her way home.  One fact was certain, that she had not yet made her appearance,
and that nothing had been heard of her since she was seen off Bellevue on the morning of the
hurricane.  The important point decided was that the two parties should on no account go to
law, and that they should wait a further decision till efforts had been made to discover the
fate of the missing ship, should she not in the mean time return to port.  Mr Ferris was informed
that she had not yet arrived, and was requested to take all the steps he could devise for discovering
what had become of her.  Among others, he was to apply to the admiral to ascertain if any British
cruisers had seen or heard of such a vessel in distress, while notice was to be sent on board
every merchantman begging the master to make inquiries concerning her, or to afford any information
he might already have obtained.

Captain Tracy, having concluded all the business he had to transact in Dublin, went back to
Waterford.  What a blessed thing is hope!  Poor Norah and the widow were still supported by
the expectation of the Ouzel Galley's return, even although every one else in Waterford believed
that she was long since at the bottom of the ocean.  Day after day and week after week went
by, and still the Ouzel Galley did not appear.  Norah's cheek was becoming thinner and paler,
and the widow's heart sadder and sadder.  It seemed hard indeed to lose her only child; but
she trusted in God.  She knew that He orders all for the best, and not once did she allow her
heart to entertain rebellious thoughts against His love and mercy.  Anxiously did the captain
and Norah look out for letters from Jamaica; they hoped that Gerald would send them information.
At all events, it would be a satisfaction to hear from him; but since his last long letter,
none arrived.  News was received from other sources of a fearful insurrection in the island,
but Norah got no letters from Ellen, and hearing that numerous white people had fallen victims,
she began seriously to fear that her friend might be among them.  The captain wrote to Dublin,
but the house there had not heard from Mr Ferris.  At length another report came which added
much to their anxiety, and if found to be true must plunge them into deep grief.  It was to
the effect that his Majesty's ship Champion, having sailed from Jamaica on a cruise, had not
since been heard of.

"She'll turn up," exclaimed the captain, when he brought home the intelligence, which it would
be useless to attempt concealing from Norah.  The news appeared in print in the public papers,
and an opinion was expressed that she had not been captured by the enemy, it being thought
more likely that she had been capsized in a squall and gone down, or run during a dark night
on one of the numerous reefs in the seas she was navigating and been dashed to pieces before
any of her people could escape.

"I won't believe it, any more than I'll believe that the Ouzel Galley is lost," exclaimed the
captain.  "Don't give way, Norah.  These newspapers tell lies; they're published for no other
object.  I shouldn't be surprised if we hear that the Champion has never been missing, and
that the admiral has sent her on some particular service; probably the next packet from Jamaica
will give us an account of her return to Port Royal."

Still poor Norah could not restrain her tears.  "I don't believe that she's lost, Norah.  Don't,
now!" repeated her father.  The captain, indeed, did his best to comfort her, but it was a
hard matter for him; especially as he himself, notwithstanding his bold assertions, knew how
likely it was that the sloop of war had really been lost.  His honest heart was racked with
grief as he thought that the days of his gallant young son had been cut short.  Fresh despatches
arrived from Jamaica, detailing the capture of several of the enemy's ships, the return to
port of various British cruisers, and the arrival of merchantmen; but not a word was said about
the Champion.  Further despatches arrived, which appeared in the public prints.  A short paragraph
alone mentioned that all hope of her safety had been given up, while another spoke somewhat
pityingly of the vain notion entertained by a former commander of a well-known Jamaica trader,
the Ouzel Galley, that that vessel was still in existence.  "Indeed," it continued, "go certain
it is that she must be lost, that the masters and pilots of the vessels trading in those seas
have ceased to make inquiries about her."

"I hold to my opinion, notwithstanding," exclaimed the captain; "if others refuse to help in
looking for the good ship, I'll go myself. There's an old proverb that the man who wants a
thing goes for it himself, and I'll not believe that either Owen or Gerald are lost till I've
had a thorough hunt for them.  I've cash enough of my own to fit out a stout vessel, and to
arm and man her too.  I intended it for you, Norah, and Gerald, but there'll be sufficient
left for what you may want, my poor child, even if it comes to the worst; and you must stay
at home and take care of Widow Massey--you've need to comfort each other."

"No, father, if you go I will go; and go I hope you will," said Norah. "Would that you had
ten times as much fortune to fit out as many vessels to search round the shores of the whole
Atlantic.  And, father, you'll take me with you?  I must go; I should die with anxiety were
I to remain behind.  In the voyage I took with you I learnt all about a sea life.  I know the
various dangers I may have to go through, but I don't fear them; I am ready to endure whatever
perils you may be exposed to, and I'll not flinch from them."

Thus Norah argued with her father.

"But Mrs Massey--what will she do without you?" he asked.

"She would not detain me.  Am not I going to assist in the search for her son, as well as in
that for Gerald?" answered Norah.  "Were I Owen Massey's younger brother, she would not hesitate
to send me; she will not do so now.  She has too long lived a life of solitude to object to
being left for a few short months, especially when she can hope that Owen may be found."

Norah had gained her point.  The old captain was really thankful to have her society, and so
often had he braved the dangers of the sea that he no longer feared them for his daughter.
Firm as the captain was in his opinion, few others agreed with him; and when it was known that
he was looking out for a ship, most of his acquaintance pitied him, and whispered that the
loss of his son had turned his head.  Still, nothing any one could say changed his resolution;
indeed, there was something grand in his very obstinacy, and worthy of admiration.  The only
person who stuck to him was Captain O'Brien.

"If I were a younger man, faith, I'd be after going out as mate," exclaimed the brave old captain.
"Whether the lads are alive or dead, the point will be settled, and I am fain to believe that
they are still alive.  If I can't go myself, I'll prove my faith in the undertaking by subscribing
five hundred pounds towards it.  The sooner you get the ship fitted out and put to sea, the
better it will be for my friend Norah--of that I'm very sure."

Though the two old captains were thus of one mind, no one else agreed with them.  The house
of Ferris, Twigg, and Cash would have nothing to do with the matter; they were not inclined
to send good money after bad, and unless they could gain some information, however slight,
that the Ouzel Galley was really in existence, they should consider it folly to send another
vessel to look for her.  They would not even help in searching for a fitting vessel.  Captain
Tracy, however, heard of one which had been brought into Cork harbour as a prize, and, accompanied
by his friend O'Brien, he went over to have a look at her.  She was just the vessel they wanted;
she was ship-rigged, carried twenty guns, and was quite new, having been only a few weeks out
of port when she was captured.  She was of great beam, and would carry four or six more guns,
if necessary.  The purchase was soon completed; and the two captains, having engaged a few
hands to navigate her, brought her round to Waterford, where she could be fitted out under
their own eyes.  One of the points to be settled was her name.  Captain O'Brien, bowing to
Norah, proposed that she should be called Love's Messenger; but to this Norah objected, and
it was finally settled that she should be called the Research.  The captain had devoted Gerald's
prize-money, and the whole sum he had at his own disposal, and the amount contributed by Captain
O'Brien; but still a sum was required for ammunition, stores, and the wages of the crew.  Captain
Tracy was in a dilemma; he might obtain a cargo for the vessel, but then he would have to wait
for a convoy, as no insurance could otherwise be effected on her, and that would cause a delay.
Rather than suffer this, he resolved to sell his patrimony, though very unwilling to do so.
Captain O'Brien, who had formerly traded to Bristol, had gone over to that port to look out
for efficient officers and any good men he could find to form part of the crew; the remainder
could be obtained at Waterford.

Captain Tracy was setting off one morning, resolved to make the final arrangements with his
lawyer for the disposal of his property, when just as he left his house he was accosted by
a man, whose ragged dress, shoeless feet, and thin cheeks showed that he was suffering from
the extreme of poverty.  Captain Tracy's well-practised eye convinced him at once, before the
man had spoken, that he was a sailor, and believing that he came to beg, he put his hand into
his pocket to relieve his necessities, when the man, touching his battered hat, addressed him,
"Plase, yer honour, are you Captain Tracy?"

"I am.  What is it you want with me?" asked the captain.

"Shure, I'm glad to hear it, for I've been looking for yer honour for many a day," answered
the man, "as I've made a vow, if you were still in the land of the living, to give you a message
from a dying shipmate, and my mind couldn't rest aisy till I'd done it."

"What's the message, my friend?  Is it a long or a short one?" asked the captain, eyeing the
man steadily, to judge whether he was speaking with sincerity or uttering a falsehood.  "What
ship did you belong to, my friend?"

"The Fair Rosamond, yer honour, homeward-bound from Port Royal.  We met with misfortunes from
the time of sailing.  We had Yellow Jack aboard us; then a course of foul wind, and when about
a hundred leagues from the chops of the Channel, we were dismasted in a heavy gale; and at
last, after driving about for many a day till we ran short of water and provisions, we were
cast on the coast of Connemara, and only I and three others got to shore--the captain and the
rest of the hands who were left alive, for Heaven hadn't spared many of them, were washed away
and drowned.  I was like to have died too, but some country people took care of me, and I pulled
through; and then, remembering my vow, I set off without a shiner in my pocket to give the
message to yer honour."

"Come in, my friend," said the captain, by this time convinced that the man was speaking the
truth, and becoming anxious to hear what he had got to say.  The stranger looked at his ragged
garments and hesitated when the captain invited him into the parlour, where Norah was seated,
and bade him take a chair; however, plucking up courage, he did as he was desired.  Captain
Tracy having briefly told Norah what he had just heard, turned to the seaman.

"You have not yet given me your name," he said.

"It's Larry Cregan, yer honour.  You may trust to what I say, for I wouldn't desave yer honour,
that I wouldn't," answered the man.

"Well, Larry, let me hear all about this message," said the captain, "for you haven't given
me a hint yet what it is."

"Well, thin, yer honour, it's nothing but the truth I'll spake," began Larry.  "We had well-nigh
half our crew pressed out of the Fair Rosamond, and had to make up our number with such hands
as the captain could get without being over particular.  Among them was a countryman of mine--Tim
Reardon, he called himself.  He looked mighty sickly when he came aboard, and we hadn't been
many days at sea before he grew worse. He wasn't fit for work; but we were short-handed, and
he had to stick to his duty.  And says I to myself, `Tim Reardon isn't long for this life,
and so I'll do my best to help him;' and when he was aloft or whatever he had to do, I always
kept near him, and helped him many a time when he hadn't strength to pull and haul by himself.
This won his heart and made him wish, as he said, to do me a good turn; but that wasn't ever
likely to be in his power.  He grew worse and worse, and at last could no longer crawl upon
deck.  I used to sit by him when it was my watch below, and spake such words to comfort him
as I could think of.  One day, howsomdever, he says to me, `Larry, I've got something on my
conscience, and something else in my pocket which I want you to take charge of.'

"`Anything to serve ye, Tim,' says I.

"`I've been an outrageous wicked fellow all my life, and have done all sorts of bad things,'
says Tim.  `I've consorted with pirates, and have seen many a robbery and cruel murther committed--but
I won't talk of that now.  I can't do much good, I'm afraid, but what I can I wish to do, what
I'd made up my mind some time ago, when I was well-nigh dying and should have slipped my cable
if it hadn't been for the care I received from a countryman, who took pity on me and nursed
me as if I'd been his brother.  As I got better he told me to cheer up, as he felt sure I should
live.  "Now, Tim," says he, "if you ever get to Old Ireland, I want you to find out Captain
Tracy, who lives near to Waterford, and tell him that I am alive, and, please Heaven, will
one day get back to see him and his daughter.  I can't tell him whereabouts to look for me,
for the best of reasons, that I don't know where I am-- nor have I any chance of making my
escape; but you, Tim, may some day get free, and promise me, if you do, that you will take
this message to Captain Tracy, and say that hope keeps me alive."'

"`But maybe Captain Tracy won't believe me?' says I.  `If he doesn't, his daughter will; and
to make sure, take this bit of paper and show it them,' he replied. "Don't you want Wilmet to
hold your hands and make you open your mouth?" said Lance, laughing.

Gertrude, who had already received the Indian arrival, met Angela, who was bounding up to see to her
charge, with, "Not come in yet! She is gone out with the children quite happily, with Awdrey's doll
in her arms. Come and enjoy each other in peace."

"In the office, please," said Angela.

"That is home. We shall be our four old selves."

Lance opened the office door, and gave a hint to Mr. Lamb, while they
looked at each other by the fire.

Bernard was by far the most altered. The others were slightly changed, but still their "old selves,"
while he was a grave responsible man, looking older than Lancelot, partly from the effects
of climate; but Angela saw enough to make her exclaim, "Here we are!

Don't you feel as if we were had down to Felix to be blown up?"

"Not a bit altered," said Bernard, looking at the desks and shelves of ledgers, with the photographs
over the mantelpiece--Felix, Mr. Froggatt, the old foreman, and a
print of Garofalo's Vision of St. Augustine, hung up long ago by Felix,
as Lance explained, as a token of the faith to which all human science
and learning should be subordinated.

"A declaration of the Pursuivant," said Angela. "How Fulbert did look out for Pur! I believe
it was his only literature."

"Phyllis declares," said Bernard, "that nothing so upsets me as a failure in Pur's arrival."

"And this is Pur's heart and centre!" said Robina.

"Only," added Angela, "I miss the smell of burnt clay that used to pervade the place, and that
Alda so hated."

"Happily the clay is used up," said Lance. "I could not have brought Gertrude and the children
here if the ceramic art, as they call it, had not departed. Cherry was so delighted at our
coming to live here. She loved the old struggling days."

"Fulbert said he never felt as if he had been at home till he came here. He never TOOK to Vale
Leston."

"Clement and Cherry have settled in very happily," said Robina, "with convalescent clergy in the
Vicarage."

"I say, Angel, let us have a run over there," cried Bernard, "you and I together, for a bit of
mischief."

"Do, DO let us! Though this is real home, our first waking to perception and naughtiness, it is
more than Vale Leston. We seem to have been up in a balloon all those five happy years."

"A balloon?" said Bernard. "Nay, it seems to me that till they were over, I never thought at all
except how to get the most rollicking and the finest rowing out of
life.

It seems to me that I had about as much sense as a green monkey."

"Something sank in, though," said Lance; "you did not drift off like poor Edgar."

"Some one must have done so," said Angela. "I wanted to ask you, Lancey, about advertising for
my little Lena's people; the Bishop said I ought."

"I say," exclaimed Bernard, "was it her father that was Fulbert's mate? I thought he was afraid
of your taking up with him. You didn't?"

"No, no. Let me tell you, I want you to know. Field and a little wife came over from Melbourne
prospecting for a place to sit down in. They had capital, but the poor wife was worn out and ill,
and after taking them in for a night, Fulbert liked them. Field was an educated man and a
gentleman, and Ful offered them to stay there in partnership. So they stayed, and by and by
this child was born, and the poor mother died. The two great bearded men came galloping over
to Albertstown from Carrigaboola, with this new born baby, smaller
than even Theodore was, and I had the care of her from the very first,
and Field used to ride over and see the little thing."

"And--?" said Bernard, in a rather teasing voice, as his eyes actually looked at Angela's left
hand.

"I'll own it DID tempt me. I had had some great disappointments with my native women, running wild
again, and I could not bear my child having a horrid stepmother; and there was the glorious
free bush life, and the horses and the sheep! But then I thought of you all saying Angel had
broken out again; and by and by Fulbert came and told me that he
was sure there was some ugly mystery, and spoke to Mother Constance,
and they made me promise not to take him unless it was cleared up.

Then, as you know, dear Ful's horse fell with him; Field came and fetched me to their hut,
and I was there to the last. Ful told each of us again that all must be plain and explained before
we thought of anything in the future. He, Henry Field, said he had great hopes that he should
be able to set it right. Then, as you know, there was no saving dear Fulbert, and after that
Mother Constance's illness began. Oh! Bear, do you recollect her coming in and mothering us
in the little sitting-room?

I could not stir from her, of course, while she was with us. And after that, Harry Field came
and said he had written a letter to England, and when the answer
came, he would tell me all, and I should judge!

But I don't think the answer ever did come, and he went to Brisbane to see if it was at the
bank; and there he caught a delirious fever, and there was an end of it

At that moment something between a whine or a call of "sister" was heard. Up leapt Angela and
hurried away, while Lance observed, "Well!

That's averted, but I am sorry for her."

"It was not love," said Robina.

"Or only for the child," said Bernard; "and that would have been a dangerous speculation."

"The child or something else has been very good for her," said Lance; "I never saw her so gentle
and quiet."

"And with the same charm about her as ever," said Bernard. "I don't wonder that all the fellows fall in
love with her. I hope she won't make havoc among Clement's sick clergy."

"I suppose we ought to go up and fulfil the duties of society," said Robina, rising. "But first,
Bear, tell me how is Phyllis?"

"Pretty fair," he answered. "Resting with her mother, but she has never been quite the thing of
late. I almost hope Sir Ferdinand will see his way to keeping us at home, or we shall have to
leave our little Lily."

Interruption occurred as a necessary summons to "Mr. Mayor," and the paternal conclave was broken
up, and had to adjourn to Gertrude's tea in the old sitting-room.

"I see!" exclaimed Agatha, as she looked at the party of children
at their supplementary table.

"I see what the likeness is in that child. Don't you, Dolores? Is it not to Wilfred Merrifield?"

"There
is very apt to be a likeness between sandy people, begging your pardon, Angel," said Gertrude.

"Yes, the carroty strain is apt to crop up in families," said Lance, "like golden tabbies, as
you ladies call your stable cats."

"All the Mohuns are dark," said Dolores, "and all Aunt Lily's children, except Wilfred; and is not
your Phyllis of that colour?"

"Phyllis's hair is not red, but dark auburn," said Bernard, in a tone like offence.

"I never saw Phyllis," said dark-browed Dolores, "but I have heard the aunts talk over the
source of the--the fair variety, and trace it to the Merrifields. Uncle Jasper is brown, and
so is Bessie; but Susan is, to put it politely, just a golden tabby, and David's baby promises
to be, to her great delight, as she says he will be a real Merrifield. So much for family feeling!"

"Sister,
Sister!" came in a bright tone, "may I go with Pearl and get a stick for Ben? He wants something
to play with! He is eating his perch."

Ben, it appeared, was the pink cockatoo, who was biting his perch with his hooked beak. The children
had finished their meal, and consent was given. "Only, Lena, come here," said Angela, fastening
a silk handkerchief round her neck, and adding, "Don't let Lena go on the dew, Pearl; she is not
used to early English autumn, I must get her a pair of thicker boots."

"What is her name?" asked Agatha, catching the sound.

"Magdalen Susanna. Her father made a point of it, instead of his wife's name, which, I think, was
Caroline."

"I don't think I ever knew a Magdalen except my own elder sister," said Agatha, "and Susanna!
Did you say Miss Merrifield had a sister Susan?"

"An excellent, sober-sided, dear old Susan! Yes, Susanna was their mother's name," said Dolores
"and now that you have put it into my head, little Lena, when she is animated, puts me more in
mind of Bessie than even of Wilfred, though the colouring is different. Why?"

"Did you never hear," said Agatha, "that there was one of the brothers who was a bad lot, and
ran away. My sister says Wilfred is like him. I believe," she added, "that he was her romance!"

"Ha!"
exclaimed Bernard, "that's queer! We had a clerk in the bank who gave his name as Meriton, and
who cut and ran the very day he heard that Sir Jasper Merrifield was coming out as Commandant.
Yes, he was carroty. I rarely saw Wilfred at Clipstone, but this might very well have been
the fellow, afraid to face his uncle."

Angela did not look delighted.

"She is not destitute, you know," she said, "I am her guardian, and she will have about two
hundred a year."

"Is there a will?" asked Lance.

"Oh, yes, I have it upstairs! It is all right. It was at the bank at Brisbane, and they kept a
copy. I brought her because the Bishop said it was my duty to find out whether there were
any relations."

"Certainly," said Bernard. "In our own case, remember what joy Travis's letter was!"

Angela was silent, and presently said, "You shall see the will when I have unpacked it, but there
is no doubt about my being guardian."

"Probably not," said Bernard, rather drily.

"If it be a valid will, signed by his proper name," said Lance.

Whereupon the two brothers fell into a discussion on points of law, not unlike the editor of
the Pursuivant, as he had become known to his family, but most unlike the Bernard they had known
before his departure for the East. At any rate it dissipated the emotional tone of the party;
and by and by, when Bernard and Angela had agreed to make a bicycle rush to Minsterham the
next day, "that is," said Angela "if Lena is happy enough to spare me," the Harewoods took leave.

When
the children had gone to bed, and Angela had stayed upstairs so long that Gertrude augured that
she was waiting till her charge had gone to sleep, and that they
should have no more of her henceforth but "Lena's baulked stepmother,"
she came down, bringing a document with her, which she displayed before
her brothers.

There was no question but that it was a will drawn up in due form,
and very short, bequeathing his property at Carrigaboola, Queensland,
to his daughter, Magdalen Susanna, and appointing Fulbert Underwood
and Angela Margaret Underwood and "my brother Samuel" her guardian.

It was dated the year after his daughter's birth, and was signed Henry Field, with a word
interposed, which, as Lance said, might be anything, but was certainly the right length for the
first syllables of Merrifield. Bernard looked at it, and declared it was, to the best of his belief,
the same signature as his former clerk used to write.

"And this," he said, looking at the seal, "is the crest of the Merrifield's--the demi lion. I
know it well on Sir Jasper's seal ring."

"Have you nothing else, Angel?" asked Lance.

"Here is the certificate of her baptism, but that will tell you nothing."

No more it did, it only called the child the daughter of Henry and Caroline Field, and the surname
was omitted in the bequest.

"Who was the mother?" asked Lance.

"I never exactly knew. Fulbert thought she had been a person whom Field had met in America or somewhere,
and married in a hurry. Fulbert said she was rather pretty, but she was a poor helpless, bewildered
thing, and very poorly. He wanted to bring her to Albertstown for fit help and nursing; but
she cried so much at the idea of either horse or wagon over the-no-roads, that it was put off
and off and she had only his shepherd's housekeeper, so it was no wonder she did not live! Field
was dreadfully cut up, and blamed himself extremely for having given way to her; but it is
as likely as not the journey would have been just as fatal."

"Poor thing!"

"You never heard her surname?"

"No, it did not signify."

"He did not name his child after her?"

"No. I remember Fulbert saying he supposed she should be called Caroline; and he exclaimed,
'No, no, I always said it should be Magdalen and Susanna.'"

"My sister's name," repeated Agatha.

"And Susan Merrifield," added Dolores.

"But she is mine, mine!" cried Angela, with a tone like herself, of a sort of triumphant jealousy.
"They can't take her away from me!"

"Gently, Angela, my dear," said Lance, in a tone so like Felix of old, that it almost startled her.
"Tell me what arrangement is this about the property.

Your share of Fulbert's has never been taken out, I think?"

"No, Macpherson, the purchaser, you know, of Fulbert's share, pays
me my amount out of it, and agreed to do the same by Lena.

I don't think the value is quite what it used to be. It rather went down under Field; but Macpherson
is all there, and it has been a better season. I could sell it all to him, hers and mine both;
but I have thought how it would be, as it is her native country, and I have not parted with
my own to go out again to Carrigaboola, and bring her up there. I assure you I am up to it," she
added, meeting an amused look.

"I know a good deal more about sheep farming than either of you gentlemen. I can ride anything
but a buckjumper, and boss the shepherds, and I do love the life,
no stifling in fields and copses!

I only wish you would come too, Bear; it would do you ever so much good to get a little red paint
on those white banker's hands of yours."

"Well done, sister Angel!" And the brothers both burst out laughing.

"But really," proceeded Angela, "it is by far the best hope of keeping up Christianity among those
hands.

Fulbert had a sort of little hut for a chapel, and once a month one of the clergy from Albertstown
came over there; I used to ride with him when I could, and if I were there, I could keep a good
deal going till the place is more peopled, and we can get a cleric. It is a great opportunity, not
to be thrown away. I can catch those cockatoos better than a parson.

And there are the blacks."

The brothers had not the least doubt of it. Angela was Angela still, for better or for worse.
Or was it for worse? Yet she went up to bed chanting -

"His sister
she went beyond the seas, And died an old maid among black savagees."

CHAPTER
XXIII--WILLOW WIDOWS

"Set your heart at rest. The fairyland buys
not that child of me. - "MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM."

An expedition
to Minsterham finished the visit of Dolores and her faithful "Nag,"
whose abilities as an assistant were highly appreciated, and who came
home brilliantly happy to keep her remaining holiday with Magdalen;
while Dolores repaired to Clipstone. Bernard had been obliged to go
to London, to report himself to Sir Ferdinand Travis Underwood, but
his wife and little girl were the reigning joy at Clipstone. Phyllis
looked very white, much changed from the buxom girl who had gone out
with her father two years ago. She had never recovered the loss of
the little boy, and suffered the more from her husband's inability
to bear expression, and it was an immense comfort to her to speak
freely of her little one to her mother.

The little Lilias looked
frail, but was healthy, happy, and as advanced as a well-trained companion
child of six could well be, and the darling of the young aunts, who
expected Dolores to echo their raptures, and declare the infinite
superiority of the Ceylonese to "that little cornstalk," as Valetta
said.

"There's no difficulty as to that," said Dolores, laughing.
"The poor little cornstalk looks as if she had grown up under a blight."

"It
is a grand romance though," said Mysie; "only I wish that Cousin Harry
had had any constancy in him."

"I wonder if Magdalen will adopt her!"
was Valetta's bold suggestion.

"Poor Magdalen has had quite adopting
enough to do," said Mysie.

"Besides," said Dolores, "Sister Angela
will never let her go. And certainly I never saw any one more TAKING
than Sister Angela. She is so full of life, and of a certain unexpectedness,
and one knows she has done such noble work. I want to see more of
her."

"You will," said Mysie. "Mamma is going to ask her to come,
for Phyllis says there is no one that Bernard cares for so much. She
was his own companion sister."

"Magdalen might have the little cornstalk,"
said Valetta.

"Well," said Mysie, "it is rather funny to have two--what
shall I say?--willow widows, and a child that is neither of theirs!
How will they settle it?"

Magdalen had heard from Agatha on the first
evening of the arrival of the sister, and the probability of the identification
of little Lena's father with the Henry Merrifield of her former years,
and she was deeply touched by the bestowal of her name--so much that
Nag avoided saying more, but only kissed her and went to bed.

The
Merrifields discussed the subject dispassionately.

Sir Jasper recollected
what his brother had written to him of his anxieties and disappointment
in his son Henry, and of his absconding from Manitoba, since which
time all trace of him had been lost, except in the restoration to
the two brothers in Canada. To the surprise and indignation of Sir
Jasper, there had been no attempt to follow it up.

"If my poor brother
Edgar had done anything of the kind," said Bernard, "none of us would
have rested."

So far as they could put recollections together this
act of restitution must have been made soon after the connection with
Fulbert Underwood began, perhaps at the time of the wife's death.
If there had been another letter, as Sister Angela thought, it was
more recent, certainly within the last two years.

Captain Samuel
Merrifield, of Stokesley, had been on a voyage for four years, and
had not long been at home. His wife had been charged with the forwarding
of the letters that she thought of immediate interest, and there was
an accumulation of those that had been left for his return, as yet
not looked over.

Of course, Sir Jasper impelled him to plunge into
these, and by and by one came to light, which Mrs. Merrifield had
taken "for only some Australian gold mines," and left to wait, especially
as it was directed to his father instead of himself.

It was a letter
full of repentance, and entreaties for forgiveness, describing in
part poor Henry's past life, and adding that the best thing that had
ever befallen him was his association with "such a fellow as Underwood."

It
was to be gathered that Fulbert's uprightness of mind had led him
to the first impulse of restitution, and he went on to mention his
first hasty marriage and the loss of his wife, with the kindness of
the Carrigaboola Sisterhood; above all, of Sister Angela, and declaring
his love and admiration for her, and his sense that she was the one
person who could keep him straight now that her brother was gone.

He
had more than once offered to her, but he found that her brother had
solemnly charged her not to accept him till he had made all his past
clear before her, and could show her that he was acknowledged by his
family, and had his father's forgiveness, and for this he humbly craved,
as one deeply sensible of his own demerits.

It was piteous to think
of the poor fellow waiting and hoping for an answer to such a letter
as this, and dying without one, while all the time it was lying unread
in the Captain's desk, and no one even knew of the changed life and
fresh hopes. Sir Jasper was much moved by it; but Sam said, "Ay, ay!
poor Harry always was a plausible fellow!" and his wife was chiefly
concerned to show that the suppression was not by her fault. Sir Jasper
had brought the will with him, and the certificate of the child's
baptism.

Both were met with a little hesitation. So little had been
said in the letter about the marriage that the Captain wanted to know
more, and also whether the will had been properly proved in Australia,
and whether it had force in England. In that case he was surely the
right person to have the custody of his brother's child. His wife,
who had been bred up in a different school, was not by any means satisfied
that she should be consigned to a member of a Sisterhood.

David came
to Stokesley, saw the letter, and agreed with his brother on the expediency
of obtaining full proof of the validity of the will in both Queensland
and England, and put in hand the writing of inquiries for the purpose,
from the legal authorities at Brisbane, for which purpose Angela had
to be consulted.

She had been (having left the budgerigars to the
delight of Pearl and Awdrey), in the meantime, at Vale Leston, enjoying
the atmosphere of peace that prevailed wherever were Clement and Geraldine,
and hailed with delight by all her old village friends, as well as
Lady Vanderkist and her somewhat thinned flock.

She won Adrian's
heart by skating or golfing with him, and even, on one or two hunting
days, joining in his pursuit of the chase, being altogether, as he
said, ever so much better a fellow than even his youngest sister Joan,
and entrancing them all with tales of kangaroos. Lena had really a
tame kangaroo at Carrigaboola. Oh, why did they not bring it home
as well as Ben, the polly? She quite pined for it, and had tears in
her eyes when it was spoken of.

Indeed the joyous young Vanderkists
were too much for the delicate little girl, and sorry as Angela was
to leave Vale Leston, she was not ungrateful for an invitation to
the Goyle, where there was more room for them than at Clipstone in
the holidays, and with the Bernard Underwoods making it their headquarters.

Lena
and she were much better and happier with "Sister" always at her service,
and Paula and Thekla were delighted to amuse her. Paula was in a state
of delight with Sister Angela, only a little puzzled by the irregularity
of her course, though it was carefully explained that she had never
been under any vows.

"The sooner, then, we start the better," said Mr Ferris, "or business of some sort may prevent
us, and we must not prolong our stay here."

"Then I propose we start to-morrow morning," said Mr Twigg.  "There's nothing like fixing an
early day, as an ardent lover would say, and we couldn't well choose an earlier.  We'll order
the buggies and horses to be at the door on the first sound of the slave-driver's born, so
that we may enjoy the full freshness of the morning."

Mrs Twigg forthwith despatched a messenger with a note to Walton Hall, Mr Pemberton's estate,
which was situated about four miles inland from Bellevue, asking Miss Pemberton and her brother
to come over at once, that they might be ready to start at daybreak.

The proposed expedition formed the subject of conversation for the rest of the evening, Archie
Sandys being especially pleased that his suggestion had been so readily adopted.  He and two
other young book-keepers were to form members of the party.  The family had collected for an
early supper, when horses' hoofs were heard approaching the house; and it being announced that
several gentlemen were coming, Mr Twigg, followed by half a dozen blacks, hurried out to meet
them. He speedily returned, accompanied by two strangers in military uniforms, whom he introduced
as Major Malcolm and Lieutenant Belt.  The officers bowed to the ladies and shook hands with
the gentlemen, and at once felt themselves at home.

"Supper will be ready in about ten minutes; in the mean time, will you go to your rooms and
make yourselves comfortable after your ride," said Mr Twigg.

"What, did you expect us?" exclaimed the major.

"We always expect guests," answered Mr Twigg, laughing--"at all events, we are always ready
for them.  Let me show you the way, gentlemen; your valises are already there."

On their return, Major Malcolm, a fine, soldierly looking man who had apparently seen much
service, explained that he and Lieutenant Belt were on their way to Montego Bay, having to
inspect several small fortresses along the coast.  "We pushed on, however," he continued, "rather
faster than was prudent, and knocked up our horses so that they require a day's rest before
proceeding further; and we must therefore impose ourselves on you as guests, unless you turn
us out."

"My dear sir, you and your men and horses are perfectly welcome to remain as long as you please,"
answered Mr Twigg; "and so you would be if you'd brought your whole regiment, though we might,
in that case, have found some difficulty in housing you."

Of course Major Malcolm and the lieutenant heard of the proposed expedition.  Mr Ferris suggested
that it could be put off, but the major begged that that should on no account be done, and
that if steeds could be found for him and Lieutenant Belt, they might accompany the party.

"With great pleasure, my dear sir; we can mount you without difficulty," said Mr Twigg; and
turning round, he gave the order to old Martin, who was standing behind his chair.  Supper
was still proceeding when Miss Pemberton and her brother Jack arrived and were heartily welcomed.
She was a Creole, but with far more life and animation than the generality of her fair countrywomen;
still, her cheek, pure as alabaster, was colourless; but her figure was good, and her features
remarkably handsome.  Altogether, she fully merited the encomiums Ellen had passed on her.
She had been sent to school in England, and was thoroughly well educated and accomplished.
Her brother Jack had had the same advantage, though he spoke, unless when excited, with the
usual Creole drawl.  From the few remarks he made--for he was not much addicted to talking--he
was, however, not destitute of spirit; and, among his other good qualities, he evidently looked
upon his lovely sister with the most devoted admiration.  The two young people promised to
be a pleasant addition to the party.

The family retired earlier than usual, that they might be ready to start at the hour fixed
on.  The gallant major and the young subaltern were escorted to their room by Mr Twigg.

"I little expected to find two such houris in this out-of-the-way spot," observed the major,
as he was throwing off his uniform.

"Nor did I," exclaimed the lieutenant.  "It is difficult to decide which of the two is the
most charming, but I am most inclined to lose my heart to the young lady with the roses in
her cheeks.  She hasn't been long in this burning clime, I suspect, or they would have faded
ere this."

"We shall not be rivals, then," observed the major, standing up in his shirt and trousers,
and striking out with his doubled fists, as was his wont before turning in.  "I prefer the
last arrival, with the classical features and cheeks as pure as the lily--a fit model for Juno.
If I were to be long in her society, I should fall desperately in love with her; but I am not
likely to commit such a folly, and take care that you don't, Belt.  We shall know more about
them to-morrow, and perchance we shall discover that their charms are not so overpowering as
we fancy.  I have often found it to be the case on a second interview."

"I expect to be more enthralled than ever," remarked the lieutenant. "However, I have seldom
found it difficult to break my fetters; so, major, you needn't trouble yourself on my account."

"We shall see by to-morrow evening," said the major.  After a few more remarks in a similar
strain, the two officers, both old campaigners, threw themselves on their beds, and were soon
fast asleep.

They were aroused by a black servant, who, bringing in some large ewers of cold water, lighted
their lamps and announced that the horses would soon be at the door.  On descending to the
hall they found the two young ladies in their riding-habits, whip in hand, ready to mount.
Mrs Twigg and her husband and the other gentlemen soon made their appearance, and the servants
brought round trays with cups of hot chocolate and bottles of liqueur.

"You must fortify yourselves, gentlemen," said Mr Twigg.  "Let me recommend this curacoa; it
is a good preventive against any ill effects from the morning air."

While the major was engaged in sipping his chocolate, the young ladies had gone out, and the
two officers, greatly to their vexation, found that Archie Sandys had performed the office
they had expected to have undertaken, and had assisted Ellen and Fanny to mount.  The horses
provided for the officers were next brought forward.

"Here is your horse, major," said Mr Twigg, pointing to a fine-looking animal; "and, Lieutenant
Belt, I hope you will not find yours inferior."

The two officers mounted, and had every reason to be satisfied with their steeds.  Archie Sandys
assumed the leadership of the party, and as they moved forward he managed to place himself
by the side of Ellen. The carriages started almost immediately afterwards.  Major Malcolm very
quickly found an opportunity of riding up to Miss Pemberton, a position he seemed in no way
disposed to abdicate.  The young lieutenant in vain attempted to gain an equally favourable
place by the side of Ellen, for Archie kept his post pertinaciously, determined not to be out-manoeuvred,
and the road was not of a width to allow of three abreast.  The rest of the gentlemen followed,
talking and joking merrily.

The road led between hedges of prickly-pear, eight or ten feet in height, and often of considerable
width, the broad leaves so closely overlapping each other that they formed a dense mass through
which the light failed to penetrate, bright scarlet flowers and purple fruit ornamenting the
massive wall.  Here and there cocoa-nut trees sprang up from the inner side like oaks or elms
in an English hedgerow, most of them loaded with fruit; while occasionally a cabbage palm or
the palmetto royal towered above them, surpassing its neighbours in graceful beauty, its straight
trunk rising without a branch to the height of a hundred feet or more, crowned by a waving
plume, in the centre of which appeared a tender green shoot.  Through the openings to the right
appeared plantations of sugar-cane, and occasionally fields of Indian corn--the magnificent
yellow cobs, with long, wavy beards, hanging from their vigorous stalks.

"Did you taste the cabbage palm the other day at dinner?" asked Archie.

"Yes, I thought it very nice," answered the young lady, rather surprised at the question.

"Do you know where it came from?" asked Archie.

"From a cabbage garden, I suppose," answered Ellen, laughing.

"No, from the top of one of those lofty trees," answered Archie.  "That is to say, it was at
the top, but to obtain it the tree had to be cut down."

"What a cruel sacrifice!  I should not have eaten it with any satisfaction had I known that,"
exclaimed Ellen.

"We soon get indifferent to such matters in this country," said Archie. "See how many of them
there are in all directions."

"I am afraid that you will become indifferent in other matters," observed Ellen--"to those
slave-whips, for instance, though you say they are only used in cases of necessity.  When the
drivers are judges as to whether that necessity is lawful, the poor slaves are likely to feel
the lash very frequently, I suspect."

"It is found from experience that they cannot otherwise be kept in order," answered Archie.
"I confess that at first I shuddered as I saw the whip used."

"Do the blacks never rebel against such treatment?" asked Ellen.

"They have at times," replied Archie.  "In the year '37 there was an outbreak, and there have
been others at different periods; but they were put down in so rigorous a fashion that the
negroes are not likely again, I fancy, to make the attempt."

"I trust not," said Ellen, "for it would be a fearful thing were these tens of thousands of
blacks, discovering their strength, to rise on their masters and attempt to revenge the wrongs
they have suffered."

The conversation between Ellen and her devoted attendant was, it must be confessed, of a very
unsentimental character; indeed, she would very quickly have put a stop to anything that had
been otherwise, although the romantic scenery through which they were passing might, under
other circumstances, have exercised its influence over her.  Not a breath of wind as yet disturbed
the calm, pure atmosphere; the ocean appeared like a sheet of glass; the blue sky overhead
was undimmed by a cloud; the mountain-tops seen to the right rose above the mass of green,
their outline distinctly marked, though at a considerable distance.  The only sounds which
reached them were the lowing of cattle and the signal horns of the drivers summoning the negroes
to their work.  In a short time the light increased, the sun rose above the ocean, and a gentle
breeze waved the topmost boughs of the trees, breaking the sea below on the left into tiny
wavelets.  Now the road led round a hill, with a steep precipice on the left reaching down
to the water, and high cliffs to the right covered with shrubs and creepers of every hue. 
As it was seen ahead, it appeared as if there was barely room for more than one horse to pass,
and that no carriage could possibly get along without risk of falling over the precipice; but
as they proceeded it widened out, and Archie, notwithstanding Ellen's cautions, insisted on
still keeping his place, riding between her and the edge of the precipice.

"Pray keep behind me, or ride on in front, Mr Sandys," she exclaimed. "You would horrify me
exceedingly were you to fall over the edge; and to save you from running the risk, I am compelled,
you see, to ride so close to the cliff that I run the chance of having my hat torn off by the
boughs above, or getting my shoulder struck by a projecting rock."

Still Archie begged to ride on as he was doing.  "Were your horse to shy, Miss Ferris," he
remarked, "I might be the means of saving you, and I would run every risk for the sake of doing
that."

Ellen laughed.  "I am very ungrateful," she said, "but I cannot allow you to be placed in any
danger on my account: you make me feel uncomfortable, if not nervous, and I am almost inclined
to be angry with you for your disobedience."

Archie at length rode on, though very unwillingly, and the hill being passed the road now struck
more inland, sometimes leading over slight elevations, and at others along the levels for some
distance, when the steeds, trained to a Spanish amble suitable for a tropical climate, got
quickly over the ground.  The groves of tall trees threw a shade across the road which prevented
the heat from being overpowering.  Before the sun had attained its full strength a rocky hill
rose before them with a wood at its base; here they found a tent already pitched, and a fire
at a little distance from it.  A number of black servants, who, it appeared, had been sent
on before, were busily engaged in cooking breakfast.

"De tent for de missee," said a black, Quambo by name, who acted as under-butler to old Martin,
coming forward.  "Dey rest dere till de carriages come if dey like."

The gentlemen threw themselves from their horses, eager to assist Ellen and Miss Pemberton
to dismount, the lieutenant rushing forward and offering his hand to the former, who accepted
it with a smile which sent a pang of jealousy through poor Archie's breast, the gallant major
helping Fanny from her horse.  While the young ladies took advantage of the tent to rest--for
the ride had been much longer than they had been accustomed to take, and they felt somewhat
tired--the gentlemen, lighting their cigars, strolled through the thick wood towards the entrance
of the cavern.  On their way they passed a large lagoon of stagnant water, surrounded by trees,
every branch and leaf reflected on its mirror-like surface with a peculiar clearness.  They
could discover only two holes, which looked like the upper parts of arched doorways. Between
them, in the face of the rock, was a niche in which a statue might have been placed, while
just below it was a basin or hollow in the rock, which appeared to have been formed by art
for the purpose of holding water.

"I shouldn't be surprised if the Spaniards had made a sort of chapel here when they had possession
of the country," observed Lieutenant Belt. "See, that niche looks as if a figure of the Virgin
Mary, for instance, had been placed there.  This basin was evidently made to hold what they
call holy water.  They had probably made an attempt to convert the Indians by introducing their
worship, but finding them obdurate and unable to comprehend its mysteries, put them to death
as a punishment. From an account I read the other day, the island, when first discovered by
Columbus, was thickly populated; but in the course of a few years, after the Spaniards took
possession, the greater number of the natives had been murdered or expended in some other way."

The rest of the party agreed with him.  As they were all getting hungry, they returned to the
camp, where, in a space which had been cleared by the servants, a tablecloth had been spread,
and was already covered with viands, cushions and mats being placed around on which the ladies
could recline.  The carriage party soon arrived, and Mr Twigg, in his cheery voice, summoned
his guests to breakfast, which consisted of numberless West Indian delicacies.  In spite of
the good appetites their ride had given them, most of the party were too eager to explore the
cavern to pay them that attention they undoubtedly deserved.  After the gentlemen had smoked
their cigars, and the ladies had put on costumes more suitable for the object in view than
their riding-habits, headed by Mr Twigg the party set forth, Major Malcolm escorting Miss Pemberton,
and Ellen being attended by Archie and Lieutenant Belt, who was determined no longer to be
cut out.  Mr Ferris had taken charge of Mrs Twigg, who confessed that had not the girls required
her as a chaperone, she would rather have remained at home.

"Martha, indeed, particularly wanted me not to come," she remarked. "She seemed unusually put
out about something or other.  Whether she fancied that the children were not as well as usual,
or for some other cause, I could not guess; but they appeared to me to be so perfectly happy
that I did not think it necessary to listen to her.  She urged, however, that we should come
back before dark, and Mr Twigg agreed that it would be important to get by the cliffs before
sunset; after that, the ride is so easy, and we know it so well that there can be no danger."

This was said as they were proceeding through the wood.  Mr Ferris agreed that it would certainly
be advisable not to delay their departure after they had explored the cavern and taken luncheon,
and that it would be better to endure the heat of the afternoon than to run the risk of travelling
in the dark.  An experienced guide and a supply of torches, consisting of bundles of candlewood
split into small strips, had been provided.  The party stood before the face of the rock.

"What, are we to go in there?" asked Miss Pemberton, in a tone of dismay.

"I am afraid that we shall discover no other mode of ingress," said Mr Twigg, as the guide,
with the torches under his arm, crept through the larger of the two openings.  "Come, Archie,
do you and the rest of you go next," he said, turning to the two book-keepers, "and hail when
the torches are lighted.  You will assist to sweep the passage."

Archie, not very well pleased, obeyed his superior, and in a short time the voices of the young
gentlemen from within were heard shouting, "All right!"  The gallant lieutenant next went down
on his hands and knees, his long legs disappearing through the entrance.  The major stood bowing
to Mrs Twigg, who seemed to consider that it was her duty to go next, that she might be ready
to receive her charges; they, laughing, quickly followed her, the major and the other gentlemen
bringing up the rear. They found themselves in a circular vestibule about twenty feet in diameter
and fourteen in height, with an irregular concave ceiling covered, as were the sides, with
innumerable glittering stalactites, reflecting on their polished surfaces the light of the
torches held by the guide and the young book-keepers, who stood round in a circle, flourishing
them over their heads.  Several columns of stalactite forming arches overhead gave the cavern,
the appearance of a Gothic chapel, while between the pillars various openings led into avenues
which diverged in different directions, apparently running far away into the interior of the
mountain.

"See, there sits the presiding genius of the cavern," said Mr Twigg, taking a torch and advancing
a few steps towards an object which had a wonderful resemblance to a statue carved by the sculptor's
hand.  It was that of a venerable hermit, sitting in profound meditation, wrapped in a flowing
robe, his arms folded and his beard descending to his waist. His head was bald, his forehead
wrinkled with age, while his features were well defined, the eyes, nose, and mouth being perfect.
The graceful, easy folds of the drapery and the wavy flow of his beard were especially remarkable.
Mr Twigg did not say that he had gone in shortly before with the guide and artistically touched
up the features by the liberal use of charcoal.

"Shouldn't wonder if the old fellow was a god of the original inhabitants of the island," said
Lieutenant Belt.  "Never saw anything so natural in my life."

Expressions of delighted surprise escaped from the young ladies, and even Mrs Twigg was very
glad that she had come.

"But we have only seen the commencement of this magic cavern; it has more wonders to reveal
to us," remarked her husband, desiring the black guide to lead on.  He accordingly proceeded
through one of the widest passages in front of them, holding his torch high above his head
to show its height, which appeared to be from twelve to fifteen feet.  Each of the young men
also carried a torch, which illumined the otherwise total darkness of the cavern, bringing
out the numberless objects hanging from the roof or appearing on either side--canopies studded
with bright gems, festoons of sparkling icicles, rostrums and thrones, busts of warriors and
poets.  Here were skulls grinning from the wall; columns of every order of architecture; fonts
and basins, some holding water; and a thousand other representations of works of art.  Here
and there other passages struck off to the right or left, adorned in the same curious fashion.
Most of the arches and columns appeared to consist of a greyish marble, and were wild and curious
in the extreme.  Some of the pillars were perfect, sustaining apparently the massive superstructure;
others were only half formed; and many were but just commenced by the dripping of water from
above.  Several of the apartments were cellular; others spacious and airy, having eyelet holes
through the roof, which allowed the escape of noxious vapours, and assisted greatly to ventilate
the cavern.  The ground beneath their feet was of a soft nature, deep and yielding, and had
a peculiar smell.  As they advanced, thousands of bats flew out from among the crevices of
the rock, disturbed by the light of the torches and the voices of the visitors, which echoed
through the passages and vaulted roof.  They had not gone far when the guide stopped short,
and an exclamation of alarm escaped him.

"What is dem?  Did you see dem, massa?" he asked of Archie, who was by his side.  The rest
of the party, who were close at his heels, saw numerous dark forms flitting by at the further
end of a passage directly in front of them, while unearthly sounding voices reached their ears.

"Those must be shadows cast by the light of our torches," observed the major; "the sounds are
merely echoes."

"No, no, massa, dey duppies," cried the guide; "de echo nebber take so long to come back to us."

Still the major was not convinced, although Mr Twigg suspected that they had disturbed an assembly
of negroes, who, not expecting that the cavern was about to be visited by strangers, had met
there for some purpose or other.  It was some time before the guide recovered his courage.

"Come along," said Archie; "if they were duppies they will be afraid of interfering with white
people, and if black fellows, they are still less likely to trouble us."

The other young men, who were always ready to follow Archie, insisted on the guide going on;
but he let them proceed in advance, directing them which way to take.  They had gone some distance
further, passing the entrances of several more passages, when the guide cried out, "Stop, atop,
massa; we got furder dan I tink."  Scarcely were the words out of his mouth than Archie and
his torch disappeared, and before they could stop themselves, two of his companions fell over.
The ladies shrieked, supposing that the young men had fallen down some frightful hollow; but
the shouts of laughter which followed soon reassured them, as did the assertions of the guide,
that there was no harm done.  It was found that they had merely gone done a descent of four
or five feet, and had quickly again picked themselves up.  The guide followed them, and the
ladies, assisted by the gentlemen, easily leaped down to a lower level of the cavern.  They
continued their walk without further interruption, till daylight streamed down upon them from
above, and they found themselves in an open area, with steep rocks covered with trees surrounding
them on all sides.  This area, as nearly as they could conjecture, lay about a quarter of a
mile from the entrance of the grotto.  From it numerous other passages branched off, into one
of which the guide led them.  They shortly came to a magnificent circular chamber with a vaulted
ceiling eighteen feet or more in height.  The most curious feature was the straight taproot
of a tree which descended from above, about the size of a cable, uniform in shape from the
top to the bottom.  It had apparently made its way through a cleft in the rock, and penetrated
downwards till it reached the floor of the apartment.  On one side was an opening into a narrow
passage, which the guide endeavoured to dissuade the gentlemen from entering.  Archie, however,
who had become excited, and considered himself the leader of the party, insisted on going forward.

"Don't go, massa, don't go; you'll fall down deep well and nebber come up again," shrieked
the guide.  Archie and his companions, notwithstanding this warning, pushed forward, holding
their torches well before them.  The passage became more and more contracted, till they reached
an upright ledge of rock rising like a parapet wall almost breast high.  They climbed up it,
but on the other side it sloped rapidly down, and Archie, bold as he had become, thought it
prudent to draw back; but instead of doing so he found himself slipping forward, and would
have been unable to stop had not one of the other book-keepers caught hold of his coat and
assisted him to scramble up again.  Just then the guide came up.  "Massa, you not know what
you escape," he exclaimed.  "See."  And he threw a stone, which, after descending for some
seconds of time, was heard to plunge into water, the noise echoing backwards and forwards amid
the rocks which formed the side of the chasm.  Archie shuddered as he thought of his merciful
escape.  Other stones of larger size being thrown in produced a loud, hoarse sound which reached
to a considerable distance.

"What a fearful uproar you would have made, Archie, if you'd taken a leap into the chasm!"
said one of his companions.

"Don't talk of it, man; it is a lesson to me for the future to look before I leap," was the answer.

"No, massa, as I say, you nebber come up again, unless you pop up in de sea," observed the
guide.  "Dat hole full ob salt water and full ob big fish; but I nebber gone down, and nebber
intend to go--he, he, he!"

Further exploration in that direction having been cut short, the party turned back, slowly
to retrace their steps, occasionally entering for a short distance some of the numerous avenues
which they discovered as they proceeded; but they were all apparently much like those they
had already visited.  The ceilings were incrusted with stalactites, between which in several
places the fibrous roots of trees and plants forced their way downwards through the interstices;
in many places honeycombed rocks formed the roof-work of the grotto; and in others, where openings
appeared towards the sky, the ground was strewed with various seeds and roots, that of the
bread-nut especially being in great abundance. Reptiles, too, of curious shape were seen scuttling
away, disturbed by the intruders--toad, snake, and lizard forms, all curiously covered with
incrustations.  The parts of the cavern open to the air were delightfully cool, and Lieutenant
Belt proposed that they should send for their provisions and lunch in one of the larger apartments.
His motion, however, was overruled, the ladies especially objecting to sit down with the bats
flying overhead, and the creatures they had seen crawling about round them.  Still, they all
lingered to examine more particularly the numberless curious formations, unwilling to bid farewell
to the grotto, which few of them were likely again to visit. Perhaps, too, they hesitated to
commence the undignified exit which they would have to make.  The torches being nearly exhausted,
Mr Twigg, looking at his watch, announced that it was time for luncheon.

"After which we must not delay in commencing our homeward journey," observed Mr Ferris, who
had remembered Mrs Twigg's warnings.

With much laughter, Major Malcolm on this occasion leading the way, the whole party crept in
succession through the opening of the cavern, and stood at length in the free air, their sensations
reminding them of the feeling experienced on entering a hot-house.  Major Malcolm had scarcely
for a moment left Fanny Pemberton's side; he now escorted her back to the camp.  His first
inquiry of the servants was whether they had seen any strange negroes in the wood.  The blacks
all declared that they had not; but his own man, who had made an excursion by himself to the
side of the lagoon, stated that while he was looking towards the rock he saw some dozen or
twenty black fellows steal out of a small opening and run off in an opposite direction, evidently,
as he supposed, endeavouring to keep themselves concealed.

"Were they armed?" asked the major.

"Yes, sir; each man had a weapon of some sort--a spear or bow--in his hands, and two or three
had firelocks," was the answer.

"That looks suspicious," thought the major; and he mentioned what his man had told him to Mr
Ferris, who became very grave.

"Fortunately the fellows don't consider us enemies, or they might have shot us down with impunity,"
he observed.  "There is something going forward among the blacks, I fear; and at all events
the sooner we are on our return home the better."

An ample luncheon of fish, flesh, and fowl, vegetables, and fruit of every description had
been prepared.  It was hurried over somewhat rapidly; the servants were directed to pack up
and proceed on their way homeward; and as soon as the tent was struck, the steeds, which had
been tethered in the shade with their heads in nose-bags, were bridled and saddled.

"To horse! to horse! ladies and gentlemen," shouted Mr Twigg.  "We must brave the heat and
dust, instead of riding home by moonlight as we proposed; we shall enjoy the cool evening all
the more on our arrival."

The younger members of the party, who had heard nothing of the cause which had created anxiety
in the minds of Major Malcolm and Mr Ferris, were somewhat surprised at the summons, but quickly
prepared to start.

"Let me assist you to mount, Miss Pemberton," said Major Malcolm. Leading forward her horse,
and placing his hand a little above the ground, he dexterously lifted her into her saddle.
Lieutenant Belt, imitating his example, brought forward Ellen's steed, and was delighted to
find that she accepted his services, poor Archie being compelled to fall into the rear.  The
party on horseback led the way, the carriages rattling after them.  Major Malcolm, who once
having gone a road never forgot it, rode on with Miss Pemberton, Ellen and her cavalier following
close behind them.  They had just passed the cliff, when, the road being broad and level, Fanny
proposed a canter.  They had ridden on about a mile further, when they saw, beneath the shade
of the tall trees directly ahead, a horseman galloping at full speed towards them.  As he approached
he was seen to be a white-headed negro, his hat, which just then blew off, exposing his hoary
locks.

"He is old Martin, Mr Twigg's butler," exclaimed Fanny.  "What could have made him come out
to meet us in so great a hurry?"

"Where Massa Twigg?" exclaimed the old man.  "I tank Heaven I meet you so soon."

"He is close behind," answered Major Malcolm.  "I trust that you are not the bearer of bad news?"

"Yes, sar, I bring berry bad news: we all hab our troats cut and be murdered and burnt before
dis night," answered old Martin, who had fastened a huge silver spur to one of his heels, and
had caught up a slave-driver's whip.  Without waiting for further questions he galloped forward,
leaving Major Malcolm and Miss Pemberton as ignorant as at first of what had occurred.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

MR. TWIGG RIDES FORWARD TO PREPARE FOR THE DEFENCE OF THE HOUSE--THE REST OF THE PARTY FOLLOW--ENCOUNTER
A PARTY OF BLACKS--PROVE TO BE FRIENDS--THE OVERSEERS INCREDULITY--PREPARATIONS FOR DEFENDING
THE HOUSE--DOUBTS AS TO THE TRUTH OF THE REPORTS--A FRESH ARRIVAL BRINGS ALARMING NEWS--MR.
HAYWARD'S ACCOUNT OF HIS ESCAPE--SCOUTS SENT OUT--ALL HANDS LABOUR AT THE FORTIFICATIONS--MAJOR
MALCOLM AND A PARTY SET OFF FOR WALTON HALL--THE INSURGENTS APPEAR AND ATTACK THE HOUSE--DRIVEN
BACK--THE SIEGE--PROVISIONS AND WATER BECOME SCARCE--A SORTIE TO OBTAIN WATER--THE INSURGENTS
ATTEMPT TO BURN THE STOCKADES--DRIVEN BACK BY BELT AND ARCHIE--ANOTHER SORTIE TO DIG YAMS--ARCHIE
CAPTURED BY THE REBELS.

Mr Ferris was acting as charioteer to Mrs Twigg, and took the lead of the carriages.

"What's the matter?" she cried out, as she caught sight of old Martin galloping up, dreadful
surmises, however, entering her mind.

"Oh, Missee Twigg, don't stop, and I tell you as you go along," answered the old butler, who
having seen his master following behind, turned his horse round.

"Are the children all safe?" was the next question the anxious mother put.

"Yes, dey all berry well; but Martha tell me if I lub dere lives and yours to jump on horseback
and come and tell you to make haste home. She say, and I know she speak de truth, dat de black
fellows who run away to de mountains, and many oders, tousands and tousands from all de estates,
hab got hold of firelocks and 'munition, and intend to murder all de whites in de island, from
one end to de oder, and before night dey come and burn down Bellevue and cut de troats of us
all.  She say our only hope am to get aboard ship or make de house so strong dat we able to
drive dem away when day come."

"How did Martha know this?" asked Mrs Twigg anxiously.

"Dat more nor I can tell," answered Martin.  "All I know am dat she speak de truth."

"Then tell your master, and we will drive on as fast as we can," said Mrs Twigg.  "Say Mr Ferris
and I are considering what it will be best to do."

Martin, allowing Mr Twigg to come up with him, gave him the same account.  Mr Twigg received
the information with more composure than his wife had done.  "Desert the house I will not,"
he answered.  "We will fortify it, and defend ourselves like men.  It is providential these
two officers arrived with their troopers, as they will be of the greatest assistance; and if
all the boys prove true, we shall have no difficulty in holding out against any attack, should
one be made on us. Go back, Martin; send at once to find Mr Thompson.  Say that I have reason
fully to believe the information Martha has given; beg him to collect all the white men and
trustworthy overseers, with their arms and ammunition.  And also we must not forget our neighbours.
Despatch a messenger--Jericho, Sambo, or any other fellow--to Mr Pemberton, and advise him
either to join us with all his family, or to fortify his house as we intend doing ours.  But
stay, Martin.  It may be safer, to prevent mistakes, if I go myself; a gallop, though the sun
is hot, won't kill me.  I'll take your horse, and you shall drive the buggy."

The exchange was soon made, and Mr Twigg galloped forward, telling his wife as he passed what
he proposed doing, and quickly dashing by Ellen and Fanny.

"Don't be alarmed, ladies," he cried out; "but the truth is we expect an attack from some blacks,
who have broken out into rebellion, and we are going on to see what can be done to give them
a warm reception."

"Surely, in that case, Major Malcolm, we ought not to detain you, as you will wish to assist
in preparing for the defence of the house--for I conclude that is what Mr Twigg means," said
Fanny in a calm tone.

"But we cannot leave you unprotected, Miss Pemberton," answered Major Malcolm.  "Should the
negroes really have risen, you might encounter some on the road, who would, seeing you alone,
try to make you prisoners for the sake of holding you as hostages.  I positively cannot leave you."

"Then we will gallop on together," said Miss Pemberton.  "Miss Ferris's horse and mine are
firm-footed, and I am sure that she will be ready to do as I propose."

She turned round to Ellen, who was perfectly willing to go on, and pressing their horses with
their whips in a way which astonished the animals, they galloped forward.  The road was dry
and dusty, and in some places, where unsheltered by the trees, the sun beat down with intense
heat; but in their anxiety they cared not for the inconvenience.  On looking back they saw
Mr Ferris and the other carriages coming along at almost as fast a rate as they were going.
Gradually they were distancing them.  Ellen was unwilling to leave her father behind.

"I am afraid that they are pursued by the blacks," she exclaimed.  "Oh, should they be overtaken!"

"In that case Mr Ferris would far rather that you should escape," urged the lieutenant.  "Let
me entreat you not to stop; supposing the rebels are pursuing us, we could do nothing."

Still Ellen checked her horse till Mr Ferris again came in sight, when she heard him shouting,
"Go on! go on!" and at the same time making signals with his whip as he lashed his horse. 
Poor Mrs Twigg was holding on to the carriage, expecting every moment to be thrown out; but
Mr Ferris, an experienced driver, kept a tight hand on the rein.  Old Martin came dashing after
him, standing up lashing his horse, and shrieking out at the top of his voice, "On! on! old
nagger; no tumble down on oo knees!" while still farther off Jack Pemberton, Archie, and the
other horsemen were seen acting as a rearguard, they, even if so inclined, not considering
it respectful to pass the carriages.  Ellen, on hearing her father's shouts, again applied
her whip to her horse's flanks and galloped forward, much to the lieutenant's satisfaction.
The major and Fanny could only dimly be seen amid the cloud of dust in the road, here darkened
by overhanging trees.

"We cannot be very far, I trust, from Bellevue," said Ellen; "my horse appears to be flagging."

"The animal is but little accustomed to move at this rate with any one on its back.  Be ready
to check it should it stumble," answered the lieutenant; "but with your light weight there
is very little chance of that.  We have, I believe, but two miles to go, and we shall soon
cover that ground.  Don't spare the whip, Miss Ferris; you must think of your own safety more
than the feelings of your steed."

Following Lieutenant Belt's advice, Ellen made her horse spring forward, and they at length
again overtook Major Malcolm and Fanny.  Just then a party of blacks were seen ahead, coming
along the road towards them. Fanny was about to check her horse, fearing that they had evil
intentions.

"If they are rebels we must dash by them--it is our best chance of escape," cried the major,
drawing his sword.  "I will defend you with my life, Miss Pemberton.  Only keep up your courage
and ride straight forward; they'll not dare to come within arm's length of us." Lieutenant
Belt imitated the major's example, and said something of the same tenour to Ellen.

"But my father--they will attack him and Mrs Twigg!" she exclaimed.

"He has pistols in the carriage, and a shot or two will soon send the black fellows to the
right-about," answered the major.  They galloped forward, and their anxiety was quickly relieved
on discovering that the blacks were headed by one of the book-keepers, who had been met by
Mr Twigg and despatched along the road to render any assistance which might be required.

"All's safe at the house, sir, and it's my belief that the blacks on the estate will prove
loyal, whatever may be the case elsewhere," observed the book-keeper.

"Go forward and obey your orders, sir," said the major; "we will ride on more leisurely to
the house."

Fanny drew a deep breath.  "I feel inexpressibly relieved," she said, "though I was sure, Major
Malcolm, that you would have protected me; but I am more anxious about my father and mother
and the rest of the family at Walton.  It is more exposed even than Bellevue, and, though perhaps
our own slaves may prove faithful, there are other estates on either side where the blacks
are said to be harshly treated; and they may take the opportunity of revenging themselves on
all the white people within their reach.  I would rather go home at once to share their fate."

"I am very sure, Miss Pemberton, that should your family be in danger, they would not desire
that you should be exposed to it," answered the major.  "You yourself require rest--and, indeed,
your steed would not carry you much further.  I trust that the report which has alarmed us
may prove to be without much foundation, and I will get Mr Twigg to send over at once to Walton
and ascertain the state of affairs--or, if I find that Bellevue is safe, I will ride over myself
to offer my services."

"Oh, thank you, thank you!" exclaimed Fanny; "I shall indeed be grateful."

Riding somewhat more leisurely than at first, though still keeping up a smart canter, they
soon reached Bellevue, where they found that Mr Twigg had sent out to collect the book-keepers
and drivers, white and brown, to assemble at the house for its protection.  Major Malcolm's
first inquiry was as to his means of defence.

"I have firearms, which I have kept ready in case of any outbreak such as that of '37, and
all the white men on the estate have their fowling-pieces and pistols," he answered.  "We fortunately
procured a couple of casks of powder not long ago."

"Very good; but have you a supply of bullets?" asked the major.

"No--dear me, I am afraid not," said Mr Twigg.

"But you have moulds, surely, for casting them?" continued Major Malcolm.

"Yes; some are stored with the arms, I believe," was the answer.

"And what about lead?" asked the major.  The worthy planter looked perplexed.  "You must surely
have some leaden pipes or cisterns, or lead in some form or other.  Pray search in every direction,
and I will set my two fellows to work at once to cast bullets, while we go round and consider
the best means for fortifying the house.  It is as well to be prepared, although I believe
that, after all, it will prove a false alarm."

The ladies were more tired and overcome with the heat than they had expected while the excitement
of riding lasted, and had to retire to their rooms.  Mr Ferris soon arrived with Mrs Twigg,
when she and her husband immediately sent for the black nurse, Martha, that they might ascertain
from her whence she had obtained the alarming intelligence she had sent them.  She would only
reply, "I tell you, massa, what is de truth.  I lub de children better than life; but I know
when de black fellows find out dat I tell you, dey kill me.  De Obeah man do it.  Even though
he not find me, I die--I know it; but if I save you and de children, I not care."

Nothing else could be elicited from Martha, but she persisted in declaring that they would
find ere long that she had given no false alarm.  Both Mr and Mrs Twigg, indeed, were convinced
that she spoke the truth; and Mr Twigg went on with the preparations for the defence of the
house.  In a short time Mr Thompson, who had been at the further end of the estate, and several
book-keepers came in.

"What has happened, Mr Twigg?" he exclaimed. The name of the piece is The Shipwrecked Lovers,
a tragedy in five acts, by James Templeton, Dublin, 12mo., 1801. I regret that I am unable
to give any account of the author, but perhaps some of your Irish readers may be able to do
this.

SIGMA.

Sir John Bingham.--In Burke's Peerage and Baronetage, article "Lucan," it is stated that this gentlemen
was high in rank in King James's army at the battle of Aughrim, and
turned the fortune of the day in favour of William by deserting, with
his whole command, at the crisis of the battle.

A late number of the Dublin University Magazine repeats this story on the authority of Mr. Burke,
and it would therefore be satisfactory to know where the latter found
a statement affecting so much the honour of the family in question,
one of the first in my native county.

The dates of Sir John's birth and marriage are not given, but the ages of several of his children
are known, and from them it follows that, supposing the father of
the first Lord Lucan not to have married till the mature age of fifty-five
or sixty, he was barely of age at the time of the battle, therefore
not likely to have been high in command.

My countrymen are too much inclined, like the French, to attribute their disasters to treachery,
or to any cause but the equal numbers and courage, and superior discipline, of their adversaries:
but they have never done so to less purpose than when they ascribe the loss of that battle to a man
who was in all probability not born in 1691, and must in any case
have been a mere boy at the time.

No peerage that I have met with gives the date of his birth, which would at once settle the question.
It seems most unlikely, if such were actually the case, that the family, on attaining the peerage,
should have revived the title of the gallant Sarsfield (whose representatives
they were), and thus challenged public attention, always on the alert
on such points in Ireland, to their alleged dishonour and betrayal
of the cause for which he fought and fell.

J. S. WARDEN.

Proclamation for making Mustard.--Did Queen Elizabeth issue a proclamation for "the right of
making mustard?" And if so, what was the language of such proclamation?

AN ADMIRER.

Judges practicing at the Bar.--A curious disquisition has run through "N. & Q." on the relinquishment
of their sees by bishops, but I do not see that any of them are shown to have officiated as
parish priests after quitting the episcopate.

Not that this is the point I wish now to put before you and your readers,
but I want information on a somewhat kindred subject.

In Craik's Romance of the Peerage there occurs:

"Percy's leading
counsel upon this occasion was Mr. Sergeant (afterwards Sir Francis)
Pemberton, who subsequently rose to be first a puisne judge, and then
Chief Justice of the King's Bench, was thence transferred to the Chief
Justiceship of the Common Pleas, and after all ended his days a practitioner
at the bar."--Vol. iv. p. 291. note.

Pemberton, it appears, was dismissed
from the Common Pleas in 1683; he was counsel for the seven bishops
in 1688, as was also another displaced judge, Sir Creswell Leving,
or Levinge, who was superseded in 1686.

Are these the only two instances
of judges, qui olim fuere, practising at the bar? Night was approaching, and after the first few loads had been brought
in, Mr Thompson suggested that they should wait till the following morning.  Martha, who was
eagerly watching all the proceedings, went to her master and, with tears in her eyes, entreated
that there might be no delay.

"I know what will happen dis berry night," she said; "if any one shut his eyes, perhaps no
wake in de morning."

As the moon was nearly half full, there would be light.  For some hours Mr Twigg accordingly
directed that the people should continue their work.  Most of the slaves seemed to labour willingly;
but the drivers who were superintending them observed that they went lazily about their work,
and did as little as they possibly could.  Mr Thompson, on being told of this, remarked that
it was no wonder, as they had been toiling all day, and it was not his custom to work the slaves
after sundown, as was done on some ill-managed estates.  As soon as the logs of wood and the
canes were brought in, Major Malcolm and the lieutenant, with their men, having provided themselves
with axes, threw off their coats and commenced cutting the logs and canes into proper lengths
and showing how they were to be fixed in the ground.  Between the canes which formed the chevaux-de-frise
were planted large masses of prickly-pear, through which no ill-clad black, nor indeed any
human being, could force his way.  It was considered that this would stop the enemy even more
effectually than the palisades.  It was no easy task, however, to cut the sword-like leaves
and place the plants in their required positions. The young Englishmen not otherwise employed
offered their assistance, as did old Martin and the other black servants, in forming both the
works, the latter managing to handle the prickly-pears far more dexterously without hurting
themselves than their masters.

"We shall do no material harm to your lawn, Mrs Twigg," observed Major Malcolm, "and for your
sake I trust that it may not become the scene of a conflict.  By-the-by, Mr Twigg, if there
is a serious chance of it we must barricade the doors and windows, and it will be prudent to
have the materials ready for the purpose.  If you have no spare planking, I have no doubt that
one of the out-buildings will supply what we require."

Mr Twigg of course agreed to this, and, lantern in hand, led the way to a building at a little
distance from the house.

"I advise you to have this pulled down at once; but if you are unwilling to do that, you can
give directions to one of the young men, who will superintend the work should it become necessary,"
said the major.

Mr Twigg, having sent for Archie Sandys, told him what might be required, and he, of course,
undertook to carry out his orders.  Some time went by.  The ladies having rested and partly
recovered from their fatigue, assembled in the supper-room, in which a handsome repast was
spread.  Here they were joined by the gentlemen, who, having worked hard, had good appetites.
No one would have supposed as they were seated round the table that they were apprehensive
of the danger threatening them.

"It seems very ridiculous to be taking all this trouble and expending our strength on account
of a vague report of which really nobody seems to know the origin," observed Lieutenant Belt
to Ellen.  "The major of course thinks there is something in it; but, for my part, I believe
we shall find that we have all been frightened out of our wits for nothing."

"I wish that I could agree with you," answered Ellen.  "There have been terrible outbreaks
before in this island, and rumours have been for some time going about that the slaves are
in a discontented state."

"I had expected, from the way our friends galloped after us this afternoon, that a body of
savage rebels were at their heels," said the lieutenant, "and I confess that when we reached
the house I fancied that we should have had to stand to our arms, and defend ourselves as best
we could.  I was very glad to see our hostess and Mr Ferris and the rest of the party arrive
safely, and was somewhat surprised when no enemy followed them.  We shall find, I suspect,
that the foe did not come because no foe is in existence."

Ellen, however, could not agree with the young lieutenant.

Miss Pemberton's anxieties had been somewhat quieted.  Mr Twigg assured her that he had sent
a messenger to warn her father, who would of course make preparations to defend his house;
she might soon therefore expect an answer saying that they were all safe.  The party at length
became more cheerful, and Mr Ferris expressed his belief that they might all go to sleep without
fear of becoming dead men before the morning.

"Belt and I ought to be on our road at an early hour," remarked Major Malcolm; "but I wish
before we go to see your fortifications in a forward state, and I shall then feel it my duty
to ride round to Walton to render Mr Pemberton any assistance he may require."

Fanny was on the point of asking him to escort her, but a very natural feeling made her hesitate,
and she resolved to remain with her friends. The conversation had become more lively than at
first, and jokes and laughter were even being indulged in, when the sound of horses' hoofs
was heard coming along the road from the east at a rapid rate.  Mr Twigg hurried to the door,
followed by Mr Ferris.

"Who is it?" asked the former.

"Hayward," answered a voice.  "Thank Heaven I find you safe!  I've had a narrow escape of my
life, and I was afraid that you might be placed in equal danger; indeed, had it not been for
my faithful fellow Tom Yam here, I should to a certainty have been killed."

"Come up, then, and tell us all about it," exclaimed Mr Twigg, who the next instant was shaking
hands with the stranger, while Martin took charge of Tom Yam.  Mr Twigg introduced the new
arrival.  Mr Hayward, sitting down, tossed off a glass or two of Madeira, for he required some
stimulant before he could speak.

"I bring you dreadful news," he said.  "I would thankfully not have to alarm you, ladies, but
it may be better to know the worst at once.  I had come over to Stillwater, having providentially
left my family at Kingston, when, as I was resting after my journey, Tom Yam, who had been
sent with a message to Fort Maria to ask Captain Torrens, commanding there, to come over and
dine with me, rushed into my room panting for breath with the fearful news that the entire
garrison and a number of white people from different places assembled there at dinner had suddenly
been surprised by a whole host of blacks.  The villains had been lying in ambush near at hand,
and rushing upon them without warning, had put nearly every human being of the party to death.
Among the few survivors was a black servant of one of the officers, who had given him the information.
He himself had got near enough to see the blacks in possession of the fort, some engaged in
burning down the buildings, and others carrying off the arms and ammunition.  The boy told
him that the white men were at the supper-table, and that all had there been butchered without
being able to reach their arms or strike a blow for their defence.  He hurried back, and as
he came along he heard the negroes close at his heels, shouting and shrieking over their victory,
and threatening to attack Stillwater House.  Scarcely had he uttered the words than the cries
of the barbarians reached my ears.  Not a moment was to be lost; I hastily threw on my clothes
and followed Tom, who entreated me to run for the stable, where we could get our horses and
gallop off as the best prospect of saving our lives, for if we attempted to hide ourselves
the rebels were nearly sure to find us-- many, indeed, of my own slaves having, as Tom assured
me, joined them. So close were they by this time that I was afraid they would see us as we
made our way to the stable.  We reached it just as they broke into the grounds on the opposite
side.  Some time was lost in saddling the horses; as I led mine out, I saw several black faces
peering out of the windows above us.  I threw myself on the animal's back, Tom having mounted
his horse inside the stable; a shower of bullets, happily ill aimed, came whizzing about our
ears--two, indeed, passed through my jacket.  Away I galloped, followed by Tom; though several
more shots were fired at us, we escaped them all.  Fortunately, there were no other horses
in the stable or we should probably have been followed.  As I looked over my shoulder I saw
smoke ascending from the roof of the house, and ere I had got much further flames burst out
from every part. At first I proposed pushing for Kingston, but Tom expressed his belief that
we should find bands of rebels on the road, and I determined therefore to come on in this direction,
and to warn any friends on the way.  How our horses have done so much seems surprising, for
you may be sure we took but a short time to rest.  We passed on the way, I should say, several
parties of blacks, but as they had no firearms, we dashed by them uninjured, although some
made an attempt to stop us."

"Did you say, sir, that all the officers and men were massacred at Fort Maria?" asked Major
Malcolm, in an agitated tone.

"I have too little doubt about it, sir," answered Mr Hayward.  "I can trust Tom's word, and
Captain Torrens's servant assured him that he saw his master and Ensign Duck murdered with
the other white gentlemen."

"Only two days ago we dined with him, little thinking what was soon to occur!" said the major,
with a sigh.  "Poor fellow! poor fellow! how full of life and spirits he seemed!  Such may
be the fate of any one of us!"

Miss Pemberton looked sad as he spoke.

"You are now convinced, Mr Thompson, that there is something in the report we heard," observed
Mr Ferris to the overseer, "and that we were not foolishly alarmed?"

"How soon do you think that the band of rebel blacks can reach Bellevue, should they come in
this direction?" asked the major of Mr Hayward.

"They might be here in a day--and my belief is that there are several bands much nearer at
hand, and that it would be wise to prepare for an attack without a moment's delay," answered
Mr Hayward.

"Preparations have already been commenced," observed the major; "but I would urge our friend
here to follow your advice."

"I am glad to hear it," replied Mr Hayward.  "From the way the rebels made their attack on
the fort, and the rapidity and order with which they retreated, it is evident that they are
no contemptible foes, besides which, they have obtained a considerable store of arms.  I will
remain to assist you, for my horses could not proceed a mile further; and I should wish indeed,
before I go on, to ascertain the state of the country to the westward.  I fear from the report
Tom gave that the slaves in the whole island are in a state of revolt."

"In that case our only wise course will be to barricade the house and throw up such other fortifications
as time will allow," said Major Malcolm.  "Mr Twigg, will you give the order to your people
to bring in sufficient planking to close up all doors and windows, and we will then form a
stockade round the house.  Rouse up all the hands you can muster; they must work during the
night, by the light of lanterns or torches or fires, if necessary.  I will answer for your
safety if the work is completed in time."

The worthy planter showed that he was a man of spirit--he immediately issued the necessary
orders, and the overseer, now convinced that the report of the insurrection was founded on
truth, ably seconded him. Coats were thrown aside, and the carpenter's tools in the house being
collected, each person took such as he could best use, and, as soon as the wood was brought
in, began sawing and nailing away with might and main.  Others went on with the chevaux-de-frise,
while a third party dug a trench and began erecting a palisade between it and the house. Major
Malcolm and Lieutenant Belt were everywhere, showing the people how to put up the palisade
and lending a hand to the work.  Archie Sandys was especially active; the planter and Mr Ferris
laboured away with hammer and nails in barricading the windows; while the three troopers who
had accompanied the officers, having cast a sufficient store of bullets, came out and gave
their valuable assistance.  Major Malcolm was too good a soldier to forget the importance of
having timely notice of the approach of a foe, and had directed the overseer to select four
trustworthy negroes, who were sent out to do duty as scouts, with orders to make their way
back the moment they discovered the enemy.

"Can you entirely trust those fellows?" asked the major, after the men had been despatched.

"As to that, sir, I can't be answerable for their not running away, though I believe that they'll
not willingly join the rebels," answered the overseer.

"Then we must not depend implicitly on them," said the major.  "I must ask some of the young
gentlemen to undertake the duty; Lieutenant Belt and one of my men will accompany them."

Archie Sandys, on hearing this, immediately volunteered, as did two other of the book-keepers.
The party made their way for some distance in the direction it was expected that the rebels
would appear; and, leaving Archie in a sheltered spot, the lieutenant conducted the others
round, posting first one and then the other in positions in which they could command a view
of the different approaches, so that on whatever side the enemy might come, time would be given
to the garrison to prepare for their reception.  All the men who had been collected continued
diligently engaged in erecting the fortifications, and were thus employed when daylight returned.
The works were by this time in a tolerably forward state, and were of a character well calculated
to resist an attack by an undisciplined and ill-armed force, though they would have been useless
against artillery or well-trained troops.  No one proposed stopping for breakfast, for all
saw the importance of getting the works completed before the arrival of the foe.  The house
standing high, and a good view over the country round being obtained from it, there was no
necessity to keep the sentries at their posts during the daytime.  The lieutenant accordingly
went out to call them in.  They had seen nothing of the black scouts--as the overseer had thought
probable, they had run away and hidden themselves.  They, however, came back during the morning,
each one bringing the same account--"All right, massa, no enemy come yet."

"You hid yourselves, you rascals," said Mr Twigg.

"Ki Massa Twigg, de ossifer tell hide selves," answered one of the scouts.

"But you went to sleep, Quasho, into the bargain, I suspect," observed the planter.

"If ever shut eyes, hear all de same, massa," replied Quasho, with perfect coolness.

It was not a time to inflict punishment if it could be avoided, and the negroes were ordered
to assist at the work going forward.

It was past noon before the fortifications were completed.  They were in such a form that the
enemy attacking any portion would be exposed either to a flanking or a cross fire.  The major
surveyed them with evident satisfaction.

"Provided our ammunition does not run short, we shall be able to hold out for a siege of any
length against such enemies as are likely to attack us," he observed to Mr Twigg; "although,
as the rebels have not appeared, I think it possible they may not come at all."

"I trust not, major; but we shall be deeply indebted to you notwithstanding," answered the
planter.  "Now, after your labours, come in and have some breakfast."

The major willingly accepted the invitation, and found to his satisfaction the ladies ready
to receive him.  Miss Pemberton gave him a grateful smile, but he thought she still looked
anxious.  She confessed that she was so on account of her family.  Would she wish to send assistance
to them? he asked.

"Indeed, I would," she answered; "for, though our house can be more easily fortified and defended
than this can, there are fewer trustworthy people to form its garrison."

"Would you wish me to go, Miss Pemberton?" asked the major.  "I would," he added, speaking
very low, "run every risk for your sake.  I, of course, would not offer to quit Bellevue unless
I considered that it already possessed a sufficiently strong garrison; indeed, I think it probable
that it will not be attacked, or if it is, that the insurgents will very quickly retire when
they see the preparations we have made for their reception."

"Oh, it will indeed greatly relieve my mind if assistance could be carried to Walton!" exclaimed
Fanny.

"Then I will go, and will leave Belt here with two of our men.  Your brother will, I conclude,
wish to accompany me," said the major.

"So will I," said Mr Hayward, "with my man Tom.  We shall not too greatly weaken the garrison
of this place, and we may render essential assistance to the Pembertons."

Mr Twigg, though he possibly might rather have kept his friends, could not object to this proposal,
and Major Malcolm immediately desired that the horses might be got ready.  Several white men
and mulattoes had come in from two small plantations in the neighbourhood on hearing of the
rebellion, knowing that it would be hopeless to attempt the defence of their homes; and three
of these, who were well mounted and armed, volunteered to accompany Major Malcolm and Mr Hayward.
Fanny thanked the major more by her looks than in words, as she bade him farewell. The party,
throwing themselves into their saddles, rode off, setting the heat at defiance.  They had been
gone scarcely half an hour when Archie Sandys, who was doing duty as sentry, and had posted
himself on a height from whence he could command a view of most of the approaches to the house
on the and south, came hurrying in with the information that he had seen a large body of blacks
moving along from the latter direction. "They looked exactly like a swarm of ants as they came
over the hill," he observed.  "Hark! you can already hear the shrill notes of their horns."

"Then to arms, my friends!" cried the lieutenant.  "We must man our lines, but don't let a
shot be fired till I give the order."

All arrangements had previously been made; each gentleman having a certain number of men placed
under him, while the two orderlies were to act as the lieutenant's aides-de-camp.  To each
party was assigned the defence of a certain portion of the lines, so that the moment the order
was issued the entire garrison knew where they were to go. Notwithstanding the absence of Major
Malcolm and those who had accompanied him, they felt secure in their numbers and fortifications.

The shouts and shrieks of the rebels and the sound of their horns were now distinctly heard
as they hurried on to attack the house, fully expecting to surround it, and in a few minutes
to massacre the inhabitants, as they had done those of several other pens they had already
attacked, little dreaming of finding it so strongly garrisoned and fortified.

"Keep under cover, my men," cried the lieutenant, as the enemy were seen marching from the
wood and running forward without order into the open; "our fire will stagger them, and probably
make them scamper off, if we reserve it till they come sufficiently near for each man to take
a good aim.  Don't throw a bullet away.  Aim low, remember--aim low!"

As the rebel blacks advanced, they discovered that there was something unusual about the house,
and at length began to suspect that it was fortified in a way to which they were unaccustomed.
They accordingly halted, and were seen talking eagerly to each other, while they held their
muskets pointing towards the building.

Their leader, whom Archie recognised as the ugly negro he had seen at the Jumby dance, went
among them vociferating loudly, and endeavouring to induce them to advance.  Thus encouraged,
they rushed forward, firing their muskets; many of them, who had put the butts against their
eyes, being knocked over by the recoil as they did so.  Some fired at one moment, some at another,
with the greatest possible irregularity, many of the bullets flying over the house, others
striking the roof.

"Let them expend their ammunition as fast as they like in that style," cried the lieutenant,
laughing; "they will not do us much harm.  It is not worth replying to such a salute."

The lieutenant's remarks greatly encouraged his men, who waited patiently to fire in return.

"Now give it them, my lads!" he at length cried out, when the blacks had got within fifty yards
of the palisade.  The order was obeyed, and as the smoke cleared away the rebels were seen
running off at full speed, leaving five of their number on the field; and from the way others
retreated, leaning on their companions, it was evident that several more were wounded.  They,
however, halted immediately they got beyond gunshot, having no intention, apparently, of retreating
altogether. They were now seen assembled as before, a vast amount of talking taking place among
them, while their leaders rushed hither and thither urging them to renew the attack.  But this
it at first seemed they were little inclined to do; most of them, indeed, sat down on the ground
as if determined not to advance.

"I believe if we were to sally out and charge them we might put them all to flight," exclaimed
Archie Sandys, who, his Highland blood being up, was full of fight.

"Don't attempt anything of the sort," said Lieutenant Belt, who showed that he possessed the
qualities so important for a soldier of coolness as well as of courage.  "We might drive those
immediately in our front before us, but we should have their companions on our flanks and be
to a certainty cut off, or have to fight our way back again.  As long as they keep where they
are they can do us no harm."

It was especially trying to the garrison to see their enemies sitting down quietly just out
of the reach of their bullets, without permission to attack them.  The day was waning, and
in all probability the blacks would make another attack at night, when they would have a better
chance of getting near without being discovered.  All the time their cries and shrieks, and
the blowing of their horns, were heard from all sides; then came the sound of other horns in
the distance, which were answered with loud blasts from the rebels surrounding the house.

"I am afraid that the rascals have been reinforced," observed Mr Twigg. "As they increase in
numbers they will grow bolder, and we shall have harder work to drive them off."

"Don't be anxious about that," answered the lieutenant; "as long as our men prove true we shall
have no difficulty in keeping them at bay, and we may hope in time that troops will be sent
to assist us, as well as others who may be attacked.  I hope that many planters will have wisely
taken the precautions you have done, and fortified their houses."

"My belief is that Mr Pemberton will have done so," answered Mr Ferris; "if not, I fear that
Major Malcolm will be unable to render him much assistance."

Weary from hard work as all the garrison were, they could not venture to take any rest, except
such as they could obtain by sitting with their backs to the palisades or the wall of the house,
with their muskets by their sides, ready for instant service.  Lieutenant Belt, who felt the
responsibility resting on his shoulders, divided the other gentlemen into two watches, so that
one party might be continually going round to see that the sentries were on the alert.  As
it was fully expected that the rebels would make a sudden attack during the dark hours of night,
he himself felt that he must dispense with sleep.

"I quite envy you," said Archie, who accompanied him.  "I wish that I had been a soldier; this
work just suits me."

"You might soon get tired of it.  If it were to become the sole occupation of your life, you
would begin to sigh for rest and long for a quiet life, I can tell you," was the answer.

None of the men appeared inclined to sleep at their posts, for they all well knew that their
lives depended on their vigilance.

After some time had elapsed, several dusky forms could be seen creeping up towards the house,
as if to ascertain what the garrison were about.

"Keep silence," whispered the lieutenant to the men, as he went his rounds; "when they get
near enough we will show them that we are wide awake.  The blacks can then be picked off by
any good marksmen among you."  As he spoke, the lieutenant's voice may have been heard, or
the negroes may have observed the heads of the sentries above the palisades, for they suddenly
disappeared under cover.

Towards the morning the darkness increased, and the garrison redoubled their vigilance, every
moment expecting an attack, for the rebels might have got close up to the house without being
discovered.

The ladies, meantime, with the nurses and children, had been placed in one of the lower rooms,
into which it was believed no shot could penetrate.  Mr Ferris had urged them, in case of an
attack, to lie down, so that, should any balls make their way through the planking, they might
pass over their heads.

"But surely we can help in some way or other," exclaimed Fanny.  "We might load the muskets,
even if we do not fire them; and if any of our defenders are wounded, we will come out and
take their places with the rest."

"I will do my best, but I do not feel that I could try to kill the poor blacks," answered Ellen.

"They deserve to be killed," exclaimed Miss Pemberton, "for daring to rebel against their masters."
She spoke as a planter's daughter.

"Perhaps we might better employ ourselves in attending to any of our defenders who are unfortunately
wounded," observed Mrs Twigg, who knew Ellen's sentiments, and did not wish to enter into any
discussion on the subject.

"I trust that, now they have seen the preparations made for their reception, the rebels will
not attempt to attack the house," said Mr Ferris.  "All I beg you to do is to remain quiet,
and to keep up your spirits.  Perhaps in the morning we shall find the blacks have retreated,
and gone off to attack some more defenceless houses. However, if any of the people are wounded,
we will place them under your care.  In the mean time, let me entreat you to lie down and get
some rest."

Somewhat reassured by his remarks, the ladies followed his advice; and, except the sentries
and the officers on guard, the greater number of the inmates of the house might have been found
fast asleep.  Not a sound was heard throughout the building, nor was a light shown which might
attract the notice of the rebels.  Occasionally their voices and the shrill blasts of their
horns could be heard rising out of the valley, but even the keenest pair of eyes among the
garrison failed to detect a single object moving in any direction.

Day at length broke, and it was hoped that the enemy might have disappeared; but as the light
increased, the blacks were seen amid the openings of the trees, collected in still greater
numbers than on the previous evening, while in the far distance parties were observed moving
across the country, some approaching the house, others going in the direction of Walton.

"I fear that the major and his companions have had some difficulty in reaching Mr Pemberton's
house," observed Lieutenant Belt to Archie Sandys.  "If he could not get in, he will have gone
on to Montego, or some place to the westward where he might hope to obtain troops to relieve us."

"But suppose that he has encountered some such large gang of armed blacks as those we see out
yonder; he and his companions must have been shot down, for what could so small a party do
against a whole host of enemies?" answered Archie.

"That depends upon how his followers behave.  If they prove staunch and obey his orders, they
may put any number of armed undisciplined blacks to fight," said the lieutenant.  "Still I
own that I shall be glad to have tidings of him.  What the fellows round this house intend
doing, I cannot make out; but I conclude that they prefer fighting in daylight rather than
in the dark, and that we must expect to be attacked before long.  In the mean time, I shall
be glad to have some breakfast and a few minutes' sleep.  Do you take my place, and let me
be called if you detect the slightest movement among the blacks."  Saying this, the lieutenant
went into the house, through the only door which had been left open.  Preparations had also
been made for barricading that, should it become necessary.

The house, it must be understood, was to form the citadel, should the outer defences be forced
or should there be a prospect of their being so.  With this object in view, loopholes had been
formed in all the doors and windows, from whence a warm fire could be poured down upon the
assailants.  Still the rebels did not venture to approach nearer. Archie and the others began
heartily to wish that the blacks would attack them, not doubting for a moment what would be
the result.  Hour after hour went by, but no movement was perceived.  Still it could scarcely
be hoped that the rebels had given up all intention of assaulting the house.

A stock of provisions had been collected, but there were many mouths to consume them, and no
one had expected that the siege would last beyond a day or two, as all supposed that, after
being defeated in the first attack, the blacks would take to flight.  The consumption of water
was also considerable, and it was found that nearly all had been used up. The well which supplied
it was at some little distance from the house. Water, however, must be obtained at all hazards.
Archie undertook to lead a party with buckets to get what was wanted: it would be more easy
to do that at night than in the daytime.  But thirst can be ill endured in that burning climate;
Archie therefore cried out for a dozen volunteers, six to carry the buckets, and six, fully
armed, to defend them should they be attacked.  The well was little more than a hundred yards
off, while the nearest blacks who could be seen were at the distance of four hundred yards
off at least, but others might be concealed nearer at hand.

Six white men, book-keepers and others, volunteered to accompany Archie; the remainder, who
were to carry the buckets, were blacks. You see what sensible people think."

"But, indeed, Miss Prescott, I cannot leave you to suppose I am only actuated by the fact of
that awkward situation. Of course that would never have been if I did not deeply, entirely
love your sister. It has only precipitated matters. I entreat of you to give her to me, as one
who is--who is devoted to her! If my station is inferior I will work--"

"That is not the point. Vera is too young for such things. What does your father say?"

"My father sees that I am right."

"I see what that means," said Magdalen, smiling. "But where is he? I should like to talk to
him."

Mr. Delrio, pretty well knowing what was going on, was found endeavouring to distract his mind
by sketching the Goyle.

He and Magdalen walked up and down the drive together, perfectly agreeing that it would be senseless
cruelty to permit an early marriage between these two young people, and that it was a pity
there should be an engagement; but this could hardly be prevented, since Mr. Delrio could
only give advice, and leave a self-supporting worthy son to judge for himself; but the elder
sister and the trustee could stipulate for delay till Vera should be of age.

So Hubert was called, and acquiesced, cheerfully observing that he trusted that four years would
make him able to render Vera's life an easy and pleasant one; and after heartily thanking both
Miss Prescott and his father, he went off to rejoice the heart of the maiden, who was sitting
under the pear-tree, watching with anxious eyes.

CHAPTER XV--BROODS ASTRAY

"But ill for him who, bettering not with time, Corrupts the strength
of Heaven-descended will, And ever weaker grows through acted crime,
Or seeming genial venial fault." - TENNYSON.

"Man Friday hope piccaniny live well--bring her buckra fish from sea!" Such was the greeting
from Lord Rotherwood to Thekla when the whole party walked over in time for tea on the lawn, before
church at Clipstone, as he presented her with a facsimile oyster which he had hunted up in a
sweet shop, making an absurd bow and scrape.

Poor Thekla coloured, and mumbled a shy, "Thank you, my--my--" having had a lecture from Vera
on treating a marquis with over familiarity and it was left to Primrose to ask where Friday learnt
nigger language. "By nature, Missy buckra," he responded; "all same nigger everywhere." And he
repeated his bow so drolly that Primrose's laugh carried Thekla's along with it, as Lady Phyllis
walked up with, "Come, father, you are wanted to congratulate."

"Eh! Am I? So they have perpetrated it, have they?

More's the pity is what I should say in the Palace of Truth; but the maiden has landed a better
fish than she knows--that is, if she have landed him."

"There! take care, don't be tiresome, Papa!" admonished Lady Phyllis,
drawing him on, when he met Vera with a courtly manner, and, "I hope
I see you recovered, Miss Prescott, and able to rejoice in the pleasant
consequences of your adventure."

Vera blushed, and looked very pretty and modest, making not much answer as she retreated among
her contemporaries to show them her ring, a hoop of pearls, which Wilfred insisted were Roman pearls,
fishes' eyes, most appropriate; but Flapsy felt immeasurably older than Wilfred to-day, and able
to despise his teasing, though Hubert Delrio was not present, and indeed Wilfred was not disposed
to bestow much of his attention upon her, having much more inclination to beset his cousin, Lady
Phyllis, who surely ought to perceive that he had attained at least the same height as his brother
Jasper, and could, in his absence, pose as the young man of the household.

Phyllis

had not much to say to him, nor after the first to Vera, though she duly admired the ring so exultantly
shown, and accepted the assurance that Hubert was the dearest fellow
in the world.

But there was no getting any condolence out of her upon the misery
of having to wait four whole years.

She said, "It was a very good thing! There was her cousin Gillian, who had insisted on waiting
three years to finish her education."

"Oh, but dear Hubert likes me as I am," simpered Vera.

"You might wish that he should find more in you to like. Gillian," said Phyllis, coming up to her
and Agatha, "I want you to assure Vera that four years is not such a great trial in waiting."

"It
is what I have been trying to persuade her," said Agatha; "she is hardly seventeen."

"And I would not have been married at seventeen for anything," said Gillian to the pouting Vera.
"I want to be more worth having."

Vera did not like it, she had heard the like at home, and she fell back upon Valetta, while
the others walked on. "Poor little Flapsy!" said Agatha, "I do hope this engagement may make more
of a woman of her."

"My father was very much struck by Mr. Delrio," said Phyllis, "both as artist and personally."

"You
must be glad of the time for putting her up to his level," said Gillian.

"Do

you think such things are to be done?" asked Agatha.

"Yes," said Phyllis stoutly. "You may not make her able to be a Senior Wrangler--(Oh you are Oxford!)--or
capable of it, like this Gillyflower; but you can get the stuff into her that makes a sound sensible
wife."

Gillian caught a little hopeless sigh of "CAN," and answered it with,
"When all this effervescence is blown off, then will be the time for
working at the substance, and she may be all the better wife-- especially
for the artist temperament, if she is of the homely sort."

"How angry she would be if she heard you say so!" returned Agatha. "Yet certainly I do feel relieved
that wifehood is to be my poor Flapsy's portion, for she is not of the sort that can stand
alone and make her own way."

"There will always be plenty of such women in the world," said Gillian.

"So much the better for the world," retorted Phyllis, who had never shown any symptoms of exclusive
devotion to any one of the other sex, except her father.

One thing Agatha wanted to know, and dared not ask, namely, what impression Vera had made in
the Kittiwake and what Hubert had said about her; for she and Paula
had begun to remark that, lover as he was, not a word about her heroism
had escaped him.

And it was as well that she did not hear what the extra plain spoken Primrose did not spare the boasting
Thekla.

"Cousin Rotherwood and Fly both say they can't think how Mr. Delrio got on with such a silly
little hysterical goose upon his hands; and that it is a foolish
romantic unlucky notion that he ought to be engaged to her.

I think Mamma will tell Miss Prescott so."

The Kittiwake, having arrived three days later than had been expected, there had been an amount
of revolution in the general arrangements. The break up of the High
School was to be on an early day of the next week.

It had become a much more extensive and public matter than in the days of Valetta and Maura,
though these were not so very long ago, and there was a great day of exhibitions and speeches
to the parents and neighbourhood generally. Two ladies had been secured for the purpose, Elizabeth
Merrifield and Miss Arthuret, and the former arrived on the Saturday afternoon, but as the
Rotherwood party almost overflowed Clipstone, she was transferred to Miss Mohun.

After the death of their parents, about three years previously, Susan and Elizabeth had gone to
live at Coalham, and to be useful to their brother David's parish; Susan betaking herself
to the poor, and Bessie finding herself specially available in the various forms of improvement
undertaken by ladies in modern days.

To her own surprise, and her sister's discomfiture, her talent as a public speaker had become
developed. With a little assistance from her sister-in-law Agnes's unwilling stage experience, and
entreaties, not easily to be withstood, came from various quarters
that she would come and advocate the good cause.

Of course she was ever welcome at Clipstone, and she walked up thither with General Mohun, arriving
just after the others from the Goyle; and in the general confusion of greetings, and the Babel of cousinly
tongues, there were no introductions nor naming of names. Bessie declared herself delighted with
the chance of seeing Lady Ivinghoe, whom she considered more to realise the beauty of women
than any one she had hitherto beheld, and the fair face had not lost
its simplicity, but rather gained in loveliness by the sweetness of
early motherhood, as she and Phyllis sat by Mysie, regaling her with
tales of what they regarded as the remarkable precocity of the infant
Claude, reluctantly left to his grandmother.

"But where's Dolores?" asked Bessie. "I miss her among the swarm of mice!"

"Dolores is at Vale Leston," answered Gillian. "She has been a long time making up her mind to
go there, to Gerald's home; and now she is there, they will not let her go till some birthday is
over."

"Uncle Felix's!" whispered Franceska to Mysie. "You know it was dear Gerald's place. She had
never seen it."

Another voice was now raised, asking, "What had become of Miss Arthuret?"

"She only comes down on Monday," said Bessie. "Just in time for the meeting. She is too valuable
to come for more than one meeting."

"But who is she?"

"Arthurine Arthuret? She is a girl, or rather woman, who has some property at Stokesley. In
fact, she is one of those magnets that seem to attract inheritance without effort--like the
Hapsburgs, though happily she makes a most beneficent, though, sometimes, original use of them."

"Is
not that very dangerous?" said Aunt Lily.

"The first came to her early, and coming into it very young, and overflowing with new ideas,
she began rather grotesquely; but she has tamed down a good deal since, and really has done an immense
deal of good in finding employment for people, making improvements and the like, though she
is Sam's pet aversion, a tremendous Liberal, almost a Socialist. They are so like cat and
dog that Susan and I were really glad to be away from Stokesley, especially at election times;
but altogether she is an admirable person."

Lady Merrifield thought she detected a start of Miss Prescott at the
name Stokesley, and that her eyes looked anxiously at the speaker.

Bessie was not of the sandy part of the family. Was the unattractive schoolboy, once seen,
like his sisters? All that was observable was startling similitudes to her own children, though
in them the elements of the handsome dark Mohun generally predominated.

But by and by, in a quiet moment, Bessie suddenly asked, "Did you say her name was Magdalen?"

Lady
Merrifield laughed. "Four years MAY do a good deal at that time of life," she said. "I suppose
no time ever so changes--changes-- what shall I say?--eyes--views--characters. Only constancy
in absence is the dangerous thing. There are distinguished examples of- -of the mischief of
being constant without knowing what one is constant to.

Virulent constancy, as Mrs. Malaprop has it."

Magdalen thanked and smiled. Perhaps there was a certain virulent constancy in a remote corner
of her heart which had been revived by a certain indescribable look in the eyes and contour of
Bessie Merrifield.
And Bessie herself, while sitting under the verandah with Lady Merrifield,
while all the others were walking down to embark Lord and Lady Ivinghoe
in the yacht, suddenly repeated, "Did you say that her name was Magdalen?"

"Yes;
I saw it startled you, my dear."

"It revived an old, old story. I
do not know whether there was anything in it. Who or what is she,
Aunt Lily? I only know her as the sister of the girl that the Ivinghoes
picked up."

"She is the owner of a little property at Arnscombe,
and has taken home her four young half-sisters to live with her, after
having slaved for them as a governess till she came into this inheritance.
She is an excellent person."

"Ah! Was her house at Filsted?"

"I
am not sure. Yes, I think the young ones were at school there. You
think--"

"I feel certain. May I tell you, Aunt Lily? Some of the
others cannot bear to mention my poor Hal; but to me the worst of
the sting is gone, since I know he repented."

"My dear, I should
be very glad to hear. Your father and mother never mention your brother,
and we were away at the time."

"Poor Hal! I am afraid there was a
weakness in him. He never had that determination that carried all
the others on. He never could get through an examination, and my father
put him into a bank at Filsted. By and by, after some years, came
a letter telling my father he was gambling very seriously, getting
into temptation, and engaging himself to an attorney's daughter. It
was while I was living with grandmamma, and he used sometimes to look
in on me, and talk to me about this Magdalen. Once he showed me her
photograph and I thought I knew her face again. But my father went
off, very angry. I have always feared he found poor Hal on the verge
of tampering with the bank money, but he never would say a word. He
broke everything up, put an end to the engagement if there was one,
and sent Hal off to John and George, who had just got their farm in
Manitoba, and were getting on by dint of hard work."

"They have done
very well, have they not?"

"Yes, by working and living harder than
any day labourer at Stokesley. Hal could not stand it, and--and I'm
afraid the boys were not very merciful to him, poor fellow, and he
got something to do in Winnipeg. There he fell in with a speculator
called Golding, they all did in fact; he was a plausible man, whom
they all liked, and used to put up at his house when they took waggons
in with their produce. He had a daughter, and Johnnie got engaged
to her, or thought he was. They all were persuaded to put money into
a horrid building speculation,--Henry, what he had brought out, the
other two what they had realised. Well, suddenly it all ended. They
were all gone, Golding, daughter, Hal and all--yes, all--the money
the other boys had put in the thing, off to the States, as we suppose!
No trace ever found."

"Really no trace?"

"None! The poor boys lost
all they had, and were obliged to begin over again."

"And has really
nothing been heard of this unfortunate Hal?"

"There is one thing
that does give me a hope. There did come to Stokesley a letter from
a Brisbane bank, addressed to J. and G. Merrifield, to the care of
Rear-Admiral Merrifield, and in it were bank bills up to the value
of what the boys had been robbed of, about two hundred and fifty pounds.
Poor Henry must have repented, and wished to make restitution."

"Was
there no name, no clue?"

"None at all. We know no more."

"But was
there no inquiry made at Brisbane?"

"It was when my father was very
ill. The parcel was not opened at first. I have been always sorry
he never heard of it; but after all there was no asking of forgiveness,
nor anything that could be answered. The boys got it with the tidings
of our dear father's death. John came home to see about things, George
stayed to look after his Stokesley.  A third followed, but scarcely was he visible,
when a shot was heard and he dropped to the ground.

"We must go and rescue Mr Sandys," cried the lieutenant; "he must have fallen into the hands
of the rebels."

"If so, the poor fellow is dead by this time," said the overseer.

The report of the two blacks who now came tended to confirm this latter opinion.  A party of
negroes had suddenly sprung out from a neighbouring cover as they had just got their baskets
on their heads to come away, when, throwing down their loads, they had made off, though the
hindermost had been nearly caught; and it was more than probable that Mr Sandys, who was stopping
to cover their retreat, had been unable to escape.  This was the saddest event which had hitherto
occurred, and all sincerely grieved for his loss.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

MAJOR MALCOLM PROCEEDS TOWARDS WALTON HALL--SUSPICIOUS CIRCUMSTANCES-- THE PARTY CUT THEIR
WAY THROUGH THE REBELS AND GAIN THE HOUSE-- PREPARATIONS FOR AN ATTACK--THE REBELS ATTEMPT
TO STORM THE HOUSE WITH LADDERS AND FIREBRANDS--BEATEN BACK--AN EXPEDITION TO FOLLOW THE REBELS--MAJOR
MALCOLM AND HIS PARTY SET OUT--JACK PEMBERTON TRIES TO REACH BELLEVUE--FINDS IT STILL BESIEGED--RETREATS--QUASHIE
SENT WITH A MESSAGE TO BELLEVUE--SUCCEEDS IN GETTING IN--A NOVEL FLAG OF DISTRESS HOISTED--A
FIERCE ATTACK MADE ON THE HOUSE--THE STOCKADES SET ON FIRE-- BLACKS AGAIN DRIVEN BACK--CUDJOE
OFFERS TO ABANDON THE SIEGE IF THE OVERSEER IS GIVEN UP--AMMUNITION OF THE DEFENDERS ALMOST
EXHAUSTED--THE OVERSEER SHOT--ANOTHER FIERCE ATTACK MADE BY THE BLACKS ON THE HOUSE.

Major Malcolm, influenced by the admiration he felt for Fanny Pemberton--if a deeper feeling
had not already inspired him--had set out from Bellevue for the purpose of warning her family
of the danger to which they were exposed, and, if he found it necessary, remaining to assist
in their defence.  He had intended, immediately he could do so, to ride on to Montego, to bring
up such forces as he could collect, and to disperse the rebels wherever they could be found;
but from the information his companions gained as they rode along, that large bands of rebels
were already in arms in the intermediate country, he feared that he should be unable to force
his way through them unless with a stronger party than he now had with him.  He was acting
according to his judgment for the best.  He certainly could, not leave his friends at Bellevue
without as soon as possible sending them assistance, while most of his present companions were
bound to go on to Walton with young Pemberton.  As they pushed forward as fast as their horses
could go, they frequently caught sight of negroes, three and four together, who invariably
ran away from them.  A few old men and women in a great state of alarm were, however, found
in the villages.  They said that the younger men had run off to hide themselves, asserting
that they were afraid of the rebels.  But it seemed doubtful whether such was the case, or
whether they had gone to join them.  Jack Pemberton, who acted as guide, now told the major
that they were approaching Walton Hall, and pointed out a house situated on an eminence, the
ground sloping round it.  On one side, up which the road led to the front door, the ascent
was more gradual than on the others.

"I am in great hopes, sir, that the rebel negroes, notwithstanding what we heard, have not
got here yet," said Jack Pemberton.  "If they have we must look out for them, for they cannot
be far off, and we shall see them as soon as we have passed this wood."

He led the way to the left round a grove of tall trees, when, in an open space which intervened
between the wood and the foot of the hill on which the house stood, a large body of blacks
were seen marshalling their forces, evidently preparing to attack the place.  The party of
horsemen were soon discovered, and the negroes, three or four hundred in number at least, faced
about, and seeing a few white men, with their usual shrieks and shouts advanced to attack them.

"Now, my friends," exclaimed the major calmly, "we must cut our way through these fellows.
Trust to your swords, keep close together, and follow me.  Forward!" and putting spurs to his
horse, he dashed on.  In another minute he was up to the black mass; and striking right and
left with his sword, he quickly cleared a broad way for his companions, who, following close
at his heels, had scarcely to use their weapons.  A few shots only were fired at them, as the
band apparently had but a small supply of muskets or pistols.  The trooper brought up the rear,
and as he saw the blacks attempting to close on him, quickly again drove them back.

"On! on!" shouted the major, "make your horses breast the hill, and we shall soon be under
shelter."

Before the negroes had recovered from their astonishment the whole party were up the hill,
and the doors being thrown open by those within, who saw their approach, they forced the horses
up the broad steps into the house.  Here they were of course heartily welcomed by the planter
and his family.

His first question was for his daughter.  "We have had dreadful reports about Bellevue, that
it was about to be attacked by the whole army of insurgents; and I was on the point of setting
off to assist our friends, when those fellows down there made their appearance," said Mr Pemberton,
a portly, handsome-looking man with a bald head.

The major replied that he had done his best to place the house in a state of defence, and,
as no enemy had appeared, that he had come at the request of Miss Pemberton to the relief of
Walton, which it was also reported was to be attacked.

"I am afraid, however, as the rebels have favoured us with a visit, that the rumour with regard
to Bellevue is also likely to prove true," said Mr Pemberton, after warmly expressing his gratitude
to Major Malcolm. "But with your assistance we can easily beat off our assailants.  The house
has stout walls, and we have, as you see, barricaded the windows and doors.  We are amply provisioned,
and have a supply of ammunition, so that we can hold out during a long siege should the insurgents
venture to remain in our neighbourhood, which is not, I think, likely. But perhaps, major,
as a soldier, you will think fit to look round the house, and see if we have left any weak
points unguarded."

"Very willingly," was the answer; and the planter led his visitor through the building.

The front of the house was well fortified, but when they arrived at the back premises Major
Malcolm pointed out more than one place through which a subtle enemy might easily find an entrance
during the hours of darkness.

"See," he observed, "they might make their way along under the shelter of that wall and reach
this window and door, which might easily be forced with a few strokes of a roughly constructed
battering-ram.  I don't know if these negroes have sense to use such an engine of war, but
the knaves with whom I had to do in India would very certainly have made the attempt."

The place pointed out was accordingly more strongly barricaded, and the major suggested a few
other improvements.

"I feel satisfied," he said at length, "that you are perfectly secure as long as your provisions
and ammunition hold out.  My only regret is that Miss Pemberton did not accompany us.  She
was more anxious about you than about herself, as we fully believed that Bellevue was sufficiently
well fortified to resist any attack the rebels are likely to make against it."

The worthy planter was much pleased with Major Malcolm, and especially grateful to him for
coming to his assistance and bringing back his son.

Of course a watch was kept on the movements of the rebels, sentinels being stationed on the
roof at each side of the house to give due notice of their nearer reproach.  They showed no
disposition to attack it during the daytime.  It was naturally expected, however, that they
would do so at night, should they entertain any hope of success.  It was difficult otherwise
to account for their remaining in the neighbourhood.

Major Malcolm expressed his wish to continue his journey, and Mr Hayward was anxious to accompany
him, that they might carry out their intention of collecting all the available military and
militia for the purpose of attacking the rebels wherever they could be met with.  Mr Pemberton,
as might be supposed, was desirous of retaining them.

"My dear sir," he observed, "it is a very different thing to cut your way up to a fortress
in the gallant style you did, and to force a road through an enemy on leaving it.  In the one
case, you at once gain shelter, and in the other are open to the pursuit of the foe.  Your
party, too, will be diminished, and you may be surrounded by overwhelming numbers, in contending
with whom the most determined bravery will not avail."

Major Malcolm saw the force of this reasoning, and agreed to remain till the following morning.
Besides the book-keepers, overseers, drivers, and other free persons employed on the estate
who formed the garrison of the house, there were several guests, planters and their families,
from the neighbouring small properties, who had come to Walton for protection, knowing that
they could not hold out should they be attacked in their own houses.  They all brought rumours
of the massacre of numerous families of whites.  On still more distant estates one or two like
Mr Hayward had narrowly escaped with their lives.  Notwithstanding this, when they all assembled
round Mr Pemberton's hospitable board, few of them looked like people who had been exposed
to fearful danger, and were at any moment liable to have to fight with a savage foe.  Some
of them, it is true, uttered threats of bitter vengeance on the heads of the villainous slaves,
as they called the blacks; but they passed the bottle freely, and talked, and even laughed,
as if nothing special was happening.

Major Malcolm was surprised at their apparent indifference to danger.

"Carpe diem is my motto," observed a jovial, bald-headed gentleman, who sat next to him.  "It
does not do to think too much of to-morrow. `Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.'
Of course our pockets will suffer, but the rebellion will be quickly put down, and all things
will come right in the end."

"I only hope so," observed the major; but he thought to himself, "If you were to treat your
slaves justly, and do your utmost to instruct them, there would be less fear of outbreaks for
the future."  He did not say this aloud, however, for he saw that his neighbour was not in
a mood to listen calmly to such a remark.

Major Malcolm was more pleased with the lady of the house than with any of her guests.  He
had a good deal of conversation with her, the most interesting subject being her daughter,
of whom she was justly proud, and she expatiated on her perfections with all a mother's fondness.
He won the good opinion both of his host and hostess, who begged that he would again favour
them with a visit on the first opportunity, when they hoped that the country would be restored
to peace.

The evening passed away quietly.  So little was an attack expected that some of the guests
proposed retiring to their rooms.

"You will run the risk, my friends, of being roused up in an unpleasant manner," said their
host in a warning voice; "the very silence of the rebels is, I suspect, ominous of their evil
intentions."

Major Malcolm agreed with him, and advised that a vigilant watch should be kept, offering to
take command of the fortress.  Jack begged that he might be allowed to act as his aide-de-camp.
Like a good officer as he was, the major made frequent rounds of the house, seeing that the
sentries kept a good look-out, and again examining every portion of the building to assure
himself that no point remained unguarded through which an enemy might force his way.  He went
also, occasionally, on the roof, whence he could command an extensive view over the country.
On each occasion he turned his glance especially in the direction of Bellevue, though he discovered
nothing to cause him anxiety.  He was about to descend, when, as he looked down into the valley,
it appeared to him that a number of dark objects were creeping up the hill.  He watched them
till he was convinced that they were men.

Slowly and cautiously they came along.  He had no longer any doubt that the house was about
to be attacked.  He hurried down and, going from room to room, warned the defenders to be prepared,
while he sent Jack Pemberton to other parts of the building.  As he looked out through a loophole
on the side which the rebels were approaching, he saw that several carried ladders, and others
bundles of firewood, though, for fear of betraying themselves, they had no lighted torches.

"Mr Pemberton," he said to his young aide-de-camp, "tell the people to aim at the fellows with
the ladders, and not to trouble themselves about the others--they can do no harm.  The moment
a man touches a ladder, shoot him down.  Say those are my orders--they must be obeyed."

The importance of the advice was soon evident.  The insurgents, knowing that they must be discovered,
now rushed forward, uttering fierce shrieks and yells.  As they did so they lifted up the ladders
with the intention of placing them against the walls, their object being evidently to throw
the brands on the roof and set it in flames.  Without waiting for further orders, the defenders
fired, and every man carrying a ladder was shot down.  Others took their places, most of whom
shared the same fate; but one succeeded in fixing his ladder, a dozen others following fast
at his heels, and instantly began to ascend.

Scarcely, however, had the first got half-way up, carrying a torch in his hand, than a shot
struck him.  He fell headlong among his companions.  Another, notwithstanding, made the attempt,
followed by a third; but they both met with the same fate, being exposed to the aim of the
two best marksmen in the fortress, the rest of the assailants in the mean time firing away,
aiming at the loopholes and roof.  As few of them had before handled muskets, their bullets
flew wide of the mark, while the garrison kept pouring down a continual fire among them.  Even
more experienced troops might have retired before such a reception.

The blacks showed the most desperate courage, and it was some time before they discovered that
their attempt was hopeless.  A few of them, indeed, again endeavoured to place the ladders
against the wall, but as all of those who did so were shot, the rest, finding that so many
of their companions had fallen, were seized with a panic and began to rush down the hill. 
The braver fellows among them lifted the slain and wounded, and, in spite of the bullets which
flew about their ears, carried them off.

"If all the insurgents behave as these rascals have done it will be no easy task to subdue
them," observed Major Malcolm to his host.

Not a single person in the house had been injured, but they could not help acknowledging that
the case would have been very different had they met the insurgents in the open field, for
it would have been no easy task to drive back a host of savages who displayed the desperate
courage their assailants had done, as Major Malcolm was afterwards to find.

No one expected that another attack would be made during the night, but of course a watch was
kept as before, though many of the gentlemen threw themselves on the cane sofas and chairs,
or went to sleep on the ground overcome with fatigue.

The next morning, when daylight enabled them to discern objects at a distance, not a black
could be seen.  Jack Pemberton and several other young men, on this, volunteered to go out
and ascertain if the rebels had really retreated.  They had been gone for some time, and fears
began to be entertained that they had been cut off.  However, they at length were seen coming
up the hill.  They gave the satisfactory report that not a black was to be discovered in the
neighbourhood.  "In what direction have they gone?" asked Major Malcolm.  They had not thought
of making any observations on the subject.  "Then I must beg you and a few of your friends
to accompany me that we may ascertain the point," he said.  Jack would go with the greatest
pleasure.

They set out, and in a short time Major Malcolm expressed his opinion that they had gone northward,
in the direction of Bellevue.  He returned to the house and begged Mr Pemberton to allow him
to take as many volunteers as he could obtain, that he might push his way on to Montego, to
gather as large a force as could be collected, in order to attack the rebels without delay.
Mr Hayward assured him that it would be hopeless to gain assistance in any other direction,
as from certain information he had obtained the whole of the intermediate country was in a
state of rebellion.  Jack was very eager to go, but this his father would not allow.  Six other
young men, for whom horses could be provided, volunteered, and they, with the major's servant
and Mr Hayward's follower, made up a party of ten.

After a hurried breakfast they set off, and were seen from the house galloping rapidly to the
westward.

The remainder of the day passed off quietly.  Not a negro was seen moving about in the neighbourhood
of the house, and, except that here and there blackened patches showed that the cane-fields
had been visited by the ruthless bands of the insurgents, there were no signs visible of the
fearful rebellion raging throughout the country.  Mr Pemberton, however, had become very anxious
to obtain news from Bellevue, for although Major Malcolm had assured him that the house was
well fortified, he was alarmed at hearing that the blacks who had so fiercely assaulted Walton
had gone off in that direction.  Bellevue, from its position and the character of the house,
was less capable of offering an effectual resistance to a determined attack than Walton, and
should the rebel slaves have resolved on its destruction, he dreaded lest they might by persevering
attacks accomplish their object.

On going to the roof of the house he could see, both to the northward and eastward, dense columns
of smoke ascending to the blue sky--too clear evidence that the insurgents had possession of
the country, and were burning the plantations and residences of the settlers.  Several of his
guests thus witnessed the destruction of their homes and property, while they gave vent to
their bitter feelings by uttering threats of vengeance, though they had ample cause to be thankful
that they had escaped with their lives.

Proposals were made by the more daring to sally forth and disperse the rebels, but the greater
number thought it wiser to remain in a place of safety.  Mr Pemberton himself was unwilling
to leave the house without defenders, lest some fresh bands, discovering that it was unguarded,
might visit it during his absence.

No news had come from Bellevue, and at length his son Jack and three other men volunteered
to make their way very cautiously in that direction and ascertain the state of affairs.  If
the rebel slaves were attacking the house, or were in the neighbourhood, so that they could
not approach it without the risk of being cut off, they were to return; but if not, they had
leave to go on and visit their friends, and report that all had gone well at Walton.

"Remember, my lads, you are to be cautious and not expose yourselves to the risk of losing
your lives by getting between the savages and the road by which you can retreat to this house.
Discretion, in this case, is the better part of valour.  By the time you return we may perhaps
have obtained further assistance, and we will then, if Bellevue is really besieged, do our
best to go to the relief of our friends.  The slaves are, I suspect, especially bent on revenging
themselves on Thompson, the overseer, who is looked upon by them as a hard man and a severe
taskmaster, though our friend Twigg thinks well of him, and is satisfied with his management
of the estate.  A slave who has become one of their leaders--Cudjoe, I am told by our people,
is his name--was flogged some time back by Thompson, and the savage has ever since threatened
to revenge himself on the overseer.  This makes me fear that they will persevere longer than
under other circumstances they might have done, but if our friends at Bellevue can hold out
it will be an advantage, by occupying the slaves who would otherwise have been roaming through
the country and devastating other estates.  You may, Jack, if you have an opportunity, warn
Thompson to beware of Cudjoe when the rest of the slaves have been again brought under subjection,
for the savage is not likely to forego his desire of vengeance, even should the overseer escape
at this time."

These remarks were made while Jack was preparing for his expedition.  He promised strictly
to obey his father's directions.

He and his friends, well armed, forthwith set out.  They were all spirited young men, who had
been educated in England, but had been long enough in the country to be well acquainted with
its ways, and had also been accustomed to field sports.  They were thus admirably suited for
the task they had undertaken.  Well aware of the danger they were running, they advanced cautiously,
keeping as much as possible under cover of the hedges and trees, and looking out well ahead
that they might not suddenly come upon the enemy.  They had wisely agreed to keep shoulder
to shoulder, or back to back, as the case might be, should they be attacked, and being stout-hearted
and confident in the use of their weapons, they had little doubt that they should be able to
beat back any number of assailants.

The sun struck down with tremendous force in the open places they had to pass, but they were
lightly clad, with thick straw hats on their heads, and none of them cared much for the heat.
When passing across the open country they pushed on rapidly, but moved forward more leisurely
in the shade.  As they avoided the villages, they met no one.  The whole country indeed had,
it seemed, suddenly become a desert.  They wished to avoid falling in with any slaves who might
give notice to the rebels of their whereabouts, and also had resolved not to rely on any reports
they might hear, but to trust only to their own observations.

It took them nearly two hours, from the circuitous route they followed, to reach the neighbourhood
of Bellevue.  They now proceeded more cautiously.  All seemed quiet.  No shots were heard,
and they began to hope that they should reach their friends without difficulty.

"We must not trust to appearances, however," observed Jack.  "The rebels may possibly be investing
the house, and, judging from our own experience, they may yet not venture to attack it in the
daytime.  You lie down under these bushes while I creep forward, as from the top of this rise
I shall get a sight of Bellevue, and be able to ascertain more accurately the state of affairs."

Saying this, while his companions followed his advice, Jack made his way to the top of the
hill, bending low, that should any of the enemy be posted in the intermediate valley, he might
run less risk of being seen. At length the house came in view.  All seemed quiet around it,
but he was still not perfectly satisfied.  He advanced a little further towards a bush, through
the branches of which he could see into the valley without exposing himself.  As he bent aside
the boughs with the barrel of his musket to look through them more easily, he caught sight
of a number of black heads moving here and there some five or six hundred yards below him.
There could be no doubt that they were rebels, and that they were, after their fashion, laying
siege to the house.

Presently he saw a party issue from the stockades, and he thought even at that distance he
could recognise Archie Sandys.  The leaders were white men, and were followed by several blacks
with buckets on their heads.  He at once divined their object.  For some time, apparently,
they were not discovered by the rebels, but presently one of the latter, doing duty as a sentinel
in advance of the rest, saw what was taking place.  He giving notice to the others, a number
of them started forth, and, dashing up the hill, began firing away at the white men.  Jack
witnessed the gallant way in which Archie defended his followers, and had the satisfaction
of seeing them regain their fortifications without any of them apparently being wounded.

While this scene was being enacted, as the rebels' eyes were turned toward the house, he was
able, without much risk, to creep forward and get a more complete view of their position.

"We should not have the slightest chance of getting in, that's very certain," he said to himself;
"but if we remain here, we shall run a great risk of being caught."  And, not without some
fear that he might be seen by the blacks, who now covered the opposite hill, he hurried back
to his friends.

They agreed with him that the sooner they were off the better, but that if they could collect
a sufficient force of white men and trustworthy mulattoes, they might without difficulty out
their way through the undisciplined band of savages, with some prospect also of putting them
to flight.

"In my opinion, if they are attacked in a determined way, they will very quickly take to their
heels," said Jack.

Their return occupied a shorter time than they had before taken, for, as they cared less for
being seen, they were able to follow the highroad. On their way, about a mile distant from
Walton, they passed through a village which appeared to be entirely deserted.  Looking into
one of the huts, however, they saw a boy of about twelve years old sitting on the ground, crying
and looking very miserable.

"What is the matter?" asked Jack, who recognised him as the son of one of the Walton slaves.

"Me out in de fields, and when come back find fader gone, me not know where, but s'pose rebels
take him away to kill him, for dey kill eberybody else who not get off and hide," answered
the boy, who was evidently an unusually intelligent little fellow.

"Well, Quashie," said Jack, who was kind-hearted as well as brave, "you had better come along
with us, and we will take care of you till father comes back--as I hope he will.  Where is
your mother?"

"Mother lib wid Massa Twigg--she call Martha," he answered.

"Oh, then I know her.  She nurses the children.  All right, Quashie. Cheer up; you shall have
something to eat as soon as we get back," said Jack.

Quashie started up, and accompanied the young gentleman without further questioning.

Glad as Mr Pemberton was to get his son and young friends back again, he was made very anxious
on hearing of the state of affairs at Bellevue.

"The rebels are evidently bent on taking the place, and from the desperate character I hear
of Cudjoe, I fear that he will not give up the enterprise as long as he has a hope of success,"
said Mr Pemberton.

The matter was talked over by himself and the other planters.  Before any desperate enterprise
was undertaken to afford relief to their friends, it was important to ascertain how much they
required it.

"I will try what can be done by means of Quashie, the boy Jack just now brought in," said Mr
Pemberton.  "He would make his way where a man would fail; and as his mother is a slave of
the Twiggs, he can, I should think, be trusted, for I will let him understand she will be benefited
as well as her master and mistress."

"A good idea, perhaps.  Not that I fancy these slaves have any natural affection," observed
one of the party.

"I do not agree with you there, my friend," observed Mr Pemberton. "Both fathers and mothers
are very fond of their children in their way; and I will answer for it that Quashie will manage
to carry any message we may send, and bring back an answer safely."

Quashie being called, he without hesitation undertook to do what was required of him.  He begged
only that he might take his own time and mode of proceeding, and grinned when some one remarked
that he might be caught by the rebels.

"Me git in and me come back, neber fear," he answered.

The only question was how to send a note.  Mrs Pemberton proposed writing what was necessary,
and, the paper being rolled up tightly and covered with black stuff, to conceal it among his
thick crop of woolly hair.  "Were he caught, the rebels might search him thoroughly and not
discover it in the way that I will manage," she said.

Quashie was perfectly content with the proposal, and was evidently proud of the confidence
placed in him.  He confessed that he had heard of the intended outbreak, and had given his
mother the information which she had sent to her master and mistress.

Quashie, having had a good supper, declared that he should be ready to set out that night if
required; but as it was hoped that during the next day a plan might be organised more effectually
to help their friends than could be then done, it was agreed that it would be better to wait
till the following evening.  From Jack's report they were at present, at all events, in no
distress, and were likely to hold out against any attack.

Another night went by, and the next morning Jack and his companions expressed their wish to
set off again to ascertain how their friends at Bellevue were getting on; but Mr Pemberton
would not allow them to go. The risk, he said, was far too great for the advantage to be obtained.
They could render no assistance, and would run a great chance of falling into the hands of
the rebels and being put to death.  In the course of the day, he hoped that Major Malcolm,
with some troops, or at all events a body of militia, would appear, and that their first task
would be to attack the rebels besieging Bellevue and relieve their friends.  In that case,
it would not be safe to leave Walton without a garrison, as the fugitives, if they found it
unguarded as they made their way to the mountains, would to a certainty in revenge destroy
it.  "We must wait patiently till the evening, and then Quashie shall go and bring us word
what they are about," he added.  He spoke with more confidence perhaps than he felt, yet on
one point he had made up his mind, that he would not allow his son to run the risk of losing
his life.

The day drew drearily on.  The feelings of the ruined inmates of the mansion can better be
imagined than described.  Their friends slaughtered, their crops and houses destroyed, and
their slaves (the most valuable part of their possessions) in revolt, and, if not killed, possibly
never again to be reclaimed--what the future had in store for them no one could say.  The more
confident asserted that the rebellion would quickly be quelled, but others thought that the
slaves, joined by the maroons and other free coloured and black people, might overrun the country,
and compel all the whites who might escape slaughter to quit it for ever.

Mr Pemberton laughed at such a notion.  "Depend on it, as soon as the troops and militia can
be collected, the slaves will fly from them as chaff before the wind, or will, if they resist,
to a man be cut to pieces," he observed.  "It will be a bad look-out for us, I confess, for
we shall become bankrupt; but our estates will remain, and we must procure fresh labourers
from other countries, Irish or Germans, who would stand the climate almost as well as blacks,
and do twice as much work."

Though the worthy planter talked and went about trying to keep up the spirits of others, he
felt his own sinking when darkness came on, and no troops appeared.

Quashie was sent for, and Mrs Pemberton secured the note, done up, as proposed, in his woolly
head.  She had written it at her husband's dictation, in a small, delicate hand, so that it
occupied little more space than a quill.

It mentioned Major Malcolm's arrival, the attack and defence of the house, the flight of the
rebels, the fact that the major had gone to collect troops who might be expected every hour,
Jack's visit to the neighbourhood of Bellevue, and his having witnessed Archie's expedition
to obtain water.  "We conclude," it continued, "that you are well able to hold out; but if
not, send us word, and, should the military fail to arrive, we will make an expedition to your
relief, and will advise you to sally forth and cut your way through the savages.  They will
not for a moment stand our united attack, and there will be but little or no danger in the
undertaking.  We cannot leave Walton unprotected, but we can muster twenty well-armed men.
Be prepared, and directly you see our signal--a flag flying on the top of the hill--dash out
of the house, with the women and children in your centre.  Should the rebels threaten to attack
you, we will charge down upon them; if not, we will be ready to protect your retreat, and keep
the savages at bay till you have got to a safe distance.  I propose this in the possibility
of your not having a sufficient store of provisions, or being unable to obtain water to stand
a long siege.  We have an ample supply of food for several weeks.  Our love to Fanny.  We were
much pleased with Major Malcolm, who appears to be greatly struck by her."

Quashie evidently felt the importance of the message confided to him, and was proportionately
proud.

"Neber fear, massa, I git into de house and out again, and no one see me," he said, strutting
about after the note had been concealed in the top of his woolly pate.  "Look here, massa,
you no see it now, or neber anybody else till moder get it."

"Well, then, away you go, my boy, and a dollar shall be yours when you come back," said Mr
Pemberton.

"Ki! dat's good," exclaimed Quashie, eager to be off.

The planter took him down to a back-door, by which he let him out that he might creep away,
lest any prowling foe might be watching the house; not that there was much risk of that, or
Jack and his friends would not have performed their expedition so securely.

Quashie ran on along the well-accustomed road till he got near his own village, when, taking
off the few clothes he wore, he did them up in a bundle and stowed them away in the hollow
of a tree to be ready for his return, leaving only a piece of black stuff round his waist,
with which Mrs Pemberton had supplied him at his request.  The sharpest of eyes only could
have detected Quashie as he crept along under the hedges: he felt confident there was very
little risk of his being discovered.  Few of his age could outstrip Quashie, and making good
use of his legs, he got over the ground in a third of the time Jack Pemberton had taken to
accomplish the distance.  He now moved more cautiously, stopping to listen every now and then
for the sound of voices which might warn him of the whereabouts of the rebels.

At first he began to fancy that they must have decamped.  Creeping down the hill, he suddenly
found himself close to a group of men lying stretched on the ground fast asleep, while as he
peered over a bush he observed others in the same position.  He stole silently back, making
his way to the left at a cautious distance from the besieging force, if they could be dignified
by such a title.  Presently, again he drew near, looking out for some opening in their line
through which he might make his way, but they appeared to have extended themselves so as completely
to encircle the house.  Again and again he got up close to the line; still he was not to be
daunted.  He had undertaken to get through them, and he intended by some means or other to
do so.  Suddenly he heard a shot, followed by several others.  The blacks close to him started
to their feet, and hurried off in the direction from whence the shot came.

Now was his opportunity.  He darted forward down the hill, springing up the opposite declivity
like a hunted hare, at the same time keeping his body almost bent to the ground; and before
he was perceived, he was close to the chevaux-de-frise.  In vain, however, he endeavoured to
find his way through it.  The garrison were too much occupied with what was going forward on
the other side of the house to observe him; indeed, his small, black, lithe body could scarcely
have been perceived.  He ran on like a mouse, looking for a hole through which to escape, and
considering whether he should not cry out for assistance and ask to be taken in.  At last he
got to an opening, and in he darted, just as two men rushed up from the lower ground, no one
in the darkness perceiving him.  As soon as the men were in the inside, several persons filled
up the gap, and he made his way undiscovered within the palisades and through the door of the
house.

The first person he met was Martha, who had come out to learn what was going forward.  Their
delight was mutual.  Tears streamed from the eyes of his mother as she pressed him to her heart.
The planter who had lately expressed an opposite opinion would have acknowledged that the slaves,
degraded as they were, were capable of human affection.

His errand was soon told, and Martha, proud of his performance, took him to her master, who
was naturally very much surprised at seeing him.

"I bring message from Massa Pemberton," he said.

"Where is it?" asked Mr Twigg.

"Here, massa," answered Quashie, presenting his woolly pate.  "You take it out, please."

Martha, however, performed the operation; and the note being eagerly read, a consultation was
held on its contents, which considerably raised the spirits of the besieged party, lowered
as they had been by the loss of Archie Sandys.

None of them, however, were disposed to attempt cutting their way through the rebels.  Lieutenant
Belt was almost disabled--for though, in spite of much suffering, he still continued the command
in the fortress, he could not use his sword--while the gallant young Scotchman was lost to
them.  Mr Ferris was willing to make the attempt if others wished it, but he feared the risk
to which the ladies would be exposed; and it was finally determined to hold out till the arrival
of the troops.

"The small quantity of yams we have secured will not last us long," observed Mr Twigg, "and
we must remember that we are threatened with starvation, as well as with another attack from
the savages."

"We have food sufficient for another day," remarked Lieutenant Belt; "before the end of that
time, relief may be sent to us."

"But should it not come, what then are we to do?" inquired Mr Ferris.

"Act as our friend Pemberton suggests," said Mr Twigg.  "To-morrow evening, as soon as it is
dark, we will send off Quashie.  We must take care in the mean time that the rebels do not
see him, or they will know that by some means or other he got in, and will be on the watch
for him. We may depend on Pemberton's carrying out his plan, and I should advise that the attempt
be made in the night-time."

Quashie was rather disappointed at finding that he was not to set off at once, as he was eager
to get his dollar.  His mother consoled him by assuring him that he would be allowed to go
the following night, and Mr Twigg made him perfectly happy by at once giving him a dollar,
so that he would become the possessor of two dollars, should he accomplish his return journey.

The garrison were not allowed to rest in quiet.  The blacks, growing impatient, made several
attempts to surprise them, but, in consequence of the severe punishment they had received,
were more wary than at first.  Each time, on finding that they were discovered, they retreated
so rapidly that few, if any, of them were shot.

Morning at length arrived; the blacks had retreated to their cover, and, except that a few
shots were at times wantonly fired from a distance at the house, the day went on as the previous
ones had done.  Much as they wanted food, it would be evidently a dangerous undertaking to
attempt procuring it from the yam ground.

The arrival of Major Malcolm was eagerly looked for, but in vain, and it was resolved to send
Quashie off at dark, with an account of their now truly desperate condition.  He was confident
of being able as before to get through the enemy's lines.

In accordance with Mr Pemberton's suggestion, it was resolved in the mean time to get up a
flagstaff at the top of the house, with a flag hoisted half-mast high as a signal of their
distressed condition.  This would hasten the arrival of friends to their relief, should any
be in the neighbourhood.  It would not, however, prevent the necessity of sending off Quashie
to urge that aid might at once be despatched. Fortunately a long pole, which Mr Twigg had intended
to put up for that purpose on a neighbouring height, had been brought to the house to be prepared
by the carpenter.  It was at once carried indoors, and, the lower end being fixed in a beam
of the ceiling of the upper story, was run through the trap which led to the roof.  Here, under
the direction of Mr Ferris, who had some nautical knowledge, it was stayed up by ropes to the
corners of the house, halliards having previously been rove through the sheave at its summit.
The difficulty was to obtain a flag. None was to be found, till Mrs Twigg remarked that she
and the young ladies had some light dresses which would answer the purpose.

"Let us have them at once, then," exclaimed Mr Twigg eagerly; "there is no time to be lost."

Ellen and Fanny, hurrying to their room, quickly returned with a couple of cambric dresses,
such as are generally worn in that warm climate. Before they had time to take their scissors
and cut them open as they had intended, Mr Twigg seized them, and hurried with them up to the
roof, where Mr Ferris was superintending the erection of the flagstaff.

"Here they are," exclaimed Mr Twigg.  "Run them up at once; they will tell our tale better
than any more perfect flag."

Mr Ferris, with a ball of rope yarn in his hand, fastened the dresses forthwith to the halliards
by the skirts, allowing the full sleeves to blow out.

"There!" he exclaimed, with a touch of his native wit.  "Faith, they will show that there are
ladies in distress, and if there is any gallantry in the heart of the islanders, we shall soon
have them running a race to our assistance."

The dresses thus hoisted flew out to a brisk breeze which blew from the eastward.  Just then
several shots were heard, and two or three bullets fell on the roof, which, though spent, warned
those on it that should the marksmen approach somewhat nearer their position would become dangerous.
Mr Ferris, therefore, calling his assistants down, they all quickly got under shelter.

Notwithstanding the signal flying from the roof, the day passed without any one coming to their
relief.  Their provisions were almost exhausted, and affairs were becoming serious.  Another
consultation was held, when it was determined to beg Mr Pemberton to come as he proposed, the
garrison undertaking to attempt cutting their way through the rebels, and abandoning the house
to destruction.  A note to that effect was accordingly written, and secured, as the former
one had been, in Quashie's woolly head.  About an hour after sundown he crept out at the back
of the house, and the instant after was lost to sight.  Even his mother felt no fear for his
safety, and every one believed that he would make his way without difficulty back to Walton.

After he had gone the enemy recommenced their system of annoyance, coming up under cover and
firing at the house.  Though the garrison aimed in return at the points from which the flashes
of the rebels' muskets were seen, the latter so rapidly retreated that it was supposed none
of them were hit.  Nothing could be more trying.  Sometimes for several minutes together they
would remain quiet, when suddenly a shower of shot would come pattering against the walls.
The enemy would then again retreat, and single shots would be fired, now from one point, now
from another; then again another shower would come, as if the enemy had made a general advance.

"Let them fire away as much as they like," observed Lieutenant Belt, laughing.  "I only wish
they would fire much oftener at so safe a distance, as they must thus at last expend their powder."

Still those unaccustomed to warfare could not fail to experience uncomfortable sensations as
the bullets in rapid succession struck the walls, although as yet they had done but little
damage, five of the people only, besides Lieutenant Belt, having been slightly wounded in their
shoulders or faces.  At length the rebels appeared to have grown tired of that style of amusement,
and perfect silence reigned around the house.

Towards morning, when most of the little garrison were lying down, worn out with constant alarms
and watching, the cry was raised that the blacks were again coming on; and they were seen rushing
up the hill, carrying not only faggots but ladders, evidently intending to attack the house
as they had done at Walton, and to set both it and the stockades on fire.  Should they succeed,
nothing could save the lives of the inmates.

The shrieks and yells uttered by the blacks for the purpose of intimidating the garrison were
certainly terrific, and even the gallant lieutenant began to fear that all the efforts made
to resist them would be in vain.  On inquiry, too, he found that the ammunition was running
short, a large proportion having been expended during that and the previous night.  Still undaunted,
he went round among the people, inspiring others with his own cool courage.

"We have more serious work than hitherto, my friends," he said; "but if we are true to ourselves,
we shall beat the enemy as before.  Never mind though they burn the chevaux-de-frise, they
will not venture through the flames, depend on that; and if we fail to put out the fire, we
must retreat into the house.  As I told you before, do not throw a shot away. Here they come."

As he spoke, the savages carrying the faggots rushed forward with the intention of casting
them over the outer line against the stockades. Many, however, were shot down before they succeeded
in doing this; others were killed or wounded after they had thrown forward their loads. A number
of men now advanced, carrying candlewood torches.

"Those fellows must be picked off," shouted the lieutenant.

In some cases the command was obeyed; but many of the blacks, now leaping on one side, now
on the other, eluded the bullets aimed at them, and threw the burning brands amid the bundles
of wood, which catching fire began to blaze up in all directions, the smoke almost concealing
the combatants from each other.  Whenever it lifted, however, the flames exposed the shrieking
mass of blacks clearly to view, and many were shot down in the moment, as they supposed, of
their triumphant success.

As Lieutenant Belt had expected, none of them ventured through the burning mass; but here and
there the stockades were catching fire, and it appeared too probable that they would be burnt
through and afford an ultimate ingress to the foe.  The scene was indeed terrible to those
standing in the narrow space within the stockades--the crackling of the burning wood, the lurid
flames, the dense mass of smoke, and outside the shouting, shrieking savages eager to break
through the defences and massacre all within.

Efforts were made to extinguish the fire, and had there been an ample supply of water, it might
easily have been done, for it was only in spots where the flames blew against the woodwork
that they produced any effect.  Still the back and sides of the house were protected, and until
the stockades were destroyed the besiegers could make no use of their ladders.

"I do not think we need fear them," said Lieutenant Belt.  "We must watch narrowly where they
are placed, and shoot down the people from the windows immediately they attempt to mount."

The blacks, as before, carried off their dead and wounded, and it was difficult to ascertain
how much they had suffered.  Already a good many had retreated, but others were seen coming
up with more faggots, which they attempted to throw amid the already burning mass.  By this
time the whole house was surrounded by a hedge of flames, and Mr Twigg, who had exerted himself
as much as any one, made his way up to the lieutenant, and advised that they should retreat
into the house while the enemy were unable to follow them.

"Let us make another attempt to drive them off," was the answer.  "They are afraid themselves
of the flames they have kindled, and will not venture through them.  Now, my lads, give them
one more volley," he shouted, "and if I mistake not they will turn tail."

As he shouted "Fire!" at the top of his voice, the order was heard by the blacks, and away
they went scampering down the hill, hoping to avoid the bullets which they expected would follow.

The greater number got under cover, or escaped by falling flat on their faces.  Ignorant savages
as they were, they were unable to take advantage of the success their bravery and hardihood
had accomplished. On this the ultimate safety of the hard-pressed garrison depended.  Had they
pressed on through the opening which the fire had produced, they might have forced their way,
not only within the stockade, but into the house itself.  Hopes were entertained that the enemy
had had fighting enough for the night, and intended to allow the fire to do its work before
making another assault.  Fresh efforts were made by the garrison to extinguish the fire, which
had got hold of the stockades.  They had been composed chiefly of dry timber, which easily
ignited and burned furiously.  At length the lieutenant saw that all attempts to save them
would be futile, and that the utmost that could be done would be to prevent the doors and windows
of the house itself from catching fire. This, by constant watchfulness and great exertion,
was done; and he then, complying with Mr Twigg's earnest appeals, summoned the people to come
within the house, when the door was barricaded, and they prepared to hold out, in what they
had from the first called their citadel, till the moment for the intended sortie had arrived.

It was a night of terror to many and anxiety to all.  Their ammunition was running terribly
short; but a few rounds only remained, and there was barely food sufficient to afford a breakfast
for the weary garrison. The water also was almost exhausted.

Daylight came, and the lieutenant went himself to the roof of the house to look out, but could
see no friendly band coming to their relief.  The young ladies' dresses were flying in the
morning breeze, sadly rent by the bullets which had passed through them.  The lieutenant then
turned his glance into the valley, where he saw the black besiegers still apparently as numerous
as ever.  The hedge of fire had now burned itself out; large gaps existed in the stockades,
but portions still remained standing, and would afford some protection to his men in case a
sortie had to be made.  His chief object was to examine the ground which they would have to
traverse, should Mr Pemberton carry out his intention of coming to their relief.  He at last
descended, and went round to each of the windows, where he had posted a sentry to keep a look-out
on the movements of the rebels; then, feeling that he had done his duty, he threw himself down
on a cane sofa, to snatch for a short time the rest he so much required.

The other inmates of the house, who had been kept awake all the night, were dozing in their
chairs or on their sofas; the men not on guard were lying down on the ground; the children
were in their cribs, watched over by Martha.  She had reserved some food for them, and they
were in that respect better off than any one else.  The young ladies and Mrs Twigg had positively
refused to take more than their share.  They were happily also forgetting their troubles in sleep.

Weary as he was, Mr Ferris felt the dangerous position in which they were placed too much to
rest, and continued going from room to room, looking out at each window, and occasionally mounting
to the roof.  He was standing there, when he saw a single black advancing up the hill from
among the savages.  He was unarmed, and carried in his hand a pole with a large white flag
waving from it.  He evidently understood the use of a flag of truce, and trusted to its being
respected.  He advanced till he got within hearing distance of the house.  He was a tall, strongly
built man, his features unusually hideous even for a negro.  On seeing Mr Ferris, he shouted
at the top of his voice, "Will you gib in? You see what we can do.  We ask you to make friends."

"We shall be ready to do so on condition that you lay down your arms and return to your duty,"
answered Mr Ferris.

The black laughed loud and hoarsely.  "Do you know who I am?" he asked.

"No," answered Mr Ferris.

"Den I tell you--I Cudjoe.  Some inside de house know me, and know dat I no fool.  Listen den.
We go away and leave Massa Twigg--he good man-- and all de people alone on one 'dition, dat
you gib up the oberseer and let us hab him to do wid him as we like.  Dat is our 'dition; 'cept
it and you safe.  If not--listen, massa--you got one lily-white daughter, and Massa Twigg him
got wife and piccaninnies.  You lub dem.  You see what we do dis night; we soon come again
wid more faggots and fire and ladders, and we burn de house ober your heads and kill ebery
one. Cudjoe no fool--Cudjoe speak de truth.  Listen, massa, what I say--gib up de overseer or die."

"It is useless making such a proposal," answered Mr Ferris; "no one would consent to it.  If
you have any other terms to offer we will listen to them.  We can hold out against all your
attempts to take the house.  You have already lost a number of your foolish followers, and
many more will be killed if you venture again to attack us."

While Mr Ferris was speaking, he heard a person coming up the ladder, and glancing round he
saw Thompson the overseer standing by his side, and on the point of lifting a musket, which
he had placed on the roof. Before Mr Ferris had time to stop him, he had raised it to his shoulder
and was taking aim at the insurgent leader.  As he pulled the trigger Mr Ferris struck up the
weapon, and the bullet whistled over the black's head.

"Respect a flag of truce, even in the hands of a savage," he exclaimed indignantly.  "If we
set such an example, what can we expect in return?"

Cudjoe had observed the act.  "I tank you, massa," he shouted, "but dat man die before de sun
go down;" and, rapidly turning, he bounded down the hill.

Several shots, which went whistling after him, were fired by the men on guard in the lower story.

"You have done an ill service to the country, sir, and worse to all within this house," exclaimed
the overseer.  "That man is the mainspring of the rebellion.  Had I killed him, the blacks
in this neighbourhood, without a leader, would have taken to flight, and we should have been safe."

"I did what was right.  A flag of truce should ever be held sacred," answered Mr Ferris.  "I
do not regret refusing his request, but your act has prevented us from making other terms,
which might have been done."

"No terms can be kept with savages.  It is impossible to trust them," exclaimed the overseer.
"However, we must now stand the consequences."

Mr Ferris, who felt his anger rising at what he considered Thompson's insolence, descended
from the roof.

The firing had aroused the rest of the party.  The lieutenant even, although musket-shots were
familiar sounds, started to his feet, believing that the house was about again to be attacked.
Mr Ferris explained what had happened, and both the lieutenant and Mr Twigg agreed that he
had acted rightly, and blamed the overseer for firing. "You are absolutely relieved that the Beechcroft
wedding takes all of us out of the way naturally and without offence,"
she said so kindly that Ada laid her head on her sisterly shoulder,
and allowed herself to shed a few tears.

"Yes, yes," she said; "I am glad to have so good a reason to mention.

Only I do hope Jasper will not object to Valetta's coming back to be bridesmaid. That would really
be a blow and give offence, and it would make difficulties with others--even James Henderson,
who swears by Jasper. I have often wished they would have done as
I advised, and have had this wedding at Rocca Marina, out of the way
of everybody!

I sometimes think it will be the death of me. Do come home to help me through it."

She spoke so like the Ada of old that it went to Jane's heart.

She promised that she would return in time to give the very substantial
assistance in which all believed, and the more sentimental support
in which nobody believed, though her distaste arose tenfold after
seeing the bridegroom, who looked like an old satyr, all the more
because Maura was like a Greek nymph.

Mrs. Henderson was much grieved, and had tried remonstrance with her sister, but found her
quite impervious.

Glad were all the Merrifields to escape to the quiet atmosphere of Beechcroft, where the relations
were able to congregate between the Court, the Vicarage, and the
more-distant Rotherwood; and the wedding was an ideal one in ecclesiastical
beauty, and the festivities of those who had known and loved Lady
Merrifield as Miss Lily in early youth, grandmothers who had been
her schoolchildren, and were pleased to hear that she was a grandmother
herself, and hoped in a year or two to welcome her grandchildren.

Alethea and her little Somervilles she had seen en route to Canada,
and Phyllis was to come in due time when Bernard Underwood could be
spared from the bank in Colombo, and they would bring their little
pair.

In the matter of bridesmaids Gillian certainly had the advantage, for she was amply provided
with sisters and cousins, Dolores coming for a few days for the wedding; whereas the six whom
Maura had provided for beforehand in Paris were only, as Miss Jane said, "scraped up" with difficulty
from former schoolfellows.

Lord Roger's nieces would not hear of being present. Paulina was unwillingly pressed into the
service, as well as the more willing Vera; but Mysie Merrifield was
not to be persuaded to give up her visit to Lady Phyllis, and Aunt
Jane could only carry home Valetta, who held the whole as "capital
fun," and liked the acquisition of the white silk and lace and cerise
ribbons.

Dolores had negotiated that No. 6 of the Vanderkist girls should spend a year with Miss Mohun
for a final polish at the High School at Rock Quay, so as to be with
her brother Adrian, who was completing his term at the preparatory
school before his launch at Winchester.

Wilfred also returned, father and uncle having decided that he did not merit a game licence, nor
to attack the partridges of Beechcroft, and the prospect of the gaieties
of Cliffe House consoled him.

Adeline had to endure her husband's mortification at other disappointments. The Ducal family
was wholly unrepresented. Even Emily, the connecting link, would not venture on the journey; and
the clerical nephew was not sufficiently gratified by Lord Roger's
intention to se ranger to undertake to officiate; and a Bishop, who
had enjoyed the hospitality of Rocca Marina, proved to have other
engagements.

No clergyman could be imported except Maura's brother Alexis, who had been two years at work
at Coalham under Mr. Richard Burnet, and had just been appointed by the newly-chosen Bishop
of Onomootka, and both were to go out with him as chaplains. In the meantime, while the Bishop
was preparing, by tours in England, Alexis undertook the duties of
Mr. Flight's curate, rejoicing in the opportunity of seeing his elder
sister, and the old friends with whom he had never been since his
unlucky troubles with Gillian Merrifield, now no more.

The delight of receiving him compensated to Kalliope Henderson for
much that was distressing to both in Maura's choice.

The seven years that had passed had made him into a noble-looking man, with a handsome classical
countenance, lighted up by earnestness and devotion, a fine voice and much musical skill, together
with a bright attractive manner that, all unconsciously on his part, had turned the heads of
half the young womanhood of Coalham, and soon had the same effect at Rock Quay.

Vera and Paulina were in a state of much excitement over their white silks, in which the three other
sisters took great pleasure in arraying them, and Thekla only wished that Hubert could see
them. She should send him out a photograph, buying it herself with her own money.

She was, of course, to see the wedding, in her Sunday white and broad pink sash, of the appropriateness
of which she was satisfied when, at Beechcroft, they met Miss Mohun's young friend, Miss Vanderkist,
in the same garb. She and her brother had been put under Magdalen's protection, as Miss Mohun
was too much wanted at Cliffe House to look after them; but Sir Adrian,
a big boy of twelve, wanted to go his own way, and only handed her
over with "Hallo, Miss Prescott! you'll look after this pussy-cat
of ours while Aunt Jane is dosing Aunt Ada with salts and sal volatile.

She--I'll introduce you! Miss Prescott, Miss Felicia Vanderkist! She wants to be looked after,
she is a little kitten that has never seen anything! I'm off to Martin's."

The stranger did look very shy. She was a slight creature, not yet seventeen, with an abundant
mass of long golden silk hair tied loosely, and a very lovely face
and complexion, so small that she was a miniature edition of Lady
Ivinghoe.

Her name was Wilmet Felicia, but the latter half had been always used
in the family, and there was something in the kitten grace that suited
the arbitrary contractions well.

In fact, Jane Mohun had been rather startled to find that she had the charge of such a little
beauty, when she saw how people turned around at the station to look,
certainly not at Valetta, who was a dark bright damsel of no special
mark.

At church, however, every one was in much too anxious a state to gaze
at the coming procession to have any eyes to spare for a childish
girl in a quiet white frock.

St. Andrew's had never seen such a crowded congregation, for it was a wedding after Mr. White's
own heart, in which nobody dared to interfere, not even his wife, whatever her good taste might
think. So the church was filled, and more than filled, by all who considered a wedding as legitimate
gape seed, and themselves as not bound to fit behaviour in church.

On such an occasion Magdalen, being a regular attendant, and connected with the bridesmaids,
was marshalled by a churchwarden into a reserved seat; but there
they were dismayed by the voices and the scrambling behind them, which,
in the long waiting, the Vicar from the vestry vainly tried to subdue
by severe looks; and Felicia, whose notions of wedding behaviour were
moulded on Vale Lecton and Beechcroft, looked as if she thought she
had got into the house of Duessa, amid all Pride's procession, as
in the prints in the large- volumed "Faerie Queene."

And when, on the sounds of an arrival, the bridegroom stood forth,
the resemblance to Sans Foy was only too striking, while the party
swept up the church, the bride in the glories of cobweb veil, white
satin, &c., becomingly drooping on her uncle's arm, while he beamed
forth, expansive in figure and countenance, with delight.

Little Jasper Henderson, anxious and patronising to his tiny brother Alexis, both in white pages'
dresses picked out with cerise, did his best to support the endless glistening train.

The bridesmaids' costumes taxed the descriptive powers of the milliners in splendour and were
scarcely eclipsed by the rich brocade and lace of Mrs. White, as she sailed in on Captain Henderson's
arm; but her elaborate veil and feathery bonnet hardly concealed
the weary tedium of her face, though to the shame, well nigh horror,
of her sister, she was rouged.

"I must, I must," she said; "he would be vexed if I looked pale."

It was true that "he" loved her heartily, and that he put all the world at her service; but she
had learnt where he must not be offended, and was on her guard. Hers had been the last wedding
that Jane had attended in St. Andrew's. "Did she repent?" was Jane's
thought.

No, probably not. She had the outward luxuries she had craved for, and her husband was essentially
a good man, though not of the caste to which her instincts belonged--very
superior in nature and conscience to him to whom his blinded vanity
was now giving his beautiful niece, a willing sacrifice.

It was over! More indecorous whispering and thronging; and the procession came down the aisle, to
be greeted outside by a hail of confetti and rice; the schoolboys, profiting by the dinner
interval, and headed by Adrian, had jostled themselves into the foreground, and they ran headlong
to the portico of Cliffe House to renew the shower.

And there, unluckily, Mr. White recognised the boy, and, pleased to have anything with a title to
show, turned him round to the bridegroom, with, "Here, Lord Roger, let me introduce a guest,
Sir Adrian Vanderkist."

"Ha, I didn't know poor Van had left a son. I knew your father, my boy. Where was it I saw him last?
Poor old chap!"

"You must come in to taste the cake, my boy," began Mr. White.

"Thank you, Mr. White, I must get back to Edgar's. Late already. The others are off."

"Not a holiday! For shame! He'll excuse you. I'll send a note down to say you must stay to
drink the health of your father's old friend."

Those words settled the matter with Adrian. The holiday was enticing, and might have overpowered
the chances of a scholarship, for which he was working; but he had begun to know that there
were perplexities from which it was safer to retreat; and that he had never transgressed his
Uncle Clement's warning might be read in the clear open face that showed already the benefits,
not only of discipline, but of self-control.

So obedience answered the question; though, as he again thanked and refused, he looked so dogged
as he turned and walked off, that Ethel Varney whispered to Vera that at school he was called, "the
Dutchman, if not the Boer."

Nor did he ever mention the temptation or his own resistance. Only Mr. White asked Miss Mohun
to bring him to the dance which was to be given in the evening, telling her of his refusal of
the invitation to wedding cake and champagne and she--mindful of her duty to her charge as
hinted by Clement Underwood--had not granted the honour of his presence on the score of his
school obligations.

The afternoon was spent in desultory wanderings about the gardens, Magdalen and her sisters
being invited guests, and Vera in a continual state of agitated expectation.

Had not Wilfred Merrifield always been a cavalier of her own? And here he was, paying no attention to her,
with all the embellishment of her bridesmaid's adornments, and squiring
instead that little insignificant Felicia, in a simple hat, and hair
still on her shoulders; whilst she had to put up with nothing better
than a young Varney, who was very shy, and had never probably mastered
croquet.

She was an ill-used mortal; and why had she not Hubert to show how
superior she was to them all, in having a piece of property of her
own to show off?

There was Paula, too, playing animated tennis with that clerical brother of the bride, who
had been talking to Magdalen about the frescoes of St. Kenelm's (as
if she, Vera, had not the greatest right to know all about those frescoes!).

Even little Thekla was better off, for she was reigning over a merry party of the little ones, which
had been got up for the benefit of the small Hendersons, and of which Theodore White had constituted
himself the leader, being a young man passionately devoted to little children.

So when the guests dispersed to eat their dinner at their homes and
dress for the dance, Vera was extremely cross.

Each of the other three had some delightful experiences to talk over; but whether it was Mr.
Theodore's fun in acting ogre behind the great aloe, or Mr. Alexis's achievements with the croquet
ball, or his information about the Red Indians and Onomootka, she
was equally ungracious to all; she scolded Thekla for crumpling her
skirt, and was quite sure that Paula had on the wrong fichu that was
meant for her.

Each bridesmaid had been presented with a bracelet, like a snake with ruby eyes; but Vera,
fingering hers with fidgeting petulance, seemed to have managed to
loosen the clasp, and when arranging her dress for the evening thought
that her snake had escaped.

Upstairs and downstairs she rushed in hopes of finding it. The cab in which they had returned
was gone home to come again, and there was the chance that it might be there or in the Cliffe
House gardens; and then the others tried to console her, but they
were not able to hinder a violent burst of crying, which scandalised
Thekla.

"I am sure you couldn't cry more if you had lost Hubert's, and that would be something worth crying
about."

Hubert's was an ingeniously worked circle of scales of Californian gold, the first ornament that
Vera had ever possessed, and that all the sisters had set great store by. But with an outcry
of joy Vera exclaimed, "Here's the snake all safe! I pushed the other up my arm because it
looked so plain and dull, and it was that which came off."

"That is a great deal worse than losing the snake," said Thekla. "He has a nasty face, and I
don't like him, with his red eyes."

"Don't be silly," returned Vera; "this is a great deal more valuable."

"Surely the value is in the giver," said Paula; to which Vera returned
in the same vein, "Don't be silly and sentimental, Polly."

She was so much cheered by the recovery of the snake that they brought her off to the evening
dance without a fresh fit of ill- humour, and she sprang out under
the portico of Cliffe House, with her spirits raised to expectation
pitch.

But disappointment was in store for her. It was not disappointment in other eyes. Paula had
all the attention she expected or desired, she danced almost every
time and did not reckon greatly on who might be her partner.

What pleased and honoured her most was being asked to dance by Captain Henderson himself.

What was it to Vera, however, that partners came to her, young men of Rock Quay whom she knew
already and did not care about?

And she never once had the pleasure of saying that she was keeping the next dance for Wilfred
Merrifield!

To her perceptions, he was always figuring away with Felicia Vanderkist, her golden hair seemed
always gleaming with him; and though this was not always the case,
as the nephew of the house was one of those who had duties to guests
and was not allowed by his aunts to be remiss, yet whenever he was
not ordered about by them, he was sure to be found by Felicia's side.

Vera's one consolation was that Alexis White took her to supper.

To be sure he was a clergyman, and had stood talking to Lady Flight half the time, and his conversation
turned at once to Hubert Delrio's frescoes; but then he was very handsome, and graceful in manner,
and he sympathised with her on the loss of her bracelet, and promised to have a search for
it by daylight in the gardens.

CHAPTER XX--FLEETING

"And variable as the shade By the light quivering aspen made." - SCOTT.

The bracelet came to light in the gardens of Cliffe House the next morning, and Alexis White
walked over to the Goyle to return it safely, little guessing, when he set forth to enjoy the
sight of the purple moors, and to renew old recollections, what a flutter of gratified vanity
would be excited in one silly little breast, though he only stayed ten minutes, and casually
asked whether the sisters were coming to Lady Flight's garden party.

Everybody was going there.

Miss Mohun even took Felicia, as it was on a Saturday's holiday; and, unwittingly, she renewed
all the agitation caused by Wilfred's admiration, and that of others, to the all-unconscious
girl.

Vera could no longer think herself the reigning belle of Rock Quay, though she talked of Felicia
as a schoolgirl or a baby, or a horrid little forward chit! Her excitement was, however, divided
between Wilfred and Mr. Alexis White, who could not look in her direction without putting her
in a state of eagerness.

In this, however, she was not alone.

Half the ladies were interested about him; his manners were charming,
his voice in church beautiful, and his destination as chaplain to
a missionary bishop made him doubly interesting; while he himself,
even though his mind was set on higher things, was really enjoying
his brief holiday, and his sister, Mrs. Henderson, was delighted to
promote his pleasure, and garden parties and the like flourished as
long as weather permitted; and as Vera was a champion player, she
was sure to be asked to the tournaments, and to have to practise for
them.

Inopportunely there arrived a letter from Hubert, requiring an answer about the form of ornament
in the moulding of the fourteenth century! Paula dutifully went to the library, looked out and traced
two or three examples, French and English. Nothing remained but for Vera to write the letter after
the early dinner. However, she went to sleep in a hammock, and only roused herself to recollect
that there was to be tea and lawn tennis at Carrara.

"Won't you just write to Hubert first?"

"Oh, bother, how can I now? Don't worry so!"

"But, Flapsy, he really needs it without loss of time."

"I'm sure he has no right to make me his clerk in that horrid peremptory way, as if one had nothing
else to do but wait on his fads."

"Flapsy, how can you?" broke out even Thekla.

"Surely it is the greatest honour," said Paula.

"Well, do it yourself then, I'm not going to be bothered for ever."

Thekla went off, in great indignation, to beg "sister" to speak to
Flapsy, and beg her not to use dear Hubert so very very badly, which
of course Magdalen refused to do, and Thekla had her first lesson
on the futility of interfering with engaged folk; Paula meanwhile
sent off the despatch, with one line to say that Vera was too busy
to write that day.

There had been two or three letters from Hubert, over which Vera had
looked cross, but had said nothing; and at last she came down from
her own room, and announced passionately, "There!

I have done with Mr. Hubert Delrio, and have written to tell him so!"

"Vera, what have you done?"

"Written to tell him I have no notion of a man being so tiresome and dictatorial! I don't want
a schoolmaster to lecture me, and expect me to drudge over his work
as if I was his clerk."

"My dear," said Magdalen, "have you had a letter that vexed you? Had you not better wait a
little to think it over?"

"No! Nonsense, Maidie!

He has been provoking ever so long, and I won't bear it any longer!" and she flounced into a chair.

"Provoking!
Hubert!" was all Paulina could utter, in her amazement and horror.

"Oh, I daresay you would like it well enough! Always at me to slave for him with stupid architectural
drawings and stuff, as if I was only a sort of clerk or fag! And boring me to read great dull
books, and preaching to me about them, expecting to know what I think! Dear me!"

"Those nice letters!" sighed Paula.

"Nice! As if any one that was one bit in love would write such as that! No, I don't want to marry a
schoolmaster or a tyrant!"

"How can you, Flapsy?" went on Paula, so vehemently that Magdalen left the defence thus far to
her; "when he only wishes for your sympathy and improvement."

The worst plea she could have used, thought the elder sister, as Vera
broke out with, "Improvement, indeed!

If he cared for me, he would not think I wanted any IMPROVING! But he never did! Or he would have
taken Pratt and Povis' offer, and I should have been living in London and keeping my carriage!
Or he would have taken me to Italy! But that horrid home of his, and his mother just like a half-starved
hare! I might have seen then it was not fit for me; but I was a child, and over-persuaded among you
all! But I know better now, and I know my own mind, as I didn't then.

So you need not talk! I have done with him."

"Oh, Flapsy, Flapsy, how can you grieve him so? You don't know what you are throwing away!"
incoherently cried Paula, collapsing in a burst of tears. "Maidie, Maidie, why don't you speak
to her, and tell her how wicked it is--and--and--and--"

The rest was cut short by sobs.
"No, Paula, authority or reasoning of mine would not touch such a
mood as this. We must leave it to Hubert himself. If she really cares
for him, she will have recovered from her fit of temper by the time
his letter can come, and it may have an effect upon her, if our tongues
have not increased her spirit of opposition. I strongly advise you
to say nothing."

Paula tried to take her sister's advice, and would
have adhered to it, but that Vera would talk and try to make her declare
the rupture to have been justified; and this produced an amount of
wrangling which did good to no one. Magdalen really rejoiced when
the frequent golf and tennis parties carried Vera on her bicycle out
of reach of arguing, even if it took her into the alternative of flirtation.

Thekla
cried bitterly, and declared that she should never speak to Flapsy
again; but in half an hour's time was heard chattering about the hedgehog's
meal of cockroaches. In another week the excitement was over. The
Bishop of Onomootka had come and gone, after holding meetings and
preaching sermons at Rock Quay and all the villages round, and had
carried off Alexis White with him.

Nothing had come of the intercourse
of the latter with his rich uncle, nor of the varieties of encounters
with the damsels of Rock Quay, except that society was declared by
more than one to have become horridly flat and slow.

Vera was one
of these, and the letters received from Hubert Delrio did not stir
up a fresh excitement. There were no persuasions to revoke her decision,
no urgent entreaties, no declaration of being heart-broken. He acquiesced
in her assurance that the engagement had been a mistake; and he wrote
at more length to Magdalen, avowing that he had for some time past
traced discontent in Vera's letters, and fearing that he had been
too didactic and peremptory in writing to her. He relinquished the
engagement with much regret, and should always regard it as having
been a fair summer dream--but, though undeserving, he hoped still
to retain Miss Prescott's kindness and friendship, which had been
of untold value to him.

A little more zeal and distress would have
been much more pleasing to Vera; and she began to be what Agatha and
Thekla called cross, and Paula called drooping, and even excited alarm
in her, lest Flapsy should be going into a decline. But a note came
to the Goyle which Magdalen read alone, and likewise she cycled alone
to Rockstone.

"Miss Mohun, can you give me a few minutes?" said she,
as the trim little figure emerged from beneath the copper beeches,
basket in hand.

"By all means; I shall not be due at the cutting-out
meeting till three o'clock."

"I wanted to consult you about an invitation
that Mrs. White has been so very kind as to give my little sister,
Vera."

"Oh!" quoth Jane Mohun, in a dry sort of tone.

"I know that
she had wished to take out one of her own nieces to Rocca Marina,
but that Sir Jasper did not wish it, and I thought perhaps it would
be easier for you than for Lady Merrifield to tell me whether there
is any objection that would apply to Vera."  They made their way up a steep path which led to the rear of the
fort.  The gates were open, and they hurried in.  A fearful sight met their gaze.  Every building
within had been set on fire and gutted.  Amid the mass of charred timber lay numerous bodies,
apparently, as far as their dreadful condition enabled the party to judge, of white men--some
in the dress of civilians, while the half-destroyed uniforms showed that others had been soldiers.
Two, from the broken swords still grasped in their hands, were apparently officers, who had
fought their way out of the building, which had been the mess-room of the fort, and had been
shot or cut down by the savages.  A few bodies of blacks were seen, evidently from their dresses
the officers' servants, who had been waiting at table.  The general state of the fort told
its own story.  The whole garrison and several visitors had, not dreaming of danger, been suddenly
surprised by an overwhelming body of insurgents, who must have rushed in and massacred them
before the soldiers could stand to their arms.  If any white people in the neighbourhood had
escaped with their lives, they must have gone away and not dared to return to the scene of
the catastrophe.

The lieutenant and the midshipmen climbed to the highest part of the fort, and looked round
in every direction.  Nowhere could they see a human being, but in the distance they observed
several blackened spaces where flourishing sugar-canes had lately grown or gardens or other
plantations had existed.  The fisherman's account was thus fearfully verified.  As no one could
be seen from whom to gain further information, Mr Foley and his companions re-embarked, and
pulled back for the ship as fast as the men could lay their backs to the oars.  The commander
thought of landing the marines and a party of small-arms men, but, without further information,
it would be impossible to know in what direction to proceed.

The boats being hoisted in, the sails were again filled, and the ship stood on to the westward
as close to the shore as the master would venture to take her.  Every telescope on board was
turned towards it, no one looking out more eagerly than Norman Foley, who dreaded lest they
should come in sight of a once pleasant mansion now reduced to a mass of ruins.  If a well-garrisoned
fort had been surprised and thus fearfully destroyed, what might not have happened in the event
of a single planter's house with small means of defence being attacked.  He very naturally
conjured up all sorts of dreadful pictures; at the same time, he manfully tried to combat his
apprehensions, and to hope for the best.

"I see some one on the shore, sir, making a signal," cried Gerald, who had a telescope to his
eye.  "He appears to me to be a white man.  He is running up and down, seemingly trying to
attract our attention.  There he is now, under that tall cocoa-nut tree."

All the telescopes in use were turned in the same direction.

"Yes, that is a white man, no doubt about it," said the commander.  "He has taken off his shirt
and is waving it.  Heave the ship to, Mr Tarwig.  Call the gig's crew away, Mr Foley, and pull
in to ascertain what he wants.  There can be little doubt that it is a matter of importance.
Come off again as soon as possible, for we shall probably find places further along the coast,
where the white people are hard-pressed by the blacks."

The commander's orders were speedily obeyed, and Norman Foley, without the loss of a moment,
followed by Gerald who was directed to accompany him, lowered himself into the gig.  He was
eager to be off.  Every moment of time was precious; he had vividly realised the truth of the
commander's last remark.

"Give way, lads, give way!" he exclaimed, imparting his eagerness to the boat's crew.

They bent lustily to their oars, and the boat shot rapidly over the blue waters towards the
sandy beach, where the white man had been seen.  It was yet impossible to discern him, however,
without a glass.  Mr Foley kept his eyes fixed on the spot, hoping that he would soon again
come in sight.

"I see him, sir," cried Gerald; "he is still waving his shirt, and seems in a desperate hurry.
Perhaps he is some one who has escaped from the blacks, and he wants us to go and help some
white people attacked by them."

"Very probably," answered Norman Foley, with a scarcely suppressed groan.

The boat was nearing the shore.

"He is now making for the west side of the bay, towards a reef of rocks which runs out some
way into the sea," exclaimed Gerald.  "He expects that he shall reach us sooner."

"I see him," said Mr Foley; but directly afterwards Gerald exclaimed--

"He has disappeared."

"He has had, probably, to go to the inner end of the rock to climb up it," observe the lieutenant.
"I thought so," he added; "we'll pull in and look out for a place where we can take him on board."

"He has good reason to be in a hurry," exclaimed Gerald.  "See, there on the top of the hill
are a whole host of black fellows, and now they are running down towards the sand.  I suspect
that they are in chase of him, and if he does not make haste they will catch him, too."

While Gerald was speaking, a number of negroes, armed with spears headed with long blades used
for cutting the canes, and with axes and other rudely formed weapons, were seen scampering
down the hill.  They possessed apparently no firearms, however, or the fugitive's chance of
escape would have been very small.  He made his way along the rough rocks, leaping across the
fractures in his course, and often passing spots on which he would scarcely have ventured had
not a foe been at his heels.  The blacks in their eagerness to catch him scarcely took notice
of the boat, though had they done so they might have suspected that her crew possessed firearms,
with which they could be reached.  They were scarcely more than a hundred yards off, when the
boat got up to the ledge of rock, and the white man, springing forward, aided by the bowman,
leaped on board and was passed along by the crew to the stern-sheets.

The lieutenant immediately ordered the boat to be backed off, and her head being turned in
the direction of the ship, the crew once more gave way.  The blacks, meantime, finding that
their expected victim had escaped, gave vent to their feelings of anger in shouts and cries.
A few also, who had been in the rear, now appearing armed with muskets, had the audacity to
fire at the boat, but happily the bullets fell short of her, and she was soon entirely beyond
their range.

"Where do you come from?  What has happened?" asked the lieutenant, as the stranger sank down
by his side.

"I was hiding from the rebel slaves in the wood up in the hill, when I saw the ship out there,
and came down in the hopes that the commander would land some of his crew and send them to
the assistance of a white family, friends of mine, whose house is surrounded by savages who
are threatening their destruction," answered the latter.  "There is no time to be lost, for
they were fearfully beset, and have neither food nor water remaining, while nearly all their
ammunition is, I fear, expended."

"Who are they?" asked Norman Foley, in an evident tone of agitation.

"A Mr Twigg and his family, with whom Mr Ferris, an Irish gentleman, and his daughter are staying.
There are several other white people in the house," was the answer.

"Mr and Miss Ferris in danger!" ejaculated the lieutenant and Gerald in the same breath.  "How
far off is the house?  Can we soon reach it?" inquired the former.

"Twelve or fourteen miles to the westward from here," answered the stranger.  "I should think
with this breeze you might get off it in less than a couple of hours."

"We'll lose no time, and the commander will, I am sure, afford every assistance in his power,"
said Norman Foley.  "Mr and Miss Ferris are friends of mine, and I will use every exertion
to go to their assistance.  But how do you know that they are so hard-pressed?" he added, anxiously.
"Have you made your escape from the house?"

"I did not do so intentionally.  Having set out with a number of others to obtain some yams,
we were attacked by a party of blacks, and I was made prisoner.  Happily I had done some service
to two or three slaves among the party, and had saved them more than once from a flogging.
While some of the others proposed putting me to death, they dragged me off among them, and
before the rest of the gang knew what had happened, it being at night, they enabled me to get
off.  I made my way along the shore, as I knew that part of the country and recollected places
where I could conceal myself.  I felt pretty sure, however, that should the black leader or
any other instigators of the rebellion discover that I had escaped they would send in pursuit
of me.  I could not move fast in the darkness, and had got to no great distance when daylight
broke, so I climbed up into a big cotton-tree and hid myself among the mass of creepers to
rest.  I had intended trying to reach a fort where I could obtain assistance, but on looking
out of my hiding-place in the morning I saw a party of blacks, who were apparently searching
for me.  I therefore crouched down among the creepers, where, as I was pretty well worn out,
I fell asleep.  At night I again pushed on, hoping that the blacks had given up the pursuit.
I had reached the hill below which you saw me, when another day broke, and I had once more
to hide myself for fear of being discovered.  On looking out next morning I saw your ship approaching,
and though I thought it probable that the blacks might still be looking for me, I hurried down
in the hope that you would see me and would go to the assistance of my friends.  But two days
have passed since I left them, and I know not what may have happened in the meantime."

Norman Foley's anxiety was greatly increased by the account given him by Archie Sandys, for
he it was who had so happily escaped destruction.  He observed the lieutenant's evident agitation,
though he might not have suspected the cause.  Gerald plied him with questions, and drew forth
many particulars of the siege and defence of Bellevue.

On reaching the ship Norman Foley introduced Archie Sandys to the commander, who, learning
from him the state of affairs at Bellevue, ordered the sails to be filled, and the Champion
under every stitch of canvas she could carry stood along the coast.  As she approached that
part where, by Archie's account, Bellevue was situated, a look-out was kept for a fitting landing-place
for the boats.  They had all been got ready for lowering.  The marines, under their sergeant,
and a party of blue jackets armed with muskets, pistols, and cutlasses, were ordered to be
prepared to go in them with Mr Foley, Crowhurst, Mr Dobbs the boatswain, and Gerald; Archie
Sandys was of course to accompany the expedition as a guide.  On nearing the spot dense volumes
of smoke were seen rolling along, driven by the wind, concealing the landscape from view.

Poor Norman was almost ready to give way to despair.  His worst apprehensions were fulfilled.
The savage blacks must have set the house on fire, and too probably its hapless inmates were
destroyed.  Many others on board thought as he did.

Gerald, who was looking out, however, suddenly exclaimed, "I see the top of the house above
the smoke; the fire does not reach it.  There is a flagstaff with two flags flying from it,
though they are odd-looking ones."

"It is my belief that they are petticoats, or some female gear," exclaimed the master.  "Yes,
no doubt about it; the signal is pretty clear, it means females in distress.  We'll soon help
you, my pretty maidens, whoever you are."

Mr Foley had taken the glass.  After carefully surveying the spot he began to breathe more
freely.  Yes, it was a wood on fire, some way below the house, and that might still be holding
out.  The flags, too, he discovered, were light muslin dresses, and he very likely suspected
even then that one belonged to Ellen.  It did not require that, however, to make him spring
forward with even greater eagerness than he had more than once displayed when setting forth
on a cutting-out expedition.  He took the lead, the launch and pinnace following.  He allowed
his crew to dash on ahead of the other boats, for as they approached the shore rapid firing
was heard.  Even now the house was being attacked, and Archie had mentioned the scarcity of
ammunition.  Should there be any delay they might be too late to save its inmates.  The thick
smoke had concealed their approach, as it had the ship, from the view of the blacks as also
from those in the house.  The former, indeed, not expecting to be interfered with from the
side of the sea, had not turned their eyes in that direction.

Norman had time to land, and with the assistance of Archie, who pointed out the different localities
to form his plan of proceeding.  It was to move to the right just outside the burning wood,
then to charge up the hill under cover of the smoke and attack the enemy on the flank, so that
their shot might not be directed towards the house.  The other boats appeared to him to be
pulling very slowly, but they arrived at last, and a small party of marines quickly formed
with the blue jackets on either hand.  The orders were given in a low voice, Norman and Archie
leading in Indian file, and at a double quick march.  They proceeded a short way along the
shore, and then facing about they rushed up the hill, uttering a true English cheer.  The blacks
raised a cry of alarm.  Those who with burning brands in their hands were attempting to mount
the ladders let them drop, tumbling head over heels to the ground.  Their companions scampered
off, many throwing down their muskets.  Their leader Cudjoe held his, and sullenly retired,
but as several shots came whizzing past him, he increased his pace, till he began to run as
fast as the rest, and the whole multitude took to their heels, shrieking with alarm, like a
herd of swine, tumbling over each other down the hill, some making for the opposite height,
others rushing along the valley.

The marines, led by their sergeant, charged after them till the greater number of the fleet-footed
savages had disappeared.

Archie Sandys accompanied the master with one party of blue jackets in pursuit of Cudjoe, but
the black leader succeeded in reaching a wood, and was soon lost to sight among the trees.
Several negroes, however, were overtaken.  Seeing that they could not escape, they fell on
their knees, begging for mercy.  The seamen were about to cut them down when Archie recognised
two or three slaves who had saved his life, and throwing himself before them intreated the
seamen to desist.  The master, who had fortunately heard his account, understanding his motive,
restrained the sailors, and the lives of the poor blacks were spared.

"I don't forget the mercy you showed me," said Archie, "but I wish you had managed to run off."
Then, turning to the master, he begged that he would allow the blacks to escape.  "If they
are made prisoners I may be unable to save their lives," he said.

"Well, then, let us go and look after some others," exclaimed Mr Billhook.  "Tell them to show
leg-bail and we'll not follow them."

The kind-hearted seamen fully appreciating Archie's object were well pleased to let the poor
trembling wretches escape, and led by the master, they pursued some others who had still retained
their muskets, and who proved to be Coromantees, the most warlike and savage of the blacks
engaged in the insurrection.  Several of these attempting to make a stand were captured.

The shouts of the gallant band of seamen and marines had been heard by the garrison, and their
movements and the flight of the blacks seen from the windows.  The doors being thrown open,
the greater number rushed out to join them in the pursuit of the fugitives, but their ammunition
being expended they were unable to fire a shot, and the blacks happily for themselves were
soon beyond the reach of the whites, or they would have received less merciful treatment than
the blue jackets were inclined to show them.  As it was, indeed, the British officers had some
difficulty in restraining several of the drivers from cutting down the prisoners who had been
secured.  In a few minutes not a single black, except those who had been made prisoners and
a few who lay dead or wounded on the ground, was to be seen.

Mr Foley, having ordered the recall to be sounded, hurried with Gerald to the house, where
the first person they met was Mr Ferris, who at once recognised them.  Taking them by the hands,
he thanked them with tears in his eyes as the deliverers of his daughter and himself and their
friends.

"You have rendered me for ever your debtor," said the merchant; "indeed, it is impossible to
repay you."

Norman, making a fitting answer, eagerly inquired for Ellen.

"She is there," replied her father; and the words were scarcely out of his mouth before Norman
sprang forward, and there he saw Ellen standing, somewhat pale indeed, though the colour began
to mount rapidly to her cheeks, with her hands extended to greet him, her trembling limbs,
however, preventing her from moving towards him as her feelings might have prompted.  He had
good reason to be satisfied that absence had not cooled her affection.  Mr Twigg kindly allowed
them to enjoy each other's society without interruption.  Perhaps Norman would have remained
longer than his duty ought to have permitted him, had not the sound of hearty cheers reached
their ears, and he and Ellen on going into the hall were informed by Mr Ferris that a party
of white men were seen coming over the hill who were thus welcomed by the garrison.  Ellen
now first heard of the escape of Archie Sandys, who had been heartily welcomed by all hands,
among whom he was a universal favourite.  He might before have had his suspicions as to the
interest which Lieutenant Foley entertained for Miss Ferris.  When he saw them together, he
had no doubt about the matter, and the slight hopes he had cherished vanished for ever.

Mr Twigg in the meantime had dispatched people to the yam ground, and to every part of the
neighbourhood where provisions could be found, though the blacks had consumed most of the roots
and fruits as well as the animals they could lay hands on near the house.  Water had also been
brought up from the well to supply the thirsty inmates, while the sergeant of marines had drawn
up his men, as he said, to observe the enemy, lest they should venture on another attack. 
That, however, did not appear probable, as numbers were seen flying at full speed towards the
mountains to escape the vengeance of their masters, which they knew full well was likely to
overtake them.

Jack Pemberton and the party from Walton now appeared.

"We hurried off as soon as Quashie arrived," said Jack, "but he with a misadventure, and was
captured by some rebels who, though they could make nothing of him, detained him, and he had
no little difficulty in making his escape.  On our way we were overtaken by a messenger from
Major Malcolm, who is advancing with a strong force, and depend upon it he will give the rebels
a fearful drubbing if he overtakes them."

"We are much obliged to you, Jack, for your good intentions, but had not the party from the
ship arrived in the nick of time, you would in all probability have found the house a heap
of ruins, and we all burned to cinders in the middle of it," answered Mr Twigg.

No one welcomed Archie Sandys more cordially than did Lieutenant Belt, who had greatly admired
the coolness and courage he had displayed.  He had now also a fellow feeling for him, as he
quickly perceived that the sailor officer had forestalled him in the affections of Miss Ferris.

The family at Bellevue, notwithstanding the fearful danger they had gone through, soon recovered
their spirits.  Such provisions as could be hastily collected were cooked, and, as there was
a good store of wine and other articles of luxury, an ample repast was soon prepared for their
guests.

While they were seated round the table, it was announced that a body of soldiers were seen
coming from the west, with several persons on horseback; and in a short time Major Malcolm
and two other officers galloped up to the door.  The expression of his countenance when Mr
Twigg went out to meet him, and as he surveyed the havoc which had been made around the house,
and saw the fearful danger to which the inmates had been exposed, showed how much he felt.
He condemned himself for having quitted Bellevue, although he had gone at Miss Pemberton's
express wish; but when he entered the room and saw her eyes turned towards him, and the slight
tinge which rose to her generally pale cheeks, he knew that she, at all events, did not blame
him.  His stay could be but very brief, for as soon as the forces who were coming up arrived,
he must push forward in pursuit of the rebel blacks.

"It is painful work, without honour or glory, and yet duty demands that it must be done," he
observed to Miss Pemberton.  "I would that others had to do it."

Mr Twigg did not fail to expatiate largely on the gallant conduct of Lieutenant Belt, and the
important service he had rendered them.  "It was indeed a happy day for us when you came here,
for, had it not been for him, I believe that none of us would now be remaining alive; and I
therefore propose the health of the hero of Bellevue, for such he deserves to be called."

Every one corroborated Mr Twigg's account, and the gallant lieutenant made a very neat and
appropriate speech.

"As he is unfit to march, if you desire it, Mr Twigg, I will leave him here in command of a
detachment sufficient to protect the house," said Major Malcolm, "as probably the marines and
sailors may be required on board their ship, to render aid in other directions."

Norman Foley was not especially obliged to the major for this offer, as he had thought it possible
that he might again have been sent on shore in command of a party to protect the house.  He
had now, however, no excuse for remaining; he was therefore compelled, very unwillingly, to
order his men to prepare for embarking.

"You will write to Norah, Miss Ferris," said Gerald, as he was wishing good-bye.  "Tell her
all about me, and say that I hope to see Owen Massey when he comes back again in the Ouzel
Galley; and also tell her that we had a brush with, we believe, that same rascally buccaneer
which attacked the old ship on her voyage out, when you were on board.  The fellow escaped
us, but we shall keep a sharp look-out for him and take him one of these days.  I suppose that
we shall remain on this northern coast for some time, and then go back to Port Royal, with
lots of prizes, I have no doubt, and perhaps the pirate among them."

Ellen and Norman had to part, but they expected ere long to meet again at Kingston, to which
place Mr Ferris intended returning as soon as the country was considered safe for travelling.

As the evening was approaching, Lieutenant Foley had to hurry his men to the boats, after a
friendly parting with Archie Sandys.  He had another reason for making haste, for he did not
altogether like the look of the sky.

"What do you think of the weather, Mr Dobbs?" he asked.

"Coming on nasty, to my mind," answered the boatswain, casting his eye round the horizon. 
"Whether it is one of them hurricanes which blow in those seas, or only a common gale, I can't
just say; but the sooner we are aboard, and the ship can get a good offing, the better."

Crowhurst, who had been some time before in the West Indies, was of the boatswain's opinion,
and thought that they had already delayed too long; but, then, he was not, like the lieutenant,
in love, and had found nothing of especial interest on shore.

The commander was highly pleased at hearing of the service his officers and men had performed,
and did not blame the lieutenant for remaining on shore so long.  Indeed, he observed, "Had
no other force appeared to protect the house, I should have considered it right to send you,
with the marines and a few seamen, back to guard it, in case the rebels should return."

Norman heartily wished that Jack Pemberton with his friends, and Major Malcolm with his troops,
had marched after the rebels, instead of coming to Bellevue.

The commander had observed the signs of a change of weather, and by the master's advice, who
felt sure that a heavy gale would soon be blowing, though he could not say from what quarter
it might come, the ship's head was put off shore, so as to gain as good an offing as possible
before it was down upon them.  The wind increased, and though the Champion could still carry
her whole canvas, it was necessary to keep a bright look-out against a sudden squall, all hands
remaining on deck, ready to shorten sail at a moment's notice.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

THE CHAMPION IN A HURRICANE--HOVE ON HER BEAM-ENDS--LOSS OF MAIN AND MIZEN-MASTS--RUNS ON BEFORE
THE GALE--STRIKES ON A REEF--AN ISLAND DISCOVERED AT DAYBREAK--BOATS AND STORES GOT OUT--THE
CREW REACH THE SHORE--WATER FOUND--SITE FOR A FORT CHOSEN--STORES AND GUNS LANDED--A GALE--SHIP
GOES TO PIECES--LAUNCH LOST--A VESSEL SEEN--CHASED--ESCAPES-- FORT FINISHED--A SPANISH MAN-OF-WAR
APPROACHES--ATTACKS THE FORT-- SPANIARDS DEFEATED--A GALE--SPANISH SHIP LOST--VAIN ATTEMPTS
TO SAVE THE CROW.

The Champion was standing across the channel between Jamaica and Cuba. The night came on very
dark.  The wind, though blowing fresh from the north-west, did not increase as much as had
been expected, and it was hoped that the ship would claw off the shore and obtain a good offing
before the morning.  The topgallantsails had been handed, and as much canvas was set as she
could carry.  The master turned many an anxious glance over the quarter, where he could still
dimly discern the outline of the land.  The ship was heeling over till her lee bulwarks were
smothered in the fast-rising sea.  Still the commander was unwilling to shorten sail while
she could bear what she was then carrying.  It was impossible to say from which direction the
wind might next blow.  It might come from the northward, and if so, she would have the shore
dead under her lee, and, should her masts go, might be driven helplessly towards it.  Another
reef was taken in the topsails, but still she heeled over to the wind more than the commander
liked, notwithstanding which she was evidently making considerable leeway.

At length there came a lull; the ship righted, and for some time continued to stand up better
than heretofore to her canvas.  The appearance of the sky, however, did not improve.  Dark
masses of clouds flew across it, gradually thickening till a dense canopy hung over the ocean
without any discernible break.  The wind howled and whistled, and the sea rose more and more.

"We'll heave the ship to, Mr Billhook," said the commander.  "We have got, I should think,
a sufficient offing, and we must return to the shore as soon as the weather will allow."

"If you will take my advice, sir, we will rather stand on for some time longer.  We are perhaps
nearer the coast than we may fancy, and we might find it a hard matter to get off again, should
we discover in the morning that we have been drifting towards it."

"Keep her as she is going, then," said the commander, who thought that the master was probably
right.

Soon after this the wind somewhat lulled, and the ship looked up more to the northward than
she had hitherto done, showing that the wind had shifted a point or two.  Even the master thought
that the weather was improving.  The watch below was ordered to turn in and some of the officers
went to their berths.

It had just gone two bells in the morning watch, when a sound like a thunder-clap was heard,
and Gerald, who was in his hammock, was nearly thrown out of it.  He felt the ship heeling
over to starboard.  He and all those below, slipping into their trousers, sprang on deck. 
The ship was on her beam-ends, the water washing half-way up to the coamings of the hatchways.

"Hard up with the helm! let fly the main and mizen-topsail sheets!" cried the commander; but
the ship did not rise or answer the helm.  "Cut away the mizen-mast!" he shouted; and the carpenter
and boatswain, armed with axes, came aft, and while some of the men severed the rigging, a
few blows served to send the mast, with its spars and fluttering sails, over the side.  At
the same moment the mainmast, which must already have been sprung when the hurricane struck
the ship, fell after it, and the seamen immediately commenced hacking away at the rigging to
clear the wreck.  The ship thus relieved, rose to an even keel, and now feeling the power of
the helm, away she flew before the gale.

The master hurried to the binnacle.  The wind had happily shifted to the westward, and though
blowing with far greater fury than before, the ship was in less peril than she would have been
had it continued in its former quarter.  The yards were now squared and preventer backstays
set up, and the carpenter, having examined the mast, reported that it was secure.  The hands
were sent to close-reef the fore-topsail; but even though thus reduced, it was as much sail
as the ship could carry.  On she flew, free from the wreck of both the masts, which it was
impossible to secure.  Every effort was made to secure the remaining mast, on which so much
depended. She would not even respond to Susan's doll or Bessie's picture book; and Bessie advised
leaving her alone, and turned to the window with Agatha, who was nothing loth to tell of her
Bexley and Minsterham experiences.

Angela tried to talk about the voyage, or any thing that might save the child from being discussed
or courted; but Susan's heart was in the subject, and she had not
enough tact or knowledge of the world to turn away from it.

Regret for the past was strong within her, and she could not keep from asking how much "little
Magdalen" (at full length) remembered of her father, how much she had been with him, whether
he had much altered, whether there were a photograph of him, and a great deal more, with tears
in her eyes and a trembling in her voice which made Angela feel much for her, even while vexed
at her pertinacity, for the child was by no means the baby she looked like, but perfectly well
able to listen and understand, and this consciousness made her own
communications much briefer and more reserved than otherwise they
would have been.

Bessie, with more perception, saw the embarrassment, turned round from Agatha, went up to the cockatoo
in his cage, and asked in a pleasant voice if Magdalen would show him to her, and tell her his
name. Angela was glad enough to break off poor Susan's questioning, and come forward, with the
child still clinging, to incite the bird to display the rose colour under his crest, put up a
grey claw to shake hands, and show off his vocabulary, laughing herself
and acting merriment as she did so, in hopes to inspire Lena.

"Come, Ben, tell how you were picked up under a gum tree, quite a baby, a little grey ball, and
brought over in the shepherd's pocket for a present to the little Boss, and how we fed you and
nursed you till you turned all rose-colour and lovely! There! put up your crest and make red revelations.
Can't you speak? Fetch him a banana, Lena. That will open his mouth."

At sight of the banana, the bird put his head on one side and croaked in a hoarse whisper, "Yo
ho!"

"No, you need not be afraid of any more sailors' language," said Angela. "They were as careful
as possible on board. I overheard once, 'Hold hard, Tom, Polly Pink
is up there, and she's a regular lady born!

Whereupon Polly indulged in a ridiculous chuckle, holding the banana cleverly in one foot, while
Angela laughed and chattered more and more nervously, but only succeeded in disgusting the visitors
by what Susan at least took for unbecoming flippancy.

"THAT Sister," said Susan, as they drove away, "does not seem to me at all the person to have
the charge of Henry's poor little girl!"

"I wish she had not thrust herself in," said Bessie, "to prevent me
from getting on with the child over the cockatoo."

"She calls herself a Sister! I don't understand it, for she seems to have been bent on marrying
poor Henry."

"She never took any vows."

"Then why does she wear a ridiculous cap over all that hair?"

By and by they were met by Bernard Underwood striding along.

"Holloa! have you seen Angel and her darling? She is a perfect slave to the little thing, and
one only gets fragments of her."

"She seems very fond of her," said Bessie.

"Just kept her alive, you see. Poor old Angel! She is all for one thing at a time! Are you going
up to Clipstone?"

"I think we shall find Phyllis at Beechcroft."

"Yes, she is driving there to lunch, and Angel is to bring the little cornstalk over to make
friends with our Lily! I trust the creature goes to sleep now, and
I may get a word out of Angel!"

Wherewith he dashed on, and the two ladies agreed that "those Underwoods seemed to be curiously
impulsive."

They were, however, much better satisfied with the Ceylonese Lily,
who was a very well trained civilised specimen, conversing very prettily
over one of Aunt Jane's picture books, which Bessie looked at with
her, and showing herself fully able to read the titles beneath, a
feat of which Lena was quite incapable, though she was less on the
defensive than she had shown herself at the Goyle, and Angela was
far more at her ease than when she was conscious that "Field's" original
love was watching the introduction to his sisters.

Besides, Bernard's presence was sunshine to her, and the two expanded
into bright reminiscences and merry comparisons of their two lives,
absolutely delightful to themselves, and to Phyllis and her Aunt Jane,
and which would have been the same to Elizabeth, if she had not been
worried at Susan's evident misunderstanding of--and displeasure at--the
quips and cranks of the happy brother and sister; also she was bent
on promoting an intercourse between Lily and Lena, over the doll she
had brought for the former.

She was a little hurt that Lena had not been accompanied by the blue-eyed article with preposterously
long eyelashes that had been bestowed on her at the Goyle; but the little Australian had no
opinion of dolls, and had let the one bought for her at Sydney be
thrown overboard by the ship's monkey.

"That was cruel!" said Lily, fondling her black-eyed specimen.

"She could not feel," reasoned Lena, with contempt.

"I don't know," said Lily, knitting her brows. "It's not ALL make believe! I do love my Rosamunda
Rowena, and she loves me, and I shall tell her not to be jealous
of this dear Betsinda.

For, do you know, when Rosamunda was ill in the Red Sea, father carried her up and down on deck,
and made her a dear little deck chair."

"But she is not alive. She COULDN'T be," sighed Lena. "I like my Ben and my kangaroo! Oh, I
do want to go back to my kangaroo!"

"And does Lily want to go back to her riki-tiki?" asked Lily's father, lifting a little girl on each
knee, so that they might be vis-a-vis, when certainly his own had
the advantage in beauty, as she answered, leaning against him, "Granny's
better than riki-tiki!"

For which pretty speech some of the ladies gave her much credit; but her father, with a tender
arm round her, said, "Ah! you are a sentimental little pussy-cat! Is anything here as good as Carrigaboola?
Eh, Lena?"

But Lena resolutely shook her carrots; but kept silence, while Bernard turned over the leaves of
a great book of natural history, till as a page was displayed with a large kangaroo under a blue-gum
tree, with a yellow wattle tree beside him, her lips quivered, her face puckered, and she burst
into an uncontrollable fit of crying; "Oh! I want to go home, home! Sister, Sister, take me home!"

Angela
was in a minute beside her, took her within loving arms, and carried her off.

There was a good deal of worry and anxiety for some little time, while correspondence was going
on about Henry Merrifield's will, and in the meantime Angela decided to board with Miss Prescott,
since her charge was certainly much better in health there; and besides,
as Mrs. Bernard Merrifield was naturally at Clipstone, it became the
head quarters of her husband, though he made many excursions to his
own people, and on business affairs to Sir Ferdinand Travis Underwood
in London.

And Clipstone suited him well for his holiday. Sir Jasper had, of course, a certain amount
of intercourse with the garrison at Avoncester, and the officers stationed there at present had
already some acquaintance with Bernard Underwood, who was known to be a champion in Ceylon in
all athletic sports, especially polo and cricket.

Tall and well made, he had been devoted to all such games in his youth, and they had kept up
his health in his sedentary occupation. Now, in his leisure time, his prowess did much to
efface the fame of the much younger and slighter Alexis White, and,
so far as might be, Angela enjoyed the games with him, keeping well
within bounds, but always feeling activity a wholesome outlet for
her superfluous strength, and, above all, delighting in an interval
of being a child again with her Bear of old times; and her superabundant
life, energy, and fun amazed all, especially by the contrast with
her poor little languid charge, who seemed, as Jane Mohun said, centuries
older.

The Merrifield lads were also devoted to him. Even Fergus was somewhat distracted from his allegiance
to Dolores and her experiments, and in the very few days that Christmas afforded for skating,
could think of nothing else.

And as to Wilfred, his whole mind seemed to be set on sports, and marble works to be only an
incident thrown in. Bernard, whom he followed assiduously, and who took him to Avoncester, and introduced
him to young officers, began to have doubts whether he had done wisely.

Bernard had, in his time, vexed Felix's soul by idleness and amusement, but he had been one
betted upon, not himself given to betting. He loved football and cricket for their bodily excitement,
not the fictitious one of a looker on, or reader of papers, and it struck him that Wilfred knew
a good deal too much about this more dangerous side of races and athletics.

He said so to Angela, and she answered, "Oh, nonsense! Young men are out of it if they don't know
the winning horse. Even Pur had to be up to the Derby."

And Angela had her own bitter trial in the decision of the lawyers.

Not only was the signature of the will unsatisfactory, from the confusion between Field and
Merrifield, but the two witnesses failed to be traced, John Shepherd and George Jones were
not to be identified, and though Brisbane might accept wills easily, an English court of law
required more certainty. The little daughter being the only child and natural heiress, this
was not felt to be doing her any injury; but the decision deprived her of the guardian her
father had chosen, and Angela was in despair. She was ready to write to the Pursuivant, to the
Bishop of Albertstown, to the Lord Chancellor, with an exposition of the wicked injustice and
hardness of heart of lawyers, and the inexpedience of taking the
poor child from her earliest motherly friend, expressly chosen by
her father.

All Bernard's common sense and Magdalen's soothing were needed to make her hold her peace,
when correspondence made it plain that the guardianship being assumed by the uncles, Captain
Merrifield would not hear for a moment of the scheme of taking the child out to Carrigaboola.
In his opinion, and his sister Susan's, the only fit thing to be done with her was to place
her with the two aunts at Coalham to be educated. He came down to Rock Quay to inspect her.
It was a cold, raw day, with the moors wrapped in mist, and the poor
little maid looked small, peaky and pinched.

He was sure that the dry winds of the north were what she needed, wanted to carry her off immediately,
and looked regardless of Angela's opinion, though backed by Miss Prescott, that it would be highly
dangerous to take the delicate child of a semi-tropical climate off in the depth of winter to
a northerly town. Angela walked off to ask Dr. Dagger to inspect the child and give his opinion,
while Captain Sam repaired to Clipstone to visit his relations and lunch with them.

He did not meet with all the sympathy he expected. Lady Merrifield said that Coalham had not agreed with
her own son Harry, and that little Lena ought not to be taken there till after the cold winds
of spring were over; and her daughters all chimed in with a declaration that Angela Underwood
was perfectly devoted to the little one, and that no one else could make her happy.

"Petting her! spoiling her!" scoffed the Captain. "Why, Susan and Bessie were full of the contrast
with your little girl."

"Health," began Phyllis.

"An Indian child too!" he went on. "Just showing what a little good sense in the training can do!
No, indeed! Since I am to be her guardian, I have no notion of swerving from my duty, and letting
poor Hal's child be bred up to Sisterhoods and all that flummery."

"It will just break Angela's heart," cried Valetta, with tears in her eyes, at which the Captain
looked contemptuous.

"I must say," added Bernard, "that I should think it little short of murderous to take that unlucky
child from the one woman who understands her up into the bleak north at this time of year."

"Decidedly!" added Sir Jasper. "Miss Underwood deserves every consideration in dealing with
the child who has been always her sole charge."

Wherewith he changed the conversation by a question about Stokesley; but he held to his dictum
when alone with his nephew, and as he was the only person for whose opinion Captain Sam had any
respect, it had its effect, though there was a sense that he might
be biassed by his son-in-law and his herd of womanfolk, and that he
did not partake Mrs. Samuel Merrifield's dislike to the very name
of Sister or of anything not commonplace.

Angela obtained Dr. Dagger's opinion to reinforce her own and Lady
Merrifield's, and the Captain was obliged to give way so far as to
consent to Magdalen, as he insisted on calling her, being allowed
to remain at Arnscombe till after Easter, when her aunts were to fetch
her to Coalham, there to send her to the kindergarten.

After Angela's period of raging against law and lawyers and all the Stokesley family, and being
on the verge of impertinence to Captain Merrifield, she submitted to the prospect more quietly
than her friends had dared to hope. Lance had almost expected her to deport her charge, parrot and
all, suddenly and secretly by an Australian liner, and had advised Bernard, on a fleeting meeting
at Bexley, to be on his guard if she hinted at anything so preposterous; but Bernard shook his
head, and said Angel was more to be trusted than her elders thought. "Waves and storms don't
go over us for nothing, I hope," he said.

And he found himself right on his return. Angela had bowed her head to the inevitable, and was
quietly trying to prepare her little charge for the change, accustoming her to more discipline
and less petting.

When Angela proposed to walk over to Clipstone with her brother on his return, and the whine
was set up, "Let me go, Sister," it was answered, "No, my dear, it is too far for you. You must
stay and walk with Paula."

"I want to go with Sister."

"You must be a good child, and do as Sister tells you. No, I can't have any fretting. Paula
will show you how to drive your hoop.

Keep her moving fast, Paula, don't let her fret and get cold."
And Angela actually detached the clinging hand, and put it into Paulina's,
and, holding up her finger, silenced the burst of weeping, though
tears sprang to her own eyes as she resolutely turned away, and, after
running out and shutting the back gate after her, put her arm with
a clinging gesture into Bernard's.

"That's right!" he said, pressing
her hand.

"Cruel," she said, "but better by and by for her. Oh, Bear,
if one could but learn to lie still and say, 'Thou didst it,' when
it is human agency that takes away the desire of one's eyes with a
stroke."

"The desire of thine eyes!" repeated Bernard. "How often
I thought of that last February."

It was the only time he had referred
to the loss of his little boy. His wife had told her mother that he
could not bear to mention it, and had poured out all her own feelings
of sorrow and her struggle for cheerfulness and resignation alone
with her or with Mysie; but he had shrunk from the least allusion
to the little two year old Felix, who slept beneath a palm tree at
Colombo.

Now, however, still holding his sister's hand, he drifted
into all the particulars of the little ways, the baby language, the
dawning understanding, and the very sudden sharp illness carrying
the beautiful boy away almost before they were aware of danger; and
he took out the photograph from his breast, and showed her the little
face, so recalling old fond remembrances. "Forbear to cry, make no
mourning for the dead," he repeated. "Yes, the boy is saved the wear
and tear and heat and burthen of the day, but it is very hard to be
thankful."

"Ah, and it is all the harder if you have to leave your
Lily."

"If--yes; but Travis MAY so arrange that we can stay, or I
make only one voyage out to settle matters and then come home for
good. If you are still bent on Carrigaboola you might come as far
as Frisco with me. I may have to go there about the Californian affairs."

"That
would be jolly. Yes, I think it will clench the matter, for I believe
I am of more good at Carriga than anywhere else, though the heart
of it is taken out of it for me; but one lives on and gets on somehow
without a heart, or a heart set where I suppose it ought not to be
entirely at least! And, indeed, I think that little one taught me
better than ever before how to love."

"That's what the creatures
are sent us for," said Bernard, in a low voice. "And here are, looming
in the distance, all the posse of girls to meet us."

"Ah-h!" breathed
Angela, withdrawing her arm. "Well, Bear, you have given me something
to look forward to, whether it comes to anything or not. It will help
me to be thankful. I know they are good people, and the child will
do well when once the pining and bracing are over.  The commander wisely sent off a proportion of each, so that, should
bad weather come on and the ship go to pieces, a certain amount of all things necessary might
be saved.  The weather, however, continued favourable, though the stormy period of the year
had now come on.  All the guns and provisions, and a considerable quantity of the stores, were
at length landed.  The carpenter had of course taken good care to bring his tools.  He proposed
building a vessel out of the wreck.  The commander approved of his suggestion, and it was arranged
that they should return the next day, and endeavour to procure timber sufficient for the purpose.

The commander had hitherto not left the ship.  The last of the crew who had remained with him
were sent into the boat.  His own gig was alongside.  With a heavy heart he hauled down the
flag, which had hitherto been kept flying on a temporary flagstaff, secured to the stump of
the foremast.  After looking round his dismantled ship, he descended into the boat.

"Shove off," he said, and his voice as he spoke appeared to have lost its usual cheerful ring.

He cast another fond look at her as she lay bilged on the cruel rocks. He had reason to be
thankful that not a life had been lost, and that it was from no carelessness or want of good
seamanship that she had been driven on shore.  Had she struck one of the outer reefs, where
would he and his gallant crew now be?  Probably not one would have escaped.  The sky as he
looked westward had again assumed a threatening aspect.

"We shall have another gale before long, I suspect," he observed to Gerald, who had brought
the gig for him.  "It may not do us on shore much harm, although it may blow down our tents
if we don't stay them up well, but the poor ship--I fear that her days are numbered.  A heavy
sea rolling in here would soon knock her to pieces.  Give way, my lads, and overtake the raft;
we may assist in towing it, and the sooner it reaches the shore the better."

Fortunately by this time everything of value had been landed from the ship.  The cabins had
been stripped of their furniture, even to the bedding; the men's hammocks, and every article
belonging to them, had been brought off.  There was an abundance of water, and there was no
probability of their provisions running short for some time to come.

Scarcely had the boats and raft been unloaded and the stores carried up to the camp, than the
sea began to roll in with much greater force than hitherto, and as the sun went down the white
breakers appeared on every side, like horses' manes waving in the wind, above the darkening
waters. The commander was received with hearty cheers by his crew.

"Now, my lads," he said, "I intend to turn this island into a man-of-war, and although we cannot
get under way--for if we could we would soon run her up to Port Royal harbour--we will hold
her against all enemies, whoever they may be, who may wish to make a prize of us.  I intend
to maintain the same discipline as heretofore, and I expect that you will still remain the
well-ordered crew of whom I have always been proud."

The captain's address was received, as he expected it would be, with hearty cheers, and several
voices among the men cried out, "We'll stick by you, sir, and you won't have to be ashamed of us."

Several fires had been lighted, round which the men were collected, cooking their suppers in
a fashion in which Jack especially delights when he has the chance; but the rising wind soon
made it necessary to put them all out, for fear of their setting the bushes and trees in flames,
or lest a wandering spark might find its way to the tent in which the powder was stored.  This,
by Mr Foley's forethought, had been erected some way from the camp, and a sentry placed over
it.  The next thing to be done was to secure the tents with preventer-stays, as the seamen
called them.  By this means, furiously as the wind began to blow, not a tent was capsized.
Being composed of sails, they were much lower than ordinary tents, and thus much less exposed
than such would have been.  They resembled indeed gipsy tents, though on a larger scale.  It
was fortunate for the shipwrecked crew that they had been erected in good time, for as the
night drew on the rain came down in torrents, and would have drenched them to the skin.  The
wind increased, howling and whistling amid the cocoa-nut trees; while the sea, as it dashed
with increasing fury on the shore, uttered continuous and never-ceasing roars, echoed, so it
seemed, by the breakers on the more distant reefs. The commander, who had scarcely closed his
eyes on board, shared a tent with his lieutenants and the surgeon.  His chief care, for the
present was over, and he at length fell fast asleep.

"It is a hard trial for him, poor man," observed the surgeon, as he and the two lieutenants
sat at their table at the further end of the tent. "Though it may not be the commander's fault
when he loses his ship, he must feel it dreadfully."

"Somewhat as you feel when you lose a patient, Mac," observed Mr Tarwig.

"Nay, nay," answered the doctor.  "I have a better chance of getting fresh patients, whereas
the captain who loses his ship is often looked upon as unfortunate, and may chance not to get
another--"

"That he may have the opportunity of losing her, doctor, you would say, just as you would desire
to have the chance of losing some fresh patients."

"You're hard on me, Tarwig," said the doctor.  "My desire is to cure them.  And just remember
that men's lives are not in our hands: all we can do is to employ such knowledge as we possess.
That may be but little, I confess, for I tell you our ignorance is great.  If I pride myself
on anything, it is that I am aware that I know next to nothing, and that is what many fools
do not."

"Well said, Mac," observed Norman.  "I always had a respect for you, and I have a greater now,
and shall have perfect confidence in your skill, if I should have again to come to you for
assistance.  I believe I owe my life to you when I was wounded, as far as I owe it to any human
being."

"Nay, nay," again said the doctor, laughing.  "You owe it, to my thinking, to a fair young
lady who looked after you so carefully when we put you on shore at Waterford--for you were
in a bad way then, let me tell you, though I did not say so at the time."

"He has repaid the debt, doctor, for I understand that the same young lady was in the house
attacked by the rebels, and that they were on the point of entering it and murdering all the
inmates, when he drove them to the right-about," said Mr Tarwig.

In another tent the master and purser, with the midshipmen, were engaged in amusing themselves
in a more uproarious fashion.  Many a merry stave and sentimental ditty was sung, and not a
few yarns were spun, anecdotes told, and jokes cut, albeit not of the newest.  The remainder
of the shipwrecked men having been pretty well worked during the day, soon turned in, and in
spite of the storm raging over their heads went fast asleep; the only people awake being the
sentries, who, wrapped in their greatcoats, their firelocks sheltered under them, stood with
their backs to the wind.

Thus the night passed away.  With the morning light the rain ceased, and as Norman, who was
the first among the officers on foot, looked in the direction of the spot where the ship had
been, she was nowhere to be seen, but here and there amid the foam-covered reefs fragments
of the wreck could be discerned, tossed about by the tumbling seas.  He had reason to be thankful
that such had not been her fate while the crew were still on board.  He was soon joined by
Mr Tarwig.  He pointed in the direction of the wreck.

"Our chance of building a craft to carry us away is gone," observed the first lieutenant, with
a sigh.  "Well, we must bear our lot patiently, and maybe some friendly craft may heave in
sight.  And if a friend does not come, why, perhaps an enemy will; and if so, we must capture
her, and change places with her crew."

"Little chance of that, I fear," said Norman, who, eager as he was to get off, had from the
first not been very sanguine of doing so.

After the crew had been piped up, and Mr Tarwig had mustered them and gone through the usual
duties performed by a first lieutenant--although, as he observed with one of his comical looks
to Norman, he need not get the decks washed, the rain having done that already--they re-entered
their tent, to which their servants brought fresh water for their morning ablutions.  Fires
were lighted, though the wood did not burn at first very briskly, and the cooks busied themselves
in preparing for breakfast.

The commander on going out of his tent took one glance seaward.  "I feared it would be so,"
he said, turning away his head.  "Now, Mr Tarwig, we'll get our fort under way."

"It would be a hard matter to do that, sir," answered the first lieutenant, screwing up his
mouth, with a twinkle in his eye, "seeing it is not built yet."

The commander, who knew he was fond of a joke, laughed, and desired to be shown the proposed
site.  On inspecting it, he highly approved of the spot selected.

Immediately breakfast was over, all hands were ordered to man the guns and commence the work
of dragging them up the hill.  One at a time, however, only could be moved, till it was got
near enough to a stout tree to which a tackle could be fixed, and the seamen then ran it up
the steepest part of the ascent with surprising rapidity.

Before the day was over half the guns were placed in position, and by means of stout shears,
which were erected on the hill, were hoisted on their carriages.  The rest were allowed to
remain where they were till the embankments were thrown up.  The smith and his mates, with
such hands as he required, had put up a forge, and he and the carpenters had been busily engaged
manufacturing pickaxes and spades.  With such as had been finished the men were the next day
set to work on the trenches, some being employed in cutting down trees to serve for the woodwork
which was required.  Eighty men were engaged in these operations, and it seemed extraordinary
how much that number of willing hands could get through, the officers all labouring away to
set them the example.

The commander was well pleased as he surveyed the work.  "We shall be able to give a fair account
of an enemy should one attack us before many days are over," he observed to Mr Tarwig.  "I
think it very probable, should the Spaniards find out we are here, that they will not let us
alone, as they will fancy that for some reason or other we have taken possession of the island."

"Ay, sir; but I have a notion we should be able to beat them off without these embankments,
satisfactory as it may be to have them as shelter," answered the first lieutenant.

It took, however, several days to complete the fort, and when that was done, one of the chief
objects of the commander was to find occupation for the men.  He knew that it would never do
to let them be too long idle.  Among the stores saved were several seines; one or two of these
were drawn every day on the sandy portions of the beach, and never failed to catch a number
of fish, which added to the store of provisions.  Drawing the seine afforded not only occupation
but amusement to the men, who engaged in it with the greatest avidity.  The fresh fish, too,
assisted to keep scurvy at a distance.  The surgeon explored the island in search of any vegetable
productions which might assist in that object.  Happily there were a good number of cocoa-nuts,
but it was necessary to husband them, or the men would have consumed them in the course of
a day or two.

Though it was necessary to prepare for a long stay, the commander took the requisite measures
for attracting the notice of any passing vessels. A high flagstaff was put up in the centre
of the fort, from which the British ensign was kept flying from sunrise to sunset, and on the
two highest points of the island piles of firewood were placed ready to light up at night,
should it be considered expedient to try and attract the attention of any ships seen in the
offing.  There might, however, be a danger in doing this, lest a stranger, standing too close
in, might run on the rocks.  By firing guns, however, she might be warned off.  Of course,
by these means it was as likely that an enemy would be attracted to the spot as a friend, but
this caused them no anxiety, as they could beat off any vessel which might come with hostile
intentions.

Day after day, however, went by, and no sail appeared in sight.  As soon as the weather moderated
the boats were launched, and the second lieutenant and master, with Crowhurst, pulled round
the island and surveyed its approaches in every direction.  They found but two channels through
which a vessel of any size could approach to attack them, and that could only be done with
the greatest caution, by those who had a thorough knowledge of the navigation.  Indeed, the
island was almost completely surrounded by reefs, some rising above the surface, others sunk
beneath it at different depths.  These, it was found, extended to a considerable distance from
the shore, so that no craft of large size was likely intentionally to approach.  After the
survey had been completed, Lieutenant Foley offered to try and make his way to Jamaica in the
pinnace, the largest boat which now remained, the launch having been lost with the ship.

"I cannot let you go," answered Captain Olding.  "Even should the weather continue favourable,
the probabilities are that you would be picked up by a Spaniard or a Frenchman, and you would
fail to reach your destination."

"But I might as probably be picked up by an English man-of-war or a merchant vessel, sir,"
answered Norman, who was eager to make the attempt.

The commander, however, was inexorable, and the lieutenant did not again for some time venture
to broach the subject.

The shipwrecked crew continued in vain to look out for relief, and Commander Olding remained
firm to his resolution of not allowing one of the boats to try and make her way to Jamaica.

Notwithstanding the refusal Lieutenant Foley had received, Mr Billhook, the master, offered
to take charge of the pinnace with four or five volunteers.  "No great harm can happen if we
are taken, sir, and still less, some will say, if we go to the bottom, but the chances are
we get clear and arrive all right," he urged.

"One great harm would happen.  Should you be captured, the enemy would suspect where you came
from, even if you refuse to tell them, and we should have them coming here to try and cut us
off," answered the commander.  "Wait patiently, gentlemen.  Either some friendly vessel will
appear, or a French or Spanish trader or guarda-costa will some day come to an anchor within
the reefs; then, if we manage carefully, we shall be able to get aboard her before she has
time to cut her cable and run out to sea."

This idea of the commander's soon got talked about, and all hands were constantly on the watch
for any vessel which they might hope to capture. Not that the seamen were in any great hurry
to leave the island; as long as they had an ample supply of food and liquor they were happy,
while they had sufficient occupation to keep them out of mischief.

A look-out for any craft which might approach the shore was of course constantly kept on both
sides of the island.  A mist had hung over the sea during the night, which completely concealed
all objects, except those close at hand, from view.  The sun rising above the horizon dispersed
the mist, when a small vessel was discovered under sail, threading her way among the reefs
to the westward.  Those on board her must have perceived the fort with the people moving about,
and the British flag which had just been hoisted on the flagstaff, for she immediately kept
away, and, the wind being to the eastward, ran off before it towards the open sea.  If she
could be captured she would afford the means of sending to Jamaica, though she could not carry
all the crew.  The boats were therefore launched, and chase was made; but, the breeze freshening,
the stranger got clear out to sea, when all chance of overtaking her was abandoned.  Much disappointment
was felt-- but as one vessel had come off the island so might others, and it was hoped that
one of sufficient size would appear to carry the whole ship's company.  The commander, being
a sensible man, advised his officers to be patient, and to make the best of the circumstances
under which they were placed.

After the fort was completed, and all the huts required were erected, the officers had work
enough in devising employment and amusement for the men.  They encouraged games of all sorts--football,
cricket, rounders, and ninepins; indeed, a stranger coming among them would not have supposed
that the merry fellows he saw were a shipwrecked crew, especially if they had been found playing
leapfrog, or dancing to the sound of Pat Casey's fiddle.  The commander and his officers were
not, however, without anxiety; they knew that no British ships, either men-of-war or merchant
vessels, were likely intentionally to approach the dangerous reefs which surrounded the island,
and that their store of provisions must in time come to an end.

"We must not run the risk of starving," observed Commander Olding; "and in the course of a
couple of months, if we do not get off, I will allow you, Foley, or Mr Billhook to try and
make your way, as you propose, to Jamaica."

"I shall be ready to go at any time you give me leave," answered the second lieutenant, well
pleased with the thoughts of getting away from the island and once more meeting Ellen.  By
that time the hurricane season would be over, and he hoped to be able to make the passage safely.

"I trust, sir, that you will let me accompany you," said Gerald, when he heard that there was
at length a chance of a boat being sent off.

"That must depend on the commander," answered Lieutenant Foley.  "If he will give you leave,
I will gladly take you, as I can depend thoroughly on you; but I suspect that he will prefer
sending Crowhurst.  However, we have some weeks to wait, and many things may occur in the mean
time."

"Thank you, sir, for your kindness," answered Gerald, highly pleased at the compliment paid
him, and thinking nothing of the danger to be run during a voyage of some hundred miles in
an open boat, with a chance of being picked up by an enemy's cruiser, or by one of the piratical
craft which were known to infest those seas.  Gerald was not given to boasting, but he confided
to Nat Kiddle the promise Mr Foley had made him.

"I wonder whether he would take me too," said Nat.  "I should not like to be left here without
you.  I should wonderfully enjoy the trip.  What fun it would be if we were chased, and managed,
notwithstanding, to get away!"

"It would be no fun if we were caught, however," answered Gerald; "but I hope that won't happen.
Depend on it, Mr Foley will do his best to keep clear of an enemy."

Still some weeks had to be passed before the commander would consent to send off a boat, while
not a vessel appeared in sight.  The weather had remained fine for some time, but at length
it gave signs of changing. One evening, as the commander, with several of the officers, were
taking a quarter-deck walk on a piece of level ground near the flagstaff, occasionally sweeping
the horizon with their glasses, now to the eastward, and now on the west side of the island,
the commander, who had turned his in the latter direction, exclaimed, "There is a sail at last.
Judging from her appearance she is a large craft; we shall soon ascertain how she is standing."

The other glasses were turned towards the stranger, and in a few minutes the general opinion
was that she was approaching the island.  The wind was blowing pretty fresh from the south-west.
Her topgallantsails had been above the horizon when she was first seen; gradually her topsails,
then the heads of her courses, rose above the water.  "Is she a friend or an enemy?" was the
question asked by several of those watching her. Hopes, of course, were entertained that she
might be the former.  Gerald and Nat Kiddle thought that she must be a British man-of-war.

"See what a wide spread of canvas she has," observed Gerald; "no merchant vessel would carry
sails like that."

"If so, then our chance of a trip in the boat is over," said Nat.

The commander and his lieutenants discussed the subject earnestly.

"She is not a British ship," exclaimed Mr Tarwig, who had been watching her attentively through
his glass for a minute or more; "that craft out there is a Spaniard.  She is coming here to
see what we are about. Depend on it, the little craft we saw the other day has carried the
information that we are here, and the Spaniards have come to turn us out, if they can."

"I believe you are right," observed the commander, after again examining the stranger.  "We
must be prepared for whatever may happen.  If, as you suspect, yonder ship is a Spaniard, she
comes with the intention of taking us.  What say you, Mr Billhook?"

"I agree with the first lieutenant, sir," answered the master.

"And what is your opinion, Foley?"

"I have little doubt that she is an enemy, and probably well acquainted with the reefs.  If
so, she will stand in near enough to attack the fort; or if its existence is not known, the
Spaniards will send their boats on shore, expecting without difficulty to make us all prisoners,"
answered the second lieutenant.

"They will find that they are mistaken," observed the commander.  "Get all the boats hauled
up and placed under shelter behind the rocks, Mr Billhook.  Call the men to their quarters,
see that the guns are ready for action, and serve out arms and ammunition.  We shall somewhat
surprise the enemy if they attempt to land, for they are not likely to know of the existence
of the fort, and will probably at once send their boats on shore, expecting to carry us off
without difficulty."

The men, who had, like their officers, been watching the approach of the stranger, were well
pleased when they heard that she was supposed to be an enemy, and were eager for a fight. 
It would be a pleasant variety to the monotony of their existence, and no one entertained a
doubt but that they should beat her off.  The rays of the setting sun, glancing on her side
as it rose above the water, showed her to be a large frigate. Though her flag could not be
seen, not a doubt was entertained that she was Spanish.  The wind, however, had fallen, and
she was still some three or four miles beyond the outer reefs; when darkness settled down on
the ocean, she was seen to haul her wind, apparently to lay to till daylight.  The night was
unusually dark, so that nothing could be seen of her.

The men were kept under arms, and sentries were posted round the island at the different points
at which boats could land, to give notice should any approach, in which case the sentries were
directed to fire off their muskets and retire to the fort.  The officers continually went their
rounds to ascertain that the men were awake and attending to their duty. Hour after hour passed
by, still no sounds were heard to indicate the approach of an enemy.

It was within an hour of dawn, when Mr Foley, who having just visited the western side of the
island, had returned to the fort, heard a musket fired, and presently afterwards a sentry came
running up.  "I caught the sound of the splash of the oars in the water, sir," he said; "they
cannot be far off.  They hope to catch us asleep, for they seem to be making as little noise
as possible."

As the man was speaking, another sentry's musket was heard to go off. He quickly came up and
gave the same report as the first.  The garrison were at once ordered to stand to their guns,
and the two sentries were sent off to bring in their comrades.

"My lads, we shall probably be attacked in a few minutes by Spaniards: perhaps there may be
soldiers as well as seamen among them, but I know that I can depend on you to beat them off,"
exclaimed the commander. "Not a gun or musket must be fired until I give the order.  They may
or may not know, of the existence of our fort; possibly they suppose that we are without defences,
and expect easily to make us prisoners.  Don't cheer now--let not a sound be heard till they
get close up to us; they perhaps expect to surround our camp, but as they know we are awake,
they cannot hope to capture us without a struggle, and will come on cautiously."

The guns had been loaded with grape and canister.  The men not required to work them were armed
with muskets, so that should even the greater part of the frigate's crew have been sent on
shore, the shipwrecked party might well hope to drive them back.

The commander had taken up a position from whence he could command a view of the approaches
to the fort on every side; and other sharp eyes were likewise looking out.  So long a time
elapsed that he began to fancy that the sentries had given a false alarm, and he was on the
point of despatching a party down to the nearest landing-place, when he caught sight of a body
of men emerging from the gloom.  They approached cautiously, evidently doubtful of the reception
they might meet with.

The seamen stood at their guns with the matches in their hands concealed from view; perfect
silence reigned throughout the fort.  The enemy crept steadily on, not knowing how near they
were to their expected prey, the outline of the fort not being yet visible to them through
the darkness. Commander Olding judged from the ground they covered that there must be between
two and three hundred men--double the number of his own crew. Suddenly they halted, probably
having just then discovered the fort. Two or three figures, apparently those of officers, were
seen moving in front of them; then a shout was heard, and the whole line, advancing, fired
their matchlocks, the bullets flying thick as hail over the fort.

The commander leaped down from his exposed position unhurt.  "Now, give it to them, my lads!"
he cried, and the guns sent forth an iron shower into the midst of their assailants.  Shrieks
and cries arose from the direction of the enemy, who had evidently not expected to find the
English possessed of guns.  Still the little garrison fully expected to be attacked; but when
the smoke from the first discharge of the guns cleared off, the whole body of the enemy were
discovered in rapid flight, making their way back to their boats.

"Let us follow them, sir," cried several voices from among the men; "not one of them shall
get back to their ship."

"They have been sufficiently punished, and are not likely to renew the attack," answered the
commander, who had no wish to make prisoners, and saw no necessity for the utter destruction
of the enemy.  "If they come on again they must take the consequences."

The seamen were somewhat disappointed at this, but they knew that it would be useless to expostulate.
They remained at their guns, hoping that the enemy would again attack them; but when daylight
appeared, the boats were seen making their way back to the frigate, which lay outside the reef.
On the ground they had occupied when the fort opened fire on them were stretched upward of
a dozen dead men.  It was evident that the Spanish had carried off their wounded, who probably
numbered as many more.  A party was at once sent down, accompanied by the surgeon, to ascertain
if any of those on the ground were still alive; but Mac, having gone round and examined each
of these carefully, pronounced them all as "dead as herrings."

"There, my lads," he said to the men, who had come with pickaxes and spades.  "Now you may
bury them all as fast as you like; their fighting days are over."

The seamen carried the bodies off to a distance from the fort, when having dug a large grave,
they tumbled them in without any ceremony. Before the sun had risen many degrees above the
horizon, the dead Spaniards were for ever put out of the sight of their fellow-creatures.

Meantime, the proceedings of the frigate had been watched with no inconsiderable interest by
Commander Olding and his officers.  The wind was still blowing a moderate breeze from the south-west,
and would enable her without difficulty to get in much nearer than she was at present to the
island.  She was seen to be getting up her anchor.  The topsails were let fall, and, with her
boats ahead, she stood in towards the fort.

"Her captain, finding that he cannot capture us as he expected, intends to attack the fort
with his great guns," observed the commander.  "He will find, if he attempts to do so, that
he has made a still greater mistake than at first.  He must be well acquainted, however, with
the navigation or he would not venture to bring his frigate in among these reefs."

The men had in the mean time been piped to breakfast, the commander and his two lieutenants
alone remaining on the ramparts to watch the proceedings of the frigate.  The wind was light,
the sea smooth, and she was enabled to thread her way amid the reefs without difficulty.

"Her captain maybe a bold fellow, but he is not a wise one," observed Mr Tarwig.  "If it comes
on to blow, and I think there is a great probability that it will do so, he will wish himself
well out to sea again before he can get there.  He seems only to be thinking how he can get
near the fort, but if he had kept his eye to windward he would have observed yonder bank of
clouds rising above the horizon."

The Spanish flag was now seen to fly out from the peak of the frigate, leaving no doubt as
to her nationality.  She stood on for a few minutes longer, when her sails were clewed up and
her anchor let drop.  Though she had now got near enough to reach the fort with her guns, she
had to get a spring on her cable before she could bring them to bear upon it.

"Now, my lads, let us show the Spaniards what English gunnery is like," cried the commander,
as the men returned to their quarters.  "Fire!"

No sooner was the order given than every gun on that side of the fort was discharged at the
enemy, with so good an aim that few missed, some of the shots striking her hull, others her
rigging.  In spite of it, however, the Spaniards managed to get a spring on their cable and
to open fire with the whole of their broadside.

"They will not hurt us if they can't take better aim than that," observed Gerald to Nat Kiddle,
as the greater number of the enemy's shot flew either on one side or the other of the fort,
or buried themselves in the bank below it.

As twelve of the corvette's guns had been brought over to the west side of the fort, they were
not much inferior in number to those the Spanish frigate could fire in return; while they were
much better served, the English crew firing two guns to the Spaniard's one.  Their shot soon
began to tell with terrible effect on the enemy; several were seen to go through her bulwarks,
while her rigging was much cut up.

The action had continued for nearly an hour, and during all that time not a single person in
the fort had been hit.  At length the Spaniard appeared to have had enough of it.  Her boats
were observed ahead, as if about to tow her off the shore.  Her cable was cut, and she was
seen steering for a passage which the master had lately discovered between the reefs to the
north-west.

"She must put her best foot foremost, if she expects to get to sea before the wind which will
come out of yonder black cloud catches her," he observed.  "Should it hold as it does now she
may do it, but if it shifts to the northward or westward she will go ashore as sure as my name
is Billhook."

As soon as the frigate's head had come round, her topsails were let fall and sheeted home,
and she quickly glided out of the range of the Champion's guns.  The British crew cheered lustily
as they saw the defeat of their enemy.

"We must not be too sure that she will not come back again," observed Mr Tarwig.  "The Spaniards
do not like the look of the weather; when the squall blows over, they will probably pay us
another visit."

"It is a chance if they will be able to do so," observed the master. "See! here comes the wind
sooner than I expected.  If they can manage to get out between the reefs, they are better navigators
than I take them for," he added, as he eagerly watched the retreating enemy.

The wind continued for some time blowing from the same direction as before, enabling the frigate
to thread her way between the rocks on either hand.  A blast at length reached her.  Over she
heeled.  There was no time for shortening sail; onward she flew at a rapid rate through the water.

"She will get through, after all," observed the commander.

The various spectators almost held their breath, for, though the ship they were watching was
an enemy, no one wished her to meet that fate which it seemed probable would overtake her.
Now again she rose almost to an even keel, but not a brace or a sheet was slackened.  Already
the sea was breaking with fearful violence over a dark reef under her lee, while she was sailing
as close as possible to the wind.

"She will not weather it," cried the master.  "They are attempting to go about.  It's too late,
though.  She's lost--she's lost!"

At that instant the gale with fresh force struck the devoted ship.  Down she heeled, and a
sea striking her before she had come round, drove her bodily on the reef.  The following seas
dashed wildly over her, almost concealing her dark hull from view.  For a few moments her masts
again came into view, but directly afterwards they fell over one after the other, and the vessel
herself appeared to be melting away before the reiterated blows of the fierce waves, which
seemed suddenly to rise for the purpose of effecting her destruction.

"We must be ready to offer help to any of the poor fellows who may be washed ashore," exclaimed
the commander; "though I fear that few will reach it alive."

Both officers and men were eager to carry out his suggestion.  A number of long spars and coils
of rope were got ready, and the greater number of the Champion's officers and crew set off
towards the northern end of the island, the only point where it was at all probable that any
of the Spaniards would be able to land.  On reaching it, however, the desperate condition of
the unfortunate crew was still more clearly seen. To send them help was beyond the power of
the English.  No boat could possibly live in the sea already running round the reef on which
the ship had struck.

Already a large portion of the hull had been knocked to pieces, while the greater number of
her crew had been washed into the raging surf and drowned.  A few wretches alone clung desperately
to the forepart of the ship and the stump of the bowsprit.  No assistance could be sent to
them.  Every instant the wind increased; the seas rolled up more wildly against the wreck,
as if eager for their destruction.  Still the commander and most of the officers and crew stood
watching, on the bare possibility of the wind again shifting and driving some of the hapless
Spaniards on the beach.

They waited in vain.  The hurricane had only as yet been gathering strength.  Suddenly it burst
with terrific violence, which even the seamen on the firm ground could with difficulty face,
as it drove masses of spray and sand against them, the roar of the seas almost drowning the
commander's voice as he ordered them to retire to the shelter of some rocks a short distance
from the shore.  On getting under their lee, as they again looked towards where the wreck had
been, scarcely a vestige of her remained, nor was one of her hapless crew seen alive.  Still,
while a hope remained that some poor fellow clinging to a piece of the wreck might be thrown
on the beach, a look-out was kept to render him assistance; but some hours passed by, and not
a single human being of those who had lately formed the crew of the Spanish frigate could by
any possibility have remained alive.  The commander ordered the men to return to the fort.
The hurricane continued raging with unabated violence for the greater part of the flight.

"I say, Nat, it is as well we had not started with Mr Foley," observed Gerald to his brother
midshipman.  "What would have become of us, I wonder?"

"We should have been in a bad plight, I suppose," answered Nat.  "I can't help thinking that
the commander was right in not letting us go as soon as we wished."

The stormy weather continued for some time longer.  Occasionally the wind ceased, but only
again to blow with almost as much violence as before.  Mr Foley and the master both acknowledged
the commander's wisdom in not allowing them to do as they had desired.  The hurricane season
must, however, come to an end, for it had apparently already lasted longer than usual, and
the young lieutenant began to indulge in the expectation of soon returning to Jamaica.

CHAPTER NINETEEN.

TWO VESSELS APPEAR OFF THE ISLAND--ONE CHASING THE OTHER--THE STERNMOST SUPPOSED TO BE THE
OUZEL GALLEY--FIRING HEARD AT NIGHT--A CALM--THE BOATS PUT OFF--A BREEZE--THE PIRATE ESCAPES--SOUND
OF AN ENGAGEMENT HEARD--BELIEF THAT THE MERCHANTMAN HAS BEEN CAPTURED--A BOAT PREPARED FOR
A VOYAGE TO JAMAICA--JUST AS SHE IS STARTING, A VESSEL IS SEEN AT ANCHOR INSIDE THE REEFS--THE
BOATS PUSH FOR HER--THE STRANGER FIRES AT THEM--IS BOARDED AND CAPTURED--GERALD'S DISMAY ON
DISCOVERING THE "LOG OF THE RESEARCH, CAPTAIN GERALD TRACY"--DILLON FOUND ON BOARD AS LEADER
OF THE PIRATES--HE OFFERS TO PILOT THE RESEARCH INTO TIGER HARBOUR-- COMMANDER OLDING AND HIS
WHOLE CREW EMBARK WITH GUNS, AMMUNITION, AND STORES--THE RESEARCH SAILS FOR THE NORTHWARD--A
CANOE, WITH FIVE PEOPLE IN HER, SEEN.

One morning Gerald and his constant companion, Nat Kiddle, had gone down just at daybreak to
bathe in a pool on the beach, into which no hungry sharks were likely to enter.  It was the
only place where the commander would allow the men to go into the water, and they naturally
preferred getting their swim before the rest of the ship's company.  They were somewhat earlier
than usual, and after swimming about for some time had landed and were dressing, when Gerald,
looking to the north-east, caught sight of a sail just rising above the horizon.

"Hurrah!  I do believe she is standing towards the island," he exclaimed, pointing her out
to Nat.  "She will see our signal and probably heave to, to know what we want.  The chances
are that she is a friend.  No Spanish vessel would be coming from that direction, at all events,
with the intention of attacking us.  She is probably a man-of-war, or, if a merchantman, she
is bound to one of the islands to the southward."

"But she is as likely to be a foreigner as an English vessel," observed Nat; "at all events,
she must be greatly out of her course.  If bound to Jamaica, she would have kept through the
Windward Passage, or if bound to one of the Leeward Islands, she would not have come near this."

The sun, now just rising above the horizon, cast a bright light on the topsails of the stranger,
which must have discovered her to the look-out at the signal station, who immediately ran up
the colours.

Gerald and Nat were soon after this joined by several other officers who had come down to bathe.
Mr Foley, being among the last, had brought his telescope.  The north-east trade-wind, which
began blowing during the night, was now carrying the stranger steadily along before it.  Mr
Foley had lent Gerald his glass.

"Why, sir," he exclaimed, as he was looking through it--"`It never rains but it pours'--there
is another craft of the same rig as the first, under all sail.  It appears to me that she is
chasing the headmost one."

Crowhurst took the glass, and having glanced through it, agreed that Gerald was right.  He
then handed it to the master, who observed, "There is no doubt about it.  The headmost vessel
is a merchantman; by the cut of her canvas, I should say she was English.  But the sternmost
I can't quite make out; she is probably a French or Spanish privateer.  However, as they are
coming on at a good rate, we shall know before long.  In the mean time I intend to take my dip."

Gerald and Nat continued watching the strangers as they approached. They had got considerably
nearer by the time the master came out of the water.

"They must have encountered dark and heavy weather, and got out of their course, or they would
not have been so close in to this dangerous coast," he observed.  "Lend me the glass again,
Foley," he added, turning to the second lieutenant.  "Well, I can't make out what she is,"
he continued.  "Her sails have an English cut about them, too.  We shall make out her colours
before long, for if she is English she is sure to hoist them when she sees ours flying from
the flagstaff."

Mr Foley and the rest of the party were as much puzzled as the master. No one felt inclined
to leave the spot, even though breakfast-time was approaching.

Gerald felt unusually interested; why, he could scarcely tell, except that he had been the
first to discover the strangers.  Now he threw himself down on the sand; then he got up and
walked about, and again borrowed Mr Foley's telescope.

The course the two vessels were steering would carry them within half a mile of the outer reefs
that surrounded the island.  The hull of the first could already be distinctly seen.  She appeared
to be either an armed merchantman or a privateer; but if the latter, it was not likely that
she would run from a vessel not much, if at all, superior to her in size.

Nearer and nearer drew the leading vessel.  Those on board must have been aware of the dangerous
character of the coast.  As it was, she was standing closer than, under ordinary circumstances,
prudence would have allowed.

"Yes, she is English," exclaimed Gerald, who had been taking a long look at her through the
glass.  "I can see the people on her deck.  They are looking, it seems to me, for some opening
in the reefs, but they can find none on this side, and must see the surf breaking over the
outer rocks.  But what can the other craft be?  If the first is English, I am sure she must
be so, by the look of her hull and the cut of her sails, though I can't make out her flag."
His hand began to tremble as he held the glass to his eye--a very unusual thing for him.  "Mr
Foley, sir," he exclaimed at length, "will you take a look at yonder vessel, and say if you
have ever seen her before?  It seems to me that I ought to know her."

He handed the glass as he spoke to the lieutenant, who took a long look through it.

"I can scarcely believe it possible; yet, Tracy, she appears to me remarkably like the Ouzel
Galley," observed Mr Foley.

"That is what I think she is, sir; but how she comes to be chasing another English vessel is
mere than I can make out."

While the lieutenant was speaking a flash was seen, and a shot flew from the vessel they were
looking at towards the one ahead.  Another and another followed from her bow-chasers, but the
range was a long one, and they fell harmlessly into the water, under the counter of the ship
at which they were fired.

"They were well aimed, and had they been fired from longer guns and with better powder, they
would have hit their mark," observed Lieutenant Foley.

"It won't be long before the chase has some of those round shot aboard her," observed the master.
"The sternmost vessel is gaining on her fast, and unless she can manage to knock away some
of the spars of the other, she must be overtaken in a few hours at most."

Gerald had again got hold of the telescope.  "I cannot make it out," he exclaimed again and
again.  "I have just caught sight of her flag.  It is black, with the death's head and cross-bones.
There is no mistaking her character; she is a pirate, but still I never saw a craft so like
the Ouzel Galley.  She has the same new cloth in her fore-topsail which she had when she last
sailed from Port Royal, and a patch in the starboard clew of her main-topgallantsail.  Can
anything have happened to Owen Massey?  He has not turned pirate; of that I am very certain."

"I am afraid, then, Tracy, if that vessel is really the Ouzel Galley, she must have been captured
by pirates," observed Lieutenant Foley.

"I am dreadfully afraid that such must have been the case, sir," answered Gerald, almost ready
to burst into tears.  "All I hope is that, though she is wonderfully like the Ouzel Galley,
she is not her, after all.  If she is, poor Owen, his officers and crew must have been murdered.
Dear, dear! what will become of Norah when she hears of it?"

The two ships were now passing almost directly in front of the island; indeed, the chase had
already got some way to the southward, the pirate ship--for that a pirate she was there could
be no doubt--continually firing at her.  Gerald walked up and down in a state of painful doubt
and anxiety.  Nat Kiddle remained with him, though getting very hungry and wishing to go back
to the fort for breakfast.  Mr Foley, who was almost as much interested as Gerald, was the
only officer who remained with him.

Neither of the vessels appeared to have observed the flag flying from the fort; at all events,
they took no notice of it.  Both were too far off for the guns to reach them, or Commander
Olding would not have allowed the pirate to pass unquestioned.

The wind, which had been blowing fresh in the morning, as the day advanced decreased, and by
the time the two vessels were about three or four miles to the southward of the island it fell
almost to a dead calm. They were still, however, at some distance from each other, but their
guns could be heard as they exchanged shots; the headmost vessel firing her stern guns, and
the other her bow-chasers, but, as far as could be seen at that distance, without inflicting
much damage on the other.  No sooner did the commander perceive the state of affairs than,
calling his two lieutenants and the master, he proposed attacking the pirate with their three
boats.

"If you will allow me, sir, I will gladly take the command," exclaimed Mr Tarwig.

"I intended to have gone myself, but I will yield to your wishes," answered the commander.

Of course, all the other officers were ready to go.  The commander selected the master and
boatswain to take command of the other two boats.  Gerald and Nat Kiddle were eager to accompany
them, and greatly to their satisfaction obtained leave, Gerald to accompany the first lieutenant,
and Nat the master.  By keeping among the reefs, many of which rose considerably above the
water, they would be able to get near the pirate without being perceived, and it was hoped,
should the calm continue until nightfall, that they might take her by surprise.  This, of course,
was most desirable, as she might thus be captured without much bloodshed.  No time was to be
lost, for the wind could not be depended on, and it might soon again breeze up, when she would
quickly get beyond their reach.

The three boats carried altogether thirty hands, armed with firelocks, cutlasses, and pistols.
The pirate's crew was in all probability much more numerous, but that was not likely to deter
British seamen from attacking them, either by night or day.

Mr Tarwig led his little squadron, threading his way among the rocks to the southward.

Gerald naturally felt an intense interest in the expedition.  He was sure that the pirate was
the Ouzel Galley, and he hoped from some of the prisoners they might take to gain information
about Owen Massey.

A considerable portion of the day had been spent before the boats, rounding the island, again
came in sight of the two ships.  They were still as before cannonading each other at a distance.
The boats had met with a strong current, which had considerably impeded their progress. It
wanted a little more than an hour to sunset, while they were upward of two miles from the pirate.

"If we wait till dark we shall have a better chance of taking the pirate by surprise, as she
will not expect to be attacked by the boats," observed Mr Tarwig to Gerald; "but then, again,
we run the risk of losing her altogether, should a breeze spring up.--What do you say, master?"
he shouted to Mr Billhook, who was in the boat nearest to him. "Shall we wait till darkness
comes on, or pull away at once for the pirates?"

"As you ask me, I venture to say that we had better wait till dark.  If the pirates catch sight
of us before we are alongside, they may knock one of our boats to pieces, or, for that matter,
sink all of them," answered the master.

The boatswain, when asked, agreed with the master.  Mr Tarwig therefore decided to wait, under
shelter of a high reef of black rocks, which would effectually conceal the boats from the pirate.

Gerald felt greatly disappointed.  He had hoped to pull on board at once, and settle the doubts
which had been agitating his mind all the morning.  On looking out to the northward, he observed
the hitherto glass-like sea rippled over in various directions.

"Do you observe those cat's-paws, sir?" he asked, pointing them out to Mr Tarwig.  "If the
strangers feel the breeze before we get on board, we shall lose the pirate, and too likely
the other vessel will fall into her hands."

"I believe you are right, Tracy.  We must give up the idea of surprising the pirate.--We must
pull for her at once, master.  You board on the starboard bow, Mr Dobbs on the larboard, and
I will get on board over the starboard quarter.  You will clear a road for yourself along the
starboard gangway, master.  I will meet you there."

Scarcely had these arrangements been made, the boats still remaining concealed behind the rocks,
when the pirate's canvas blew out to the increasing breeze, and she began to glide rapidly
away over the smooth water.

"I was afraid so," exclaimed Mr Tarwig.  "I am the most unlucky fellow in existence.  We shall
lose her, after all."

As he spoke the pirate was seen to be running rapidly through the water, the chase at the same
time getting the breeze, and, as before, keeping ahead and doing her utmost to escape.  On
seeing this, Mr Tarwig gave the order to the other boats to pull back.

"I can't make it out, sir," said Gerald, as they were returning to the island; "I feel more
certain than ever that the vessel with the black flag is the Ouzel Galley.  I wish that we
could have got on board her, to learn what has become of my friends."

"It is very disappointing, I allow, Tracy," answered the first lieutenant, "but I doubt if
we should have been much the wiser. The church was very elaborately ornamented, small, but showing
that no expense had been spared, though there was something that did not quite accord with
Magdalen's ideas of the best taste; so that when they went out she
answered Paula's raptures of admiration somewhat coldly, or what so
appeared to the enthusiastic girl.

The next day, meeting Miss Mohun over cutting out for a working party,
Magdalen asked her about the Flights and St. Kenelm's.

"He is an
excellent good man," said Jane Mohun, "and has laid out immense sums
on the church and parish."

"All his own? Not subscription?"

"No. He is the only son of a very rich City man, a brewer, and came here with his mother as a curate,
as a good place for health. They found a miserable little corrugated-iron place, called the Kennel
Chapel, and worked it up, raising the people, and doing no end of
good till it came to be a district, as St. Kenelm's."

"Very ornamental?"

"Oh, very," said Jane, warming out of caution, as she felt she might venture showing city gorgeousness
all over. "But it is infinitely to his credit.

He had a Fortunatus' purse, and was a spoilt child--not in the bad sense--but with an utterly
idolising mother, and he tried a good many experiments that made
our hair stand on end; but he has sobered down, and is a much wiser
man now--though I would not be bound to admire all he does."

"I see there are Sisters? Do they belong to his arrangements?"

"Yes. They are what my brother calls Cousins of Mercy. The elder one has tried two or three
Sisterhoods, and being dissatisfied with all the rules, I fancy she
has some notion of trying to set up one on her own account at Mr.
Flight's. They are both relations of his mother, and are really one
of his experiments--fancy names and fancy rules, of course.

I believe the young one wanted to call herself Sister Philomena,
but that he could not stand.

So they act as parish women here, and they do it very well. I liked Sister Beata when I have
come in contact with her, and I am sure she is an excellent nurse.

They will do your nieces no harm, though I don't like the irregular."

Of this assurance Magdalen felt very glad, when at the door of the parish room, where the ladies
were to hold a working party for the missions, Carrigaboola Missions at Albertstown, she and
her nieces were introduced to the two ladies in hoods and veils;
and Paula's eyes sparkled with delight as she settled into a chair
next to Sister Mena.

She looked as happy as Vera looked bored! Conversation was not possible while a missionary memoir
was being read aloud, but the history of Mother Constance, once Lady Herbert Somerville, but
then head at Dearport, and founder of the Daughter Sisterhood at
Carrigaboola.

To the Merrifields it was intensely interesting, and also to Magdalen; but all the time she
could see demonstrations passing between Paula and Sister Mena, a
nice-looking girl, much embellished by the setting of the hood and
veil, as if the lending of a pair of scissors or the turning of a
hem were an act of tender admiration.

So sweet a look came out on Paula's face that she longed to awaken the like. Vera meantime
looked as if her only consolation lay in the neighbourhood of a window, whence she could see
up the street, as soon as she had found whispers to Mysie Merrifield treated as impossible.

The party at the Goyle had begun to fall into regular habits, and struggles were infrequent. There
was study in the forenoon, walks or cycle expeditions in the afternoon, varied by the lessons
in music and in art, which Vera and Paula attended on Wednesdays and Fridays, the one in the
morning, the other after dinner. It was possible to go to St. Andrew's matins at ten o'clock
before the drawing class, and to St. Kenelm's at five, after the music was over. Magdalen, whenever
it was possible, went with her sisters on their bicycles to St. Andrew's, and sometimes devised
errands that she might join them at St. Kenelm's, but neither could always be done by the head
of the household.

And she could perceive that her company was not specially welcome.

Valetta, the only one of the Clipstone family whose drawing was worth cultivating, used to ride
into Rockstone, escorted by her brother Wilfred, who was in course of "cramming" with a curate
on his way to his tutor, and Vera found in casual but well-cultivated
meetings and partings, abundant excitement in "nods and becks and
wreathed smiles," and now and then in the gift of a flower.

Paula on the other hand found equal interest and delight in meetings with Sister Mena, especially
after a thunderstorm had driven the two to take refuge at what the
Sisters called "the cell of St. Kenelm," and tea had unfolded their
young simple hearts to one another!

Magdalen had called on the Sisters and asked them to tea at the Goyle, and there had come
to the conclusion that Sister Beata was an admirable, religious,
hardworking woman, of strong opinions, and not much cultivated, with
a certain provincial twang in her voice.

She had a vehement desire for self-devotion and consecration, but
perhaps not the same for obedience.

She sharply criticised all the regulations of the Sisterhoods with which she was acquainted, wore
a dress of her own device, and with Sister Mena, a young cousin of
her own, meant to make St. Kenelm's a nucleus for a Sisterhood of
her own invention.

Sister Mena had been bred up in a Sisterhood's school, from five years
old and upwards, and had no near relatives.

Mr. Flight was Saint, Pope and hero to both, and Mena knew little
beyond the horizon of St. Kenelm's, but she and Paula were fascinated
with one another; and Magdalen saw more danger in interfering than
in acquiescing, though she gave no consent to Paulina's aspirations
after admission into the perfect Sisterhood that was to be.

CHAPTER VIII--SNOBBISHNESS

"Why then should vain repinings rise, That to thy lover fate denies
A nobler name, a wide domain?"--SCOTT.

The friendship with the Sisters was about three weeks old when, one morning, scaffold poles were
being erected in the new side aisle of St. Kenelm's Church, and superintending them was a tall
dark-haired young man.

There was a start of mutual recognition; and by and by he met Paula and Vera in the porch,
and there were eager hand-clasps and greetings, as befitted old friends meeting in a strange
place.

"Mr. Hubert! I heard you were coming!"

"Miss Vera! Miss Paula! This is a pleasure."

Then followed an introduction of Sister Mena, whose elder companion was away, attending a sick
person.

"May I ask whether you are living here?"

"Two miles off at the Goyle, at Arnscombe, with our sister."

"So I heard! I shall see you again." And he turned aside to give an order, bowing as he did so.

"Is
he the artist of those sweet designs?" asked Sister Mena.

"Did we not tell you?"

"And now he is going to execute them? How delicious!"

"I trust so! We must see him again. We have not heard of Edie and
Nellie, nor any one."

"He will call on you?" said Sister Mena.

"I do not think so," said Paula. "At least his father is really an artist, but he is drawing-master
at the High School, and Hubert works for this firm. They are not what you call in society, and our
sister is all for getting in with Lady Merrifield and General Mohun and all the swells, so
it would never do for him to call."

"She would first be stiff and stuck up," said Vera, "and I could not stand that."

"I thought she was so kind," said Mena.

"You don't understand," said Vera. "She would be kind to a workman in a fever; but this sort--oh,
no."

"To be on an equality with the man painting the church?" said Paula.

"No, indeed! not if he were Fra Angelico and Ary Scheffer and Michelangelo rolled into one."

At
that moment the subject referred to in that mighty conglomeration reappeared. He was a handsome
young man, his touch of Italian blood showing just enough to give
him a romantic air; and Sister Philomena listened, much impressed
by the interchange of question and answer about "Edie and Nellie,"
and the dear Warings, and the happy Christmas at the Grange; and Vera
blushed again, and Paula coloured in sympathy, as it appeared that
Mr. Delrio had never had such a splendid time.

The colloquy was ended by Mr. Flight being descried, approaching with his mother, whereupon the two
girls fled away like guilty creatures.

Presently Vera exclaimed, "Oh, Polly dear, what a complication! Poor dear fellow! he cares for
me as much as ever."

"And you will be staunch to him in spite of all the worldly allurements," said Paula.

"Well, I mean Mr. Wilfred Merrifield is not half so handsome," returned
Vera.

"Nor is he engaged in sacred work; only bent on frivolity," said Paula; "yet see how the M.A. encourages
him with tennis and games and nonsense."

Poor M.A., when the encouragement had only been some general merriment, and a few games on the
lawn Paulina, who had heard many confidences when Vera returned from Waring Grange, believed altogether
in the true love of the damsel and Hubert Delrio, who had been wont
to single out the prettiest of the girls at Filstead, and she was
resolved to do all she could in their cause, being schoolgirl enough
to have no scruple as to secrecy towards Magdalen, though on the next
opportunity she poured out all to Sister Philomena's by no means unwilling
ears.

Lovers had never fallen within the young Sister's experience, either personally or through friends;
and they had only been revealed to her in a few very carefully-selected
tales, where they were more the necessary machinery than the main
interest, for she had been bred up in an orphanage by Sister Beata,
and had never seen beyond it.

So to her Paula's story, little as there was of it, was a perfect romance, and it gained in
colour when she related it to her senior.

Sister Beata hesitated a little, having rather more knowledge of the world, remembering that
Vera Prescott was not eighteen years old, and doubting whether an underhand intimacy ought to
be encouraged; but then Mr. Flight had spoken of Mr. Delrio as a highly praiseworthy young man,
of decided Catholic principles; he was regular at Church services, and had dined or supped
at the Vicarage. The intercourse, as the girls had explained, had been sanctioned by Mrs. Best
in their native town, where all parties were well known, and thus there could be no harm in letting
it continue. While as to the elder Miss Prescott, she was understood to be unduly bent on county
and titled society, and to be exclusive towards inferiors. Moreover, she was an attendant at
St. Andrew's Church, and thus regarded as out of the pale of sympathy
of the St. Kenelm's flock.

So no obstacle was put in the way of the gossips, for they were really nothing more, except that
there was admiration of the designs for the side chapel, which were
of the Scripture children on one side, and on the other of child martyrs.

Now and then there was a reference to the chilliness and hardship
of living with an unsympathising sister, and being obliged to go to
churches of which they did not approve.

Sometimes too there were airy castles of a distant future to be shared by the magnificent architect,
together with Vera, while Paula nursed in the convent with Mother
Beata and Sister Philomena.

But all this did not prevent an excitement and eager laughter and chatter whenever Wilfred
Merrifield came in the way, and he certainly was enough attracted by Vera's pretty face and
lively graces to make his sisters think him very absurd; but his mother had seen so many passing
fancies among her elder sons as to hold that blindness was better
than serious treatment.

There was the further effect that Magdalen had no suspicion that the vehement attraction to St.
Kenelm's went beyond the harmless quarter of the two nursing Sisters and some hero worship of
Mr. Flight. Miss Mohun, who knew everything, had indeed hinted that something foolish might be
going on there; but Magdalen had not decided on the mutual fairness of the two congregations,
and deferred investigation till Agatha should come home, when she would have a reasonable, if cold,
person to deal with. Nor did Thekla's chatter excite any suspicion; for the only time when she
had been present at a meeting with Mr. Delrio, she had been half bribed, half threatened into
silence, and she was quite schoolgirl enough to feel that such was the natural treatment of
authority, though she had become really fond of "sister."

CHAPTER IX--GONE OVER TO THE ENEMY

"Can I teach thee, my beloved? can I teach thee?" E. B. BROWNING.

Agatha came home in due time, and Magdalen sent her sister to meet her at the station, where they
found a merry Clipstone party in the waggonette waiting for Gillian, who was to come home at
the same time. There was so much discussion of the new golf ground, that Vera had hardly a
hand or a glance to bestow on Mr. Delrio, who jumped out of the same train, shook hands with Agatha,
and bestirred himself in finding her luggage and calling a cab.

"How he is improved! What a pleasing, gentlemanly fellow he looks!" she exclaimed, as she waved
her thanks, while driving off in the cab.

"Is he not?" said Paula, while Vera bridled and blushed.

"You will be delighted with his work. I never saw anything more lovely than little St. Cyriac
the martyr."

"He is taken from Mrs. Henderson's little boy," added Vera; "such a dear little darling."

"And his mother is to be done; indeed, he has sketched her for St. Juliet."

"Flapsy! St. Romeo, too, I suppose?"

"Nonsense, Nag! There really was a St. Juliet or Julitta, and she was his mother, and they both
were martyrs. I will tell you all the history," began Paula; but Agatha interposed.

"You must like having him down here. Sister must be much pleased with him. She used to like
old Mr. Delrio."

"Well, we have not said much about him," owned Paula. "He does not seem to wish it, or expect to be
in with swells."

"We could not stand his being treated like a common house-painter and upholsterer," added Vera.

"Surely
no one does so," said Agatha.

"Not exactly," said Paula; "at least, he has had supper at St. Kenelm's
Vicarage with Lady Flight, and luncheon at Carrara with Captain and
Mrs. Henderson."

"Because he was DOING the child," interposed Vera; "and Thekla says
that Primrose Merrifield says that her Aunt Jane--that is, old Miss
Mohun--says that Lady Flight is not a gentlewoman."

"What has that to do with Magdalen?"

"Why, she is so taken up with those swells of hers, especially now
that there is a talk of Lord Somebody's yacht coming in, that she
would never treat him as on equal terms, but just keep him at a distance,
like a mere decorator."

"That seemed to me just what you were doing," said Agatha, "when he was so kind and helpful about
my box."

"Oh, THEY were all there, and we did not want to be talked of," said
Vera, blushing.

"He understands."

"He understands," repeated Paula. "We do see him at the church and at the Sisters'. Those dear
Sisters! There is no nonsense about them. You will love them, Nag."

"Well, it does not seem to me to be treating our own sister Magdalen fairly."

"The M.A.!" said Vera, in a tone of wonder.

"No; not to be intimate with a person you do not introduce to her, because you do not think
she would consider him as on equal terms."

"Sister Beata quite approves," added Paula, sincerely, not guessing
how little Sister Beata knew of the situation, of which she only heard
through the medium of her own representations to Sister Mena.

The two girls rushed into the charms of these two Sisters, and the plan for an entertainment for
the maidens of the Guild of St. Milburgha, at which they were to assist. It lasted up to the
gate of the Goyle, where Magdalen and Thekla were ready to meet them;
and they trooped merrily up the hill, Agatha keeping to Magdalen's
side in a way that struck her as friendly and affectionate.

It seemed to be more truly coming HOME than the elder sister had
dared to anticipate; nor, indeed, did she feel the veiled antagonism
to herself that had previously disappointed her.

The talk was about St. Robert's, about Oxford in general, the new friends, the principal, the
games, the debates, the lectures, the sermons, the celebrities, the undergraduates, the concerts,
the chapels, the boats, the architecture; all were touched on for further discussion by and
by as they sat at the evening meal, and then on the chairs and cushions
in the verandah; and through all there was no exclusion of the elder
sister, but rather she was the one who could appreciate the interest
of what Agatha had seen and heard; and even she was allowed to enter
into the amusement of an Oxford bon mot, sometimes, indeed, when it
was far beyond Paula and Vera.

There was no doubt that the term had much improved Agatha even in
appearance and manner.

She held herself better, pronounced better, uttered no slangish expressions, and twice she
repressed little discourtesies on the part of her sisters, and neglects such as were not the
offspring of tender familiarity, but of an indifference akin to rudeness. Magdalen had endured,
knowing how bad it was for their manners, but unwilling to become
more of an annoyance than could be helped.

The indescribable difference in Agatha's whole manner sent Magdalen to bed happier than she
had been since the arrival of her sisters, and feeling as if Agatha had come to her own side
of a barrier.

Perhaps it was quite true; for the last two months had been a time
of growth with the maiden, changing her from a schoolgirl to a student,
from the "brook to the river."

She had, indeed, studied hard, but that she had always done, as being clever, intellectual
and ambitious. The difference had been from her intercourse with persons slightly her elders,
but who did not look on authorities as natural enemies, to be tolerated
for one's own good.

There had been a development of the conscience and soul even in this
first term that made her regard her elder sister not merely with a
sense of compulsory gratitude and duty, but with sympathy and fellow
feeling, which were the more excited when she saw her own chilliness
of last spring carried further by the two young girls.

So breakfast went off merrily; and after the round of the garden and
the pets, Agatha promised to come, when summoned, to hear how well
Thekla could read French. In the meantime she waited in the morning-
room, looking at her sisters' books; Vera pushed aside the Venetian
blind.

"Don't come in that way, Flapsy!" called Paula. "You'll be
heard in the dining-room, and the M.A. will tremble at your dusty
feet."

"They aren't dusty," said Vera, pulling up the blind with
a clatter.

"Aren't they?" laughed Paula, pointing.

"You had better
go and wipe them," said Agatha.

"I don't believe in M.A.'s fidgets,"
returned Vera.

"But I do, in proper deference to the head of the
house," said Agatha, gravely.

"Murder in Irish!" cried Vera, bouncing
away, while Paula argued, "Really, Nag, life is not long enough to
attend to all the M.A.'s little worries."

"Polly, dear, I am afraid
we have been on a wrong tack with our sister. I don't like calling
her by that name."

"You began it!" exclaimed Vera, dashing in by
the door as she spoke.

"I could not have meant it as a nickname to
be always in use."

"Oh yes, you did, I remember"--and an argument
was beginning, which Agatha cut short by saying, "Any way, it is bad
taste."

"Nag has been so much among the real M.A. that she is tender
about their title."

"She wants to be one herself," said Vera; "and
so she will if she goes on getting learned and faddy."

"In both senses?"
said Paula.

Agatha laughed a little, but added, "No, Polly, the thing
is that it is hardly kind or right to put that sort of label upon
a person like Magdalen--who has done so much for us--and--"

The perverse
young hearts could not bear a touch on the chord of gratitude; and
Paula burst in, "Label or libel, do you mean?"

"It becomes a libel
as you use it."

"Do you want us to call her sister or Magdalen, the
whole scriptural mouthful at once?"

"I believe that to call her Magdalen
or Maidie, as my father did, would make her feel nearer to us than
the formal way of saying 'Sister.'"

"I don't mind about changing,"
said Paula. "She can never be the same to us as dear Sister Mena."

"She
is so tiresome," added Vera. "She bothers so over my music; calling
out if I make ever so small a slip, and making me go over all again."

"Well
she may," said Paula. "She is making little Tick play so nicely. Just
listen! But I can't bear her dragging us off to that horrid old Arnscombe
Church and the nasty stuffy Sunday school."

"That reminds me," said
Agatha; "Gillian Merrifield met a relation of Mr. Earl's, who said
that Miss Prescott had brought quite new life and spirit to the poor
old man, who had been getting quite out of heart for want of any one
to help and sympathise with him."

"Then he ought to make his services
more Catholic," said Paula. "But nothing will wean her from the old
parochial idea. Why, she would not let me give my winter stockings
to Sister Beata's poor girls, but made me darn them and put them by."

"Yes,
and mine, which were bad enough to give away, she made me darn first,"
cried Vera. "She is ever so much worse than the superlative about
mending one's clothes."

"There ought to be another degree of comparison,"
said Paula,-- "Botheratissima!"

"For, only think!" said Vera. "She
won't let us have new hats, but only did up the old ones, and not
with feathers, though there is such a love at Tebbitts's at Rockstone."

"She
says it is cruel," said Paula.

"Cruel to me, I am sure; and what
difference does it make when the birds are once killed?"

"Well, she
did give us those lovely wreaths of lilies," said Paula.

"Of course,
but nothing to make them stylish! What's the good of being out if
one is to have nothing chic? And she won't let me have a hockey outfit.
She says she must see more of it to be able to judge whether to let
us play!"

"That just means seeing whether her dear Merrifields do,"
said Paula.

"Gillian did at St. Catherine's. But you will know soon.
Did I not hear something about a garden party?"

"Oh, yes; she is
talking of one, but it will be all swells and croquet, and deadly
dull."

"I thought you seemed to be getting on well with the swells,
if you mean the Merrifields, especially Wilfred, if that is his name."

"Bil--Bil!
Oh, he is all very well," said Vera, "if he would not be always so
silly and come after me! As if I cared!"

"And only think," said Paula,
"that she was going to have it on the very day that St. Milburga's
Guild has their festival! Just as if it was on purpose!"

"Did you
ask her to keep clear of your engagements?"

"I told her, but I don't
think she listened." And as another grievance suggested itself to
Vera, she declared, "And she won't let us join the Girls' Magazine
Club, because she saw one she didn't like on somebody's table. As
if we were little babies!"

"She won't let us order books at the library,
but gets such awfully slow ones," chimed in Paula, "or only baby stories
fit for Thekla.  He ordered me, with the hands you found on board, to take charge of the prize, and to
follow him as soon as I could get her into seaworthy trim."

Gerald was satisfied that one part of Dillon's statement was correct, as on examining the cabin
he could find none of his sister's trunks, nor any in either his father's or Captain O'Brien's
cabins, although nothing else had apparently been removed from the ship.  What the intention
of the pirate was with regard to them, it was impossible to say.  Dillon could throw no light
on the subject.  Mr Foley expressed his hope that the pirate intended to treat them mercifully,
and perhaps, he thought, would land them at some place whence they could find their way to
Jamaica, or to put them on board any vessel they might fall in with bound to that island.

This idea of Mr Foley's greatly relieved Gerald's mind, and he again began to hope that he
should have the happiness of once more seeing them.  The commander gave him permission to visit
Dillon, so that he might try to ascertain the fate of Owen Massey.

"Though you were among those who dragged me on board the king's ship, I bear you no ill-will,"
answered Dillon.  "I will therefore tell you that I saw Owen Massey, alive and well, not ten
days ago.  He was then on good terms with the pirate captain, but I cannot answer for what
may happen when the young lady appears on the scene.  She may perchance prove to be an `apple
of discord.'  The captain has an eye for beauty, and from what I have heard, Owen Massey is
engaged to marry your fair sister."

"How do you know that?" asked Gerald, surprised at the man's remark.

"We hear all sorts of things, and such an idea was current among our fellows," answered Dillon
in a careless tone, which somewhat excited Gerald's anger.

"You have given your promise to try and rescue Owen Massey and any of his companions, as well
as my father and sister, and their friend Captain O'Brien," he observed.

"I have promised to do my best to help them, and I intend to keep to that promise," answered
Dillon.

Villain as he knew the pirate to be, Gerald was now satisfied that the lives of his father
and Norah had been preserved.

Soon after dawn the next morning a light breeze sprang up, which enabled the Research to get
under way.  As soon as she was clear of the reefs, Dillon was brought on deck, and desired
to inform the master what course to steer in order to reach the pirate's stronghold.  Look-outs
were stationed aloft and at each fore-yardarm, that any dangers ahead might be seen and avoided,
the commander not trusting alone to Dillon's pilotage.

"With this light wind it will take us three days at least to reach `Tiger Key;' that is the
name the buccaneers have given their stronghold," said Dillon.  "It is a place no one, even
when looking for it, would be likely to find, unless he knew the landmarks well, or came upon
it by chance, and they will not thank me for leading you to it.  I must trust, sir, to your
not only sparing my life, but protecting me afterwards, for if I fall into their hands they
will murder me to a certainty."

These remarks were addressed to Mr Tarwig, to whom the pirate seemed more inclined to be communicative
than to any one else.

"What makes you so ready to deliver your late companions into our hands?" asked the first lieutenant.
"I thought that buccaneers were always faithful to each other, although at war with the rest
of the world."

"In the first place, sir, I wish to save my life--that would be sufficient reason for what
I have undertaken," answered the pirate; "and, then," he added, a dark scowl coming over his
countenance, "I have sworn vengeance against those who have offended me.  I had a quarrel with
the captain, whom, though I am his equal, I was ready to serve.  He treated me with contempt,
and refused to trust me.  However, it is a long story, and I will not trouble you with it now.
What I say will convince you that I intend to be faithful, and that it will not be my fault
if you fail to capture the pirate and his followers."

"And who is this buccaneering captain of whom we have heard so much of late years?" asked Mr
Tarwig.

"He goes under different names, sir; and, although I may happen to know his right one, you
will excuse me if I decline to tell it," answered Dillon, the dark frown still resting on his
brow as he spoke.--"His present followers know him as Manuel Bermudez; but he has not a drop
of Spanish blood in his veins, I can answer for that."

What Dillon said convinced Mr Tarwig that he could be trusted in carrying out their project.
It was arranged that on approaching Tiger harbour he should appear to have the command of the
ship, and that only as many men as had been left on board by the pirates should be seen on
deck, all of them dressed as the pirate crew had been, and that the remainder should lie down
concealed under the bulwarks, or remain below ready to spring up at a moment's notice.  Commander
Olding intended, on entering the harbour, to run up alongside the Ouzel Galley and capture
her, and then to turn his guns on the people on shore should any resistance be offered.  Dillon
assured him that no forts existed on shore for the defence of the harbour, the pirates trusting
entirely to the intricacy of its navigation.

The Research stood on for a couple of days more, close-hauled, frequently having to tack to
avoid the rocks and reefs to the westward. Without the greatest possible care she might easily
have shared the fate of the Champion.  As she got to the northward the difficulties of the
navigation increased.  Dillon, however, proved himself to be an able pilot.  He smiled as he
saw the pistol which one of the warrant officers held constantly at his head, as if he considered
the precaution a very unnecessary one.

"Nobody desires to see the Research safe inside Tiger harbour more eagerly than I do," he observed.
"Should the ship strike on a reef, it will not be my fault."

"A sail on the weather-bow!" shouted the look-out from aloft.

"What is she like?" asked Mr Foley, who had charge of the watch.

"A small boat or canoe under sail, sir," was the answer.

Gerald, who was on deck, was sent by Mr Foley with a spy-glass aloft to take a look at the
boat.  "If she steers as she is now doing she will pass, I take it, a couple of miles from
us, sir," he cried out.

The commander, who just then came on deck, upon hearing this, ordered the ship to be put about
to cut off the boat.  At the same time the colours were hoisted, so that should the people
in the boat be English, they might know that the ship was a friend.  A considerable amount
of curiosity was excited as to what a small boat could be about in these little-frequented
seas, and all the glasses on board were turned towards her.  As she had now altered her course
and was standing towards the ship, she was rapidly neared, and five people were counted on
board her.

CHAPTER TWENTY.

THE OUZEL GALLEY OVERTAKEN BY A HURRICANE--DRIVEN TOWARDS THE COAST OF CUBA--THE MAINMAST STRUCK
BY LIGHTNING--FIRE--OWEN EXTINGUISHES THE FLAMES--CLOSE IN WITH THE COAST--A STRANGER SEEN--A
MUTINY ON BOARD-- CHASED--THE OUZEL GALLEY BOARDED BY PIRATES--O'HARRALL RECOGNISES OWEN, AND
SPARES HIS AND HIS FOLLOWERS' LIVES--THE OUZEL GALLEY CARRIED TO THE PIRATE'S STRONGHOLD--OWEN
AND HIS COMPANIONS IMPRISONED IN THE STORE-- OLD MAMMY KEEPS STRICT WATCH--O'HARRALL'S CHANGEABLE
TEMPER--PLANS FOR ESCAPING--MONTHS PASS BY--FRESH GUARDS SET TO WATCH THEM--HEAR OF THE LOSS
OF THE EAGLE--THE PIRATES STILL IN THE OUZEL GALLEY--OWEN AND HIS FOLLOWERS ESCAPE IN A CANOE--SEE
THE OUZEL GALLEY--AVOID HER--GET ON BOARD THE RESEARCH.

When Owen Massey sailed from Montego Bay, he had hoped to escape all enemies and make a rapid
passage to Waterford; but those hopes were doomed to disappointment.  Scarcely had the Ouzel
Galley passed Bellevue than signs of a coming gale from the westward were perceptible. So partial,
however, are the disturbances of the atmosphere in that region, that Owen kept the ship under
all sail in the expectation of being able to run out of it before it reached him.  Still he
was too good a seaman not to take the necessary precautions.  All hands remained on deck, while
he continually turned his eye to windward, to be ready to shorten sail immediately it became
absolutely necessary.  As the day drew on, the blue mountains of Jamaica grew less and less
distinct. Should the gale overtake him, it was of the greatest importance to gain a good offing,
for in mid-channel he would not have much to fear.  The Ouzel Galley was a stout ship, and,
if well handled, might brave the fiercest hurricane.  The log was hove.  She was making between
eight and nine knots, a speed she could not often exceed.  The wind was well aft and all her
sails filled.  His hopes of escaping the gale continued. After some time, however, he saw that
the dark bank of clouds which had long been visible above the horizon was rising more rapidly
than at first.  Then masses detached themselves and came rushing across the sky, breaking into
numerous portions, like the riflemen of an advancing force feeling their way through an enemy's
country.  Still he carried on to the last moment.

"In studding-sails!" he suddenly shouted.  "Let fly royal and topgallant sheets!"

The first-named sails were speedily hauled down.  The crew then hurried aloft to hand the others,
which were fluttering in the wind.

"Three reefs in the topsails!" was the next order given.

A strong crew alone could have performed the operation as rapidly as it was got through.  The
courses were next brailed up.  Still the ship flew on as fast as previously before the rising gale.

"Bedad! and it's my belafe that we're going to have old Harry Cane on board," observed Dan
to Pompey.

"You not far wrong dere," answered the black.  "Cappen Massey know what him about.  I'se sooner
be 'board Ouzel Galley when a hurricane blowing dan on board many a king's ship, when de cappen
tink he berry wise an' carry on till de masts go ober de side."

"Troth! an' ye're right there, Pompey, my jewel!  We'll be afther running out of the harricane,
and sorra the worse will we be."

The confidence felt by the young master's two faithful followers was shared by most of the crew.

The Ouzel Galley behaved admirably; she ran on before the fast-rising seas roaring up alongside.
The wind whistled in her rigging, and bright flashes of lightning darted from the black clouds
now gathering thickly overhead.

As the night drew on the wind increased, and it was now blowing a regular hurricane; still,
as long as there was plenty of sea room, no danger was to be apprehended, unless indeed, the
ship should be struck by lightning, against which no skill or seamanship could guard.  No one
on board could hide from himself that such might possibly occur, as the flashes succeeded each
other with still greater and greater rapidity, the lightning frequently running along the yards,
now playing round the mast-heads, now darting over the foaming seas in snake-like forms.  In
the intervals between the flashes, so dense was the darkness that the eye failed to see half
across the deck, and had another vessel been overtaken, the Ouzel Galley might have run her
down before she could have been perceived.  The canvas had been reduced to a single close-reefed
fore-topsail, which so tugged and strained at the mast that every instant it seemed as if about
to be torn out of the bolt-ropes. As long as the wind blew from the westward or south-west,
the ship could run on with safety till she had got to the eastward of Cuba, and before that
time there was every probability of the hurricane ceasing.  Her only safe course was to keep
directly before it, for if she were to bring the seas abeam, they would to a certainty sweep
over her and carry everything before them.

Owen remained on deck, holding on to a stanchion, while two of his stoutest hands were at the
wheel.  For some hours he had stood at his post, feeling no apprehension of danger, when towards
the end of the middle watch the wind shifted suddenly to the southward, blowing with even greater
fury than before.  The helm was put a-starboard, and the Ouzel Galley was now running towards
the dangerous coast of Cuba. There was no help for it; but Owen expected, as is often the case
during a hurricane, that ere long the wind would again shift.

For a short time there was a comparative lull, and all on board hoped that the gale was breaking.

"We shall be able, I am thinking, sir, to make sail and haul off from the shore by morning,"
observed his first mate.  "It is well not to get nearer the Cuba coast than we can help.  There
are not a few low keys and sandbanks to bring us up; or one of the enemy's cruisers may be
spying us, and it would give us a job to get away from her."

"As to that, I am not much afraid," answered Owen.  "I shall be thankful when the hurricane
is over and we can stand on our course."

The hurricane, however, was not over.  Again the wind struck the ship with tremendous force,
the lightning, as before, playing round her, crackling and hissing as it touched the wildly
tossing waves.  Suddenly there came a frightful crash.  The splinters flew on every side, and
the tall mainmast, tottering for a moment, fell over the side, breaking away the bulwarks--either
it or the lightning which had riven it killing three men who were standing near.  In its fall
it carried away the mizen-mast.

"Fire! fire! the ship is on fire!" shouted several voices.  "Put it out, then, my lads, and
clear away the wreck," cried Owen, seizing an axe which hung inside the companion-hatch, he
himself setting the example, which was followed by his mates and several others.

While one party was engaged in cutting away the shrouds and running rigging, so as to let the
blazing mass fall into the water, another was handing up buckets and throwing water over the
stump of the mainmast. The wreck of the mast being got rid of, the flames on deck were soon
extinguished; but a cry came from below that the heel of the mast was on fire.

"We shall soon put that out, lads," cried Owen, with all the calmness he could assume; and
leading the way into the hold, bucket in hand, he forced a passage through a dense mass of
smoke until he reached the seat of the fire.

There he took his post, in spite of the heat and the clouds of smoke surrounding him.  As the
buckets were handed to him, he hove the water over the burning wood.  Bravely he fought the
flames, and at length was able to shout to his crew that they were extinguished.  Having assured
himself of this fact, he hurried on deck.  The foremast stood, carrying the closely reefed
fore-topsail.

"It can't be helped," he observed to his first officer.  "As soon as the weather moderates,
we must set up fresh backstays to the mast and try and rig jury-masts, which will carry us
back to Port Royal."

"I shall be thankful if we can keep clear of the land and escape the enemy's cruisers we were
talking about, sir," answered the mate, who, though a steady man, had less spirit than the master.

When daylight broke, the outlines of the lofty mountains of Cuba were seen ahead, but still
indistinct, and, to the ordinary eye, not to be distinguished from a bank of clouds.  Still
the ship drove before the hurricane; but, as the sun rose, the wind began greatly to decrease,
although it still blew with too much force, and the sea ran too high, to allow the ship to
be brought on a wind.  She had, therefore, still to run before it, unwilling as those on board
were to approach the dangerous coast.  The sun rose as the land became more and more distinct,
but still the sea was too high to allow of jury-masts being set up.  In the mean time the spars
were got ready to do so as soon as possible.

As the wind decreased the sea went down, but by the time the ship could be brought on a wind
she was within sight of the coast, and, owing to the eccentric course she had steered, it was
difficult to say exactly whereabouts she was, although Owen calculated that she was somewhat
to the westward of Cumberland harbour.

"We can only hope, sir, that no Spanish man-of-war or privateersman lies anywhere inside of
us, and that we shall be able to get a good offing again before we are sighted by an enemy,"
observed the mate.

"I hope so," answered Owen.  "What we now have to do is to set up our jury-masts and make sail
as soon as we can."

All hands were engaged in this important operation.  While it was going on, Owen occasionally
took an anxious glance through his telescope towards the land.  As he did so, his eye caught
sight of a sail, on which the bright rays of the sun fell, standing out from it, and he soon
saw that she was a large ship.  A friend was not to be expected from that quarter!  He made
no remark, however, as all hands were working as fast as they could.

His mate at last saw the stranger.

"What do you think of her?" asked Owen.

"No good, sir," was the answer.

"I fear not," said Owen.  "All we can pray for is that a calm may come on, till we can make
sail on the ship, and then we may get away from her during the night."

"She will be up to us long before that, sir," observed the mate, shaking his head.

"At all events, in the mean time we will do our best," remarked Owen; and, without taking further
notice of the stranger, he continued working away with his officers and men.

At length her jury-masts were got up, with yards across, and the main-topgallantsail, and such
other sails as they could carry were set on them.

By this time the stranger had approached too near to escape the notice of any one on deck.
Of course her character was suspected.

"You see her," cried Owen.  "Now, my lads, I hope you will stick by me; and if she proves to
be an enemy, of which I have no doubt, we will try and beat her off."

Several of the crew answered with a hearty "Ay, ay, sir!" but others were silent; among them
were the men who had lately come on board in Kingston harbour.

The wind was light, and the Ouzel Galley made but little way through the water.  The stranger
was now seen to be a ship of her own size, if not larger.  Owen ordered the colours to be hoisted,
but none were shown in return by the stranger.  Again and again he took a glance at her through
his telescope, and at last he called his first mate.

"Have you ever seen that ship before?" he asked.

"I have been thinking that I have, sir, and, if I mistake not, she is the very craft which
so nearly captured us on our passage out."

"I am afraid so," said Owen.  "The more reason we should try to beat her off; and, please Heaven,
we will do so."

"I will stand by you, sir; and so, I hope, will most of the men," answered the mate; "but I
don't like the looks of some of the new hands, and least of all of that man Routh."

As he spoke, he caught sight of Routh ascending to the mast-head, from which he was seen to
wave a flag, supposing, apparently, that he was not perceived from the deck.

"We must seize that fellow," cried Owen.  "He did not make that signal without a cause."

"Ay, ay, sir," answered the mate.  "I will soon learn his object;" and, calling Dan Connor
and Pompey, he went forward to secure Routh as he descended on deck.

Just then Owen observed a smaller flag hoisted at the mast-head of the stranger; then Routh,
instead of at once coming on deck, ran out to the end of the fore-yardarm, from whence he dropped
something into the water, apparently the very flag he had just waved.  He then deliberately
returned to the foretop, and after stopping there for some seconds, and looking at the stranger,
he slowly descended the fore-rigging.  As he did so, he caught sight of the mate, with Dan
and Pompey, waiting for him, when, suspecting their object, he sprang up again, and shouted
to several men who were standing forward.  They were those of whom the mate had just before
spoken as likely to become traitors.  With threatening gestures, they at once advanced towards
the mate.

"If you interfere with Routh it will prove the worse for you," exclaimed John Green, who acted
as their spokesman.

The mate's first impulse was to seize the fellow, but his courage failed him.  "You will hear
what the captain has to say to this," he answered, and began to retreat, Dan and Pompey unwillingly
following him.

Routh, on this, took the opportunity of slipping down on deck and joining his companions.

Owen, who had seen what had been taking place, at once went into the cabin and got his own
pistols and cutlass, directing the second mate to arm the rest of the men.  Still, notwithstanding
the mutiny on board, he kept to his determination of fighting the ship till the last. Fortunately,
the mutineers had no arms, and before they were aware of it all the true men had got their weapons.

"Now, my lads," cried Owen, "if you refuse to do your duty, you must take the consequences.
Go to your guns!  The first man I see flinch from them I will shoot through the head."

This threat seemed to produce its effect, and even Routh obeyed.

The stranger was now rapidly overhauling the Ouzel Galley, which, hauled on a wind, was standing
to the south-east.  Owen had got his guns ready for action; the crew were at quarters.  Crippled
as the Ouzel Galley was, he could only hope to succeed by speedily knocking away the enemy's
masts, or otherwise seriously damaging her; for, unable to manoeuvre his ship except very slowly,
he could not prevent his opponent from taking up any position which might be chosen, either
ahead or astern, and raking him at leisure--or she might at once run him aboard and overwhelm
him with superior numbers.  Still he bravely determined to fight till the last.

He anxiously watched the stranger to judge what she would do.  She had at first set all the
canvas she could carry, but as she came towards the Ouzel Galley she shortened sail, gradually
also edging away to leeward, apparently for the purpose of preventing Owen from making his
escape.  The enemy had as yet not fired a shot.  Directly, however, that Owen could get his
guns to bear he fired them at her; not without some effect, but that did not make her alter
her course. 

They were looked forward to with delight; but if there were a drawback
it was in Vera's viewing him partly as one who held her in a sort
of chain, and partly as one whom it was pleasant to tease by allowing
little casual civilities from Wilfred Merrifield.

For Wilfred was an embarrassment to his family. He had never been strong, his public school
career had been shortened by failure in health, and headaches in the summer, and coughs in the
winter made it needful to keep him at home, and trust to cramming at Rockstone, enforced by his
father's stern discipline and his mother's authoritative influence.

Thus he was always within reach of the mild social gaieties in which each family indulged, and
Vera was not quite so ready as were his sisters to contrast unfavourably his hatred of all self-improvement
with Hubert Delrio's eagerness to pick up every crumb of information,
thus deservedly getting on well in his profession.

One morning, at breakfast, Hubert opened a letter and made a sudden exclamation; and in answer
to Vera's vehement inquiry said, "It seems that the great millionaire swell, Pettifer--is that his
name?"

"Oh, yes, he was at Rock Quay."

"Well, he went to see St. Kenelm's, fell in love with the ceiling, and offered Pratt and Pavis
any sum they like to decorate a huge new hall he is building in the
same style.

So they write to propose to me to come and do it, with a promise of future work, at any terms
I like to ask."

"Oh! but that's jolly," cried Vera. "Can't you?"

"No," he said; "this is immediate, and I have two churches, reredos
and walls, on my hands, enough to last me all the year.

Nor could I throw over Eccles and Beamster."

"Is there an agreement with them?" asked Magdalen.

"Not regularly; but Mr. Eccles has been very kind to me, and promised me employment for four
years to come; in fact, he has made engagements on that understanding."

"I see," said Magdalen. "You could not break with them."

"Certainly not. Nor do I entirely like the line of this other house.

It is a good deal more secular."

"And you have dedicated your talents to the Church!" cried Paulina.

"Not that exactly, Paula," he said, smiling; "but I had rather work
for the Church, so I am glad the matter is definitely settled for me."

To that he kept, though he had a very kind letter from Mr. Eccles,
who had evidently been applied to, wishing not to stand in his light,
especially as he was engaged to be married, and telling him how it
might be possible to fairly compensate for the loss to the firm.

Between the lines, however, it was plain that it would be a great
blow, only possible because the agreement had been neglected; and
Hubert was only the more determined, out of gratitude for the generosity,
not to break what he felt to be an implied pledge; and all the sisters
sympathised with his determination.

He adhered to it even after his return to London, though his father thought it a pity to lose the
chance, if it could be accepted without discourtesy to Mr. Eccles;
and he had been interviewed by various parties concerned, and there
had been an attempt to dazzle him by the prospects held out to him
by an enthusiastic young member of the firm.

Perhaps he was too shrewd entirely to trust them, but at any rate he felt his good faith to Eccles
and Beamster a bond to hold him fast from the temptation; and his heart was really set on
the consecration of the higher uses of his art; so that regard to
the simple rule of honour was an absolute relief to him.

So he wrote to Vera, who, if there were a secret wish on her part, did not dare to give it shape;
while all her sisters, to whom she showed the letters that she scarcely
comprehended, were open-mouthed in their admiration.

Thekla, who had been seized with a fit of hagiology, went the length of comparing him to St.
Barbara; even Paula pronounced it a far-fetched resemblance.

It was some months later that Sir Ferdinand Travis Underwood had decided
on building a magnificent cathedral-like church for the population
rising around him in the Rocky Mountains; and meeting Lord Rotherwood
in London heard of the work at St. Kenelm's, and resorted to Eccles
and Beamster as the employers of young Delrio.

There would be plenty of varieties of beautiful material to be found near at hand in the mountains;
but Hubert was sent first for a short journey in Italy to study the effect of the old mosaics
as well as the frescoes, and then to go out to America to the work
that would last a considerable time.

Vera was much excited by the notion of the Italian journey, and thought she ought to have been
married at once and have shared it, including as it did a short visit
to Rocca Marina.

But she was scarcely eighteen, and neither her trustee nor her elder sister thought it advisable
to dispense with the decision that her twenty- first birthday must be waited for, at which she
pouted. Hubert came for two nights on his return, and was exceedingly full of his tour, talking
over Italian scenes and churches with Magdalen, who had never seen them, but had the descriptions
and the history at her fingers' ends, and listened with delight to all the impressions of
a mind full of feeling and poetry. The time was only too short to discuss or look out everything,
and much was left to be copied and sent after him, with many promises on Vera's part of writing
everything for him, and translating the books that Magdalen would refer to. He was allowed
to take Vera and Paulina to Filsted for a hurried visit to his parents. When they came home
again, it soon became plain that it had not been a success. "I am glad to be at home again,"
said Paula, as the pony carriage turned up the steep drive, and the
girls jumped out to walk.

"I am quite glad to feel the stones under my feet again!"

Magdalen laughed. "A new sentiment!" she said.

"I don't like the stones," said Vera, "but I did not know Filsted was such a poky place."

"A dead flat!" added Paula. "No sea, no torrs! one wanted something to look at! and SUCH a church!"

"Did
you see Minnie Maitland?" put in Thekla.

"I saw all the Maitlands in a hurry," said Vera. "I don't remember which was which. They were
all dressed alike in horrid colours. Hubert said they set his teeth on edge!"

"How was old Mrs. Delrio?"

"Just the same as ever, lean and pinched."

"But so kind!" added Paula. "She could not make enough of Flapsy."

"I should think not!" ejaculated Vera. "Enough! aye, and too much! just fancy, no dinner napkins!
and Edith went away and made the scones herself!"

"Very praiseworthy," said Magdalen. "Don't you know how Hubert always tells us what a dear devoted
good girl she is?"

"Well, I only hope Hubert does not expect me to live in that way," said Vera. "His mother looks like
a half-starved hare, and Edith is giving lessons as a daily governess!

"Edith is very nice," said Paula; "and I never understood before how excellent old Mr. Delrio's
pictures are! Do you remember his 'Country Lane'? What a pity it did not sell!"

"Poor man!" said Magdalen. "He married too soon, and that has kept him down."

"It is beautiful to see how proud they are of Hubert," said Paula, "and his pretty gentle attention
and deference to them both. Mr. Delrio is really a gentleman, I am sure; but, Maidie," she
said, falling back with her, while Vera and Thekla mounted faster, "it was very odd to see
how different things looked to us from what they seemed when we were at Mrs. Best's. Filsted
High Street has grown so small, and one could hardly breathe in Mrs. Delrio's stuffy drawing-
room. And as to Waring Grange, which we used to think just perfect, it was all so pretentious
and in such bad taste. Hubert saw it as much as we did, but I could see he was on thorns to
hinder Flapsy from making observations."

Certainly the visit had not done much good, except in making the girls appreciate the refinement
of their surroundings at the Goyle.

And when letters arrived from Hubert at the American Vale Leston, asking questions requiring
some research in books, either Magdalen's or at the Rock Quay library,
Vera dawdled and sighed over them; and when the more zealous Magdalen
or Paula took all the trouble, and left nothing for her to do but
to copy their notes, and write the letters, she grew cross.

"It was for Hubert, and she did not want any one else to meddle! So stupid! If he had only taken
Pratt and Pavis's offer, there would not have been all this bother!"

That, of course, she only ventured to utter before Paula and Thekla,
and it made them both so furious that she declared she was only in
joke, and did not mean it.

She was indulging in reflections on the general dulness of her lot,
and the lack of sympathy in her sisters, as she lingered by the confectioner's
window, with her eyes fixed on a gorgeous combination of coloured
bonbons, when Wilfred Merrifield sauntered out.

"Fresh from Paris!" he said. "Going to choose some?"

"Oh no, I haven't got any cash. M. A. keeps us horribly short."

"As usual with governors! But look here! Pocket this. Sweets to the sweet, from an old chum!"

"Oh,
Will, how jolly!

Such a love of a box."

"Make haste! Some of the girls are lurking about, and if there is any mischief to be made, trust Gill for
doing it."

"Mischief!--" but before the words were out of her mouth, Gillian
and Mysie appeared from the next shop, a bootmaker's, and Mysie stood
aghast with, "What ARE you doing?

Buying goodies! How very ridiculous!"

"The proper thing between chums, isn't it, Vera?" said Wilfred, with an indifferent air. "We aren't
unlucky Sunday scholars, Mysie, to be jumped upon! Good-bye, Vera, au revoir!"

He sauntered away with his hands in his pockets; while Gillian, from her eldership of two years,
and her engagement, gravely said, "Vera, perhaps you do not fully
know, but I should say this is not quite the thing."

"He told you we are just chums!" exclaimed Vera. "As if there were any harm in it! You've not got a sweet
tooth yourself, so you need not grudge me just a few goodies."

Gillian saw that it was of no use to prolong the dispute either for the place or the time, and she
hushed Mysie, who was about to expostulate farther, and made her go away with a brief parting,
such as she hoped would impress on Vera that the sisters thought
very badly of her discretion and loyalty.

They could not hear the reflection, "They need not be so particular and so cross. Hubert never
thought of giving me anything nice like this. Why should not my chum? Such a sweet little
box too, with a dear girl's head on it!

Would Polly fuss about it, and set on Sister? I shall put it into my own drawer, and then if they
notice it, they may think somebody at Filsted gave it!

No one has any business to worry me about Hubert, and Wilfred being
civil to me. He IS a gentleman."

The gentleman had been overtaken by his sisters. He was walking his bicycle up the hill rather breathlessly
and slowly.

Mysie indignantly began, "Of all the stupid things to do, to give goodies to that girl, like
a baby!"

"I have been wishing to speak to you," said Gillian. "You are going the way to get that foolish
girl into a scrape."

"Oh, yes, of course. Sisters uniformly object to a little civility to a pretty girl," carelessly
answered Wilfred.

"Nonsense!" returned Mysie, hotly. "We don't care! only it is not
fair on Mr. Delrio."

"The painter cad! A very good thing too! The sacrifice ought to be prevented. Is not that the general
sentiment?"

"Wilfred!" cried the scandalised Mysie, "when it is all the other way, and he is ever so much
too good for her."

"Consummate prig! The cheek of him pretending to a lady!"

"But, Wilfred," went on downright Mysie, "is it only mischief, or do you want to marry her yourself?"

"Draw
your own conclusions," responded Wilfred, mounting his machine, and spinning down the hill
faster than they could follow on foot.

"What is to be done, Gill?" sighed Mysie. "Ought we to get mamma to speak to him?"

"Better not," said Gillian, with more experience. "It would only make it worse to take it seriously.
Half of it is play--and half to tease you."

"And," said Mysie, with due deference to the engaged sister, "how about Mr. Delrio? Will it make him
unhappy?"

"If he finds out in time what a horrid little thing it is, I should say it would be very well
for him; but I don't want Will to be the means."

"Oh! when his examination is over, and he gets an appointment, he will go away, and it will be
safe."

"I have not much hopes of his getting in!"

"Oh, Gill, none of us ever failed before."

On the side of the Goyle not much was known or cared about Wilfred's little attentions, which were generally
out of sight of Magdalen, and did not amount to much; but Paula saw
enough of them to consult Agatha on, and to observe that Flapsy was
going on just as she used to at Filsted, and she thought Hubert would
not like it.

"I believe Flapsy can't live without it," sighed Agatha.

"But would
you speak to her? I don't think she ought to let him give her boxes
of bonbons--to keep up in her room, and never give a hint to Maidie."

Agatha
did speak but the effect was to set Vera into crying out at every
one being so intolerably cross about such a trifle, Gillian Merrifield
and all!

"Did Gillian speak to you?"

"Yes, as if she had any business
to do so!"

"I am sure it is not the way she would treat Captain Armitage."

"I
don't believe she cares for Captain Armitage one bit! You said yourself
that all the girls at Oxford thought she cared much more for her horrid
examination! I wouldn't be a dry, cold-hearted, insensible stick like
her for the world."

"Perhaps she is the more quietly in earnest,"
said Agatha, repenting a little that she had told before Vera the
college jokes over what had leaked out of Gillian's reception of Ernley
Armitage when he had hastened up to Oxford as soon as his ship was
paid off, and she had been called down to him in the Lady Principal's
room. Report said that she had only prayed him to keep out of the
way, and not to upset her brain, and that he had meekly obeyed--as
one who knew what it was to have promotion depending on it.

It was
a half truth, exaggerated, but it had not a happy effect on Vera.
Nevertheless, the finishing push of preparation brought on such a
succession of violent headaches as quite to disable the really delicate
boy. Moreover, the tutor declared that there had been little chance
of his success, and Dr. Dagger said that he had much better not try
again. The best hope for his health, and even for his life, was to
keep him at home for a few years, and give him light work.

He had
never been the pleasantest element in the household; and if his parents
were glad of the avoidance of the risk of a launch into the world,
and his mother's love rejoiced in the power of watching over him,
there were others who felt his temper a continual trial, while his
career was a perplexity.

However, Captain Henderson offered a clerkship
at the Marble Works, subject to Mr. White's approval; and this was
gratefully accepted. Nor did Agatha come home again at the Long Vacation
for more than two days, in which there was no time for consultation
with her sisters on matters of uncertain import.

Miss Arthuret and
Elizabeth Merrifield had arranged together to take the old roomy farmhouse
on Penbeacon for three or four months, and there receive parties of
young women in need of rest, fresh air, and, in some cases, of classes,
or time for study. It was to be a sort of Holiday House, though not
altogether of idleness; and Dolores undertook to be a kind of vice-president,
with Agatha to pursue her reading under her superintendence, and to
assist in helping others, governesses, students, schoolmistresses
from Coalham, in whose behalf indeed the scheme had been first started,
and it was extremely delightful to Agatha, among many others.

CHAPTER
XIX--TWO WEDDINGS

"How happy by my mother's side When some dear friend
became a bride! To shine beyond the rest I was In gay embroidery drest.
Vain of my drapery's rich brocade, I held my flowing locks to braid."
ANSTICE (from the Greek).

"Epidemics of marriage set in from time
to time," said Jane Mohun. "Gillian has set the fashion."

For the
Rock Quay neighbourhood was in a state of excitement over a letter
from Mrs. White, of Rocca Marina, announcing the approaching marriage
of Mr. White's niece, Maura, with Lord Roger Grey, a nephew of dear
Emily's husband, and heir to the Dukedom. The White family were coming
home for the wedding, and the interest entirely eclipsed that of Gillian
Merrifield's. In fact, though that young lady somewhat justified the
Oxford stories, she was in a state of much inward agitation between
real love for Ernley, and pain in leaving home, so she put on an absolutely
imperturbable demeanour. Her reserve and dread of comments made her
so undemonstrative and repressive to her Captain that there were those
who doubted whether she cared for him at all, or only looked on her
wedding as a mediaeval maiden might have done, as coming naturally
a few years after she had grown up. Ernley Armytage knew better, and
so did her parents. The wedding was hurried on by Captain Armytage's
appointment to a frigate on the coast of Southern America, where he
had to join at once, in lieu of a captain invalided home; and Gillian
accepted the arrangements, which would take her to Rio, "as much a
matter of course," said her aunt, "as if she had been a wife for ten
years." Her uncle, Mr. Mohun, was anxious that the marriage of his
sister Lily's daughter should take place at the family home, Beechcroft.
If there had been scruples, chiefly founded on the largeness of the
party, and the trouble to Mrs. Mohun, these were forgotten in the
convenience of being out of the way of Rockstone gossip, as well as
for other reasons.

"I should certainly have escaped," said General
Mohun. "I have no notion of meeting that unmitigated scamp."

"Mr.
White ought to be warned," said Jane.

"You'll do so, I suppose; and
much good it will be."

"I do not imagine that it will. It will be
too charming to surpass Franciska and Ivinghoe; but if neither you
nor Jasper will speak to old Tom, I shall deliver my conscience to
Ada."

"And be advised to mind your own business."

Nevertheless,
Jane Mohun did deliver her conscience, when, on the day after the
arrival, there had been loud lamentations over the intended absence
of the Merrifield family.

"With all my heart," answered Owen; and thenceforth he devoted several hours during the day
to the instruction of Dan and the lad, who, giving their minds to the task, rapidly learnt to read.

One day passed very much like another.  A month went by without O'Harrall's making his appearance,
so that Owen concluded that he had again sailed.  Pompey could obtain no information.  Mammy,
he said, had made him promise not to go outside the door, and had threatened him with fearful
punishment if he ventured to do so.  There were windows to the room, but they were high up
and strongly barred.  Dan and Tim climbed up to them, but a grove of trees intervened between
the house and the harbour, so that nothing could be seen of the vessels, while on the other
side was a wide extent of sandy country, with the blue ocean in the distance.

Owen was naturally getting very weary of his captivity.  What the pirate's object was in keeping
him a prisoner, it was difficult to understand.  He could scarcely intend to keep him a captive
for life; but when would he give him his liberty was the question.  Owen determined to ask
him as soon as he returned.  He naturally often thought over some plan for making his escape,
but, unacquainted as he was with the surrounding country, and without means of gaining any
knowledge of it, it was impossible to decide what to do.  Dan and Tim often talked over the
subject with Pompey, who, however, declared that they were so narrowly watched by the old woman
that it would be impossible to succeed.

"Mammy always sleep wid one eye open and ear wide-awake," he observed. "Suppose we get out
and she not raise a hullabaloo, where we go to? Wait a bit, and den we see what we do."

Pompey, in truth, was no more able than the rest of the party to devise any feasible plan for
getting away.

Imprisonment is galling to all men, but it was especially so to Owen, who had hoped to make
a successful voyage, and to marry his beloved Norah at the end of it.  He had no means of communicating
with her, and she, naturally supposing him to be lost, would be plunged in grief.  He felt
that he could better bear his hard fate if he could but let her know that he was alive.  He
might some day regain his liberty.  He had no doubts about her constancy; he was sure that
she would be faithful to him; and although her friends might try to induce her to marry, he
felt confident that she would not do that.

At length, one evening when Pompey was sitting with his shipmates in the loft, voices were
heard below.

"Hi, dat de pirate cappen," he exclaimed; and Owen prepared himself for an interview with O'Harrall.

Before long the pirate came up the ladder.  A dark scowl was on his brow.  Owen rose to receive
him.  O'Harrall advanced and threw himself into a chair, scarcely glancing at the men as he
passed them.

"I am glad to see you, Captain O'Harrall, for I hope that you will allow me and my companions
to quit this place, and we shall be ready to enter into any arrangement you may dictate not
to betray its position," said Owen.

"I am not in the habit of placing myself in the power of others when I can help it," answered
O'Harrall.  "Your word may be as good as your bond, but both may be broken.  I tell you plainly
I intend to keep you prisoners as long as I remain in these seas.  Circumstances may induce
me to return to Europe, and if so, I may either carry you with me or land you at some island,
from whence you may find your way to Jamaica. When that may be I cannot say.  In the mean time,
you must make up your mind to be content with your lot."

"You might land me, when you next sail from this, at some such place as you speak of without
any detriment to yourself," said Owen; and, bethinking him that he would appeal to the pirate's
better feelings, he added, "You have deprived me of my vessel and ruined my prospects of advancement.
I was engaged to marry a young lady who is sincerely attached to me, and for her sake I plead
for my liberty, that I may be able to return to her, or at all events inform her that I am
still alive."

"Who is she?" asked O'Harrall, "although I need scarcely put the question."

"Captain Tracy's daughter--you have often seen her," answered Owen.

"I thought so," exclaimed O'Harrall.  "You have counted too much on my generosity.  I have
not only seen her, as you say, but admire her more than any woman I have met, and should I
ever wed I intend to make her my wife.  Is it likely, then, that I should allow you to return
home and forestall me?"

Owen's heart sank: he could not reply.

"You have but ill pleaded your cause," continued O'Harrall in the cold sarcastic tone in which
he often spoke.  "You saved my life, and I have preserved yours; more you cannot expect from
me.  Those men there behaved well to me on board the Ouzel Galley, and I therefore could not
allow them to be killed.  My sense of justice does not go further than that.  You and they
must make up your minds to remain where you are for an indefinite period.  I came to see how
you had acted, and if you behave as wisely as you have hitherto done you need not fear being
subjected to any further restraint.  I will, by-the-by, send you some books for your amusement.
You will see by this that I do not wish to treat you with greater severity than is necessary.
Now, good evening."

O'Harrall rose as he spoke, and without further remark descended the ladder, drawing the trap
after him.

A parcel of books was delivered through Mammy the next day; they consisted chiefly of voyages
and travels, and proved a great boon to the prisoners.  O'Harrall, however, did not again appear
until some weeks after this.  He was, when he then came, evidently in a bad humour, his manner
being even threatening towards his prisoners.  He spoke as if he regretted having spared their
lives, exhibiting by the expressions he used his abandoned disposition.  Owen knew that his
only safe course was not to answer him.  He felt that it would be hopeless to attempt to arouse
any better or more generous feelings.  He, however, was more than ever resolved to try and escape.

Dan proposed, could they ascertain that the pirates had sailed on any expedition, to secure
the old woman, make their way down to the harbour during some dark night, and attempt to gain
the open sea.  Once clear of the island, they might hope to get picked up by some ship, and
under their circumstances they might trust even to an enemy, or they might succeed in reaching
Jamaica.  They must wait, however, until the hurricane season was over, and they might then,
even in a canoe, navigate these calm seas without much danger.

Owen thought the plan feasible, although it might prove difficult and dangerous.  It could
scarcely be hoped that the pirates would leave the harbour unguarded.  It might be a hard matter
to find a canoe suitable for their object, and they must also obtain a supply of provisions
and water.  Mammy's watchful eye would effectually present them from doing this, and herein
lay their first and chief difficulty.

O'Harrall had now been for some time absent.  It struck Owen that perhaps the account he had
given of the savage character of the inhabitants was to prevent then from leaving the house,
and he resolved to try how Mammy would behave should they attempt to go out.

Pompey undertook to try and persuade her to allow them to take some exercise, as their health
was suffering from their long confinement.  He got her, therefore, one day into conversation,
when she appeared to be in a better humour than usual, and after some time he made a signal
to Tim, who was on the watch, to come down.  Owen and Dan followed.  Then, telling her that
they would go out and take a short walk, they left the house without further ceremony, notwithstanding
her expostulations.

"Nebber mind, Mammy," said Pompey; "dey come back.  Me help you cook dinner meantime."

Owen took a path in the first instance away from the harbour, but as his great object was to
obtain a view of it, he doubled back on the other side, and then hurried towards it.  Just
as they had caught sight of the water through the trees, they came upon a hut, near which they
were about to pass, when Owen heard the voice of a man, as if in pain, proceeding from it.
Prompted by a kind feeling and a wish to relieve the sufferer, he entered.  On a rude bunk
lay a white man, apparently ill of fever.  He appeared greatly astonished at seeing Owen and
his companions.

"Who are you?" he asked.  "I thought the ship had sailed."

"I would inquire who you are?" said Owen.

"Well, sir, I am an unfortunate fellow, who wishes that he was anywhere but where he is.  I
see that you are not one of the Eagle's crew, and so I don't mind telling you.  I joined her
to save my life, and now that I am ill I am allowed to die like a dog by myself, with no one
to look after me.  I was left on shore sick, and since I grew worse I have been unable to get
any food, and I am too weak to walk."

Owen promised to try and induce Mammy to supply the poor fellow with nourishment.  He would
at once have hurried back, but he was anxious, having got thus far, to obtain a view of the
harbour.  Accordingly, telling the man he would send him relief as soon as possible, he, with
Dan and Tim, left the hut, and made their way on, keeping themselves concealed as much as possible
among the trees and bushes till they came in full view of the harbour.

It was a wide lagoon, which narrowed towards the southern end, where a perpendicular cliff
of some extent rose directly out of the water, its summit covered with trees.  Both Owen and
Dan were of opinion that this formed one end of the channel leading to the sea.  No boats or
canoes could be discovered on the beach.  Further along it to the northward were seen a number
of huts and buildings of larger size, probably storehouses.  People were moving about among
them, but it was impossible at the distance they were to know if they were blacks or whites.
In the centre of the harbour lay the Ouzel Galley, much in the condition in which she had been
when captured, and there were several smaller vessels at anchor, completely dismantled.

So far the inspection of the harbour had been satisfactory; there was nothing that Owen could
see to prevent the possibility of their escaping.  The party hastened back to the house.  Mammy
scolded them for being so long absent.  "If cappen here, you no do it," she observed; by which
remark they guessed that, though she held O'Harrall in awe, she had herself no ill-feeling
towards them.  On Owen's telling her of the sick man, she consented to let Pompey take him
some food, and undertook to visit him herself, provided they would promise not to leave the
house during her absence.  This they readily agreed to do.

Some days afterwards, when Owen again managed to get as far as the hut, he found the man greatly
recovered.  John Hempson (as he said was his name) professed himself very grateful, and declared
his intention of escaping from the pirates on the first opportunity.  "I suppose that they
will take me to sea the next time they go," he observed, "and if I then have the chance, I
will leave them.  They are likely to be back soon, and, indeed, I wonder they have not come
in before this."

"Well, then," said Owen, "if you ever return to the old country, you must promise to find out
Captain Tracy, living near Waterford, and tell him that I am alive, and hope some day to get
back.  Depend on it, the captain will reward you for your trouble."

"How will he believe me?" asked Hempson.

"I will write a letter for you to deliver," said Owen.  He, however, recollected that he possessed
no writing materials, and he might not again have the opportunity of communicating with Hempson.
That moment it occurred to him that he had a small book in his pocket.  It contained but a
portion of a blank leaf.  He tore it out, and with the end of a stick he wrote the letters "O.M."

"When my friends see this, they will know that you are speaking the truth," he said, giving
the man the paper.

Just then Dan, who had gone on ahead, came hurrying back with the information that a ship was
entering the lagoon, and Owen thought it prudent at once to return to the house.  Mammy, on
hearing this, told her captives that they must not again venture forth, and they, of course,
saw the prudence of obeying her.

O'Harrall, who had returned in the ship, paid them but one visit, when he evidently wished
to find a cause for quarrelling with Owen.  Owen wisely kept his temper, though Dan looked
as if he would like to try the strength of his shillelagh on the pirate's head.  Whether or
not O'Harrall suspected that his prisoners contemplated trying to make their escape, it was
difficult to say; but they found that a hut was put up close to their abode, and that it was
occupied by two Spaniards, ill-looking fellows, who seemed to have nothing to do but to sit
at the door and smoke all day.  They did not, however, prevent Mammy going out, accompanied
by Pompey, to obtain provisions; and the latter brought them word that the ship had again sailed.
Pompey also found out that Hempson had gone on board the ship, and Owen hoped that he would
carry out his intention of escaping.  Slight as was the chance that he would convey any information
to Captain Tracy, it yet raised Owen's spirits.

"We, must wait, howeber, to get 'way till we can manage dese rascal Spaniards," said Pompey.
"Dey keep de eye too wide open to let us go just now."

Days and weeks and months went by, and nothing occurred to vary the monotony of their existence.
The Spaniards kept too strict a watch to enable them to make any excursions out of the house,
and Mammy herself seemed as cautious as she had been on their first arrival.  Had it not been
for the interest Owen felt in teaching his two countrymen to read, his own spirits would have
broken down.  Pompey also begged to go to school and join their class, but he had great trouble
in learning his letters, although after he knew them he got on as rapidly as either of his
companions.

Thus several months more passed by.  Twice the Eagle came in, and again sailed without their
receiving a visit from O'Harrall.  Owen was becoming more and more sick at heart.  It may seem
strange that he and his three companions should have been kept in such thraldom by an old woman
and two Spaniards, but could these ever-watchful guardians have been overpowered, and even
a canoe secured, it would have been madness to have put to sea without provisions and water,
with the chance of being pursued or picked up by the pirate ship.  He waited, therefore, for
an opportunity, which, however, he at times thought might never arrive.

Pompey had at length one day gone out with Mammy, when on his return he brought the news that
the Eagle had been lost, and that the captain, with a portion only of the men, had returned
in a small vessel they had captured.  Owen naturally feared that O'Harrall, after his misfortune,
would be in a worse temper than before, and was thankful that he did not make his appearance.
Pompey accounted for it by informing them that he and all hands were on board the Ouzel Galley,
busily employed in fitting her out.

It was now again the hurricane season, and some time would probably elapse before the pirates
would venture to put to sea.  For the same reason Owen considered that it would not be prudent
to try and make their escape.  Their chance, however, of getting off undiscovered was less
than it had been before, for so great was the demand for hands to man the Ouzel Galley that
the two Spaniards were called away from their post, and no others were sent to take their places.
One evening, about this time, Pompey made his appearance in a great state of agitation.

"What do you tink, Cappen Massey?" he exclaimed.  "I talk berry often to Mammy, and not 'spect
anyting, but dis berry morning I'se tell her dat, when I was one piccaninny, I'se carried away
from Africa wid my mudder; when I'se come to Jamaica, one massa buy her and anoder buy me,
and from dat day I neber set eyes on her.  We talkee for some time, and den she cry out, `You
Pompey, my son,' and she trew her arms round my neck and burst into tears.  Den I kiss her
and tell her dat she right, and we laugh and cry togeder for two 'ole hours."

Owen, upon further questioning Pompey, was convinced that he was not mistaken.  It greatly
raised his spirits, and he had now hopes that Mammy would connive at their escape, even if
she would not venture to assist at it.  Pompey was very sanguine about the matter.  "She so
happy to find me dat she do anyting I ask," he said positively.  "Neber fear, cappen, we get
away soon."

It was, of course, necessary to wait till the Ouzel Galley, now fitted out as a piratical ship,
should sail.  With varied feelings Owen saw her one morning gliding out of the harbour.  He,
accompanied by Pompey, had gone as near to her as he could venture.  He had but little to fear
of being discovered, as the whole population of the place were watching the departing ship.
It was certainly trying to see his own vessel sailing away in the hands of the miscreants who
had captured her, on an expedition which boded ill for any merchant vessels she could overtake.
She was rigged exactly as before.

Owen would not have delayed making the attempt to escape, but the nights were moonlight, and
they would run a great risk of being discovered. After this bad weather came on, and a further
delay occurred.  Pompey had undertaken to look out for a suitable craft.  It was necessary
to use caution in the search lest their intention might be suspected.  He had made several
trips along the shore, and had discovered places where boats and canoes were hauled up, but
some were too large and heavy, and others too small.  At last he said that he had found one
of a proper size to hold five persons, and provisions and water sufficient to last them for
a week or ten days.  "Five persons!" exclaimed Owen.

"Yes, cappen.  Mudder says she go too.  If she stop, dat fellow cut her troat."

Although Owen would rather have dispensed with the company of the old woman, yet, in common
humanity, he felt bound to take her if she wished to go.  It showed, also, that she had confidence
in their success, and would contrive to obtain the necessary provisions.  About this she had
been engaged for some time, getting some in one place and some in another, so that no suspicions
might be raised as to her object.

The Ouzel Galley had sailed a fortnight or more, when Pompey announced that all was ready.
Mammy packed up all the provisions in bundles, and had obtained two small casks of water, besides
a number of gourds filled with the precious liquid.  Pompey and Dan started as soon as it was
dark, carrying loads, which they intended to hide near where the canoe was drawn up.

"We carry all de tings dere first," he said, "and den you, cappen, and mudder, and Tim, come
along, and we shove off widout delay."

The last trip was made at about an hour before midnight, when Pompey and Dan returned, and
Owen, with the old woman and Tim, accompanied them down to the beach.  The night was very dark;
no human being was stirring.  As silently as possible the canoe was launched, when the stores
were quickly put on board.

"Now, mudder, we put you 'longside cappen," whispered Pompey.  "Whateber happen, don't cry out."

And taking the old woman up in his arms, he waded with her till he plumped her down in the
stern of the canoe.  She knew no more of the navigation than they did, so she could not be
of further use to the adventurers, and they thus had to depend on their own judgment.

Owen took the after paddle.  Pompey placing himself in the bows, Dan and Tim gave way, and
the canoe noiselessly glided down towards the supposed entrance to the harbour.  They hoped
that any look-outs who might, under ordinary circumstances, have been stationed on the other
side of the channel, would be withdrawn to man the Ouzel Galley.  They therefore trusted that
they could escape without being questioned.  Still the expedition was one to try the best strung
nerves.  Owen feared that, should they be hailed, Mammy might forget her son's injunction.
He was not aware of the determined character of the old woman.

They soon got into the narrow channel, in the centre of which Owen steered the canoe.  It was
necessary to proceed slowly, as from the darkness the shore on either side was in some places
scarcely visible. The channel was long and intricate, but Owen, of course, knew that there
must be considerable depth of water to allow large ships to get up it. They had just got to
the end of the cliff, when a light was seen. Whether it proceeded from a hut or from a man
with a lantern, it was impossible to say.

"Cease paddling," whispered Owen; and the canoe glided on with the impulse already given to it.

The light remained stationary.

"Give way," he again whispered.  The men plied paddles as before.  They had got some way further
down, when they were startled by hearing a man shout, "Who goes there?"

They all remained perfectly silent and motionless.  Just then the noise of the surf on the
shore reached their ears, and they knew that they must be close to the entrance.

The man did not repeat his question for nearly a minute.  As soon as he again began to speak,
Owen told Dan and Tim to paddle away.  He and Pompey did so likewise, and the canoe glided
forward at a far more rapid rate than before.  A shot was heard, but the bullet came nowhere
near them.  It was evident they could not be seen by the guard.  The channel now widened out
considerably, and they could distinguish the open sea beyond; they made towards it.  There
was but little or no surf on the bar, and they crossed without shipping a drop of water.

Owen had made up his mind to steer to the southward till they should sight Cuba.  He felt sure
that the pirate island was one of those which exist close to the Bahama Bank.  Owen steered
by the stars.  His crew plied their paddles all night, the wind being too light to make it
worth while to set the sail, and they hoped to be far out of sight of the island by daybreak.
They were not without fear, however, that they might be pursued.  The man who had fired at
them would suppose that they were fugitives.

"Ill luck to the spalpeens who may be sent in chase after us!" observed Dan, showing what he
was thinking about.

"Me no tink dat any boat come off after us," said Pompey, "'cos ebery man who can pull an oar
is on board Ouzel Galley, so we safe as to dat."

The black's remark was cheering to Owen, who had hitherto thought it very probable that they
would be pursued.  Mammy, who as yet had not uttered a word, corroborated her son's statement.

When morning broke the island could scarcely be seen astern, nor was any land in sight ahead.
The sea was perfectly calm; the sky overhead undimmed by a cloud.  Owen looked round; no sail
was visible in any direction.  All they could do was to paddle on, in the hope that a favourable
breeze would spring up to carry them on their course, when two at a time might get some sleep.
The weather looked perfectly settled, and, though the canoe was somewhat deeply laden, Owen
felt confident that she would be able to go through any sea which was likely to get up.  His
chief anxiety arose from the possibility there was of falling in with the Ouzel Galley.  Should
they do so, they could scarcely expect any mercy from the pirates.  He, of course, intended
to do his best to keep clear of her.  This he trusted that he might easily do, as the canoe,
being low in the water, was not likely to be attract the attention of those on board the ship,
while she could be seen in time to be avoided.

A breeze came at last; the sail was hoisted, and the canoe ran merrily before it.  Dan begged
that he might take the steering paddle, and that the captain would lie down and get some rest,
which Owen was glad to obtain, as he intended to steer during the night.  The sun was setting
when he awoke, and after some supper was served out he resumed the steering paddle, and told
Dan and Pompey, who had hitherto been keeping watch, to turn in.  Notwithstanding the sleep
he had obtained, towards morning he began to feel very drowsy; still his eye was fixed on the
star by which he was directing the course of the canoe.

Tim had been stationed forward to keep a look-out, and Owen had hailed him every now and then
to ascertain that he was awake.  He had not done so, however, for some time, and was on the
point of crying out, when Tim exclaimed, "By the powers, captin, there's a big ship ahead!"

"Lower the sail!" exclaimed Owen.  "Dan and Pompey, out with your paddles."

They started up at hearing their names called, and obeyed the order.

"Paddle for your lives, lads!" cried Owen, keeping the canoe to the eastward.

Tim was not mistaken.  The wide-spread canvas of a large ship was seen towering upwards not
half a mile away; in a few minutes more she would have been close to the canoe.  Owen and his
companions watched her anxiously; there could be little doubt that she was the Ouzel Galley.
Although she was clearly seen, they might hope to escape observation. They continued, however,
paddling away at right angles to her course till they were well abreast of her, when Owen once
more put the canoe's head to the southward; but not, however, till she was out of sight did
he venture again to hoist the sail.  The danger he had chiefly feared was past.  It would take
her probably a day or two before she could reach the harbour and discover their flight, and
they might hope thus to keep well ahead of any boat sent in pursuit of them.

Two days more they stood on.  One passed by very like the other.  The wind remained steady,
the sea smooth.

On the fourth day, some time after sunrise, a sail was seen ahead.  Had not they all felt sure
that the ship they had passed was the Ouzel Galley, they would have avoided her.  Although
prepared, if necessary, to perform the whole voyage to Jamaica, Owen judged that it would be
far safer to get on board the first ship they could fall in with.  He resolved, therefore,
to approach her, and should she prove to be English, to run alongside.  He little doubted that,
even should she be French or Spanish, on their giving an account of their escape from the pirates,
they would be treated with humanity.  He accordingly steered towards her.

"Hurrah!" cried Dan.  "She's a frind, she's a frind--for, there, up goes the English flag."

His quick eye had seen the character of the bunting as it ascended in a ball to the peak, even
before it blew out to the breeze.

As the canoe approached, the ship hove to, and in a few minutes the party of fugitives were
alongside.  Owen was quickly on deck, when the first person he encountered was Gerald Tracy.
Exclamations of surprise burst from their lips, and Owen was soon shaking hands with Norman
Foley and the rest of the Champion's officers.  His companions had followed him, Pompey shoving
up old Mammy with his shoulder, while Dan hauled away at her from above.  Numerous questions
were put to Owen as to where he had come from, and he had to answer them before he could ask
others in return.

At first he had experienced a feeling of intense satisfaction upon finding himself on board
a friendly ship, but his grief may be imagined when he now heard that Captain Tracy and his
daughter had fallen into the power of O'Harrall and his savage crew.  Instead of rejoicing
at his escape, he regretted having left the island, lest they might retaliate on their hapless
prisoners.  He trembled at the thought of what might be Norah's fate.  Gerald, of course, shared
his feelings; and, indeed, every one sympathised with them both.

As soon as the canoe was hoisted up the sails were filled, and the Research again stood on
her course towards the pirate's island.

CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

VOYAGE OF THE RESEARCH COMMENCED--NORAH'S ANXIETIES--A CALM--TROPICAL SEA--A GALE SPRINGS UP--THE
SHIP RUNS BEFORE IT--AGAIN STANDS TO THE WESTWARD--A DANGEROUS POSITION--AMONG ISLANDS AND
REEFS--A SUSPICIOUS SAIL--CHASED--THE OUZEL GALLEY--THE PIRATE'S FLAG--THE PIRATE BEGINS FIRING--NORAH
PLACED IN THE HOLD--A FORT SEEN ON THE ISLAND--NO BOATS COME OFF--THE ISLAND PASSED--THE PIRATES
FORE-TOPSAIL YARD SHOT AWAY-- THE SECOND MATE AND SEVERAL MEN OF THE RESEARCH KILLED OR WOUNDED--A
CALM--DAMAGES REPAIRED--A BREEZE SPRINGS UP--THE PIRATE OVERTAKES THE RESEARCH--RUNS HER ON
BOARD--FEARFUL SLAUGHTER OF HER CREW--CAPTURED-- THE TWO OLD CAPTAINS UNHURT--NORAH'S INTERVIEW
WITH THE PIRATE--TAKEN ON BOARD THE OUZEL GALLEY--COURTEOUSLY TREATED--A SAIL IN SIGHT--CHASED
BY A FRIGATE--THE OUZEL GALLEY ESCAPES AMONG THE REEFS--A CALM--THE FRIGATE'S BOATS APPROACH
TO ATTACK HER--A BREEZE SPRINGS UP--SHE ESCAPES.

The two old captains were well aware of the numerous perils they might possibly have to encounter
when they sailed on their voyage in the Research, but for the sake of Norah they took care
to make light of them whenever their prospects of success were discussed in her presence. Norah
very naturally would ask questions, and to those questions they were compelled to try and find
answers.  In what part of the numberless groups of those western islands were they to search
for Owen and Gerald? One subject absorbed all their thoughts--on that alone could they converse.
Even when Captain O'Brien, as he frequently did, tried to introduce any other, it before long
was sure to merge into that one. Norah day after day would unroll the chart of the West Indies,
and pore over it for hours, till she knew the form and position and size of every island and
key, and reef and sandbank, delineated thereon.  The ship had already reached the tropics when
a heavy gale sprang up from the westward, before which she was compelled to run for three days.
She then had a long beat back, and the weather being unusually thick, no observations could
be taken to determine her position.  Day after day the two captains and the first mate came
on deck at noon with their quadrants, but not a break in the clouds appeared through which
they could get a glimpse of the sun.

They calculated at last that they could not be far off the most western of the Bahamas, and,
as they hoped, near the entrance of the Windward Passage.  At sunset the clouds dispersed,
the wind shifted to the northward, the stars shone brightly forth from the clear sky, and it
was hoped that the next day they might be able to determine their position. As no land had
yet been seen, they stood on for the greater part of the night; but towards morning, Captain
Tracy; afraid of running further, hove the ship to, to wait for daylight.

Even before the first streaks of dawn appeared above the eastern horizon, the two mates, followed
by Captain O'Brien, went aloft, eager to catch the expected sight of land.  What was their
surprise to discover it not only to the westward, where they had looked for it, but away to
the south-east and over the starboard quarter.  The ship had run in during the night among
a group of islands, but what islands they were it was difficult to determine.  Norah had dressed
and appeared from her cabin as her father and Captain O'Brien came below to consult the chart.

"Here is our position, if I mistake not," said Captain Tracy, placing his finger on the chart.
"We are further to the south'ard than I had supposed.  An ugly place to have got to, but it
might have been worse; the ship would have chanced to run foul of a reef had we stood on. 
But, Heaven be praised, we've escaped that disaster, and we'll now try to thread our way into
the Windward Passage."

While the course to be pursued was still under debate, a cry from aloft was heard of--"A sail
to the nor'ard!"

The captains hurried on deck, followed by Norah.  "What is she like?" asked Captain Tracy.

"A large ship under all sail, standing this way, sir," answered the second mate.

In a short time it became evident that the Research was seen by the stranger, for the latter
set every stitch of canvas she could carry, and steered directly after her.

A small island appeared ahead.  At first it was proposed to pass to the westward of it, but
the look-out from the mast-head discovering several dark rocks rising above the surface, and
extending to a considerable distance in that direction, the ship's course was altered so that
she would run along the eastern side of the island, as close in as prudence would allow.  It
was hoped that, to the southward of the island, a channel might be found which would lead her
clear of the rocks and shoals by which she was surrounded.

Norah, who had continued on deck, had seldom withdrawn her eyes from the stranger, which appeared
to her to be much nearer than when first seen. "What do you think, Captain O'Brien--is not
that vessel fast gaining on us?" she asked.

"That may be, my dear Miss Norah, but it need not make us fear that she will come up with us,"
answered the old captain, who could not deny the fact.  "She hitherto has had the advantage
of a stronger breeze than has filled our sails, but we may shortly get more wind and slip away
from her.  If she does come up with us, we may find that she is perfectly honest, and that
we had no cause to try and keep out of her way; so don't be alarmed, my dear, but go below
and have some breakfast--it is on the table by this time--and your father or I will join you
presently. One of us must remain on deck to look out for any reefs which may run off that island
yonder."

Captain Tracy giving Norah the same advice, she unwillingly went below, and took her seat at
the breakfast-table to await their appearance.  She waited and waited, but neither of the captains
nor the first mate came below.  They were all, indeed, too busily engaged in watching the progress
of the stranger and discussing her character to think of breakfast.  She had been bringing
up a much stronger breeze than had hitherto filled the sails of the Research, to which she
had now got almost within gunshot.  Captain Tracy had for some time been intently examining
her through his telescope.

"Tell me if you have ever seen that craft before," he said, handing it to Captain O'Brien.
"My eyes may deceive me, and it may be mere fancy, but I cannot help thinking that she is a
ship I ought to know well."

"By my faith, I ought to know her too," exclaimed Captain O'Brien.  "If that vessel isn't the
Ouzel Galley, she has been built to look like her.  Perhaps, after all, our friend Owen may
have run her on one of the unfrequented keys to the nor'ard, and, having only lately got her
afloat and refitted, is now on his way to Jamaica.  He is therefore naturally anxious to speak
an English ship, to hear news from home."

"That vessel may be the Ouzel Galley, but Owen Massey would never hoist such a piece of bunting
as that," cried Captain Tracy, who, having again taken the telescope, was looking towards the
stranger, which had just then run up to her fore topgallant mast-head a black flag with the
well-known pirate's device of a death's head and cross-bones.  The object was evidently to
intimidate the crew of the chase.

Directly afterwards the stranger yawed and fired her foremost gun.  The shot came flying across
the water, but, after several times striking the surface, sank short of the Research.  There
was no longer any doubt of the character of the stranger.

"Lads," cried Captain Tracy, "you see that flag!  Death or worse than death will be our lot
if we don't beat off the piccarooning villains who have hoisted it.  They think to frighten
us; but stand to your guns like men, and we'll beat her off."  The crew cheered, and promised
to do their duty.

Norah had not heard the sound of the gun fired by the pirate, but the men's hearty cheers reaching
the cabin, she hurried on deck to learn what caused them.  Just as she appeared, the pirate,
again yawing, fired three shot in rapid succession, one of which glanced along the side of
the Research.  Captain Tracy had just ordered two guns to be brought aft, and the crew were
engaged in the operation, when, seeing Norah, he begged Captain O'Brien to take her below and
to place her where she could be out of the way of harm.  She had seen enough, however, to show
her the state of affairs; her fears were realised.

"Come away, my dear," said the old captain, taking her hand.  "Bound shot are ugly playthings
for young ladies, and the sooner we get you stowed safely away the more ready we shall be to
carry on the game with yonder gentleman.  We'll beat him, so don't be alarmed when you hear
our guns firing.  Perhaps we shall knock some of his spars away, and we shall then take the
liberty of leaving him to repair damages at his leisure."

Captain O'Brien thus talked on, endeavouring to keep up Sarah's spirits, as he conducted her
to a secure place in the hold, which, with the help of the cook and steward, he set about arranging
for her.  It reminded her of the place to which she and Gerald had been sent on board the Ouzel
Galley, when her father and Owen, with their handful of men, had so bravely fought the famous
Captain Thurot and his numerous crew.  The recollection of that event encouraged her to hope
that the well-manned Research would beat off a vessel much larger than herself, however desperately
the pirate's ruffianly crew might fight.  She sat with her hands clasped, endeavouring to retain
her composure.  She would have been thankful for any occupation, but she could do nothing but
sit still and wait for the result of the impending fight--yes, she could pray; and earnestly
she did so, that her beloved father and his friends might be protected from the shot of the foe.

When Captain O'Brien returned on deck, he found that the two guns had been pointed through
the stern-ports.  The match was applied, and both were fired by the first mate in quick succession;
but no visible effect was produced on the enemy's spars.

"Run them in, my lads, and load again," cried Captain Tracy.  "Let me see what I can do; if
we can wing the pirate, we shall be saved further trouble."  Running his eye along one of the
guns, he fired; Captain O'Brien at the same time discharging the other.  Looking through his
telescope, Captain Tracy uttered an exclamation of impatience as he could discover no damage
caused by the shot on the pirate's rigging. The broad spread of white canvas remained extended
as before to the yards.  "We must try again and again till we succeed," he exclaimed; "maybe
we shall have better luck next time."  While the guns were being run in and loaded, he turned
his telescope towards the island, which was now broad on the starboard beam.  "Why, as I live,
there is a British ensign flying above what looks very like a fort in the centre of the island!"
he exclaimed.  "If there is anchorage under it, we can run in and set the pirate at defiance.
He does not appear to have discovered the fort, or he would not venture so near it."

Captain O'Brien took the glass, and minutely examined the coast.  "I see no opening between
the reefs through which we could get up anywhere near the fort," he observed.  "Were we to
attempt to run in, we should very probably get the ship on the rocks, and be far worse off
than we are likely to be if we stand on and trust to our guns to beat off the piccaroon.  Though
the sea is so smooth here, the surf is breaking heavily on the reefs and shore.  If you'll
take my advice, you'll not make the attempt.  There must be Englishmen on the island, though
how they came there is more than I can say, but I am very sure that, on seeing a British ship
chased by a pirate, they would come off to our assistance if they could launch their boats
through the surf."

Captain Tracy acknowledged that his friend was right.  To stand in closer to the reefs in order
to look for an opening through them would be, should one not be found, to allow the pirate
to come up and attack them with rocks close aboard.

The two ships ran on for some distance, the pirate gaining but slightly, if at all, on the
chase.  All the time a rapid fire was kept up from the two guns run through the stern-ports
of the Research, the pirate almost as frequently discharging her bow-chasers.  Her shot as
she drew close began to tell with deadly effect.  The second mate was the first to fall; two
of the crew were soon afterwards desperately wounded, and another was killed; still the spars
and rigging had hitherto escaped much damage.  Matters were becoming very serious, when the
shot from a gun trained by Captain O'Brien brought down the pirate's fore-topsail yard; the
studding-sail booms being carried away at the same time, the studding-sails were seen flapping
wildly in the wind.

"I am thankful that my old eyes are still of some use," he said, as he saw the effect he had
produced.  The British crew cheered right lustily.

The wind, which had been falling, breezed up a little, and the Research glided on out of reach
of the pirate's guns.  Not a moment was lost in repairing the slight damages her rigging had
received.  It was seen, however, that the pirates were similarly employed.

"The yard was only shot away in the slings, without damaging the mast, I fear," observed Captain
O'Brien.  "It will take the rascals some time, however, before they can sway it aloft, and
ere then, if this breeze holds, we shall have run the pirate well out of sight."

But the breeze did not hold.  As the day advanced the wind fell, and the two vessels lay becalmed
just within long range of each other's guns. Both continued firing as before.

Poor Norah, as she sat all alone in the dark hold, was not forgotten. Sometimes Captain O'Brien
and sometimes her father hurried below to say a few cheering words, assuring her that they
hoped before long to get clear of the pirate.

The calm continued, allowing time to repair damages, and to commit the poor fellows who had
been killed to the deep.  A breeze was eagerly looked-for by all on board the Research.  Should
it come from the eastward, she would probably get it as soon as the pirate and retain her present
advantage, but if from the northward, the enemy might creep up to her before she could move.
Preparations were made for every emergency.  The crew stood ready to brace the yards, from
which the sails hung down against the masts, as might be required; the guns were loaded, and
run out; pikes, cutlasses, muskets, and pistols were placed ready, in convenient positions
to be grasped, should the pirate succeed in getting alongside.

The day wore on, and evening was approaching.  The old captains were looking out astern.

"Do you see yonder dark line of water?" asked Captain O'Brien, grasping his friend's arm. 
"The pirate, after all, will get the wind before we do."

"It cannot be helped.  We must do our best, and trust in Providence," answered Captain Tracy.
"Our men will prove staunch, and though the villains outnumber them, and their metal is heavier
than ours, we may still beat them off."

In less than a minute the sails of the pirate were seen to blowout, and she began slowly to
glide through the water.  Those of the Research gave a few loud flaps against the masts, and
then hung down again, then swelled slightly to the breeze; but before she had gathered way,
the pirate had gained considerably on her. 

Is he staying here? We must ask him to come up to luncheon or to tea. I am glad he is doing
so well. I heard Eccles and Beamster were to do the decorations;
I suppose they employ him.

I should think it was a very good line to get into."

This was on a Friday; and the next day Magdalen proposed driving down in the cool of the evening
to see the decorations at St. Kenelm's and their artist; but it turned
out that he was gone to spend Sunday at the Cathedral city, and all
that could be done was to admire the designs, and listen to Paula's
enthusiastic explanation.

Magdalen consulted Agatha whether to send young Delrio a card for
the garden party; but they decided that it was too late for an invitation
to be sent, though a spoken one might have been possible.

Besides, it was not likely to be pleasant to a stranger who knew no one but the Flights and
Hendersons, and those professionally.

Agatha told her sisters, and with one voice they declared that they would not see him patronised;
while Agatha's acute senses doubted whether Vera's objection was
not secretly based on the embarrassment of a double flirtation with
him and with Wilfred Merrifield.

Indeed, Vera told her gaily: "Only think, Nag, I did have a jolly ride on the M.A.'s bike after
all."

"Indeed!

Then she lent it to you."

"Not she! But she and the little kid were safe gone to Avoncester, and Paula was with her dear
Sisters, so Will and I took a jolly spin along the cliff road; and it was such screaming fun.
Only once we thought we saw old Sir Jasper coming, and we got behind a barn, but it turned out
to be only a tripper, and we had such a laugh."

"Paula does not know?"

"What would be the good of telling her, with her little nun's schoolgirl
mind?

She would only make no end of a fuss about a mere bit of fun and nonsense."

"I think if Wilfred Merrifield was afraid to meet his father, it showed a sense of wrong."

"Sir Jasper is a horrid old martineau, who never gives them any peace at home, but is always
after them."

"A martinet, I suppose you mean.

I don't think that makes it any better. I should not be happy till Magdalen knew."

"Why, no harm was done! There's her precious machine all safe! It was just for the fun of the
thing, and to try how it goes. One can't be kept in like a blessed
baby!

She never has guessed it. That's the fun of it."

"I would not return her kindness in such an unladylike way when she is trusting you, Vera."

Did Magdalen know what had been done? She did guess, for there was a mark on the wheel that she
did not remember to have known before, and it cost her a bitter pang of mistrust; but she
abstained from inquiries, thinking that they might only do harm. But she bought a chain for
her bicycle; and Agatha felt more shame than did Vera, who tried
to believe herself amused by her tacit sense of emancipation.

CHAPTER X--FLOWN

"Till now thy soul hath been all glad and gay, Bid it arise and look on grief to-day." ADELAIDE
PROCTOR.

There was a Guild at St. Kenelm's which was considered by the promoters
to be superior to the Girls' Friendly Society, and which comprised
about a dozen young women, who attended classes held by Sister Beata,
and occasional modest entertainments given by Lady Flight.

One of these was to take place the day before Miss Prescott's garden party. It was to be given
at Carrara, the very pretty grounds on the top of the cliff, belonging
to Captain Henderson, the managing partner in the extensive marble
works of Mr. White, who lived at Rocca Marina, in the Riviera.

Mrs. Henderson had resided in Mr. Flight's parish, and been a member of his congregation, and while
he was absent for a day or two she had put her garden at the service of the Guild of St. Milburga's
for the day.

Of course Vera and Paula were delighted to assist; but Thekla was too young for the amusements
of grown-up maidens, and was much better pleased to help her two elder sisters in preparations
for the next day, placing tennis nets, arranging croquet hoops, mustering chairs by the verandah,
and adorning tables with flowers. Agatha's assistance was heartily given, as making it her own
concern, and, for that reason above all others, it was a happy day, though a very tiring one, to Magdalen,
in spite of the sultry atmosphere and the sight of lurid-looking
clouds over the moors, which did not augur well for the next day's
weather, and caused all the arrangement of chairs and rugs to be prudently
broken up and deposited under the verandah.

This was done, and the evening meal had been taken, and Thekla had gone to bed before some
flashes of lightning made the two sisters wish to see the other pair at home, especially as
Vera was much afraid of lightning, and Paula apt to be made quite ill by it.

The storm rolled on, bringing violent gusts of wind and hail, though
not at the very nearest, and such a hurricane of wind and rain ensued
that the two watchers concluded that the two girls must have been
housed for the night by some of the friends at Rock Quay, and it was
near midnight, when just as they had gone to their rooms, a carriage
was heard ascending the hill, and they had reached the door before
Paulina sprang out with the cry, "Is she come home?"

Then at sight of the blank faces of dismay, she seized hold of Agatha's hands and began to sob.
Mr. Flight had stepped out of the car at the same moment, and answered
the incoherent questions and exclamations.

"Young Delrio offered to take photographs of the party, and that was
the last time she was seen."

"Yes," sobbed Paula, "Sister Mena saw her there.

We were trying to get up croquet, and then I missed her.

I tried to find her when the lightning began, but I could not find her anywhere, though I looked
in all the summer-houses!"

"At Mrs. Henderson's? or Miss Mohun's? or the Sisters'?" asked Magdalen, catching alarm from each
denial.

"She might have gone home with one of the girls."

"She would be wild in such a storm," said Agatha, "and not know what she was about."

"Sister Beata and I have gone to each house," said Mr. Flight.

"When did you say you saw her last?"

"I saw her when we were grouped," said Paula; "Sister Mena, when she was helping him to put
up his photos."

"The strange thing is," said Mr. Flight, "though no doubt it will
be explained, that Delrio is missing too."

"Hubert Delrio!" exclaimed Agatha. "Impossible! He must have taken
her into the church to be out of the storm."

"We have tried," said the clergyman.

And as the round of suggestions began to be despairingly reiterated, he said, hesitating, "Miss
Mohun told me that she thought she had seen a boat, Captain Henderson's,
she believed, in the cave with some one rocking in it; and certainly
that little boat was there, when on the hope, if it can be called
a hope, I ran down the steps to look."

"Would it not have been put into the boathouse out of the rain?" said Agatha.

"The gardener was gone home, out of reach round the point, but we shall know to-morrow."

"He thinks they may have rowed out and been caught in the storm," cried Paula, bursting into
fresh weeping; and Magdalen saw the conjecture confirmed by Mr. Flight's countenance.

"I am afraid it is the least distressing--the least unsatisfactory idea," said he, in much agitation.
"I thought Mr. Delrio an excellent young man; and she," indicating his companion, "tells me
you know him and his family well."

"Oh, yes," said Agatha and Magdalen in one breath. "We have known his father all our lives. Nothing
can be more respectable."

"And Hubert is as steady and good as possible," continued Agatha.

"His mother used to come to Mrs. Best and praise him, till we were quite tired of his name; I
am sure he is all right."

"Or I should be much deceived in him," said the clergyman.

Yet there was an idea in Paulina's mind. Could Vera have poured out such an exaggerated tale
of oppression and unhappiness as to have induced her old playfellow
to carry her off to his mother at Filsted?

She had given some such hint to Mr. Flight on the way; but he had not seemed to hear or attend,
and he was now promising to let the sisters know as soon as possible
in the morning whether anything had been discovered, and to telegraph
to Filsted and to the office in London if he should see occasion.

Then he drove off, in what would have been almost daylight but for the pelting of the storm; and
after a vain attempt to make Paula swallow some nourishment, Magdalen
thought it kinder to let Agatha carry her off to bed, and then she
confessed, what really gave a certain hope, that the pair had been
in the habit of murmuring against "sister" so much that, considering
poor Vera's propensity to strong language, it was quite possible that
Hubert might think her cruelly oppressed, and for a freak carry her
off to his mother to be consoled.

Agatha tried to believe it, for the sake of hushing the exhausted
Paula, who almost went into hysterics, as she laughed at the notion
of to-morrow's telegram that Vera was safe at Filsted; and then allowed
herself to be calmed enough to sleep, while Agatha revolved the notion,
but found herself unable seriously to believe, that sufficient grievance
could be brought against sister to induce any man in his senses to
take such a step.

But then Paula had inferred that he was a lover, and Agatha did not know of what lovers might be capable,
and she could not but blame herself for not having given more importance to the semi-confidences
of her sisters on the first day of her arrival. It was all misery; and the two poor girls could
find no solace in the morning, save in talking to Magdalen, though that involved the confession
of all the murmurs against her, the distrust of her kindness, and the explanation of the interviews,
which, as far as Paula had ever witnessed them, were absolutely harmless, the only pity being
in their concealment.

Magdalen was manifestly as wretched as they, or even more so, being convinced of her own shortcoming
in not having won the affection or confidence that would have made all open between them. She
could not understand why Hubert Delrio should not have been made
known to her.

"We thought," said Paula, "we thought you might not think him enough- -enough--of a gentleman for
your sort of society."

"I think you might have trusted me to know what was due to an old friend," said Magdalen "but,
oh, I ought to have made you feel that we could think together."

"Perhaps," said Agatha, "there was a little consciousness on poor dear Vera's part that she did not
want you to know the terms she was on."

They had tried only to let Thekla know that they were much alarmed
because Vera had gone out in a boat and not returned.

It was observable that, on the principle that where there is life there is hope, Paula clung to the
notion that Vera's having fled to Filsted; while the two elder sisters,
perhaps because they better knew what such a flight might seem to
others, would almost have preferred to suppose there had been a fatal
accident in the midst of youthful, innocent sport.

The two were lingering sadly over their uneaten breakfast, talking more freely when they had
sent Thekla to feed her pets, when Mr. Flight came up on his bicycle; but it was plain at the first
moment that he had no good news.

Nothing had been heard. It only appeared that one of the young gardeners at Carrara had taken
Captain Henderson's boat without leave, to fetch one of the girls, but on entering the cove
had found the boathouse locked. He had moored the boat to a stake for want of the ring that secured
it within. When the storm threatened he ran down to recover it, but it was gone, and he had concluded
that the gardeners had put it into the boathouse.

It now appeared that they had not seen it, and were very angry at its having been meddled
with.

An oar had drifted up with the morning tide, and had been recognised as belonging to the boat; but
such a gale was blowing that it was impossible to put out to sea or make any search round the coast.
Words could hardly describe the distress of Mr. Flight or of his ladies at not having better looked
after the young girl; Sister Beata for never having thoroughly attended to the matter; and
Sister Mena for having accepted confidences which, if she had only guessed it, told her more than
there really was to be known.

Both these two were inclined to the elopement idea, partly because it was the least shocking,
and partly because they had looked at Vera's grievances through her
own spectacles, and partly from their unlimited notions of young men's
wickedness.

Their vicar was not of the same opinion, knowing Hubert better, and besides having found his
work, his orders to his subordinates, and the belongings at the lodgings in a state that showed that
whatever he had done had been unpremeditated.

Sending off notes to stop the garden party was a sort of occupation, broken by many signs, much
listening, and much sorrowful discussion, not quite vain, since it made Paulina more one with
Magdalen than ever before. Poor old Mr. Delrio arrived in the afternoon, a thin, grey-haired
and bearded old man, who could only make it too certain that Paula's
theory of the innocent flight to Filsted was impossible.

Moreover, he was as certain as a father could be, intimate with,
and therefore confident of, his eldest son, that though Hubert might
indulge in a little lively flirtation, it could never be otherwise
than perfectly harmless.

In the terrible suspense and restlessness, he went vibrating about in the torrents of moorland rain
between Rock Quay and the Goyle, on the watch for telegrams from the office in London or his
wife at home, or for the discovery of anything from the sea, or searching in his son's lodgings,
where nothing was found that did not show him to have been a pure-hearted young man, devoted
to his art, and fond of poetry. Sundry compositions were in the blotting-book, one, indeed, to Vera's
name, under the supposition (a wrong one) {100} that it meant "true," but mostly rough copies
of a poem about the Saints Julitta and her child Cyriac. Hope sank as another stormy day rose;
and still the poor old artist lingered in hopes of news by some returning craft which might have
picked up the derelict. His chief comfort was in walking about between the showers with Magdalen,
as an old friend, and trying to think of the two as innocent creatures, engulfed like mayflies
in the stream.

Sister Mena came over, wanting to join Paula in bewailing entreaties; but Paula, in youthful
hard-hearted wilfulness, declared that it was impossible to see her;
and it fell to Magdalen to try to discuss the grief with her.

It turned out that Mr. Flight had spoken severely to her and to the far less implicated Sister
Beata, declaring his confidence in them destroyed, so that they had begun to consider of throwing
up their work in his parish. "And it was all my fault," said Mena; "Sister Beata really knew
nothing, or hardly anything of what Vera told me."

"Indeed, I can quite understand that you had hardly experience enough to know that it might
be wiser not to encourage what was not quite open."

"But I thought,--I thought you--"

"That I was unkind and unsympathising."

"Oh, you never could have been--"

"Indeed I never meant to be, but I am afraid it seemed so to my young sisters. I can quite see how
you thought you were acting kindly."

"Oh, that is so good of you."

"And perhaps I, being only an elder sister, you would not feel that
I was the only authority the poor girls have to look to; and that
it would have been kinder to help them to be content with me."

"I did not know what you could be," said Mena, greatly soothed and surprised by her caresses.

"We
often do go on in ignorance, and get on a wrong tack; but you know God pardons our mistakes,
and I do believe that you will be wiser for all this sorrow, and better able to rise to your
work. I am sure, however it ends, that is the reason that such blows are sent to us."

Mena went back sorrowful and chastened, but tenderly hopeful. If Miss Prescott could forgive,
surely Mr. Flight could, and One still greater.

CHAPTER XI--ADRIFT

"She splashed, and she dashed, and she turned herself round, And heartily wished herself safe
on the ground." JANE TAYLOR.

And where were the missing pair?

Vera had lingered about, fancying she was helping to pack the photographic apparatus, while the
others dispersed. Presently, seeing no one near, Hubert Delrio said,
in a gentle diffident voice, "It would be a great pleasure to me if
I might ask you to listen to the verses on St. Cyriac and his mother
that the design brought with it."

"I should love it better than anything,"
said Vera, highly flattered.

"If you would come down this way, there
is a charming secluded cove, where we should be free from interruption."

"How
deliciously romantic! Quite stunning!" cried Vera, as her cavalier
conducted her down a steep path along the side of the cliff to the
stony beach, where a few red rocks had been manipulated into a tiny
harbour, with a boathouse for the little skiff in which Captain Henderson
was wont to go round to the marble works on the other side of the
headland. The boat looked very inviting as it lay swinging gently
in the sluggish waves in the advancing shade of the tall cliff; and
Vera exclaimed with delight as she was assisted into it, and placed
herself comfortably on the cushion, with one hand dabbling in the
cool translucent wave. Hubert Delrio opened his manuscript and began
to read his ballad, if so it was to be called, being the history of
the little boy of four years old, who, being taken with his mother
before the tribunal at Tarsus, was lifted on the propraetor's knee,
but struggled, crying out, "I am a Christian!" till the propraetor,
in a rage, hurled him down. His skull was fractured on the marble
pavement, and his mother gave thanks for his soul's safety, when she
too was sentenced to be beheaded. Great pains had been taken with
the noble-minded tale; and the verses had considerable merit, more,
perhaps, than Vera could appreciate. But to read such a production
of his own, in such surroundings, to the auditor whom youthful fancy
most preferred, was such luxury to both that it was no wonder that
under the broad shady hat with the lily wreath she was nodding in
the gentle breeze, the lapping of the waves, and the soft cadence
of the poetry, till at an effective passage on the mother's death,
the poet looked up, expecting to receive a responsive glance from
those blue eyes.

Not only were they hidden, but the cliff was farther
off. The mooring rope and the stake were dragging behind in the water.
The tide had turned, and the boat was already out of reach of the
rock where it had been drawn up. His exclamation of dismay awoke Vera,
who would have started up with a little shriek, but for his, "Don't!
Don't! I'll row back."

But he was a landsman, whose only knowledge
of the water was in an occasional bathe, or in a river steamer; and
his first attempt at placing the oars in the rowlocks resulted in
one falling overboard, while he helplessly grasped the other; and
Vera screamed again.

"Don't be frightened, my dear! Dearest, don't!
We must be seen. Some one will come out and help us."

"Can't you
get on with one oar? They do in pictures."

"Punting? Yes, but there
must be a bottom. No, don't move, whatever you do. There can't be
any danger. Fishermen must be about. Or we shall be seen from the
cliffs."

"They are getting farther off! Can't you shout?"

Hubert
shouted, and Vera added her shriller cries; but all in vain, and the
outgoing tide was carrying them, not towards the quay and marble rocks,
but farther to sea. The waves grew rougher and had crests of foam,
and discomfort began. Once the feather of a steamer was seen on the
horizon. They waved handkerchiefs and redoubled their shouts, and
Hubert had to hold his companion to prevent her from leaping up; but
they never were within the vessel's ken, and she went on her way,
while the sea bore them farther and farther.

The shore was growing
dim and indistinct, the sun was sinking, and the cloud, that had at
first shown only a golden border, was lifting tall perpendicular masses,
while the tossing of the little boat became more and more distressing.
Anxiety and sense of responsibility kept Hubert from feeling physical
discomfort; but Vera began to cry, and to declare that it would be
the death of her if she were not landed immediately.

"If it were
only possible!" sighed Delrio.

"There must be some way! You are so
stupid! Oh! There was a flash of lightning."

"Summer lightning."

"No
such thing! There will be a storm, and we shall be drowned. Oh, I
wish I had never listened to your nonsense, and got into this horrible
boat." She was in a state for scolding, and scold she did, as the
clouds rose higher, and sheets of lightning more decided. "How could
you?  I have now to see to
the navigation of the ship, so that I cannot for the present enjoy your society," he said.

Having led Norah to a sofa and desired his other guests, as he choose to call them, to be seated,
he hurried from the cabin.

The light from a handsome silver lamp hung in the usual position showed them that no change
had been made in its arrangements since the Ouzel Galley had sailed from Waterford.

"We might have been worse off, faith! but it's somewhat trying to find one's self on board
one's own ship in the character of a prisoner," observed Captain Tracy.  "However, our captor
appears inclined to behave with as much courtesy as can be expected, and as I hope we shall
not again be interrupted, I wish, Norah, you would try to obtain some sleep. O'Brien and I
will watch by you, and you will be the better able to endure what you may have to go through."

"I cannot sleep; I don't wish to sleep," murmured poor Norah.  "I should only dream of the
dreadful events which have occurred."

After some persuasion, however, she consented to try and obtain the rest she so much needed,
and in spite of her assertions, her father saw that she had dropped off into a calm slumber.
He and Captain O'Brien could now speak more freely than they had hitherto done.  Their firm
resolution was not, on any account, to be parted from her.  They had each retained their pistols,
which they had concealed in their pockets, and Captain O'Brien vowed that, should any violence
be threatened, he would shoot O'Harrall, and trust to win over the piratical crew by promising
them the most ample rewards.

"If we kill their chief, the fellows will be awed, and we shall have time to throw the bait
in their mouths; for the chances are that many of them will be glad enough to escape from the
perilous course they are now compelled to follow, and if we can gain over some, the rest will
not long hold out," he observed.

Captain Tracy thought his friend's plan too desperate, but he was at length won over to consent
to it should O'Harrall's behaviour render some such proceeding necessary.

By a compass fixed in the forepart of the cabin, they saw that the vessel was standing to the
westward, and that the wind must have shifted, as she appeared to be directly before it.  After
running on this course for some distance, they found that she was then hauled up to the northward.
From this she appeared to deviate but slightly, sometimes a point or two to the eastward, and
sometimes to the westward. They thus surmised that she was threading her way between reefs
with which the pirates must have been well acquainted.  Daylight at length streamed through
the cabin windows, and as the sun rose above the horizon, they saw his rays glancing across
the tiny wavelets which rippled the surface of the water, showing that a moderate breeze was
blowing, and that the ship was under the lee of an island, which impeded the progress of the
undulations rolling in from the wide ocean.

"Wherever we are going, it would be a hard matter, I suspect, without an experienced pilot,
to get out again," observed Captain O'Brien.

"We must trust to protection from above, and we may hope to find the means of escape," answered
Captain Tracy.

In spite of their intentions to keep awake, the two old captains could not avoid dozing off,
till they were aroused by the entrance of a black, who announced himself as the steward.

"Me Jumbo--come to lay breakfast, and cappen say you hab what you like ask for, especially
someting nice for de young lady."

"We shall be thankful for anything you are able to bring us, Jumbo," said Captain O'Brien.
"We do not wish to give you more trouble than necessary."

"Dat berry good," answered the black, nodding as he went out of the cabin.

Before long he returned with an ample repast, consisting of several West Indian dishes and
some others, the materials of which had probably been brought from the Research.  The prisoners
in reality cared but little for the food, but it was satisfactory to believe that the pirate
intended to treat them with courtesy.  Norah, who had taken nothing for many hours, was persuaded
to eat some breakfast.

"You will feel all the better for it, my dear," said Captain O'Brien. "I never saw any use
in starving one's self, even though one might be in the midst of an ocean of troubles.  Matters
always look worse when people are hungry, and perhaps now that we have had some food, we shall
be able to see things in a brighter light.  I have been thinking a good deal about Owen Massey,
and should not be at all surprised that we, after all, accomplish the object of our voyage
and find him.  We shall have paid a high price, to be sure, by the loss of our good ship, but
even that you will, at all events, not think too much if we get him back safe."

Norah smiled faintly.  She almost dreaded the effect her presence might produce on the treatment
of Owen, should he be in the pirate's power. The terrible thought had even occurred to her
mind that the pirate might offer her the dreadful alternative of becoming his wife or seeing
Owen murdered before her eyes.  The idea, however, was too horrible to allow her to give it
utterance.

Captain O'Brien endeavoured to amuse Norah by talking on in his usual way.  He succeeded but
ill in his attempts.  Impossible was the task to draw her thoughts from present circumstances.
"I wonder if we are to be kept prisoners below all day, or whether our piratical captor will
take it into his head to invite us on deck?" he continued.  "I should have no objection to
smoke my pipe and enjoy a little fresh air.  When Jumbo next appears, I'll send our compliments
and request the favour."

The old captain carried out his intentions, and Jumbo returned with a message from the pirate
captain, to the effect that they were welcome to come on deck if they chose.

Norah would have far rather remained in the cabin, but, as she dreaded being left alone, she
agreed to accompany her father and Captain O'Brien.  The pirate bowed as she appeared, and
placed a seat for her on the poop, inquiring simply whether she had been supplied with everything
she required.  She briefly thanked him, and turned aside her head to avoid the gaze of the
ruffianly crew, as they moved towards the after-part of the deck in the prosecution of their
various duties. O'Harrall merely nodded to the two old captains, who stood by her side. The
wind was baffling, and he was continually engaged in trimming sails, so that he was prevented
for some time from again addressing her.

The Ouzel Galley had now got into a more open part of the sea, though neither of the old captains
could tell exactly where they were.  Again the wind became steady, and O'Harrall was coming
up, apparently to speak to Norah, when the look-out from the mast-head shouted, "A sail on
the starboard quarter!"

One of the chief officers was immediately sent aloft.  On coming down, he reported the stranger
to be a large ship running free.

"Does she look like a merchantman?" inquired O'Harrall.

"Much more like a man-of-war, judging by the cut of her canvas," was the answer, in a low voice.

"Perhaps she will take no notice of us," remarked O'Harrall.  "It will be time enough if she
gives chase to make sail; but it would only be drawing her attention towards us, if we were
to do so now."

Captain Tracy overheard these remarks, but endeavoured to look as unconcerned as possible,
though, as may be supposed, he earnestly hoped that the officer's surmise was correct, and
that the stranger would endeavour to overhaul them.

The pirate continued to walk the deck, every now and then turning his glass in the direction
the stranger had been seen, while the officer again went aloft.  Presently he hurriedly came
down and spoke a few words to the pirate captain, who instantly issued orders to the crew to
make all sail.

Royals were set, and even lighter sails above them.  The studding-sails were rigged out, and
various strange-shaped sails were set between the masts and above and below the bowsprit. 
The studding-sails, however, were quickly taken in again, as the wind was too much abeam to
enable them to be carried.

Captain Tracy managed, whenever the pirate's glance was turned the other way, to take a look
over the quarter, and soon had the satisfaction of seeing the lofty sails of a large ship appearing
above the horizon.  It was pretty evident that the stranger was suspicious of the character
of the Ouzel Galley, and was coming in chase of her.

O'Harrall and his crew seemed to be of the same opinion.  They turned many an angry glance
towards the old captains and Norah, as if they considered them the cause of the risk they were
running of being captured.  Though the Ouzel Galley was a fast vessel, the stranger was evidently
much faster.

"What do you think she is, O'Brien?" asked Captain Tracy.

"A frigate or a large sloop of war; and though it is a difficult matter to judge of her nationality,
she looks more like an English ship than a foreigner," he answered.

"Grant Heaven it may be so, and that the pirates may see the uselessness of fighting, should
she come up with us," said Captain Tracy.

"They are not likely to give in without a desperate struggle, when they know that halters are
in store for most of them if they are captured," replied Captain O'Brien.

O'Harrall was pacing the deck with hurried strides.  He could only depend on the speed of his
ship for escaping, and he well knew that no British man-of-war would engage him without doing
her utmost to make him her prize.  Suddenly he walked up to his prisoners, his countenance
exhibiting a more ferocious aspect than they had hitherto seen it wear.

"You must go below," he said in a harsh tone; "your presence has brought us ill luck.  At all
events, my people think so, and I don't know how they may behave, should they see you on deck
when yonder ship gets up to us."

"We will of course obey you," said Captain Tracy, taking Norah's hand; and, followed by Captain
O'Brien, they descended to the cabin.

The latter would gladly have remained to watch the progress of the stranger, which he was more
than ever convinced was a man-of-war.  Some hours must, however pass, before she could get
the Ouzel Galley within range of her guns.  Should darkness come on, the latter would still
have a chance of escaping without fighting.  The eagerness of the pirate to avoid a contest
showed clearly enough that they were only ready to fight when they had the hope of booty before
them.

Jumbo appeared as the prisoners returned to the cabin, and placed a repast on the table.  It
was in every respect equal to the breaks fast. Even the old captains, however, could not do
justice to it, as they were too anxious about their prospect of a speedy deliverance from captivity.
They knew very well, also, that considerable danger must be run should the pirate engage the
man-of-war.  Shot might enter the cabin, or the ship might catch fire, or blow up, or be sent
to the bottom; or the pirates, when they had lost all hope of escaping, might, in their rage,
revengefully put them to death.

Jumbo had removed the dinner things, and Captain O'Brien managed to project his head far enough
from the stern windows to get a sight of the stranger.

"She may overtake us before dark, but I very much doubt it," he observed.  "If she does not,
these fellows will manage to make their escape by running in among reefs and islands, with
which they, depend on it, are well acquainted, and where the man-of-war will not venture to
follow them."

As the time went by there appeared every probability that Captain O'Brien's surmise would prove
correct.  A ruddy glow cast across the ocean showed that the sun was sinking low, and presently
the glow faded away and a grey tint alone remained.  By this time the hull of the stranger
appeared above the water, and Captain O'Brien declared that he was more than ever convinced
she was a British frigate.  The compass in the cabin showed, however, that the Ouzel Galley
was following a devious course--now hauling up round a reef, now running for a short distance
before the wind.

A shot came flying over the water from the frigate.  Several others followed, but they all
fell short.  She was then seen to keep away before the wind to the south-west.

"She has given up the chase," exclaimed Captain O'Brien, "and our chance of liberty for the
present is gone.  I was afraid it would be so, but it cannot be helped."

Norah, perhaps, felt the disappointment less keenly than her companions. The thought that she
was about to meet Owen was uppermost in her mind. She fancied that, once having found him,
they should be able to devise a plan for their escape.  Shortly after this, O'Harrall came
into the cabin.  "You expected the tables to be turned, and that the Ouzel Galley would be
captured by yonder man-of-war," he observed, as he stood with his arms folded, leaning carelessly
against the bulkhead. "It is as well for you, however, that we had not to engage her, for my
fellows are not men who would consent to be taken alive.  Had we not escaped from her, they
would to a certainty have blown up the ship, when all hope had abandoned them."

"Then, sir, we may congratulate you and ourselves on having avoided a fight," said Captain
O'Brien.  "We may wish you a better fate, and it is certainly one we are thankful to have escaped."

"I hope to enjoy greater happiness for many years to come than has hitherto been my lot," said
the pirate, gazing at Norah, who cast down her eyes to avoid his glance.  "Circumstances have
made me what I am, but I intend to abandon my present course, and to engage in some service
where I may gain an honourable name and retrieve the years which have passed.  I already possess
sufficient wealth to satisfy my utmost desires.  My only wish is to share it with one whose
affections I may hope to gain."

The pirate continued for some time speaking in this strain.  Norah did her utmost to pretend
that she did not understand him, while Captain O'Brien stood fuming with rage at what he mentally
called the audacious impudence of the villain.  Poor Captain Tracy's heart sank, and though
not less indignant than his friend, he endeavoured to conceal his feelings.  Happily O'Harrall
was again summoned on deck.  No sooner was he gone than Norah gave way to hysterical sobs.

"Oh, father! father! kill me sooner than let him take me from you," she exclaimed.  "I know
too well what he means; but I would pray for death sooner than become his wife."

"If he really wishes to obtain an honourable name he will offer no violence, my child," said
Captain Tracy, endeavouring to comfort her. "Heaven will find some way for you to escape."

The cause of the pirate's being summoned on deck was soon apparent.  The wind had fallen, and
the Ouzel Galley lay becalmed, surrounded by the reefs amid which she had taken shelter.  Though
the passage occupied her some time, she was still at no great distance from the open channel.

"Why, as I live, there is the frigate, not more than three or four miles off," exclaimed Captain
O'Brien, who had been looking through the cabin window.  "Depend on it, she has kept us in
sight, and when she finds that we are still within reach, and not able to get away, she'll
be sending her boats in to take us during the night.  I heartily hope that she may, and we
shall run much less risk of injury than we should have done had she attacked the Ouzel Galley
with her heavy guns.  I believe that the pirate's threat of blowing up the ship was all bombast.
These fellows, hardened villains as they are, are seldom in a hurry to go out of the world,
if they can by any means prolong their miserable existence.  Each man fancies that he may have
a chance of escaping by turning king's evidence or getting out of prison.  I doubt whether
even O'Harrall himself would have the nerve to set fire to the magazine, though his capture
were certain."

The darkness was now settling down on the water, and at length shrouded the stranger from view.

The pirates had evidently not been idle, and the old captains surmised that they were engaged
in tricing up boarding-nettings and making all the usual preparations in case of being attacked
during the night by the boats of the frigate, which they must of course have expected.

The sound of a boat lowered into the water reached the cabin, and the next minute she was seen
through the stern window pulling in the direction of the frigate, probably to row guard and
to give due notice should the man-of-war's boats be heard approaching: Although, during the
last two nights, the inmates of the cabin had obtained but a few minutes of sleep at a time,
their anxiety prevented them from closing their eyes.  Even Norah, though her father urged
her to try and obtain some rest, could scarcely bring herself to shut hers for a moment.  They
listened eagerly, expecting every minute to hear the pirate's boat return, followed by those
of the man-of-war.

Several hours passed away, when Captain O'Brien, who had been watching at the stern window,
exclaimed, "Here she comes!" and the next moment the boat dashed up alongside.

The ship had not been brought to an anchor, showing that the pirate entertained a hope of avoiding
a fight and making his escape, should the breeze spring up before the boats could get alongside.
The night was dark, and from the lighted cabin it was impossible to see objects at any distance.
Captain O'Brien, however, listened, expecting to hear the boats approach.  Presently he rejoined
Captain Tracy and Norah.

"Here they come," he whispered.  "It would be folly to be shot by our friends, and as the pirates
have forgotten to close the dead-lights, the bullets may be making their way into the cabin.
We shall do well to lie down under shelter.  Here, Norah, your own cabin will afford you the
safest place, and your father and I will sit on the deck by your side. Should the attacking
party succeed, at I have no doubt they will, we shall then avoid the risk of being shot by
friends or foes."

The advice was too sensible not to be followed.  Scarcely had they gained the shelter which
Captain O'Brien advised, than both the broadsides of the Ouzel Galley were discharged, succeeded
by a rapid fire of musketry, and a loud cheer from the crews of the boats.

"They will be alongside in another minute," cried Captain O'Brien.

The fluttering of some curtains hung in front of Norah's cabin showed that a strong breeze
was blowing through the stern windows, and it soon became evident that the ship was moving
rapidly through the water.

The crew of the pirate cheered, and several of her guns were fired. They were replied to by
musketry, but the reports came one after the other, apparently from different directions.

"The villains will escape after all," exclaimed Captain O'Brien, who was on the point of jumping
up to take another look through the stern window, when his friend, holding him down, observed--

"A chance bullet may come through the port, or if your head were seen, a marine would be certain
to aim at it, believing that he was firing at an enemy."

The Ouzel Galley glided rapidly over the smooth sea, the firing on both sides ceased, and though
the boats were probably still continuing the chase, they were eventually left far astern.

CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

THE RESEARCH SAILS TOWARDS THE PIRATE'S ISLAND--OWEN'S CONVERSATION WITH MICHAEL O'HARRALL--THE
RESEARCH ENTERS THE PIRATE'S HARBOUR--GETS ALONGSIDE THE OUZEL GALLEY--BOARDS HER--DESPERATE
FIGHT--O'HARRALL ESCAPES--LIEUTENANT FOLEY AND OWEN, WITH A PARTY, LAND TO SEARCH FOR NORAH
AND HER FATHER--A JOYFUL MEETING--THE PIRATE VILLAGE SET ON FIRE-- BOOTY CARRIED OFF--THE SHIPS
SAIL--REACH JAMAICA--WELCOMED BY OLD FRIENDS--THE VOYAGE HOME AND ITS RESULTS--FORMATION OF
"THE OUZEL GALLEY SOCIETY"--HAPPY MARRIAGES--NORMAN AND GERALD AGAIN SENT TO SEA-- ENGAGEMENT
WITH A FRENCH SQUADRON--DEATHS OF THUROT AND O'HARRALL--OWEN RECOVERS HIS PROPERTY--CONCLUSION.

Gerald and Norman Foley did their utmost to comfort Owen Massey, who was almost in despair,
as he thought of the fearful danger to which Norah and her father would be subjected in the
power of O'Harrall.  To what extremities might he not proceed?  His rage, too, would be great
on finding that Owen and his companions had escaped from the island, and he might vent it on
the hapless prisoners in his power.

"Should he dare to ill-treat them, swift vengeance will overtake him," observed Norman.

"Yes; but the fear of that will not influence the man," exclaimed Owen, pressing his hand to
his brow.  "Would that I had remained on the island!  I might in some way have afforded them
protection--or the kind black woman would have done so."

"Bad as he is, he will not surely venture to injure my young sister and fine old father," said
Gerald.

Owen, however, who had witnessed the fierce bursts of passion to which O'Harrall was accustomed
to give way, still feared the worst.

He, with the lieutenant and Gerald, was walking the deck, when his eye fell on Dillon, with
the boatswain standing on the watch new him.

"Why, that is one of the fellows who betrayed the Ouzel Galley into the hands of the enemy!"
said Owen.

"He is a deserter from the Champion," observed Norman Foley, "and is the man who has now undertaken
to pilot us into the pirate's harbour. When did he join the Ouzel Galley?"

"At Kingston, with some other fellows of the same stamp," answered Owen; "and I have good cause
to regret having received them."

"They must have been with you, then, when I boarded the Ouzel Galley as you went out of Port
Royal," Gerald took the opportunity of observing, after Norman Foley had left them.

Owen confessed that such was the case.  "If you had done your duty, you would have discovered
them," he could not refrain from adding.

"You are right, Owen," said Gerald.  "I now see that every neglect of duty must produce bad
consequences, but I suppose, as it was your business to conceal them from me because you wanted
a crew, so it was mine to have discovered them.  However, the less we say about the matter
the better just now."

Owen felt a strong inclination to speak to the man Routh, or Dillon, to learn how O'Harrall
had behaved towards his prisoners before they were taken on board the Ouzel Galley.

With the greatest effrontery, Dillon nodded to him as he approached. "So, Captain Massey, you
managed to get away, after all," he said, quite coolly.  "It is more than any one else has
done for a long time, and several have lost their lives in making the attempt, so you are fortunate."

"That is not the matter about which I wish to speak to you," said Owen. "You were treated well
while under my command, and in return I ask you to tell me how Captain O'Harrall behaved towards
those he took from this ship?"

"As to that, I know very little," answered Dillon.  "We killed most of the people, but the
two old captains and the young lady were unhurt. They did not look very happy at finding themselves
prisoners, but in other respects they had nothing to complain of, and they were allowed to
take their traps with them.  And now, Captain Massey, let me ask you, how do you happen to
know that the real name of the pirate captain is O'Harrall?  He is generally called Bermudez
among us."

"I knew him long before he took to his present evil courses," said Owen. "I then hoped better
things of him, and I will now ask why you are ready to betray him."

"To save my own life, and to revenge myself for the way he has treated me," answered Dillon.
"He chose to consider me as his inferior, when I am his equal in every respect.  Has it never
occurred to you, Owen Massey, who I am?  I will tell you, for I care not who knows it.  I am
Brian O'Harrall's younger brother Michael, whom you also once knew.  Our family ousted yours;
and as I conclude that neither of us is very likely to return to Ireland, and we are the last
of our race, you may possibly manage to recover the property.  If Brian is killed, I may perhaps
assist you, and if you will promise me a sufficient recompense I am ready to do so."

From what the pirate said, Owen had no doubt that he was the person he represented himself
to be; still he hesitated about entering into any engagement with a villain of his stamp.

"I must consider the subject," he answered; "much must depend upon the success of our undertaking.
Should Captain Tracy and his daughter be rescued by your means from your brother's hands, whatever
your motive, I shall be more deeply indebted to you than I should feel were you to assist in
restoring the property of which your family deprived my father.  Indeed, I cannot understand
how you can be instrumental in doing that.  In the mean time I can make no promise with regard
to the matter."

The subject the man Dillon, or rather Michael O'Harrall, had mentioned had one beneficial effect
in somewhat turning Owen's thoughts, although only occasionally, from the contemplation of
Norah's and her father's position.

Two more anxious days were passed, when, towards evening, land was seen ahead, mostly lying
low, with a slight elevation in the centre.  The wind was favourable, and Dillon undertook
to carry the ship into harbour before nightfall, declaring that he could pilot her towards
the latter part of the way as well in the dark as during the daylight.

It is impossible to describe Owen's feelings.  In a short time Norah might be safe, or he should
hear that she had suffered a fate he dare not contemplate.

Every preparation was made for surprising the pirates and recovering the prisoners.  A dozen
men were dressed to look as much as possible like the pirates who had been on board when the
Research was captured; the black flag was hoisted at her peak.  The rest of the men and the
officers concealed themselves, some below, and others under the bulwarks.  Dillon was ordered
to take his post as if in command.  A party of men, well armed, were selected and placed under
the orders of Norman Foley, who, accompanied by Gerald, with Owen, Dan, and Pompey as guides,
were to shove off from the ship as soon as the pirates had discovered their object, and to
endeavour to find out where the prisoners were confined.

Everything went well.  The wind continued favourable, the bar was crossed, and the Research
glided up through the channel leading into the lagoon.  The sun had set, and darkness was rapidly
coming on; Owen and Gerald were lying down, anxiously looking out from one of the bow ports.
There floated the Ouzel Galley, right ahead, in the centre of the lagoon.  The Research was
steered towards her, so that it might be supposed by the pirates that the new arrival was about
to bring up. Instead of letting go her anchor, however, the Research was to run alongside the
Ouzel Galley, which the British crew was immediately to board.  As the boats on the larboard
side of the Research could not be seen by the pirates, they were lowered into the water, and
Lieutenant Foley and his party were directed to leap into them the moment concealment was no
longer necessary.

The Research approached the Ouzel Galley.  "What are you about, you lubbers?" shouted a voice
from the latter ship.  "Starboard your helm, or you will be running foul of us."

It was O'Harrall who spoke.  Owen recognised his voice.

"There is something wrong," cried another man.

"Treachery! treachery!" exclaimed several of the pirates, and two guns from the Ouzel Galley
were fired at the approaching ship.  They were well aimed.  One of the shots struck the bulwarks,
the splinters from which wounded several persons; the other flew more aft, and the traitorous
pirate, Michael O'Harrall, was seen to fall.  Not a groan escaped him.  The officers and crew
sprang to their feet, those who were below leaping on deck.

Though the wind had fallen almost to a calm, the ship had way enough on her to bring her up
alongside the Ouzel Galley.  Grappling-irons were thrown on board.  At the same time two more
shots were fired by the pirates, and although, surprised as they had been, they were seen rapidly
mustering on deck, still there was evident confusion among them. The British seamen, led by
their officers, pistol and cutlass in hand, were the next instant leaping down on the deck
of the Ouzel Galley. For a few seconds the pirates fought desperately; but, bold as most of
them were, they saw that their chance of success was gone.  Then, with fierce oaths and cries
of terror and rage, they retreated to the opposite side of the ship, and those who could threw
themselves overboard with the intention of trying to swim to the shore.

One of the last to make his escape was O'Harrall.  He had been hard-pressed by Lieutenant Tarwig,
who shouted to him to yield; but, springing on a gun and aiming a desperate cut at the lieutenant's
head (fortunately the cut was parried, or it would have finished the gallant officer), the
pirate leaped over the bulwarks, and disappeared beneath the dark waters.  Mr Tarwig jumped
up on the gun, and eagerly looked over the side to ascertain what had become of his late antagonist.
He could make out through the gloom several persons swimming away from the ship, but whether
or not one of them was O'Harrall, it was impossible to say.

Not a pirate now remained alive on the deck of the Ouzel Galley.  A dozen or more had been
cut down, and so effectually had the British seamen wielded their cutlasses that every one
of them had been killed outright.  The marines had followed the boarders, and now began firing
away at the pirates in the water; but, the darkness concealing the swimmers, no effective aim
could be taken.  As the boats on the starboard side could not be lowered while the two ships
were close together, and those on the other had gone away under Lieutenant Foley, the pirates
could not be pursued, or probably several would have been captured.

Commander Olding, knowing the treachery of which the pirates were capable, at once ordered
a search to be made below, in case they might have tried to blow up the ship; he himself hurrying
into the cabin, where he thought it possible that the prisoners might still be confined. He
soon ascertained that they were not there, but he discovered a door leading to the main hold.
Obtaining a light, he, followed by the master and Crowhurst, made his way to the part of the
hold which had before served as a refuge to Norah and her friend Ellen.

In the mean time, Norman Foley's party, with Owen, had pulled for the western side of the lagoon.
As soon as the boats reached the beach, the whole of the party leaped on shore, with the exception
of a few hands left to guard the boats.

"This way," cried Owen, dashing forward in the direction of the building which had so long
been his prison.  His fear was that O'Harrall might have reached the shore, and would carry
off Norah.  Of one thing he felt nearly sure, that O'Harrall would have imprisoned her and
her father there as the most secure place in which he could leave them; still even that was
doubtful, and he might have a long search before they could be discovered.

Norman and Gerald did their best to keep the men together, and to follow close at his heels.
At any moment they might be attacked by the pirates.  They could not tell how many of the outlaws
were collected on the island; it was probable, they thought, that there were the crews of other
vessels besides O'Harrall's followers.  Firing could be heard from the side of the harbour,
and they concluded therefore that fighting was taking place in that direction.

It had not occurred to Owen that the prisoners might have been kept on board the Ouzel Galley,
and that after all he might be disappointed by not finding Norah.  Dan and Pompey sprang forward
to his side, and assisted him in keeping to the right path, with which they were far better
acquainted than he was.  They had got close to the building, when a voice shouted in Spanish,
"Who goes there?"  The flash and report of a musket followed; the bullet whistled over their heads.

"Bedad, it's thim Spanish rascals who had charge of us," cried Dan. "Faix, but it's all right,
for the captin is sure to be there.  Give a cheer, lads, and they will know we are coming."

The seaman, without stopping to receive the order from their officers, uttered a true British
cheer, which had the effect of making the Spanish guard take to their heels; and the next instant
Owen, bursting open the outer door, was mounting the ladder which led to the loft, followed
by Gerald, Dan, and Pompey, the others pressing after them.  Quickly reaching the top, Owen
found his hand grasped by that of Captain Tracy. The next moment Norah was in his arms, while
the old captain was almost overcome with joy and astonishment at seeing his son.  For some
seconds their feelings prevented them from uttering a word, when Captain O'Brien, coming forward,
exclaimed--

"I am delighted to see you, lad, for we had well-nigh given you up as lost.  How have you managed
to make your way here?  Tell us all about it.  From hearing the firing we guessed that the
pirates must have been attacked."

Before Gerald could reply, Dan and Pompey had come up the ladder.  Mr Foley quickly made his
appearance, and gave a more succinct account of the events which had occurred than the rest
of the party would probably have been able to do.

While the lieutenant was recounting what had happened, Gerald had time to tell Norah how thankful
he was to find her again.  She could even now, however, with but difficulty utter a word. 
On being brought to the loft, she had discovered that it had been occupied by Owen, and, not
knowing that he had escaped, her fears for his safety had been unspeakable, although her father
and Captain O'Brien had endeavoured to persuade her that he must have got away during O'Harrall's
absence. O'Harrall himself refused to afford any information on the subject, apparently feeling
satisfaction at the agony the poor girl was suffering.  He had paid his prisoners two visits,
but had not, as far as they could judge, made up his mind how he should dispose of them-- although,
from some hints he had let drop that very evening, they were apprehending the worst.

Norman Foley, who was ignorant of the number of persons on the island, fearing that his party
might be attacked, thought it prudent at once to return to the boats and get on board the Research.
Norah and the two captains were perfectly willing to accompany him; and the seamen shouldering
their trunks, the party at once set off, guided by Dan and Pompey--Owen very naturally preferring
to escort Norah instead of taking the lead.  Her father and Captain O'Brien walked on either
side of them, with cutlasses in their hands and pistols in their belts, the only articles belonging
to the pirates which they had carried off.  A sharp look-out was kept on either hand, lest
any of the pirates lying in ambush might spring out and attempt to recover the prisoners. 
They, of course, supposed that the Spaniards, who had made their escape, would give the alarm.

Owen breathed more freely when they at length reached the boats.  As he looked along the shore,
he observed that all the lights in the huts had been extinguished, the inhabitants, expecting
to be attacked by the English, having probably fled.  The men in charge of the boats reported
that none had approached them, nor had they seen any persons swimming to shore.

The party quickly embarked, and were received with loud cheers, as they got alongside the Research,
when it was known that the old captain and his daughter had been recovered.

With feelings of intense satisfaction and thankfulness, Owen once again trod the deck of the
Ouzel Galley, which, though a lawful prize to the Champion's crew, Commander Olding assured
him should be delivered up to him.  The cargo with which he had sailed from Montego Bay had
long since been removed, but a large amount of, treasure was found on board which, from its
character, it was known must have been pillaged from some Spanish ship.  It would therefore
now become the property of Commander Olding and his ship's company.

Lieutenant Foley, with thirty men, was sent on board the Ouzel Galley, and every preparation
was made for her defence should the pirates venture to attack her during the night.  No attempt
of the sort, however, was made, nor indeed was a single boat seen moving across the calm waters
of the lagoon, nor could any of the inhabitants be discerned on shore.  The morning found the
two ships floating peaceably in the centre of the lagoon; and except a few huts scattered here
and there along the beach, and the dismasted vessels further up the harbour, no sign existed
of its being the pirates' stronghold.  It owed its security entirely to its remote position
and the intricacy of the channel leading to it.  Before quitting it, the commander considered
it his duty to search the vessels and to destroy the pirates' dwellings.  Perhaps, too, he
had hopes of discovering some of their booty.

An expedition was therefore sent on shore, under the command of the first lieutenant.  The
vessels, having been examined, were found to be empty; none of the huts contained any articles
of value.  All met with having been burnt to the ground, the party proceeded inland, until
they reached the large building which had so long served as the prison of Owen and his companions.
A secret door was discovered, opening from the outer room in which old Mammy had lived.  On
bursting it open an inner room was found, nearly full of booty of various descriptions.  Among
it were bales of rich silks, muslins, and cloths, cases of cutlery and casks of wine, boxes
of preserves, gold and silver ornaments, caskets of jewels, and numerous other articles.  Those
of most value, which could easily be carried off, were at once shouldered by the men, who forthwith
returned with them to the boat.  On their arrival on board, another party was despatched to
bring off the greater part of the remainder, when the store was set on fire and the rest consumed.

By this time a breeze had sprung up, and as it was important to take advantage of it, sail
was made, and the Research leading, under the pilotage of the master and Owen, assisted by
Dan and Pompey, the two vessels began to thread their way along the channel.  The lead was
of course kept going; and as they neared the more intricate part, the wind being light, a boat
was sent ahead to sound.  Thus, all dangers being avoided, they at length, just before sunset,
got clear out to sea.  Fair breezes now wafted them rapidly along.  Owen had remained on board
the Research that he might enjoy the society of Norah, who would not willingly have again been
parted from him.

The weather continued fine, and after a run of ten days the two ships entered Port Royal harbour,
and stood on until they dropped their anchors before Kingston.  They were immediately boarded
by numerous persons from the shore.  Among the first who reached the Ouzel Galley was Mr Ferris.
He was greatly astonished, at finding Norman Foley in command, and still more so at hearing
what had befallen her. 

He took an active part in the struggle between the American colonies and the mother country, and
was one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence. One of his sons was the American
minister to London a few years since.

Can any of your readers inform me why the freedom of Edinburgh was conferred upon him? In 1768
he could not have been over twenty-five years of age.

INQUIRER.

Per Centum Sign.--Will you kindly inform me why the symbol % means per centum: viz. 5 %, 10 %, &c.?

JAMES
MILLS.

Burial Service Tradition.--About forty years ago, a young man hung himself. When his body was taken
to the church for interment, the clergymen refused reading the burial service over him; his
friends took him to another parish, and the clergyman of that place refused also; they then removed
him to an adjoining one, and the clergyman received him and buried
him.

The last clergyman said, if any friend of the deceased had cut off his right hand, and laid it outside
the coffin, no clergyman then could refuse legally receiving and burying the corpse. Query, is
this true?

May I ask your readers for an answer, as it will oblige many friends.
The above happened in Derbyshire.

S. ADAMS, Curate.

Jean Bart's
Descent on Newcastle.--I find no notice, either in Sykes's Local Records,
or in Richardson's Local Historian's Table-book, of the descent made
on Newcastle in 1694 by the celebrated Jean Bart, whom the Dutch nicknamed
"De Fransch Duyvel." Somewhere or other I have seen it stated that
he returned to France with an immense booty. Perhaps some of your
north country correspondents can tell us whether any record of his
visit exists in the archives of the corporation of Newcastle or elsewhere?

WILLIAM
BROCKIE.

Russell Street, South Shields.

"The commander has already made an arrangement with her former master, Captain Massey, on the
subject," answered the lieutenant.

From the Ouzel Galley Mr Ferris proceeded on board the Research to congratulate his friends
on their escape, when he invited them all to his house in Kingston, where those who were able
to do so at once accompanied him.

Commander Olding and his officers had, of course, to report themselves to the admiral, and
to give an account of the loss of the Champion. They had to undergo the usual court-martial,
and were, as was expected, honourably acquitted.

In the mean time the Ouzel Galley, having been restored to her former owners, was quickly fitted
for sea, while the Research was purchased into the navy, and the command given to Lieutenant
Tarwig.

Commander Olding and several of his officers had made up their minds to return home by the
first opportunity, but most of the rest, as well as a portion of the Champion's crew, joined
the Research.  Of the captured booty, a handsome share was made over to Owen Massey, in consideration
of his having been instrumental in securing it.

A fleet of merchantmen being ready to sail, the Thetis frigate, on board which Commander Olding
had taken a passage, was appointed to convoy them, accompanied by the Research.  Lieutenant
Foley and Gerald very naturally preferred going home in the Ouzel Galley, The weather was fine,
and there was every prospect of a prosperous voyage.

Much of the time which Ellen might otherwise have spent in comforting her friend Fanny was,
as may be supposed, passed in the society of Norman Foley.  Norah, also, had less time to bestow
on her than might have been the case if Owen Massey had not been on board.  To Archie Sandys,
therefore, fell the duty of offering such consolation as he was able, to bestow on the young
lady.  Consequences which might not altogether have been unexpected ensued.  Before the voyage
was over Fanny had greatly recovered her spirits, and had consented, when her friend Ellen
Ferris married, to become Archie's bride.  This was the most important event of the voyage.

On a fine bright morning the Ouzel Galley sailed into the Bay of Dublin, with flags flying
at her mast-heads and mizen-peak.  She was quickly recognised as she ran up the Liffey, and
Mr Ferris's partners and the underwriters who had insured her were soon collected on board
to welcome her long-lost master and their other friends.  A dinner was shortly afterwards given
to all who had returned in her, when, to commemorate the event, and to show their satisfaction
at the result of the arbitration to which they had agreed, it was determined to form a society,
the members of which should be called the captain, officers, and crew of the "Ouzel Galley,"
the president taking the title of captain, and the other office-bearers that of officers; and
it was wisely resolved, instead of going to law, to submit in future any disputes which might
arise connected with underwriting to their arbitration.  As a mark of respect to Captain Tracy,
he was elected the first captain, Owen Massey being appointed his lieutenant.

Before many weeks had elapsed the three proposed marriages took place, Archie Sandys departing
with his bride for Scotland, while Norman Foley and Owen Massey made a tour through the south
of Ireland before going to Waterford, where they had agreed to remain for some time, to be
near Mrs Massey and Captain Tracy.  Owen would, however, have again to go to sea, but neither
he nor Norah liked to talk of the subject, and wisely forebore thinking about it.

Norman was expecting to enjoy some months on shore, when he and Gerald received orders to join
the Aeolus, 32-gun frigate, which was at that time cruising off the Irish coast.  On getting
on board they found several of their old shipmates. * * * * *

CATACOMBS AND BONE-HOUSES.

Without attempting to answer the queries of MR. GATTY, (No. 11. p. 171.) I venture to send a
note on the subject. I believe it will generally be found that the local tradition makes such collections
of bones to be "the grisly gleanings of some battlefield." One of the most noteworthy collections
of this kind that I have seen is contained in the crypt of Hythe Church, Kent, where a vast
quantity of bones are piled up with great regularity, and preserved with much care. According to a
written statement suspended in the crypt, they are the relics of Britons and Saxons slain in a
battle fought on the beach in the sixth century; the local tradition is nearly to the same effect,
but of course is of little value, as it has most likely arisen from
or been conformed to this "written chronicle;" both writing and tradition
must indeed be regarded with distrust.

It is affirmed in the neighbourhood that the bones were dug up from the beach; but I, at least,
could hear of no tradition as to the period when they were exhumed. Perhaps some resident will
ascertain whether any such exists.

The bones have all the appearance of considerable antiquity; yet they
are in excellent preservation.

The skulls are remarkably white and perfect, and are altogether a very curious collection, differing
greatly in size, form, and thickness.

The holes and fractures in many of them (made evidently during life) leave no doubt that they
belonged to persons who met with a violent death.

I will not pretend to reply to the concluding queries of your correspondent,
but I would just remark that, from what we know of the feeling of
our ancestors respecting the remains of the dead, it appears probably
that if from any cause a large quantity of human bones were found,
or were from any cause obliged to be disturbed, some ecclesiastic
or pious layman would take measures to have them removed to some consecrated
spot where they might be safe from further molestation.

The Blonde and Terpsichore at length struck their colours, but Thurot held out to the last.
The Aeolus, discharging another broadside, ran her aboard, when grappling-irons were secured
and the boarders called away, led by Norman Foley and Gerald Tracy.  Her deck already presented
the appearance of a perfect shambles, so many of her crew lay dead and dying in all directions.
A determined band still held out, headed by an officer who, by his shouts and gestures, encouraged
his men to fight till the last.  Gerald at first supposed that he must be Thurot, but a second
look convinced him that he was a much taller and darker man.  Just as the British crew sprang
on board a rifle bullet struck him on the chest, and, throwing up his sword-arm, he fell backward
on the deck, when the rest of the crew, retreating, shouted out that they yielded.  One of
the men aft immediately hauled down the French flag.

Among the slain was Thurot, who had been struck down just before the ship got alongside.

Gerald then approached the officer he had seen killed.  A glance convinced him that he was
no other than O'Harrall.  This was confirmed by Tim Maloney, who had joined the Aeolus with
him, and corroborated by some of the French prisoners, who stated that he had only a short
time before come on board the ship, having lately arrived from the West Indies.

"This will not be unsatisfactory news to Owen Massey," observed Gerald to Norman Foley.  "It
is my belief that he is the last of the O'Harralls, and Owen will have a good chance of recovering
the property of which they so unjustly deprived his family." 

My humble station prevents him from saying any thing of my person but, what would be offensive
for me to hear; and I wish not to have the loyal attachment I feel
for my Sovereign's son diminished, by knowing that he indulges in
any improper licence of conversation."



The Aeolus being paid off, Lieutenant Foley obtained his commander's rank.  When the war was
over his young wife would not allow him again to go to sea.

Gerald stuck to the service and became an admiral.

Owen Massey, having regained his paternal property, remained on shore, although he joined the
representative crew of "The Ouzel Galley," of which for many years he held the honourable post
of captain.

THE END.

