It is astonishing how little these people have altered in three hundred years, although in
that time they have changed their language and lost all knowledge of their own nationality.
They are still in manners and appearance almost pure Portuguese, very similar to those with
whom I had become acquainted on the banks of the Amazon. They live very poorly as regards their
house and furniture, but preserve a semi-European dress, and have almost all full suits of
black for Sundays. They are nominally Protestants, but Sunday evening is their grand day for
music and dancing. The men are often good hunters; and two or three times a week, deer or wild
pigs are brought to the village, which, with fish and fowls, enables them to live well. They
are almost the only people in the Archipelago who eat the great fruit-eating bats called by
us "flying foxes." These ugly creatures are considered a great delicacy, and are much sought
after. At about the beginning of the year they come in large flocks to eat fruit, and congregate
during the day on some small islands in the bay, hanging by thousands on the trees, especially
on dead ones. They can then be easily caught or knocked down with sticks, and are brought home
by basketsfull. They require to be carefully prepared, as the skin and fur has a rank end powerful
foxy odour; but they are generally cooked with abundance of spices and condiments, and are
really very good eating, something like hare. The Orang Sirani are good cooks, having a much
greater variety of savoury dishes than the Malays. Here, they live chiefly on sago as bread,
with a little rice occasionally, and abundance of vegetables and fruit.

It is a curious fact that everywhere in the Past where the Portuguese have mixed with the native
races they leave become darker in colour than either of the parent stocks. This is the case
almost always with these "Orang Sirani" in the Moluccas, and with the Portuguese of Malacca.
The reverse is the case in South America, where the mixture of the Portuguese or Brazilian
with the Indian produces the "Mameluco," who is not unfrequently lighter than either parent,
and always lighter than the Indian. The women at Batchian, although generally fairer than the
men, are coarse in features, and very far inferior in beauty to the mixed Dutch-Malay girls,
or even to many pure Malays.

The part of the village in which I resided was a grove of cocoa-nut trees, and at night, when
the dead leaves were sometimes collected together and burnt, the effect was most magnificent--the
tall stems, the fine crowns of foliage, and the immense fruit-clusters, being brilliantly illuminated
against a dark sky, and appearing like a fairy palace supported on a hundred columns, and groined
over with leafy arches. The cocoa-nut tree, when well grown, is certainly the prince of palms
both for beauty and utility.

During my very first walk into the forest at Batchian, I had seen sitting on a leaf out of
reach, an immense butterfly of a dark colour marked with white and yellow spots. I could not
capture it as it flew away high up into the forest, but I at once saw that it was a female
of a new species of Ornithoptera or "bird-winged butterfly," the pride of the Eastern tropics.
I was very anxious to get it and to find the male, which in this genus is always of extreme
beauty. During the two succeeding months I only saw it once again, and shortly afterwards I
saw the male flying high in the air at the mining village. I had begun to despair of ever getting
a specimen, as it seemed so rare and wild; till one day, about the beginning of January, I
found a beautiful shrub with large white leafy bracts and yellow flowers, a species of Mussaenda,
and saw one of these noble insects hovering over it, but it was too quick for me, and flew
away. The next clay I went again to the same shrub and succeeded in catching a female, and
the day after a fine male. I found it to be as I had expected, a perfectly new and most magnificent
species, and one of the most gorgeously coloured butterflies in the world. Fine specimens of
the male are more than seven inches across the wings, which are velvety black and fiery orange,
the latter colour replacing the green of the allied species. The beauty and brilliancy of this
insect are indescribable, and none but a naturalist can understand the intense excitement I
experienced when I at length captured it. On taking it out of my net and opening the glorious
wings, my heart began to beat violently, the blood rushed to my head, and I felt much more
like fainting than I have done when in apprehension of immediate death. I had a headache the
rest of the day, so great was the excitement produced by what will appear to most people a
very inadequate cause.

I had decided to return to Ternate in a week or two more, but this grand capture determined
me to stay on till I obtained a good series of the new butterfly, which I have since named
Ornithoptera croesus. The Mussaenda bush was an admirable place, which I could visit every
day on my way to the forest; and as it was situated in a dense thicket of shrubs and creepers,
I set my man Lahi to clear a space all round it, so that I could easily get at any insect that
might visit it. Afterwards, finding that it was often necessary to wait some time there, I
had a little seat put up under a tree by the side of it, where I came every day to eat my lunch,
and thus had half an hour's watching about noon, besides a chance as I passed it in the morning.
In this way I obtained on an average one specimen a day for a long time, but more than half
of these were females, and more than half the remainder worn or broken specimens, so that I
should not have obtained many perfect males had I not found another station for them.

As soon as I had seen them come to flowers, I sent my man Lahi with a net on purpose to search
for them, as they had also been seen at some flowering trees on the beach, and I promised him
half a day's wages extra for every good specimen he could catch. After a day or two he brought
me two very fair specimens, and told me he had caught them in the bed of a large rocky stream
that descends from the mountains to the sea abort a mile below the village. They flew down
this river, settling occasionally on stones and rocks in the water, and he was obliged to wade
up it or jump from rock to rock to get at them. I went with him one day, but found that the
stream was far too rapid and the stones too slippery for me to do anything, so I left it entirely
to him, and all the rest of the time we stayed in Batchian he used to be out all day, generally
bringing me one, and on good days two or three specimens. I was thus able to bring away with
me more than a hundred of both sexes, including perhaps twenty very fine males, though not
more than five or six that were absolutely perfect.

My daily walk now led me, first about half a mile along the sandy beach, then through a sago
swamp over a causeway of very shaky poles to the village of the Tomore people. Beyond this
was the forest with patches of new clearing, shady paths, and a considerable quantity of felled
timber. I found this a very fair collecting ground, especially for beetles. The fallen trunks
in the clearings abounded with golden Buprestidae and curious Brenthidae, and longicorns, while
in the forest I found abundance of the smaller Curculionidae, many longicorns, and some fine
green Carabidae.

Butterflies were not abundant, but I obtained a few more of the fine blue Papilio, and a number
of beautiful little Lycaenidae, as well as a single specimen of the very rare Papilio Wallacei,
of which I had taken the hitherto unique specimen in the Aru Islands.

The most interesting birds I obtained here, were the beautiful blue kingfisher, Todiramphus
diops; the fine green and purple doves, Ptilonopus superbus and P. iogaster, and several new
birds of small size. My shooters still brought me in specimens of the Semioptera Wallacei,
and I was greatly excited by the positive statements of several of the native hunters that
another species of this bird existed, much handsomer and more remarkable. They declared that
the plumage was glossy black, with metallic green breast as in my species, but that the white
shoulder plumes were twice as long, and hung down far below the body of the bird. They declared
that when hunting pigs or deer far in the forest they occasionally saw this bird, but that
it was rare. I immediately offered twelve guilders (a pound) for a specimen; but all in vain,
and I am to this day uncertain whether such a bird exists. Since I left, the German naturalist,
Dr. Bernstein, stayed many months in the island with a large staff of hunters collecting for
the Leyden Museum; and as he was not more successful than myself, we must consider either that
the bird is very rare, or is altogether a myth.

Batchian is remarkable as being the most eastern point on the globe inhabited by any of the
Quadrumana. A large black baboon-monkey (Cynopithecus nigrescens) is abundant in some parts
of the forest. This animal has bare red callosities, and a rudimentary tail about an inch long--a
mere fleshy tubercle, which may be very easily overlooked. It is the same species that is found
all over the forests of Celebes, and as none of the other Mammalia of that island extend into
Batchian I am inclined to suppose that this species has been accidentally introduced by the
roaming Malays, who often carry about with them tame monkeys and other animals. This is rendered
more probable by the fact that the animal is not found in Gilolo, which is only separated from
Batchian by a very narrow strait. The introduction may have been very recent, as in a fertile
and unoccupied island such an animal would multiply rapidly. The only other mammals obtained
were an Eastern opossum, which Dr. Gray has described as Cuscus ornatus; the little flying
opossum, Belideus ariel; a Civet cat, Viverra zebetha; and nice species of bats, most of the
smaller ones being caught in the dusk with my butterfly net as they flew about before the house.

After much delay, owing to bad weather and the illness of one of my men, I determined to visit
Kasserota (formerly the chief village), situated up a small stream, on an island close to the
north coast of Batchian; where I was told that many rare birds were found. After my boat was
loaded and everything ready, three days of heavy squalls prevented our starting, and it was
not till the 21st of March that we got away. Early next morning we entered the little river,
and in about an hour we reached the Sultan's house, which I had obtained permission to use.
It was situated on the bank of the river, and surrounded by a forest of fruit trees, among
which were some of the very loftiest and most graceful cocoa-nut palms I have ever seen. It
rained nearly all that day, and I could do little but unload and unpack. Towards the afternoon
it cleared up, and I attempted to explore in various directions, but found to my disgust that
the only path was a perfect mud swamp, along which it was almost impossible to walk, and the
surrounding forest so damp and dark as to promise little in the way of insects. I found too
on inquiry that the people here made no clearings, living entirely on sago, fruit, fish, and
game; and the path only led to a steep rocky mountain equally impracticable and unproductive.
The next day I sent my men to this hill, hoping it might produce some good birds; but they
returned with only two common species, and I myself had been able to get nothing; every little
track I had attempted to follow leading to a dense sago swamp. I saw that I should waste time
by staying here, and determined to leave the following day.

This is one of those spots so hard for the European naturalist to conceive, where with all
the riches of a tropical vegetation, and partly perhaps from the very luxuriance of that vegetation,
insects are as scarce as in the most barren parts of Europe, and hardly more conspicuous. In
temperate climates there is a tolerable uniformity in the distribution of insects over those
parts of a country in which there is a similarity in the vegetation, any deficiency being easily
accounted for by the absence of wood or uniformity of surface. The traveller hastily passing
through such a country can at once pick out a collecting ground which will afford him a fair
notion of its entomology. Here the case is different. There are certain requisites of a good
collecting ground which can only be ascertained to exist by some days' search in the vicinity
of each village. In some places there is no virgin forest, as at Djilolo and Sahoe; in others
there are no open pathways or clearings, as here. At Batchian there are only two tolerable
collecting places,--the road to the coal mines, and the new clearings made by the Tomóre people,
the latter being by far the most productive. I believe the fact to be that insects are pretty
uniformly distributed over these countries (where the forests have not been cleared away),
and are so scarce in any one spot that searching for them is almost useless. If the forest
is all cleared away, almost all the insects disappear with it; but when small clearings and
paths are made, the fallen trees in various stages of drying and decay, the rotting leaves,
the loosening bark and the fungoid growths upon it, together with the flowers that appear in
much greater abundance where the light is admitted, are so many attractions to the insects
for miles around, and cause a wonderful accumulation of species and individuals. When the entomologist
can discover such a spot, he does more in a mouth than he could possibly do by a year's search
in the depths of the undisturbed forest.

The next morning we left early, and reached the mouth of the little river in about au hour.
It flows through a perfectly flat alluvial plain, but there are hills which approach it near
the mouth. Towards the lower part, in a swamp where the salt-water must enter at high tides,
were a number of elegant tree-ferns from eight to fifteen feet high. These are generally considered
to be mountain plants, and rarely to occur on the equator at an elevation of less than one
or two thousand feet. In Borneo, in the Aru Islands, and on the banks of the Amazon, I have
observed them at the level of the sea, and think it probable that the altitude supposed to
be requisite for them may have been deduced from facts observed in countries where the plains
and lowlands are largely cultivated, and most of the indigenous vegetation destroyed. Such
is the case in most parts of Java, India, Jamaica, and Brazil, where the vegetation of the
tropics has been most fully explored.

Coming out to sea we turned northwards, and in about two hours' sail reached a few huts, called
Langundi, where some Galela men had established themselves as collectors of gum-dammar, with
which they made torches for the supply of the Ternate market. About a hundred yards back rises
a rather steep hill, and a short walk having shown me that there was a tolerable path up it,
I determined to stay here for a few days. Opposite us, and all along this coast of Batchian,
stretches a row of fine islands completely uninhabited. Whenever I asked the reason why no
one goes to live in them, the answer always was, "For fear of the Magindano pirates." Every
year these scourges of the Archipelago wander in one direction or another, making their rendezvous
on some uninhabited island, and carrying devastation to all the small settlements around; robbing,
destroying, killing, or taking captive all they nee with. Their long well-manned praus escape
from the pursuit of any sailing vessel by pulling away right in the wind's eye, and the warning
smoke of a steamer generally enables them to hide in some shallow bay, or narrow river, or
forest-covered inlet, till the danger is passed. The only effectual way to put a stop to their
depredations would be to attack them in their strongholds and villages, and compel them to
give up piracy, and submit to strict surveillance. Sir James Brooke did this with the pirates
of the north-west coast of Borneo, and deserves the thanks of the whole population of the Archipelago
for having rid them of half their enemies.

All along the beach here, and in the adjacent strip of sandy lowland, is a remarkable display
of Pandanaceae or Screw-pines. Some are like huge branching candelabra, forty or fifty feet
high, and bearing at the end of each branch a tuft of immense sword-shaped leaves, six or eight
inches wide, and as many feet long. Others have a single unbranched stem, six or seven feet
high, the upper part clothed with the spirally arranged leaves, and bearing a single terminal
fruit ac large as a swan's egg. Others of intermediate size have irregular clusters of rough
red fruits, and all have more or less spiny-edged leaves and ringed stems. The young plants
of the larger species have smooth glossy thick leaves, sometimes ten feet long and eight inches
wide, which are used all over the Moluccas and New Guinea, to make "cocoyas" or sleeping mats,
which are often very prettily ornamented with coloured patterns. Higher up on the bill is a
forest of immense trees, among which those producing the resin called dammar (Dammara sp.)
are abundant. The inhabitants of several small villages in Batchian are entirely engaged in
searching for this product, and making it into torches by pounding it and filling it into tubes
of palm leaves about a yard long, which are the only lights used by many of the natives. Sometimes
the dammar accumulates in large masses of ten or twenty pounds weight, either attached to the
trunk, or found buried in the ground at the foot of the trees. The most extraordinary trees
of the forest are, however, a kind of fig, the aerial roots of which form a pyramid near a
hundred feet high, terminating just where the tree branches out above, so that there is no
real trunk. This pyramid or cone is formed of roots of every size, mostly descending in straight
lines, but more or less obliquely-and so crossing each other, and connected by cross branches,
which grow from one to another; as to form a dense and complicated network, to which nothing
but a photograph could do justice (see illustration at Vol. I. page 130). The Kanary is also
abundant in this forest, the nut of which has a very agreeable flavour, and produces an excellent
oil. The fleshy outer covering of the nut is the favourite food of the great green pigeons
of these islands (Carpophaga, perspicillata), and their hoarse copings and heavy flutterings
among the branches can be almost continually heard.

After ten days at Langundi, finding it impossible to get the bird I was particularly in search
of (the Nicobar pigeon, or a new species allied to it), and finding no new birds, and very
few insects, I left early on the morning of April 1st, and in the evening entered a river on
the main island of Batchian (Langundi, like Kasserota, being on a distinct island), where some
Malays and Galela men have a small village, and have made extensive rice-fields and plantain
grounds. Here we found a good house near the river bank, where the water was fresh and clear,
and the owner, a respectable Batchian Malay, offered me sleeping room and the use of the verandah
if I liked to stay. Seeing forest all round within a short distance, I accepted his offer,
and the next morning before breakfast walked out to explore, and on the skirts of the forest
captured a few interesting insects.

Afterwards, I found a path which led for a mile or more through a very fine forest, richer
in palms than any I had seen in the Moluccas. One of these especially attracted my attention
from its elegance. The stein was not thicker than my wrist, yet it was very lofty, and bore
clusters of bright red fruit. It was apparently a species of Areca. Another of immense height
closely resembled in appearance the Euterpes of South America. Here also grew the fan-leafed
palm, whose small, nearly entire leaves are used to make the dammar torches, and to form the
water-buckets in universal use. During this walk I saw near a dozen species of palms, as well
as two or three Pandani different from those of Langundi. There were also some very fine climbing
ferns and true wild Plantains (Musa), bearing an edible fruit not so large as one's thumb,
and consisting of a mass of seeds just covered with pulp and skin. The people assured me they
had tried the experiment of sowing and cultivating this species, but could not improve it.
They probably did not grow it in sufficient quantity, and did not persevere sufficiently long.

Batchian is an island that would perhaps repay the researches of a botanist better than any
other in the whole Archipelago. It contains a great variety of surface and of soil, abundance
of large and small streams, many of which are navigable for some distance, and there being
no savage inhabitants, every part of it can be visited with perfect safety. It possesses gold,
copper, and coal, hot springs and geysers, sedimentary and volcanic rocks and coralline limestone,
alluvial plains, abrupt hills and lofty mountains, a moist climate, and a grand and luxuriant
forest vegetation.

The few days I stayed here produced me several new insects, but scarcely any birds. Butterflies
and birds are in fact remarkably scarce in these forests. One may walk a whole day and not
see more than two or three species of either. In everything but beetles, these eastern islands
are very deficient compared with the western (Java, Borneo, &c.), and much more so if compared
with the forests of South America, where twenty or thirty species of butterflies may be caught
every day, and on very good days a hundred, a number we can hardly reach here in months of
unremitting search. In birds there is the same difference. In most parts of tropical America
we may always find some species of woodpecker tanager, bush shrike, chatterer, trogon, toucan,
cuckoo, and tyrant-flycatcher; and a few days' active search will produce more variety than
can be here met with in as many months. Yet, along with this poverty of individuals and of
species, there are in almost every class and order, some one, or two species of such extreme
beauty or singularity, as to vie with, or even surpass, anything that even South America can
produce.

One afternoon when I was arranging my insects, and surrounded by a crowd of wondering spectators,
I showed one of them how to look at a small insect with a hand-lens, which caused such evident
wonder that all the rest wanted to see it too. I therefore fixed the glass firmly to a piece
of soft wood at the proper focus, and put under it a little spiny beetle of the genus Hispa,
and then passed it round for examination. The excitement was immense. Some declared it was
a yard long; others were frightened, and instantly dropped it, and all were as much astonished,
and made as much shouting and gesticulation, as children at a pantomime, or at a Christmas
exhibition of the oxyhydrogen microscope. And all this excitement was produced by a little
pocket lens, an inch and a half focus, and therefore magnifying only four or five times, but
which to their unaccustomed eyes appeared to enlarge a hundred fold.

On the last day of my stay here, one of my hunters succeeded in finding and shooting the beautiful
Nicobar pigeon, of which I had been so long in search. None of the residents had ever seen
it, which shows that it is rare and slay. My specimen was a female in beautiful condition,
and the glassy coppery and green of its plumage, the snow-white tail and beautiful pendent
feathers of the neck, were greatly admired. I subsequently obtained a specimen in New Guinea;
and once saw it in the Kaióa islands. It is found also in some small islands near Macassar,
in others near Borneo; and in the Nicobar islands, whence it receives its name. It is a ground
feeder, only going upon trees to roost, and is a very heavy fleshy bird. This may account far
the fact of its being found chiefly on very small islands, while in the western half of the
Archipelago, it seems entirely absent from the larger ones. Being a ground feeder it is subject
to the attacks of carnivorous quadrupeds, which are not found in the very small islands. Its
wide distribution over the whole length of the Archipelago; from extreme west to east, is however
very extraordinary, since, with the exception of a few of the birds of prey, not a single land
bird has so wide a range. Ground-feeding birds are generally deficient in power of extended
flight, and this species is so bulky and heavy that it appears at first sight quite unable
to fly a mile. A closer examination shows, however, that its wings are remarkably large, perhaps
in proportion to its size larger than those of any other pigeon, and its pectoral muscles are
immense. A fact communicated to me by the son of my friend Mr. Duivenboden of Ternate, would
show that, in accordance with these peculiarities of structure, it possesses the power of flying
long distances. Mr. D. established an oil factory on a small coral island, a hundred miles
north of New Guinea, with no intervening land. After the island had been settled a year, and
traversed in every direction, his son paid it a visit; and just as the schooner was coming
to an anchor, a bird was seen flying from seaward which fell into the water exhausted before
it could reach the shore. A boat was sent to pick it up, and it was found to be a Nicobar pigeon,
which must have come from New Guinea, and flown a hundred miles, since no such bird previously
inhabited the island.

This is certainly a very curious case of adaptation to an unusual and exceptional necessity.
The bird does not ordinarily require great powers of flight, since it lives in the forest,
feeds on fallen fruits, and roosts in low trees like other ground pigeons. The majority of
the individuals, therefore, can never make full use of their enormously powerful wings, till
the exceptional case occurs of an individual being blown out to sea, or driven to emigrate
by the incursion of some carnivorous animal, or the pressure of scarcity of food. A modification
exactly opposite to that which produced the wingless birds (the Apteryx, Cassowary, and Dodo),
appears to have here taken place; and it is curious that in both cases an insular habitat should
have been the moving cause. The explanation is probably the same as that applied by Mr. Darwin
to the case of the Madeira beetles, many of which are wingless, while some of the winged ones
have the wings better developed than the same species on the continent. It was advantageous
to these insects either never to fly at all, and thus not run the risk of being blown out to
sea, or to fly so well as to be able either to return to land, or to migrate safely to the
continent. Pad flying was worse than not flying at all. So, while in such islands as New Zealand
and Mauritius far from all land, it was safer for a ground-feeding bird not to fly at all,
and the short-winged individuals continually surviving, prepared the way for a wingless group
of birds; in a vast Archipelago thickly strewn with islands and islets it was advantageous
to be able occasionally to migrate, and thus the long and strong-winged varieties maintained
their existence longest, and ultimately supplanted all others, and spread the race over the
whole Archipelago.

Besides this pigeon, the only new bird I obtained during the trip was a rare goat-sucker (Batrachostomus
crinifrons), the only species of the genus yet found in the Moluccas. Among my insects the
best were the rare Pieris arum, of a rich chrome yellow colour, with a black border and remarkable
white antenna--perhaps the very finest butterfly of the genus; and a large black wasp-like
insect, with immense jaws like a stag-beetle, which has been named Megachile Pluto by Mr. B.
Smith. I collected about a hundred species of beetles quite new to me, but mostly very minute,
and also many rare and handsome ones which I had already found in Batchian. On the whole I
was tolerably satisfied with my seventeen days' excursion, which was a very agreeable one,
and enabled me to sea a good deal of the island. I had hired a roomy boat, and brought with
me a small table and my rattan chair. These were great comforts, as, wherever there was a roof,
I could immediately instal myself, and work and eat at ease. When I could not find accommodation
on shore I slept in the boat, which was always drawn up on the beach if we stayed for a few
days at one spot.

On my return to Batchian I packed up my collections, and prepared for my return to Ternate.
When I first came I had sent back my boat by the pilot, with two or three other men who had
been glad of the opportunity. I now took advantage of a Government boat which had just arrived
with rice for the troops, and obtained permission to return in her, and accordingly started
on the 13th of April, having resided only a week short of six months on the island of Batchian.
The boat was one of the kind called "Kora-kora," quite open, very low, and about four tons
burthen. It had outriggers of bamboo about five feet off each side, which supported a bamboo
platform extending the whole length of the vessel. On the extreme outside of this sit the twenty
rowers, while within was a convenient passage fore and aft. The middle portion of the boat
was covered with a thatch-house, in which baggage and passengers are stowed; the gunwale was
not more than a foot above water, and from the great top and side weight, and general clumsiness,
these boats are dangerous in heavy weather, and are not unfrequently lost. A triangle mast
and mat sail carried us on when the wind was favourable,--which (as usual) it never was, although,
according to the monsoon, it ought to have been. Our water, carried in bamboos, would only
last two days, and as the voyage occupied seven, we had to touch at a great many places. The
captain was not very energetic, and the men rowed as little as they pleased, or we might have
reached Ternate in three days, having had fine weather and little wind all the way.

There were several passengers besides myself: three or four Javanese soldiers, two convicts
whose time had expired (one, curiously enough, being the man who had stolen my cash-box and
keys), the schoolmaster's wife and a servant going on a visit to Ternate, and a Chinese trader
going to buy goods. We had to sleep all together in the cabin, packed pretty close; but they
very civilly allowed me plenty of room for my mattrass, and we got on very well together. There
was a little cookhouse in the bows, where we could boil our rice and make our coffee, every
one of course bringing his own provisions, and arranging his meal-times as he found most convenient.
The passage would have been agreeable enough but for the dreadful "tom-toms," or wooden drums,
which are beaten incessantly while the men are rowing. Two men were engaged constantly at them,
making a fearful din the whole voyage. The rowers are men sent by the Sultan of Ternate. They
get about threepence a day, and find their own provisions. Each man had a strong wooden "betel"
box, on which he generally sat, a sleeping-mat, and a change of clothes--rowing naked, with
only a sarong or a waistcloth. They sleep in their places, covered with their mat, which keeps
out the rain pretty well. They chew betel or smoke cigarettes incessantly; eat dry sago and
a little salt fish; seldom sing while rowing, except when excited and wanting to reach a stopping-place,
and do not talk a great deal. They are mostly Malays, with a sprinkling of Alfuros from Gilolo,
and Papuans from Guebe or Waigiou.

One afternoon we stayed at Makian; many of the men went on shore, and a great deal of plantains,
bananas, and other fruits were brought on board. We then went on a little way, and in the evening
anchored again. When going to bed for the night, I put out my candle, there being still a glimmering
lamp burning, and, missing my handkerchief, thought I saw it on a box which formed one side
of my bed, and put out my hand to take it. I quickly drew back on feeling something cool and
very smooth, which moved as I touched it. "Bring the light, quick," I cried; "here's a snake."
And there he was, sure enough, nicely coiled up, with his head just raised to inquire who had
disturbed him. It was mow necessary to catch or kill him neatly, or he would escape among the
piles of miscellaneous luggage, and we should hardly sleep comfortably. One of the ex-convicts
volunteered to catch him with his hand wrapped up in a cloth, but from the way he went about
it I saw he was nervous and would let the thing go, so I would mot allow him to make the attempt.
I them got a chopping-knife, and carefully moving my insect nets, which hung just over the
snake and prevented me getting a free blow, I cut him quietly across the back, holding him
down while my boy with another knife crushed his head. On examination, I found he had large
poison fangs, and it is a wonder he did not bite me when I first touched him.

Thinking it very unlikely that two snakes had got on board at the same time, I turned in and
went to sleep; but having all the time a vague dreamy idea that I might put my hand on another
one, I lay wonderfully still, not turning over once all night, quite the reverse of my usual
habits. The next day we reached Ternate, and I ensconced myself in my comfortable house, to
examine all my treasures, and pack them securely for the voyage home.

CHAPTER XXV. CERAM, GORAM, AND THE MATABELLO ISLANDS.

(OCTOBER 1859 To JUNE 1860.)

I LEFT Amboyna for my first visit to Ceram at three o'clock in the morning of October 29th,
after having been delayed several days by the boat's crew, who could not be got together. Captain
Van der Beck, who gave me a passage in his boat, had been running after them all day, and at
midnight we had to search for two of my men who had disappeared at the last moment. One we
found at supper in his own house, and rather tipsy with his parting libations of arrack, but
the other was gone across the bay, and we were obliged to leave without him. We stayed some
hours at two villages near the east end of Amboyna, at one of which we had to discharge some
wood for the missionaries' house, and on the third afternoon reached Captain Van der Beck's
plantation, situated at Hatosua, in that part of Ceram opposite to the island of Amboyna. This
was a clearing in flat and rather swampy forest, about twenty acres in extent, and mostly planted
with cacao and tobacco. Besides a small cottage occupied by the workmen, there was a large
shed for tobacco drying, a corner of which was offered me; and thinking from the look of the
place that I should find good collecting ground here, I fitted up temporary tables, benches,
and beds, and made all preparations for some weeks' stay. A few days, however, served to show
that I should be disappointed. Beetles were tolerably abundant, and I obtained plenty of fine
long-horned Anthribidae and pretty Longicorns, but they were mostly the same species as I had
found during my first short visit to Amboyna. There were very few paths in the forest; which
seemed poor in birds and butterflies, and day after day my men brought me nothing worth notice.
I was therefore soon obliged to think about changing my locality, as I could evidently obtain
no proper notion of the productions of the almost entirely unexplored island of Ceram by staying
in this place.

I rather regretted leaving, because my host was one of the most remarkable men and most entertaining
companions I had ever met with. He was a Fleeting by birth, and, like so many of his countrymen,
had a wonderful talent for languages.

In most of the villages of this part of Ceram are schools and native schoolmasters, and the
inhabitants have been long converted to Christianity. In the larger villages there are European
missionaries; but there is little or no external difference between the Christian and Alfuro
villages, nor, as far as I have seen, in their inhabitants. The people seem more decidedly
Papuan than those of Gilolo. They are darker in colour, and a number of them have the frizzly
Papuan hair; their features also are harsh and prominent, and the women in particular are far
less engaging than those of the Malay race. Captain Van der Beck was never tired of abusing
the inhabitants of these Christian villages as thieves, liars, and drunkards, besides being
incorrigibly lazy. In the city of Amboyna my friends Doctors Mohnike and Doleschall, as well
as most of the European residents and traders, made exactly the same complaint, and would rather
have Mahometans for servants, even if convicts, than any of the native Christians. One great
cause of this is the fact, that with the Mahometans temperance is a part of their religion,
and has become so much a habit that practically the rule is never transgressed. One fertile
source of want, and one great incentive to idleness and crime, is thus present with the one
class, but absent in the other; but besides this the Christians look upon themselves as nearly
the equals of the Europeans, who profess the same religion, and as far superior to the followers
of Islam, and are therefore prone to despise work, and to endeavour to live by trade, or by
cultivating their own land. It need hardly be said that with people in this low state of civilization
religion is almost wholly ceremonial, and that neither are the doctrines of Christianity comprehended,
nor its moral precepts obeyed. At the same time, as far as my own experience goes, I have found
the better class of "Orang Sirani" as civil, obliging, and industrious as the Malays, and only
inferior to them from their tendency to get intoxicated.

Having written to the Assistant Resident of Saparua (who has jurisdiction over the opposite
part of the coast of Ceram) for a boat to pursue my journey, I received one rather larger than
necessary with a crew of twenty men. I therefore bade adieu to my kind friend Captain Van der
Beck, and left on the evening after its arrival for the village of Elpiputi, which we reached
in two days. I had intended to stay here, but not liking the appearance of the place, which
seemed to have no virgin forest near it, I determined to proceed about twelve miles further
up the bay of Amahay, to a village recently formed, and inhabited by indigenes from the interior,
and where some extensive cacao plantations were being made by some gentlemen of Amboyna. I
reached the place (called Awaiya) the same afternoon, and with the assistance of Mr. Peters
(the manager of the plantations) and the native chief, obtained a small house, got all my things
on shore, and paid and discharged my twenty boatmen, two of whom had almost driven me to distraction
by beating tom-toms the whole voyage.

I found the people here very nearly in a state of nature, and going almost naked. The men wear
their frizzly hair gathered into a flat circular knot over the left temple, which has a very
knowing look, and in their ears cylinders of wood as thick as one's finger, and coloured red
at the ends. Armlets and anklets of woven grass or of silver, with necklaces of beads or of
small fruits, complete their attire. The women wear similar ornaments, but have their hair
loose. All are tall, with a dark brown skin, and well marked Papuan physiognomy. There is an
Amboyna schoolmaster in the village, and a good number of children attend school every morning.
Such of the inhabitants as have become Christians may be known by their wearing their hair
loose, and adopting to some extent the native Christian dress-trousers and a loose shirt. Very
few speak Malay, all these coast villages having been recently formed by inducing natives to
leave the inaccessible interior. In all the central part of Ceram there new remains only one
populous village in the mountains. Towards the east and the extreme west are a few others,
with which exceptions all the inhabitants of Ceram are collected on the coast. In the northern
and eastern districts they are mostly Mahometans, while on the southwest coast, nearest Amboyna,
they are nominal Christians. In all this part of the Archipelago the Dutch make very praiseworthy
efforts to improve the condition of the aborigines by establishing schoolmasters in every village
(who are mostly natives of Amboyna or Saparua, who have; been instructed by the resident missionaries),
and by employing native vaccinators to prevent the ravages of smallpox. They also encourage
the settlement of Europeans, and the formation of new plantations of cacao and coffee, one
of the best means of raising the condition of the natives, who thus obtain work at fair wages,
and have the opportunity of acquiring something of European tastes and habits.

My collections here did not progress much better than at my former station, except that butterflies
were a little more plentiful, and some very fine species were to be found in the morning on
the sea-beach, sitting so quietly on the wet sand that they could be caught with the fingers.
In this way I had many fine specimens of Papilios brought me by the children. Beetles, however,
were scarce, and birds still more so, and I began to think that the handsome species which
I had so often heard were found in Ceram must be entirely confined to the eastern extremity
of the island.

A few miles further worth, at the head of the Bay of Amahay, is situated the village of Makariki,
from whence there is a native path quite across the island to the north coast. My friend Mr.
Rosenberg, whose acquaintance I had made at New Guinea, and who was now the Government superintendent
of all this part of Ceram, returned from Wahai, on the north coast, after I had been three
weeks at Awaiya, and showed me some fine butterflies he had obtained on the mountain streams
in the interior. He indicated a spot about the centre of the island where he thought I might
advantageously stay a few days. I accordingly visited Makariki with him the next day, and he
instructed the chief of the village to furnish me with men to carry my baggage, and accompany
me on my excursion. As the people of the village wanted to be at home on Christmas-day, it
was necessary to start as soon as possible; so we agreed that the men should be ready in two
days, and I returned to make my arrangements.

I put up the smallest quantity of baggage possible for a six days' trip, and on the morning
of December 18th we left Makariki, with six men carrying my baggage and their own provisions,
and a lad from Awaiya, who was accustomed to catch butterflies for me. My two Amboyna hunters
I left behind to shoot and skin what birds they could while I was away. Quitting the village,
we first walked briskly for an hour through a dense tangled undergrowth, dripping wet from
a storm of the previous night, and full of mud holes. After crossing several small streams
we reached one of the largest rivers in Ceram, called Ruatan, which it was necessary to cross.
It was both deep and rapid. The baggage was first taken over, parcel by parcel, on the men's
heads, the water reaching nearly up to their armpits, and then two men returned to assist me.
The water was above my waist, and so strong that I should certainly have been carried off my
feet had I attempted to cross alone; and it was a matter of astonishment to me how the men
could give me any assistance, since I found the greatest difficulty in getting my foot down
again when I had once moved it off the bottom. The greater strength and grasping power of their
feet, from going always barefoot, no doubt gave them a surer footing in the rapid water.

After well wringing out our wet clothes and putting them on, we again proceeded along a similar
narrow forest track as before, choked with rotten leaves and dead trees, and in the more open
parts overgrown with tangled vegetation. Another hour brought us to a smaller stream flowing
in a wide gravelly bed, up which our road lay. Here w e stayed half an hour to breakfast, and
then went on, continually crossing the stream, or walking on its stony and gravelly banks,
till about noon, when it became rocky and enclosed by low hills. A little further we entered
a regular mountain-gorge, and had to clamber over rocks, and every moment cross and recross
the water, or take short cuts through the forest. This was fatiguing work; and about three
in the afternoon, the sky being overcast, and thunder in the mountains indicating an approaching
storm, we had to loon out for a camping place, and soon after reached one of Mr. Rosenberg's
old ones. The skeleton of his little sleeping-hut remained, and my men cut leaves and made
a hasty roof just as the rain commenced. The baggage was covered over with leaves, and the
men sheltered themselves as they could till the storm was over, by which time a flood came
down the river, which effectually stopped our further march, even had we wished to proceed.
We then lighted fires; I made some coffee, and my men roasted their fish and plantains, and
as soon as it was dark, we made ourselves comfortable for the night.

Starting at six the next morning, we had three hours of the same kind of walking, during which
we crossed the river at least thirty or forty times, the water being generally knee-deep. This
brought us to a place where the road left the stream, and here we stopped to breakfast. We
then had a long walk over the mountain, by a tolerable path, which reached an elevation of
about fifteen hundred feet above the sea. Here I noticed one of the smallest and most elegant
tree ferns I had ever seen, the stem being scarcely thicker than my thumb, yet reaching a height
of fifteen or twenty feet. I also caught a new butterfly of the genus Pieris, and a magnificent
female specimen of Papilio gambrisius, of which I had hitherto only found the males, which
are smaller and very different in colour. Descending the other side of the ridge, by a very
steep path, we reached another river at a spot which is about the centre of the island, and
which was to be our resting place for two or three days. In a couple of hour my men had built
a little sleeping-shed for me, about eight feet by four, with a bench of split poles, they
themselves occupying two or three smaller ones, which had been put up by former passengers.

The river here was about twenty yards wide, running over a pebbly and sometimes a rocky bed,
and bordered by steep hills with occasionally flat swampy spots between their base and the
stream. The whole country was one dense, Unbroken, and very damp and gloomy virgin forest.
Just at our resting-place there was a little bush-covered island in the middle of the channel,
so that the opening in the forest made by the river was wider than usual, and allowed a few
gleams of sunshine to penetrate. Here there were several handsome butterflies flying about,
the finest of which, however, escaped me, and I never saw it again during my stay. In the two
days and a half which we remained here, I wandered almost all day up and down the stream, searching
after butterflies, of which I got, in all, fifty or sixty specimens, with several species quite
new to me. There were many others which I saw only once, and did not capture, causing me to
regret that there was no village in these interior valleys where I could stay a month. In the
early part of each morning I went out with my gun in search of birds, and two of my men were
out almost all day after deer; but we were all equally unsuccessful, getting absolutely nothing
the whole time we were in the forest. The only good bird seen was the fine Amboyna lory, but
these were always too high to shoot; besides this, the great Moluccan hornbill, which I did
not want, was almost the only bird met with. I saw not a single ground-thrush, or kingfisher,
or pigeon; and, in fact, have never been in a forest so utterly desert of animal life as this
appeared to be. Even in all other groups of insects, except butterflies, there was the same
poverty. I bad hoped to find some rare tiger beetles, as I had done in similar situations in
Celebes; but, though I searched closely in forest, river-bed, and mountain-brook, I could find
nothing but the two common Amboyna species. Other beetles there were absolutely none.

The constant walking in water, and over rocks and pebbles, quite destroyed the two pair of
shoes I brought with me, so that, on my return, they actually fell to pieces, and the last
day I had to walk in my stockings very painfully, and reached home quite lame. On our way back
from Makariki, as on our way there, we had storm and rain at sea, and we arrived at Awaiya
late in the evening, with all our baggage drenched, and ourselves thoroughly uncomfortable.
All the time I had been in Ceram I had suffered much from the irritating bites of an invisible
acarus, which is worse than mosquitoes, ants, and every other pest, because it is impossible
to guard against them. This last journey in the forest left me covered from head to foot with
inflamed lumps, which, after my return to Amboyna, produced a serious disease, confining me
to the house for nearly two months, a not very pleasant memento of my first visit to Ceram,
which terminated with the year 1859.

It was not till the 24th of February, 1860, that I started again, intending to pass from village
to village along the coast, staying where I found a suitable locality. I had a letter from
the Governor of the Moluccas, requesting all the chiefs to supply me with boats and men to
carry me on my journey. The first boat took me in two days to Amahay, on the opposite side
of the bay to Awaiya. The chief here, wonderful to relate, did not make any excuses for delay,
but immediately ordered out the boat which was to carry me on, put my baggage on hoard, set
up mast and sails after dark, and had the men ready that nigh; so that we were actually on
our way at five the next morning,--a display of energy and activity I scarcely ever saw before
in a native chief on such an occasion. We touched at Cepa, and stayed for the night at Tamilan,
the first two Mahometan villages on the south coast of Ceram. The next day, about noon, we
reached Hoya, which was as Far as my present boat and crew were going to take me. The anchorage
is about a mile east of the village, which is faced by coral reefs, and we had to wait for
the evening tide to move up and unload the boat into the strange rotten wooden pavilion kept
for visitors.

There was no boat here large enough to take my baggage; and although two would have done very
well, the Rajah insisted upon sending four. The reason of this I found was, that there were
four small villages under his rule, and by sending a boat from each he would avoid the difficult
task of choosing two and letting off the others. I was told that at the next village of Teluti
there were plenty of Alfuros, and that I could get abundance of Tories and other birds. The
Rajah declared that black and yellow Tories and black cockatoos were found there; but I am
inclined to think he knew very well he was telling me lies, and that it was only a scheme to
satisfy me with his plan of taking me to that village, instead of a day's journey further on,
as I desired. Here, as at most of the villages, I was asked for spirits, the people being mere
nominal Mahometans, who confine their religion almost entirely to a disgust at pork, and a
few other forbidden articles of food. The next morning, after much trouble, we got our cargoes
loaded, and had a delightful row across the deep bay of Teluti, with a view of the grand central
mountain-range of Ceram. Our four boats were rowed by sixty men, with flags flying and tom-toms
beating, as well as very vigorous shouting and singing to keep up their spirits. The sea way
smooth, the morning bright, and the whole scene very exhilarating. On landing, the Orang-kaya
and several of the chief men, in gorgeous silk jackets, were waiting to receive us, and conducted
me to a house prepared for my reception, where I determined to stay a few days, and see if
the country round produced anything new.

My first inquiries were about the lories, but I could get very little satisfactory information.
The only kinds known were the ring-necked lory and the common red and green lorikeet, both
common at Amboyna. Black Tories and cockatoos were quite unknown. The Alfuros resided in the
mountains five or six days' journey away, and there were only one or two live birds to be found
in the village, and these were worthless. My hunters could get nothing but a few common birds;
and notwithstanding fine mountains, luxuriant forests, and a locality a hundred miles eastward,
I could find no new insects, and extremely few even of the common species of Amboyna and West
Ceram. It was evidently no use stopping at such a place, and I was determined to move on as
soon as possible.

The village of Teluti is populous, but straggling and very dirty. Sago trees here cover the
mountain side, instead of growing as usual in low swamps; but a closer examination shows that
they grow in swampy patches, which have formed among the loose rocks that cover the ground,
and which are kept constantly full of moisture by the rains, and by the abundance of rills
which trickle down among them. This sago forms almost the whole subsistence of the inhabitants,
who appear to cultivate nothing but a few small patches of maize and sweet potatoes. Hence,
as before explained, the scarcity of insects. The Orang-kaya has fine clothes, handsome lamps,
and other expensive European goods, yet lives every day on sago and fish as miserably as the rest.

After three days in this barren place I left on the morning of March 6th, in two boats of the
same size as those which had brought me to Teluti. With some difficulty I had obtained permission
to take these boats on to Tobo, where I intended to stay a while, and therefore got on pretty
quickly, changing men at the village of Laiemu, and arriving in a heavy rain at Ahtiago. As
there was a good deal of surf here, and likely to be more if the wind blew hard during the
night, our boats were pulled up on the beach; and after supping at the Orang-kaya's house,
and writing down a vocabulary of the language of the Alfuros, who live in the mountains inland,
I returned to sleep in the boat. Next morning we proceeded, changing men at Warenama, and again
at Hatometen, at both of which places there was much surf and no harbour, so that the men had
to go on shore and come on board by swimming. Arriving in the evening of March 7th at Batuassa,
the first village belonging to the Rajah of Tobo, and under the government of Banda, the surf
was very heavy, owing to a strong westward swell. We therefore rounded the rocky point on which
the village was situated, but found it very little better on the other side. We were obliged,
however, to go on shore here; and waiting till the people on the beach had made preparations,
by placing a row of logs from the water's edge on which to pull up our boats, we rowed as quickly
as we could straight on to them, after watching till the heaviest surfs had passed. The moment
we touched ground our men all jumped out, and, assisted by those on shore, attempted to haul
up the boat high and dry, but not having sufficient hands, the surf repeatedly broke into the
stern. The steepness of the beach, however, prevented any damage being done, and the other
boat having both crews to haul at it, was got up without difficulty.

The next morning, the water being low, the breakers were at some distance from shore, and we
had to watch for a smooth moment after bringing the boats to the water's edge, and so got safely
out to sea. At the two next villages, Tobo and Ossong, we also took in fresh men, who came
swimming through the surf; and at the latter place the Rajah came on board and accompanied
me to Kissalaut, where he has a house which he lent me during my stay. Here again was a heavy
surf, and it was with great difficulty we got the boats safely hauled up. At Amboyna I had
been promised at this season a calm sea and the wind off shore, but in this case, as in every
other, I had been unable to obtain any reliable information as to the winds and seasons of
places distant two or three days' journey. It appears, however, that owing to the general direction
of the island of Ceram (E.S.E. and W.N.W.), there is a heavy surf and scarcely any shelter
on the south coast during the west monsoon, when alone a journey to the eastward can be safely
made; while during the east monsoon, when I proposed to return along the north coast to Wahai,
I should probably find that equally exposed and dangerous. But although the general direction
of the west monsoon in the Banda sea causes a heavy swell, with bad surf on the coast, yet
we had little advantage of the wind; for, owing I suppose to the numerous bays and headlands,
we had contrary south-east or even due east winds all the way, and had to make almost the whole
distance from Amboyna by force of rowing. We had therefore all the disadvantages, and none
of the advantages, of this west monsoon, which I was told would insure me a quick and pleasant
journey.

I was delayed at Kissa-laut just four weeks, although after the first three days I saw that
it would be quite useless for me to stay, and begged the Rajah to give me a prau and men to
carry me on to Goram. But instead of getting one close at hand, he insisted on sending several
miles off; and when after many delays it at length arrived, it was altogether unsuitable and
too small to carry my baggage. Another was then ordered to be brought immediately, and was
promised in three days, but doable that time elapsed and none appeared, and we were obliged
at length to get one at the adjoining village, where it might have been so much more easily
obtained at first. Then came caulking and covering over, and quarrels between the owner and
the Rajah's men, which occupied more than another ten days, during all which time I was getting
absolutely nothing, finding this part of Ceram a perfect desert in zoology, although a most
beautiful country, and with a very luxuriant vegetation. It was a complete puzzle, which to
this day I have not been able to understand; the only thing I obtained worth notice during
my month's stay here being a few good land shells.

At length, on April 4th, we succeeded in getting away in our little boat of about four tons
burthen, in which my numerous boxes were with difficulty packed so as to leave sleeping and
cooling room. The craft could not boast an ounce of iron or a foot of rope in any part of its
construction, nor a morsel of pitch or paint in its decoration. The planks were fastened together
in the usual ingenious way with pegs and rattans. The mast was a bamboo triangle, requiring
no shrouds, and carrying a long mat sail; two rudders were hung on the quarters by rattans,
the anchor was of wood, and a long and thick rattan; served as a cable. Our crew consisted
of four men, whose pole accommodation was about three feet by four in the bows and stern, with
the sloping thatch roof to stretch themselves upon for a change. We had nearly a hundred miles
to go, fully exposed to the swell of the Banda sea, which is sometimes very considerable; but
we luckily had it calm and smooth, so that we made the voyage in comparative comfort.

On the second day we passed the eastern extremity of Ceram, formed of a group of hummocky limestone
hills; and, sailing by the islands of Kwammer and Keffing, both thickly inhabited, came in
sight of the little town of Kilwaru, which appears to rise out of the sea like a rustic Venice.
This place has really a most extraordinary appearance, as not a particle of land or vegetation
can be seen, but a long way out at sea a large village seems to float upon the water. There
is of course a small island of several acres in extent; but the houses are built so closely
all round it upon piles in the water, that it is completely hidden. It is a place of great
traffic, being the emporium for much of the produce of these Eastern seas, and is the residence
of many Bugis and Ceramese traders, and appears to have been chosen on account of its being
close to the only deep channel between the extensive shoals of Ceram-laut and those bordering
the east end of Ceram. We now had contrary east winds, and were obliged to pole over the shallow
coral reefs of Ceram-laut for nearly thirty miles. The only danger of our voyage was just at
its termination, for as we were rowing towards Manowolko, the largest of the Goram group, we
were carried out so rapidly by a strong westerly current, that I was almost certain at one
time we should pass clear of the island; in which case our situation would have been both disagreeable
and dangerous, as, with the east wind which had just set in, we might have been unable to return
for many days, and we had not a day's water on board. At the critical moment I served out some
strong spirits to my men, which put fresh vigour into their arms, and carried us out of the
influence of the current before it was too late.

MANOWOLKO, GORAM GROUP.

On arriving at Manowolko, we found the Rajah was at the opposite island of Goram; but he was
immediately sent for, and in the meantime a large shed was given for our accommodation. At
night the Rajah came, and the next day I had a visit from him, and found, as I expected, that
I had already made his acquaintance three years before at Aru. He was very friendly, and we
had a long talk; but when I begged for a boat and men to take me on to Ke, he made a host of
difficulties. There were no praus, as all had gone to Ke or Aim; and even if one were found,
there were no men, as it was the season when all were away trading. But he promised to see
about it, and I was obliged to wait. For the next two or three days there was more talking
and more difficulties were raised, and I had time to make an examination of the island and
the people.

Manowolko is about fifteen miles long, and is a mere; upraised coral-reef. Two or three hundred
yards inland rise cliffs of coral rock, in many parts perpendicular, and one or two hundred
feet high; and this, I was informed, is characteristic of the whole island, in which there
is no other kind of rock, and no stream of water. A few cracks and chasms furnish paths to
the top of these cliffs, where there is an open undulating country, in which the chief vegetable
grounds of the inhabitants are situated.

The people here--at least the chief men--were of a much purer Malay race than the Mahometans
of the mainland of Ceram, which is perhaps due to there having been no indigenes on these small
islands when the first settlers arrived. In Ceram, the Alfuros of Papuan race are the predominant
type, the Malay physiognomy being seldom well marked; whereas here the reverse is the case,
and a slight infusion of Papuan on a mixture of Malay and Bugis has produced a very good-looking
set of people. The lower class of the population consist almost entirely of the indigenes of
the adjacent island. They are a fine race, with strongly-marked Papuan features, frizzly hair,
and brown complexions. The Goram language is spoken also at the east end of Ceram, and in the
adjacent islands. It has a general resemblance to the languages of Ceram, but possesses a peculiar
element which I have not met with in other languages of the Archipelago.

After great delay, considering the importance of every day at this time of year, a miserable
boat and five men were found, and with some difficulty I stowed away in it such baggage as
it was absolutely necessary for me to take, leaving scarcely sitting or sleeping room. The
sailing qualities of the boat were highly vaunted, and I was assured that at this season a
small one was much more likely to succeed in making the journey. We first coasted along the
island, reaching its eastern extremity the following morning (April 11th), and found a strong
W. S.W. wind blowing, which just allowed us to lay across to the Matabello Islands, a distance
little short of twenty miles. I did not much like the look of the heavy sky and rather rough
sea, and my men were very unwilling to make the attempt; but as we could scarcely hope for
a better chance, I insisted upon trying. The pitching and jerking of our little boat, soon
reduced me to a state of miserable helplessness, and I lay down, resigned to whatever might
happen. After three or four hours, I was told we were nearly over; but when I got up, two hours
later, just as the sun was setting, I found we were still a good distance from the point, owing
to a strong current which had been for some time against us. Night closed in, and the wind
drew more ahead, so we had to take in sail. Then came a calm, and we rowed and sailed as occasion
offered; and it was four in the morning when we reached the village of Kisslwoi, not having
made more than three miles in the last twelve hours.

MATABELLO ISLANDS.

At daylight I found we were; in a beautiful little harbour, formed by a coral reef about two
hundred yards from shore, and perfectly secure in every wind. Having eaten nothing since the
previous morning, we cooked our breakfast comfortably on shore, and left about noon, coasting
along the two islands of this group, which lie in the same line, and are separated by a narrow
channel. Both seem entirely formed of raised coral rock; but them has been a subsequent subsidence,
as shaven by the barrier reef which extends all along them at varying distances from the shore,
This reef is sometimes only marked by a. line of breakers when there is a little swell on the
sea; in other places there is a ridge of dead coral above the water, which is here and there
high enough to support a few low bushes. This was the first example I had met with of a true
barrier reef due to subsidence, as has been so clearly shown by Mr. Darwin. In a sheltered
archipelago they will seldom be distinguishable, from the absence of those huge rolling waves
and breakers which in the wide ocean throw up a barrier of broken coral far above the usual
high-water mark, while here they rarely rise to the surface.

On reaching the end of the southern island, called Uta, we were kept waiting two days for a
wind that would enable us to pass over to the next island, Teor, and I began to despair of
ever reaching Ke, and determined on returning. We left with a south wind, which suddenly changed
to north-east, and induced me to turn again southward in the hopes that this was the commencement
of a few days' favourable weather. We sailed on very well in the direction of Teor for about
an hour, after which the wind shifted to WSW., and we were driven much out of our course, and
at nightfall found ourselves in the open sea, and full ten miles to leeward of our destination.
My men were now all very much frightened, for if we went on we might be a. week at sea in our
little open boat, laden almost to the water's edge; or we might drift on to the coast of New
Guinea, in which case we should most likely all be murdered. I could not deny these probabilities,
and although I showed them that we could not get back to our starting-point with the wind as
it was, they insisted upon returning. We accordingly put about, and found that we could lay
no nearer to Uta than to Teor; however, by great good luck, about ten o'clock we hit upon a
little coral island, and lay under its lee till morning, when a favourable change of wind brought
us back to Uta, and by evening (April 18th) we reached our first anchorage in Matabello, where
I resolved to stay a few days, and then return to Goram. It way with much regret that I gave
up my trip to Ke and the intervening islands, which I had looked forward to as likely to make
up for my disappointment in Ceram, since my short visit on my voyage to Aru had produced me
so many rare and beautiful insects.

The natives of Matabello are almost entirely occupied in making cocoanut oil, which they sell
to the Bugis and Goram traders, who carry it to Banda and Amboyna. The rugged coral rock seems
very favourable to the growth of the cocoa-nut palm, which abounds over the whole island to
the very highest points, and produces fruit all the year round. Along with it are great numbers
of the areca or betel-nut palm, the nuts of which are sliced, dried, and ground into a paste,
which is much used by the betel-chewing Malays and Papuans. All the little children here even
such as can just run alone, carried between their lips a mass of the nasty-looking red paste,
which is even more disgusting than to see them at the same age smoking cigars, which is very
common even before they are weaned. Cocoa-nuts, sweet potatoes, an occasional sago cake, and
the refuse nut after the oil has been extracted by boiling, form the chief sustenance of these
people; and the effect of this poor and unwholesome diet is seen in the frequency of eruptions
and scurfy skin diseases, and the numerous sores that disfigure the faces of the children.

The villages are situated on high and rugged coral peaks, only accessible by steep narrow paths,
with ladders and bridges over yawning chasms. They are filthy with rotten husks and oil refuse,
and the huts are dark, greasy, and dirty in the extreme. The people are wretched ugly dirty
savages, clothed in unchanged rags, and living in the most miserable manner, and as every drop
of fresh water has to be brought up from the beach, washing is never thought of; yet they are
actually wealthy, and have the means of purchasing all the necessaries and luxuries of life.
Fowls are abundant, and eggs were given me whenever I visited the villages, but these are never
eaten, being looked upon as pets or as merchandise. Almost all of the women wear massive gold
earrings, and in every village there are dozens of small bronze cannon lying about on the ground,
although they have cost on the average perhaps £10 a piece. The chief men of each village came
to visit me, clothed in robes of silk and flowered satin, though their houses and their daily
fare are no better than those of the ether inhabitants. What a contrast between these people
and such savages as the best tribes of bill. Dyaks in Borneo, or the Indians of the Uaupes
in South America, living on the banks of clear streams, clean in their persons and their houses,
with abundance of wholesome food, and exhibiting its effect in healthy shins and beauty of
form and feature! There is in fact almost as much difference: between the various races of
savage as of civilized peoples, and we may safely affirm that the better specimens of the former
are much superior to the lower examples of the latter class.

One of the few luxuries of Matabello is the palm wine; which is the fermented sap from the
flower stains of the cocoa-net. It is really a very mice drink, more like cyder than beer,
though quite as intoxicating as the latter. Young cocoa-nuts are also very abundant, so that
anywhere in the island it is only necessary to go a few yards to find a delicious beverage
by climbing up a tree for it. It is the water of the young fruit that is drunk, before the
pulp has hardened; it is then more abundant, clear, and refreshing, and the thin coating of
gelatinous pulp is thought a treat luxury. The water of full-brown cocoa-nuts is always thrown
away as undrinkable, although it is delicious in comparison with that of the old dry nuts which
alone we obtain in this country. The cocoa-nut pulp I did not like at first; but fruits are
so scarce, except at particular seasons, that one soon learns to appreciate anything of a fruity
nature.

Many persons in Europe are under the impression that fruits of delicious flavour abound in
the tropical forests, and they will no doubt be surprised to learn that the truly wild fruits
of this brand and luxuriant archipelago, the vegetation of which will vie with that of any
part of the world, are in almost every island inferior in abundance and duality to those of
Britain. Wild strawberries and raspberries are found in some places, but they are such poor
tasteless things as to be hardly worth eating, and there is nothing to compare with our blackberries
and whortleberries. The kanary-nut may be considered equal to a hazel-nut, but I have met with
nothing else superior to our crabs, oar haws, beech-nuts, wild plums, and acorns; fruits which
would be highly esteemed by the natives of these islands, and would form an important part
of their sustenance. All the fine tropical fruits are as much cultivated productions as our
apples, peaches, and plums, and their wild prototypes, when found, are generally either tasteless
or uneatable.

The people of Matabello, like those of most of the Mahometan villages of East Ceram and Goram,
amused me much by their strange ideas concerning the Russian war. They believe that the Russians
were not only most thoroughly beaten by the Turks, but were absolutely conquered, and all converted
to Islamism! And they can hardly be convinced that such is not the case, and that had it not
been for the assistance of France and England, the poor Sultan world have fared ill. Another
of their motions is, that the Turks are the largest and strongest people in the world--in fact
a race of giants; that they eat enormous quantities of meat, and are a most ferocious and irresistible
nation. Whence such strangely incorrect opinions could have arisen it is difficult to understand,
unless they are derived from Arab priests, or hadjis returned from Mecca, who may have heard
of the ancient prowess of the Turkish armies when they made all Europe tremble, and suppose
that their character and warlike capacity must be the same at the present time.

GORAM

A steady south-east wind having set in, we returned to Manowolko on the 25th of April, and
the day after crossed over to Ondor, the chief village of Goram.

Around this island extends, with few interruptions, an encircling coral reef about a quarter
of a mile from the shore, visible as a stripe of pale green water, but only at very lowest
ebb-tides showing any rock above the surface. There are several deep entrances through this
reef, and inside it there is hood anchorage in all weathers. The land rises gradually to a
moderate height, and numerous small streams descend on all sides. The mere existence of these
streams would prove that the island was not entirely coralline, as in that case all the water
would sink through the porous rock as it does at Manowolko and Matabello; but we have more
positive proof in the pebbles and stones of their beds, which exhibit a variety of stratified
crystalline rocks. About a hundred yards from the beach rises a wall of coral rock, ten or
twenty feet high, above which is an undulating surface of rugged coral, which slopes downward
towards the interior, and then after a slight ascent is bounded by a second wall of coral.
Similar walls occur higher up, and coral is found on the highest part of the island.

This peculiar structure teaches us that before the coral was formed land existed in this spot;
that this land sunk gradually beneath the waters, but with intervals of rest, during which
encircling reef's were formed around it at different elevations; that it then rose to above
its present elevation, and is now again sinking. We infer this, because encircling reefs are
a proof of subsidence; and if the island were again elevated about a hundred feet, what is
now the reef and the shallow sea within it would form a wall of coral rock, and an undulating
coralline plain, exactly similar to those that still exist at various altitudes up to the summit
of the island. We learn also that these changes have taken place at a comparatively recent
epoch, for the surface of the coral has scarcely suffered from the action of the weather, and
hundreds of sea-shells, exactly resembling those still found upon the beach, and many of them
retaining their gloss and even their colour, are scattered over the surface of the island to
near its summit.

Whether the Goram group formed originally part of New Guinea or of Ceram it is scarcely possible
to determine, and its productions will throw little light upon the question, if, as I suppose,
the islands have been entirely submerged within the epoch of existing species of animals, as
in that case it must owe its present fauna and flora to recent immigration from surrounding
lands; and with this view its poverty in species very well agrees. It possesses much in common
with East Ceram, but at the same time has a good deal of resemblance to the Ke Islands and
Banda. The fine pigeon, Carpophaga concinna, inhabits Ke, Banda, Il-Iatabello, and Goram, and
is replaced by a distinct species, C. neglecta, in Ceram. The insects of these four islands
have also a common facies--facts which seem to indicate that some more extensive land has recently
disappeared from the area they now occupy, and has supplied them with a few of its peculiar
productions.

The Goram people (among whom I stayed a month) are a race of traders. Every year they visit
the Tenimber, Ke, and Aru Islands, the whole north-west coast of New Guinea from Oetanata to
Salwatty, and the island of Waigiou and Mysol. They also extend their voyages to Tidore and
Ternate, as well as to Banda and Amboyna, Their praus are all made by that wonderful race of
boatbuilders, the Ke islanders, who annually turn out some hundreds of boats, large and small,
which can hardly be surpassed for beauty of form and goodness of workmanship, They trade chiefly
in tripang, the medicinal mussoi bark, wild nutmegs, and tortoiseshell, which they sell to
the Bugis traders at Ceram-laut or Aru, few of them caring to take their products to any other
market. In other respects they are a lazy race, living very poorly, and much given to opium
smoking. The only native manufactures are sail-matting, coarse cotton cloth, and pandanus-leaf
boxes, prettily stained and ornamented with shell-work.

In the island of Goram, only eight or ten miles long, there are about a dozen Rajahs, scarcely
better off than the rest of the inhabitants, and exercising a mere nominal sway, except when
any order is received from the Dutch Government, when, being backed by a higher power, they
show a little more strict authority. My friend the Rajah of Ammer (commonly called Rajah of
Goram) told me that a few years ago, before the Dutch had interfered in the affairs of the
island, the trade was not carried on so peaceably as at present, rival praus often fighting
when on the way to the same locality, or trafficking in the same village. Now such a thing
is never thought of-one of the good effects of the superintendence of a civilized government.
Disputes between villages are still, however, sometimes settled by fighting, and I one day
saw about fifty men, carrying long guns and heavy cartridge-belts, march through the village.
They had come from the other side of the island on some question of trespass or boundary, and
were prepared for war if peaceable negotiations should fail.

While at Manowolko I had purchased for 100 florins (£9.) a small prau, which was brought over
the next day, as I was informed it was more easy to have the necessary alterations made in
Goram, where several Ke workmen were settled.

As soon as we began getting my prau ready I was obliged to give up collecting, as I found that
unless I was constantly on the spot myself very little work would be clone. As I proposed making
some long voyages in this boat, I determined to fit it up conveniently, and was obliged to
do all the inside work myself, assisted by my two Amboynese boys. I had plenty of visitors,
surprised to see a white man at work, and much astonished at the novel arrangements I was making
in one of their native vessels. Luckily I had a few tools of my own, including a small saw
and some chisels, and these were now severely tried, cutting and fitting heavy iron-wood planks
for the flooring and the posts that support the triangular mast. Being of the best London make,
they stood the work well, and without them it would have been impossible for me to have finished
my boat with half the neatness, or in double the time. I had a Ke workman to put in new ribs,
for which I bought nails of a Bugis trader, at 8d. a pound. My gimlets were, however, too small;
and having no augers we were obliged to bore all the holes with hot irons, a most tedious and
unsatisfactory operation.

Five men had engaged to work at the prau till finished, and then go with me to Mysol, Waigiou,
and Ternate. Their ideas of work were, however, very different from mine, and I had immense
difficulty with them; seldom more than two or three coming together, and a hundred excuses
being given for working only half a day when they did come. Yet they were constantly begging
advances of money, saying they had nothing to eat. When I gave it them they were sure to stay
away the next day, and when I refused any further advances some of them declined working any
more. As the boat approached completion my difficulties with the men increased. The uncle of
one had commenced a war, or sort of faction fight, and wanted his assistance; another's wife
was ill, and would not let him come; a third had fever and ague, and pains in his head and
back; and a fourth had an inexorable creditor who would not let him go out of his sight. They
had all received a month's wages in advance; and though the amount was not large, it was necessary
to make them pay it back, or I should get any men at all. I therefore sent the village constable
after two, and kept them in custody a day, when they returned about three-fourths of what they
owed me. The sick man also paid, and the steersman found a substitute who was willing to take
his debt, and receive only the balance of his wages.

About this time we had a striking proof of the dangers of New Guinea trading. Six men arrived
at the village in a small boat almost starved, having escaped out of two praus, the remainder
of whose crews (fourteen in number) had been murdered by the natives of New Guinea. The praus
had left this village a few months before, and among the murdered men were the Rajah's son,
and the relation or slaves of many of the inhabitants. The cry of lamentation that arose when
the news arrived was most distressing. A score of women, who had lost husbands, brothers, sons,
or more distant relatives, set up at once the most dismal shrieks and groans and wailings,
which continued at intervals till late at night; and as the chief houses in the village were
crowded together round that which I occupied, our situation was anything but agreeable.

It seems that the village where the attack took place (nearly opposite the small island of
Lakahia) is known to be dangerous, and the vessels had only gone there a few days before to
buy some tripang. The crew were living on shore, the praus being in a small river close by,
and they were attacked and murdered in the day-time while bargaining with the Papuans. The
six men who survived were on board the praus, and escaped by at once setting into the small
boat and rowing out to sea.

This south-west part of New Guinea, known to the native traders as "Papua Kowiyee" and "Papua
Onen," is inhabited by the most treacherous and bloodthirsty tribes. It is in these districts
that the commanders and portions of the crews of many of the early discovery ships were murdered,
and scarcely a year now passes but some lives are lost. The Goram and Ceram traders are themselves
generally inoffensive; they are well acquainted with the character of these natives, and are
not likely to provoke an attack by any insults or open attempt at robbery or imposition. They
are accustomed to visit the same places every year, and the natives can have no fear of them,
as may be alleged in excuse for their attacks on Europeans. In other extensive districts inhabited
by the same Papuan races, such as Mysol, Salwatty, Waigiou, and some parts of the adjacent
coast, the people have taken the first step in civilization, owing probably to the settlement
of traders of mixed breed among them, and for many years no such attacks have taken place.
On the south-west coast, and in the large island of Jobie, however, the natives are in a very
barbarous condition, and tale every opportunity of robbery and murder,--a habit which is confirmed
by the impunity they experience, owing to the vast extent of wild mountain and forest country
forbidding all pursuit or attempt at punishment. In the very same village, four years before,
more than fifty Goram men were murdered; and as these savages obtain an immense booty in the
praus and all their appurtenances, it is to be feared that such attacks will continue to be
made at intervals as long as traders visit the same spots and attempt no retaliation. Punishment
could only be inflicted on these people by very arbitrary measures, such as by obtaining possession
of some of the chiefs by stratagem, and rendering them responsible for the capture of the murderers
at the peril of their own heads. But anything of this kind would be done contrary to the system
adopted by the Dutch Government in its dealings with natives.

GORAM TO WAHAI IN CERAM.

When my boat was at length launched and loaded, I got my men together, and actually set sail
the next day (May 27th), much to the astonishment of the Goram people, to whom such punctuality
was a novelty. I had a crew of three men and a boy, besides my two Amboyna lads; which was
sufficient for sailing, though rather too few if obliged to row much. The next day was very
wet, with squalls, calms, and contrary winds, and with some difficulty we reached Kilwaru,
the metropolis of the Bugis traders in the far East. As I wanted to make some purchases, I
stayed here two days, and sent two of my boxes of specimens by a Macassar prau to be forwarded
to Ternate, thus relieving myself of a considerable incumbrance. I bought knives, basins, and
handkerchiefs for barter, which with the choppers, cloth, and beads I had brought with me,
made a pretty good assortment. I also bought two tower muskets to satisfy my crew, who insisted
on the necessity of being armed against attacks of pirates; and with spices and a few articles
of food for the voyage nearly my last doit was expended.

The little island of Kilwaru is a mere sandbank, just large enough to contain a small village,
and situated between the islands of Ceram-laut, and Kissa--straits about a third of a mile
wide separating it from each of them. It is surrounded by coral reefs, and offers good anchorage
in both monsoons. Though not more than fifty yards across, and not elevated more than three
or four feet above the highest tides, it has wells of excellent drinking water--a singular
phenomenon, which would seem to imply deep-seated subterranean channels connecting it with
other islands. These advantages, with its situation in the centre of the Papuan trading district,
lead to its being so much frequented by the Bugis traders. Here the Goram men bring the produce
of their little voyages, which they exchange for cloth, sago cakes, and opium; and the inhabitants
of all the surrounding islands visit it with the game object. It is the rendezvous of the praus
trading to various parts of New Guinea, which here assort and dry their cargoes, and refit
for the voyage home. Tripang and mussoi bark are the most bulky articles of produce brought
here, with wild nutmegs, tortoiseshell, pearls, and birds of Paradise; in smaller quantities.
The villagers of the mainland of Ceram bring their sago, which is thus distributed to the islands
farther east, while rice from Bali and Macassar can also be purchased at a moderate price.
The Goram men come here for their supplies of opium, both for their own consumption and for
barter in Mysol and Waigiou, where they have introduced it, and where the chiefs and wealthy
men are passionately fond of it. Schooners from Bali come to buy Papuan slaves, while the sea-wandering
Bugis arrive from distant Singapore in their lumbering praus, bringing thence the produce of
the Chinamen's workshops and Kling's bazaar, as well as of the looms of Lancashire and Massachusetts.

One of the Bugis traders who had arrived a few days before from Mysol, brought me news of my
assistant Charles Allen, with whom he was well acquainted, and who, he assured me; was making
large collections of birds and insects, although he had not obtained any birds of Paradise;
Silinta, where he was staying, not being a good place for them. This was on the whole satisfactory,
and I was anxious to reach him as soon as possible.

Leaving Kilwaru early in the morning of June 1st, with a strong east wind we doubled the point
of Ceram about noon, the heavy sea causing my prau to roll abort a good deal, to the damage
of our crockery. As bad weather seemed coming on, we got inside the reefs and anchored opposite
the village of Warns-warns to wait for a change.

The night was very squally, and though in a good harbour we rolled and jerked uneasily; but
in the morning I had greater cause for uneasiness in the discovery that our entire Goram crew
had decamped, taking with them all they possessed and a little more, and leaving us without
any small boat in which to land. I immediately told my Amboyna men to load and fire the muskets
as a signal of distress, which was soon answered by the village chief sending off a boat, which
took me on shore. I requested that messengers should be immediately sent to the neighbouring
villages in quest of the fugitives, which was promptly done. My prau was brought into a small
creek, where it could securely rest in the mud at low water, and part of a house was given
me in which T could stay for a while. I now found my progress again suddenly checked, just
when I thought I had overcome my chief difficulties. As I had treated my men with the greatest
kindness, and had given them almost everything they had asked for, I can impute their running
away only to their being totally unaccustomed to the restraint of a European master, and to
some undefined dread of my ultimate intentions regarding them. The oldest man was an opium
smoker, and a reputed thief, but I had been obliged to take him at the last moment as a substitute
for another. I feel sure it was he who induced the others to run away, and as they knew the
country well, and had several hours' start of us, there was little chance of catching them.

We were here in the great sago district of East Ceram which supplies most of the surrounding
islands with their daily bread, and during our week's delay I had an opportunity of seeing
the whole process of making it, and obtaining some interesting statistics. The sago tree is
a palm, thicker and larger than the cocoa-nut tree, although rarely so tall, and having immense
pinnate spiny leaves, which completely cover the trunk till it is many years old. It has a
creeping root-stem like the Nipa palm, and when about ten or fifteen years of age sends up
an immense terminal spike of flowers, after which the tree dies. It grows in swamps, or in
swampy hollows on the rocky slopes of hills, where it seems to thrive equally well as when
exposed to the influx of salt or brackish water. The midribs of the immense leaves form one
of the most useful articles in these lands, supplying the place of bamboo, to which for many
purposes they are superior. They are twelve or fifteen feet long, and, when very fine, as thick
in the lower part as a man's leg. They are very light, consisting entirely of a firm pith covered
with a hard thin rind or bark. Entire houses are built of these; they form admirable roofing-poles
for thatch; split and well-supported, they do for flooring; and when chosen of equal size,
and pegged together side by side to fill up the panels of framed wooden horses, they have a
very neat appearance, and make better walls and partitions than boards, as they do not shrink,
require no paint or varnish, and are not a quarter the expense. When carefully split and shaved
smooth they are formed into light boards with pegs of the bark itself, and are the foundation
of the leaf-covered boxes of Goram. All the insect-boxes I used in the Moluccas were thus made
at Amboyna, and when covered with stout paper inside and out, are strong, light, and secure
the insect-pins remarkably well. The leaflet of the sago folded and tied side by side on the
smaller midribs form the "atap" or thatch in universal use, while the product of the trunk
is the staple food of some= hundred thousands of men.

When sago is to be made, a full-grown tree is selected just before it is going to flower. It
is cut down close to the ground, the leaves and leafstalks cleared away, and a broad strip
of the bark taken off the upper side of the trunk. This exposes the pithy matter, which is
of a rusty colour near the bottom of the tree, but higher up pure white, about as hard as a
dry apple, but with woody fibre running through it about a quarter of an inch apart. This pith
is cut or broken down into a coarse powder by means of a tool constructed for the purpose--a
club of hard and heavy wood, having a piece of sharp quartz rock firmly imbedded into its blunt
end, and projecting about half an inch. By successive blows of this, narrow strips of the pith
are cut away, and fall down into the cylinder formed by the bark. Proceeding steadily on, the
whole trunk is cleared out, leaving a skin not more than half an inch in thickness. This material
is carried away (in baskets made of the sheathing bases of the leaves) to the nearest water,
where a washing-machine is put up, which is composed almost entirely of the saga tree itself.
The large sheathing bases of the leaves form the troughs, and the fibrous covering from the
leaf-stalks of the young cocoa-nut the strainer. Water is poured on the mass of pith, which
is kneaded and pressed against the strainer till the starch is all dissolved and has passed
through, when the fibrous refuse is thrown away, and a fresh basketful put in its place. The
water charged with sago starch passes on to a trough, with a depression in the centre, where
the sediment is deposited, the surplus water trickling off by a shallow outlet. When the trough
is nearly full, the mass of starch, which has a slight reddish tinge, is made into cylinders
of about thirty pounds' weight, and neatly covered with sago leaves, and in this state is sold
as raw sago.

Boiled with water this forms a thick glutinous mass, with a rather astringent taste, and is
eaten with salt, limes, and chilies. Sago-bread is made in large quantities, by baking it into
cakes in a small clay oven containing six or eight slits side by side, each about three-quarters
of an inch wide, and six or eight inches square. The raw sago is broken up, dried in the sun,
powdered, and finely sifted. The oven is heated over a clear fire of embers, and is lightly
filled with the sago-powder. The openings are then covered with a flat piece of sago bark,
and in about five minutes the cakes are turned out sufficiently baked. The hot cakes are very
nice with butter, and when made with the addition of a little sugar and grated cocoa-nut are
quite a delicacy. They are soft, and something like corn-flour cakes, but leave a slight characteristic
flavour which is lost in the refined sago we use in this country. When not wanted for immediate
use, they are dried for several days in the sun, and tied up in bundles of twenty. They will
then keep for years; they are very hard, and very rough and dry, but the people are used to
them from infancy, and little children may be seen gnawing at them as contentedly as ours with
their bread-and-butter. If dipped in water and then toasted, they become almost as good as
when fresh baked; and thus treated they were my daily substitute for bread with my coffee.
Soaked and boiled they make a very good pudding or vegetable, and served well to economize
our rice, which is sometimes difficult to get so far east.

It is truly an extraordinary sight to witness a whole tree-trunk, perhaps twenty feet long
and four or five in circumference, converted into food with so little labour and preparation.
A good-sized tree will produce thirty tomans or bundles of thirty pounds each, and each toman
will make sixty cakes of three to the pound. Two of these cakes are as much as a man can eat
at one meal, and five are considered a full day's allowance; so that, reckoning a tree to produce
1,800 cakes, weighing 600 pounds, it will supply a man with food for a whole year. The labour
to produce this is very moderate. Two men will finish a tree in five days, and two women will
bake the whole into cakes in five days more; but the raw sago will keep very well, and can
be baked as wanted, so that we may estimate that in ten days a man may produce food for the
whole year. This is on the supposition that he possesses sago trees of his own, for they are
now all private property. If he does not, he has to pay about seven and sixpence for one; and
as labour here is five pence a day, the total cost of a year's food for one man is about twelve
shillings. The effect of this cheapness of food is decidedly prejudicial, for the inhabitants
of the sago countries are never so well off as those where rice is cultivated. Many of the
people here have neither vegetables nor fruit, but live almost entirely on sago and a little
fish. Having few occupations at home, they wander about on petty trading or fishing expeditions
to the neighbouring islands; and as far as the comforts of life are concerned, are much inferior
to the wild hill-Dyaks of Borneo, or to many of the more barbarous tribes of the Archipelago.

The country round Warus-warus is low and swampy, and owing to the absence of cultivation there
were scarcely any paths leading into the forest. I was therefore unable to collect much during
my enforced stay, and found no rare birds or insects to improve my opinion of Ceram as a collecting
ground. Finding it quite impossible to get men here to accompany me on the whole voyage, I
was obliged to be content with a crew to take me as far as Wahai, on the middle of the north
coast of Ceram, and the chief Dutch station in the island. The journey took us five days, owing
to calms and light winds, and no incident of any interest occurred on it, nor did I obtain
at our stopping places a single addition to my collections worth naming. At Wahai, which I
reached on the 15th of June, I was hospitably received by the Commandant and my old friend
Herr Rosenberg, who was now on an official visit here. He lent me some money to pay my men,
and I was lucky enough to obtain three others willing to make the voyage with me to Ternate,
and one more who was to return from Mysol. One of my Amboyna lads, however, left me, so that
I was still rather short of hands.

I found here a letter from Charles Allen, who was at Silinta in Mysol, anxiously expecting
me, as he was out of rice and other necessaries, and was short of insect-pins. He was also
ill, and if I did not soon come would return to Wahai.

As my voyage from this place to Waigiou was among islands inhabited by the Papuan race, and
was an eventful and disastrous one, I will narrate its chief incidents in a separate chapter
in that division of my work devoted to the Papuan Islands. I now have to pass over a year spent
in Waigiou and Timor, in order to describe my visit to the island of Bouru, which concluded
my explorations of the Moluccas.

CHAPTER XXVI. BOURU.

MAY AND JUNE 1861.

I HAD long wished to visit the large island of Bouru, which lies due west of Ceram, and of
which scarcely anything appeared to be known to naturalists, except that it contained a babirusa
very like that of Celebes. I therefore made arrangements for staying there two months after
leaving Timor Delli in 1861. This I could conveniently do by means of the Dutch mail-steamers,
which make a monthly round of the Moluccas.

We arrived at the harbour of Cajeli on the 4th of May; a gun was fired, the Commandant of the
fort came alongside in a native boat to receive the post-packet, and took me and my baggage
on shore, the steamer going off again without coming to an anchor. We went to the horse of
the Opzeiner, or overseer, a native of Amboyna--Bouru being too poor a place to deserve even
an Assistant Resident; yet the appearance of the village was very far superior to that of Delli,
which possesses "His Excellency the Governor," and the little fort, in perfect order, surrounded
by neat brass-plots and straight walks, although manned by only a dozen Javanese soldiers with
an Adjutant for commander, was a very Sebastopol in comparison with the miserable mud enclosure
at Delli, with its numerous staff of Lieutenants, Captain, and Major. Yet this, as well as
most of the forts in the Moluccas, was originally built by the Portuguese themselves. Oh! Lusitania,
how art thou fallen!

While the Opzeiner was reading his letters, I took a walk round the village with a guide in
search of a horse. The whole place was dreadfully damp and muddy, being built in a swamp with
not a spot of ground raised a foot above it, and surrounded by swamps on every side. The houses
were mostly well built, of wooden framework filled in with gaba-gaba (leaf-stems of the sago-palm),
but as they had no whitewash, and the floors were of bare black earth like the roads, and generally
on the same level, they were extremely damp and gloomy. At length I found one with the floor
raised about a foot, and succeeded in making a bargain with the owner to turn out immediately,
so that by night I had installed myself comfortably. The chairs and tables were left for me;
and as the whole of the remaining furniture in the house consisted of a little crockery and
a few clothes-boxes, it was not much trouble for the owners to move into the house of some
relatives, and thus obtain a few silver rupees very easily. Every foot of ground between the
homes throughout the village is crammed with fruit trees, so that the sun and air have no chance
of penetrating. This must be very cool and pleasant in the dry season, but makes it damp and
unhealthy at other times of the year. Unfortunately I had come two months too soon, for the
rains were not yet over, and mud and water were the prominent features of the country.

About a mile behind and to the east of the village the hills commence, but they are very barren,
being covered with scanty coarse grass and scattered trees of the Melaleuca cajuputi, from
the leaves of which the celebrated cajeput oil is made. Such districts are absolutely destitute
of interest for the zoologist. A few miles further on rose higher mountains, apparently well
covered with forest, but they were entirely uninhabited and trackless, and practically inaccessible
to a traveller with limited time and means. It became evident, therefore, that I must leave
Cajeli for some better collecting ground, and finding a man who was going a few miles eastward
to a village on the coast where he said there were hills and forest, I sent my boy Ali with
him to explore and report on the capabilities of the district. At the same time I arranged
to go myself on a little excursion up a river which flows into the bay about five miles north
of the town, to a village of the Alfuros, or indigenes, where I thought I might perhaps find
a good collecting ground.

The Rajah of Cajeli, a good-tempered old man, offered to accompany me, as the village was under
his government; and we started one morning early, in a long narrow boat with eight rowers.
In about two hours we entered the river, and commenced our inland journey against a very powerful
current. The stream was about a hundred yards wide, and was generally bordered with high grass,
and occasionally bushes and palm-trees. The country round was flat and more or less swampy,
with scattered trees and shrubs. At every bend we crossed the river to avoid the strength of
the current, and arrived at our landing-place about four o'clock in a torrent of rain. Here
we waited for an hour, crouching under a leaky mat till the Alfuros arrived who had been sent
for from the village to carry my baggage, when we set off along a path of whose extreme muddiness
I had been warned before starting.

I turned up my trousers as high as possible, grasped a stoat stick to prevent awkward falls,
and then boldly plunged into the first mud-hole, which was immediately succeeded by another
and another. The marl or mud and water was knee-deep with little intervals of firmer ground
between, making progression exceedingly difficult. The path was bordered with high rigid grass,
brewing in dense clumps separated by water, so that nothing was to be gained by leaving the
beaten track, and we were obliged to go floundering on, never knowing where our feet would
rest, as the mud was now a few inches, now two feet deep, and the bottom very uneven, so that
the foot slid down to the lowest part, and made it difficult to keep one's balance. One step
would be upon a concealed stick or log, almost dislocating the ankle, while the next would
plunge into soft mud above the knee. It rained all the way, and the long grass, six feet high,
met over the path; so that we could not see a step of the way ahead, and received a double
drenching. Before we got to the village it was dark, and we had to cross over a small but deep
and swollen stream by a narrow log of wood, which was more than a foot under water. There was
a slender shaking stick for a handrail, and it was nervous work feeling in the dark in the
rushing water for a safe place on which to place the advanced foot. After au hour of this most
disagreeable and fatiguing walk we reached the village, followed by the men with our guns,
ammunition, boxes, and bedding all more or less soaked. We consoled ourselves with some hot
tea and cold fowl, and went early to bed.

The next morning was clear and fine, and I set out soon after sunrise to explore the neighbourhood.
The village had evidently been newly formed, and consisted of a single straight street of very
miserable huts totally deficient in every comfort, and as bare and cheerless inside as out.
It was situated on a little elevated patch of coarse gravelly soil, covered with the usual
high rigid grass, which came up close to the backs of the houses. At a short distance in several
directions were patches of forest, but all on low and swampy ground. I made one attempt along
the only path I could find, but soon came upon a deep mud-hole, and found that I must walk
barefoot if at all; so I returned and deferred further exploration till after breakfast. I
then went on into the jungle and found patches of sago-palms and a low forest vegetation, but
the paths were everywhere full of mud-holes, and intersected by muddy streams and tracts of
swamp, so that walking was not pleasurable, and too much attention to one's steps was not favourable
to insect catching, which requires above everything freedom of motion. I shot a few birds,
and caught a few butterflies, but all were the same as I had already obtained about Cajeli.

On my return to the village I was told that the same kind of ground extended for many miles
in every direction, and I at once decided that Wayapo was not a suitable place to stay at.
The next morning early we waded back again through the mud and long wet grass to our boat,
and by mid-day reached Cajeli, where I waited Ali's return to decide on my future movements.
He came the following day, and gave a very bad account of Pelah, where he had been. There was
a little brush and trees along the beach, and hills inland covered with high grass and cajuputi
trees--my dread and abhorrence. On inquiring who could give me trustworthy information, I was
referred to the Lieutenant of the Burghers, who had travelled all round the island, and was
a very intelligent fellow. I asked him to tell me if he knew of any part of Bouru where there
was no "kusu-kusu," as the coarse grass of the country is called. He assured me that a good
deal of the south coast was forest land, while along the north was almost entirely swamp and
grassy hills. After minute inquiries, I found that the forest country commenced at a place
called Waypoti, only a few miles beyond Pelah, but that, as the coast beyond that place was
exposed to the east monsoon and dangerous for praus, it was necessary to walk. I immediately
went to the Opzeiner, and he called the Rajah. We had a consultation, and arranged for a boat
to take me the next evening but one, to Pelah, whence I was to proceed on foot, the Orang-kaya
going the day before to call the Alfuros to carry my baggage.

The journey was made as arranged, and on May 19th we arrived at Waypoti, having walked about
ten miles along the beach, and through stony forest bordering the sea, with occasional plunges
of a mile or two into the interior. We found no village, but scattered houses and plantations,
with hilly country pretty well covered with forest, and looking rather promising. A low hut
with a very rotten roof, showing the sky through in several places, was the only one I could
obtain. Luckily it did not rain that night, and the next day we pulled down some of the walls
to repair the roof, which was of immediate importance, especially over our beds and table.

About half a mile from the house was a fine mountain stream, running swiftly over a bed of
rocks and pebbles, and beyond this was a hill covered with fine forest. By carefully picking
my way I could wade across this river without getting much above my knees, although I would
sometimes slip off a rock and go into a hole up to my waist, and about twice a week I went
across it in order to explore the forest. Unfortunately there were no paths here of any extent,
and it did not prove very productive either in insects or birds. To add to my difficulties
I had stupidly left my only pair of strong hoots on board the steamer, and my others were by
this time all dropping to pieces, so that I was obliged to walk about barefooted, and in constant
fear of hurting my feet, and causing a wound which might lay me up for weeks, as had happened
in Borneo, Are, and Dorey. Although there were numerous plantations of maize and plantains,
there were no new clearings; and as without these it is almost impossible to find many of the
best kinds of insects, I determined to make one myself, and with much difficulty engaged two
men to clear a patch of forest, from which I hoped to obtain many fine beetles before I left.

During the whole of my stay, however, insects never became plentiful. My clearing produced
me a few fine, longicorns and Buprestidae, different from any I had before seen, together with
several of the Amboyna species, but by no means so numerous or, so beautiful as I had found
in that small island. For example, I collected only 210 different kinds of beetles during my
two months' stay at Bourn, while in three weeks at Amboyna, in 1857, I found more than 300
species: One of the finest insects found at Bouru was a large Cerambyx, of a deep shining chestnut
colour, and with very long antennae. It varied greatly in size, the largest specimens being
three inches long, while the smallest were only an inch, the antenna varying from one and a
half to five inches.

One day my boy Ali came home with a story of a big snake. He was walking through some high
grass, and stepped on something which he took for a small fallen tree, but it felt cold and
yielding to his feet, and far to the right and left there was a waving and rustling of the
herbage. He jumped back in affright and prepared to shoot, but could not get a good vies of
the creature, and it passed away, he said, like a tree being dragged along through the grass.
As he lead several times already shot large snakes, which he declared were all as nothing compared
with this, I am inclined to believe it must really have been a monster. Such creatures are
rather plentiful here, for a man living close by showed me on his thigh the marks where he
had been seized by one close to his house. It was big enough to take the man's thigh in its
mouth, and he would probably have been killed and devoured by it had not his cries brought
out his neighbours, who destroyed it with their choppers. As far as I could make out it was
about twenty feet long, but Ali's was probably much larger.

It sometimes amuses me to observe how, a few days after I have taken possession of it, a native
hut seems quite a comfortable home. My house at Waypoti was a bare shed, with a large bamboo
platform at one side. At one end of this platform, which was elevated about three feet, I fixed
up my mosquito curtain, and partly enclosed it with a large Scotch plaid, making a comfortable
little sleeping apartment. I put up a rude table on legs buried in the earthen floor, and had
my comfortable rattan-chair for a seat. A line across one corner carried my daily-washed cotton
clothing, and on a bamboo shelf was arranged my small stock of crockery and hardware: Boxes
were ranged against the thatch walls, and hanging shelves, to preserve my collections from
ants while drying, were suspended both without and within the house. On my table lay books,
penknives, scissors, pliers, and pins, with insect and bird labels, all of which were unsolved
mysteries to the native mind.

Most of the people here had never seen a pin, and the better informed took a pride in teaching
their more ignorant companions the peculiarities and uses of that strange European production--a
needle with a head, but no eye! Even paper, which we throw away hourly as rubbish, was to them
a curiosity; and I often saw them picking up little scraps which had been swept out of the
house, and carefully putting them away in their betel-pouch. Then when I took my morning coffee
and evening tea, how many were the strange things displayed to them! Teapot, teacups, teaspoons,
were all more or less curious in their eyes; tea, sugar, biscuit, and butter, were articles
of human consumption seen by many of them for the first time. One asks if that whitish powder
is "gula passir" (sand-sugar), so called to distinguish it from the coarse lump palm-sugar
or molasses of native manufacture; and the biscuit is considered a sort of European sago-cake,
which the inhabitants of those remote regions are obliged to use in the absence of the genuine
article. My pursuit, were of course utterly beyond their comprehension. They continually asked
me what white people did with the birds and insects I tools so much care to preserve. If I
only kept what was beautiful, they might perhaps comprehend it; but to see ants and files and
small ugly insects put away so carefully was a great puzzle to them, and they were convinced
that there must be some medical or magical use for them which I kept a profound secret. These
people were in fact as completely unacquainted with civilized life as the Indians of the Rocky
Mountains, or the savages of Central Africa--yet a steamship, that highest triumph of human
ingenuity, with its little floating epitome of European civilization, touches monthly at Cajeli,
twenty miles off; while at Amboyna, only sixty miles distant, a European population and government
have been established for more than three hundred years.

Having seen a good many of the natives of Bouru from different villages, and from distant parts
of the island, I feel convinced that they consist of two distinct races now partially amalgamated.
The larger portion are Malays of the Celebes type, often exactly similar to the Tomóre people
of East Celebes, whom I found settled in Batchian; while others altogether resemble the Alfuros
of Ceram.

The influx of two races can easily be accounted for. The Sula Islands, which are closely connected
with East Celebes, approach to within forty miles of the north coast of Bouru, while the island
of Manipa offers an easy point of departure for the people of Ceram. I was confirmed in this
view by finding that the languages of Bouru possessed distinct resemblances to that of Sula,
as well as to those of Ceram.

Soon after we had arrived at Waypoti, Ali had seen a beautiful little bird of the genus Pitta,
which I was very anxious to obtain, as in almost every island the species are different, and
none were yet known from Bourn. He and my other hunter continued to see it two or three times
a week, and to hear its peculiar note much oftener, but could never get a specimen, owing to
its always frequenting the most dense thorny thickets, where only hasty glimpses of it could
be obtained, and at so short a distance that it would be difficult to avoid blowing the bird
to pieces. Ali was very much annoyed that he could not get a specimen of this bird, in going
after which he had already severely, wounded his feet with thorns; and when we had only two
days more to stay, he went of his own accord one evening to sleep at a little but in the forest
some miles off, in order to have a last try for it at daybreak, when many birds come out to
feed, and are very intent on their morning meal. The next evening he brought me home two specimens,
one with the head blown completely off, and otherwise too much injured to preserve, the other
in very good order, and which I at once saw to be a new species, very like the Pitta celebensis,
but ornamented with a square patch of bright red on the nape of the neck.

The next day after securing this prize we returned to Cajeli, and packing up my collections
left Bouru by the steamer. During our two days' stay at Ternate, I took on board what baggage
I had left there, and bade adieu to all my friends. We then crossed over to Menado, on our
way to Macassar and Java, and I finally quitted the Moluccas, among whose luxuriant and beautiful
islands I had wandered for more than three years.

My collections in Bouru, though not extensive, were of considerable interest; for out of sixty-six
species of birds which I collected there, no less than seventeen were new, or had not been
previously found in any island of the Moluccas. Among these were two kingfishers, Tanysiptera
acis and Ceyx Cajeli; a beautiful sunbird, Nectarines proserpina; a handsome little black and
white flycatcher, Monarcha loricata, whose swelling throat was beautifully scaled with metallic
blue; and several of less interest. I also obtained a skull of the babirusa, one specimen of
which was killed by native hunters during my residence at Cajeli.

CHAPTER XXVII. THE NATURAL HISTORY OF THE MOLUCCAS.

THE Moluccas consist of three large islands, Gilolo, Ceram, and Bouru, the two former being
each about two hundred miles long; and a great number of smaller isles and islets, the most
important of which are Batchian, Morty, Obi, Ke, Timor-Laut, and Amboyna; and among the smaller
ones, Ternate, Tidore, Kaióa, and Banda. They occupy a space of ten degrees of latitude by
eight of longitude, and they are connected by groups of small islets to New Guinea on the east,
the Philippines on the north, Celebes on the west, and Timor on the south. It will be as well
to bear in mind these main features of extent and geographical position, while we survey their
animal productions and discuss their relations to the countries which surround them on every
side in almost equal proximity.

We will first consider the Mammalia or warm-blooded quadrupeds, which present us with some
singular anomalies. The land mammals are exceedingly few in number, only ten being yet known
from the entire group. The bats or aerial mammals, on the other hand, are numerous--not less
than twenty-five species being already known. But even this exceeding poverty of terrestrial
mammals does not at all represent the real poverty of the Moluccas in this class of animals;
for, as we shall soon see, there is good reason to believe that several of the species have
been introduced by man, either purposely or by accident.

The only quadrumanous animal in the group is the curious baboon-monkey, Cynopithecus nigrescens,
already described as being one of the characteristic animals of Celebes. This is found only
in the island of Batchian; and it seems so much out of place there as it is difficult to imagine
how it could have reached the island by any natural means of dispersal, and yet not have passed
by the same means over the narrow strait to Gilolo--that it seems more likely to have originated
from some individuals which had escaped from confinement, these and similar animals being often
kept as pets by the Malays, and carried about in their praus.

Of all the carnivorous animals of the Archipelago the only one found in the Moluccas is the
Viverra tangalunga, which inhabits both Batchian and Bouru, and probably come of the other
islands. I am inclined to think that this also may have been introduced accidentally, for it
is often made captive by the Malays, who procure civet from it, and it is an animal very restless
and untameable, and therefore likely to escape. This view is rendered still more probable by
what Antonio de Morga tells us was the custom in the Philippines in 1602. He says that "the
natives of Mindanao carry about civet-cats in cages, and sell them in the islands; and they
take the civet from them, and let them go again." The same species is common in the Philippines
and in all the large islands of the Indo-Malay region.

The only Moluccan ruminant is a deer, which was once supposed to be a distinct species, but
is now generally considered to be a slight variety of the Rusa hippelaphus of Java. Deer are
often tamed and petted, and their flesh is so much esteemed by all Malays, that it is very
natural they should endeavour to introduce them into the remote islands in which they settled,
and whose luxuriant forests seem so well adapted for their subsistence.

The strange babirusa of Celebes is also found in Bouru; but in no other Moluccan island, and
it is somewhat difficult to imagine how it got there. It is true that there is some approximation
between the birds of the Sula Islands (where the babirusa is also found) and those of Bouru,
which seems to indicate that these islands have recently been closer together, or that some
intervening land has disappeared. At this time the babirusa may have entered Bouru, since it
probably swims as well as its allies the pigs. These are spread all over the Archipelago, even
to several of the smaller islands, and in many cases the species are peculiar. It is evident,
therefore, that they have some natural means of dispersal. There is a popular idea that pigs
cannot swim, but Sir Charles Lyell has shown that this is a mistake. In his "Principles of
Geology" (10th Edit. vol. ii p. 355) he adduces evidence to show that pigs have swum many miles
at sea, and are able to swim with great ease and swiftness. I have myself seen a wild pig swimming
across the arm of the sea that separates Singapore from the Peninsula of Malacca, and we thus
have explained the curious fact, that of all the large mammals of the Indian region, pigs alone
extend beyond the Moluccas and as far as New Guinea, although it is somewhat curious that they
have not found their way to Australia.

The little shrew, Sorex myosurus, which is common in Sumatra, Borneo, and Java, is also found
in the larger islands of the Moluccas, to which it may have been accidentally conveyed in native
praus.

This completes the list of the placental mammals which are so characteristic of the Indian
region; and we see that, with the single exception of the pig, all may very probably have been
introduced by man, since all except the pig are of species identical with those now abounding
in the great Malay islands, or in Celebes.

The four remaining mammals are Marsupials, an order of the class Mammalia, which is very characteristic
of the Australian fauna; and these are probably true natives of the Moluccas, since they are
either of peculiar species, or if found elsewhere are natives only of New Guinea or North Australia.
The first is the small flying opossum, Belideus ariel, a beautiful little animal, exactly line
a small flying squirrel in appearance, but belonging to the marsupial order. The other three
are species of the curious genus Cuscus, which is peculiar to the Austro-Malayan region. These
are opossum-like animals, with a long prehensile tail, of which the terminal half is generally
bare. They have small heads, large eyes, and a dense covering of woolly fur, which is often
pure white with irregular black spots or blotches, or sometimes ashy brown with or without
white spots. They live in trees, feeding upon the leaves, of which they devour large quantities,
they move about slowly, and are difficult to kill, owing to the thickness of their fur, and
their tenacity of life. A heavy charge of shot will often lodge in the slain and do them no
harm, and even breaking the spine or piercing the brain will not kill them for some hours.
The natives everywhere eat their flesh, and as their motions are so slow, easily catch them
by climbing; so that it is wonderful they have not been exterminated. It may be, however, that
their dense woolly fur protects them from birds of prey, and the islands they live in are too
thinly inhabited for man to be able to exterminate them. The figure represents Cuscus ornatus,
a new species discovered by me in Batchian, and which also inhabits Ternate. It is peculiar
to the Moluccas, while the two other species which inhabit Ceram are found also in New Guinea
and Waigiou.

In place of the excessive poverty of mammals which characterises the Moluccas, we have a very
rich display of the feathered tribes. The number of species of birds at present known from
the various islands of the Molluccan group is 265, but of these only 70 belong to the usually
abundant tribes of the waders and swimmers, indicating that these are very imperfectly known.
As they are also pre-eminently wanderers, and are thus little fitted for illustrating the geographical
distribution of life in a limited area, we will here leave them out of consideration and confine
our attention only to the 195 land birds.

When we consider that all Europe, with its varied climate and vegetation, with every mile of
its surface explored, and with the immense extent of temperate Asia and Africa, which serve
as storehouses, from which it is continually recruited, only supports 251 species of land birds
as residents or regular immigrants, we must look upon the numbers already procured in the small
and comparatively unknown islands of the Moluccas as indicating a fauna of fully average richness
in this department. But when we come to examine the family groups which go to make up this
number, we find the most curious deficiencies in some, balanced by equally striking redundancy
in other. Thus if we compare the birds of the Moluccas with those of India, as given in Mr.
Jerdon's work, we find that the three groups of the parrots, kingfishers, and pigeons, form
nearly one-third of the whole land-birds in the former, while they amount to only one-twentieth
in the latter country. On the other hand, such wide-spread groups as the thrushes, warblers,
and finches, which in India form nearly one-third of all the land-birds, dwindle down in the
Moluccas to one-fourteenth.

The reason of these peculiarities appears to be, that the Moluccan fauna has been almost entirely
derived from that of New Guinea, in which country the same deficiency and the same luxuriance
is to be observed. Out of the seventy-eight genera in which the Moluccan land-birds may be
classed, no less than seventy are characteristic of Yew Guinea, while only six belong specially
to the Indo-Malay islands. But this close resemblance to New Guinea genera does not extend
to the species, for no less than 140 out of the 195 land-birds are peculiar to the Moluccan
islands, while 32 are found also in New Guinea, and 15 in the Indo-Malay islands. These facts
teach us, that though the birds of this group have evidently been derived mainly from New Guinea,
yet the immigration has not been a recent one, since there has been time for the greater portion
of the species to have become changed. We find, also, that many very characteristic New Guinea
forms lave not entered the Moluccas at all, while others found in Ceram and Gilolo do not extend
so far west as Bouru. Considering, further, the absence of most of the New Guinea mammals from
the Moluccas, we are led to the conclusion that these islands are not fragments which have
been separated from New Guinea, but form a distinct insular region, which has been upheaved
independently at a rather remote epoch, and during all the mutations it has undergone has been
constantly receiving immigrants from that great and productive island. The considerable length
of time the Moluccas have remained isolated is further indicated by the occurrence of two peculiar
genera of birds, Semioptera and Lycocorax, which are found nowhere else.

We are able to divide this small archipelago into two well marked groups--that of Ceram, including
also Bouru. Amboyna, Banda, and Ke; and that of Gilolo, including Morty, Batchian, Obi, Ternate,
and other small islands. These divisions have each a considerable number of peculiar species,
no less than fifty-five being found in the Ceram group only; and besides this, most of the
separate islands have some species peculiar to themselves. Thus Morty island has a peculiar
kingfisher, honeysucker, and starling; Ternate has a ground-thrush (Pitta) and a flycatcher;
Banda has a pigeon, a shrike, and a Pitta; Ke has two flycatchers, a Zosterops, a shrike, a
king-crow and a cuckoo; and the remote Timor-Laut, which should probably come into the Moluccan
group, has a cockatoo and lory as its only known birds, and both are of peculiar species.

The Moluccas are especially rich in the parrot tribe, no less than twenty-two species, belonging
to ten genera, inhabiting them. Among these is the large red-crested cockatoo, so commonly
seen alive in Europe, two handsome red parrots of the genus Eclectus, and five of the beautiful
crimson lories, which are almost exclusively confined to these islands and the New Guinea group.
The pigeons are hardly less abundant or beautiful, twenty-one species being known, including
twelve of the beautiful green fruit pigeons, the smaller kinds of which are ornamented with
the most brilliant patches of colour on the head and the under-surface. Next to these come
the kingfishers, including sixteen species, almost all of which are beautiful, end many are
among the most brilliantly-coloured birds that exist.

One of the most curious groups of birds, the Megapodii, or mound-makers, is very abundant in
the Moluccas. They are gallinaceous birds, about the size of a small fowl, and generally of
a dark ashy or sooty colour, and they have remarkably large and strong feet and long claws.
They are allied to the "Maleo" of Celebes, of which an account has already been given, but
they differ in habits, most of these birds frequenting the scrubby jungles along the sea-shore,
where the soil is sandy, and there is a considerable quantity of debris, consisting of sticks,
shells, seaweed, leaves, &c. Of this rubbish the Megapodius forms immense mounds, often six
or eight feet high and twenty or thirty feet in diameter, which they are enabled to do with
comparative ease, by means of their large feet, with which they can grasp and throw backwards
a quantity of material. In the centre of this mound, at a depth of two or three feet, the eggs
are deposited, and are hatched by the gentle heat produced by the fermentation of the vegetable
matter of the mound. When I first saw these mounds in the island of Lombock, I could hardly
believe that they were made by such small birds, but I afterwards met with them frequently,
and have once or twice come upon the birds engaged in making them. They run a few steps backwards,
grasping a quantity of loose material in one foot, and throw it a long way behind them. When
once properly buried the eggs seem to be no more cared for, the young birds working their way
up through the heap of rubbish, and running off at once into the forest. They come out of the
egg covered with thick downy feathers, and have no tail, although the wings are full developed.

I was so fortunate as to discover a new species (Megapodius wallacei), which inhibits Gilolo,
Ternate, and Bouru. It is the handsomest bird of the genus, being richly banded with reddish
brown on the back and wings; and it differs from the other species in its habits. It frequents
the forests of the interior, and comes down to the sea-beach to deposit its eggs, but instead
of making a mound, or scratching a hole to receive them, it burrows into the sand to the depth
of about three feet obliquely downwards, and deposits its eggs at the bottom. It then loosely
covers up the mouth of the hole, and is said by the natives to obliterate and disguise its
own footmarks leading to and from the hole, by making many other tracks and scratches in the
neighbourhood. It lays its eggs only at night, and at Bouru a bird was caught early one morning
as it was coming out of its hole, in which several eggs were found. All these birds seem to
be semi-nocturnal, for their loud wailing cries may be constantly heard late into the night
and long before daybreak in the morning. The eggs are all of a rusty red colour, and very large
for the size of the bird, being generally three or three and a quarter inches long, by two
or two and a quarter wide. They are very good eating, and are much sought after by the natives.

Another large and extraordinary bird is the Cassowary, which inhabits the island of Ceram only.
It is a stout and strong bird, standing five or six feet high, and covered with long coarse
black hair-like feathers. The head is ornamented with a large horny calque or helmet, and the
bare skin of the neck is conspicuous with bright blue and red colours. The wings are quite
absent, and are replaced by a group of horny black spines like blunt porcupine quills.

These birds wander about the vast mountainous forests that cover the island of Ceram, feeding
chiefly on fallen fruits, and on insects or crustacea. The female lays from three to five large
and beautifully shagreened green eggs upon a bed of leaves, the male and female sitting upon
them alternately for about a month. This bird is the helmeted cassowary (Casuarius galeatus)
of naturalists, and was for a long time the only species known. Others have since been discovered
in New Guinea, New Britain, and North Australia.

It was in the Moluccas that I first discovered undoubted cases of "mimicry" among birds, and
these are so curious that I must briefly describe them. It will be as well, however, first
to explain what is meant by mimicry in natural history. At page 205 of the first volume of
this work, I have described a butterfly which, when at rest, so closely resembles a dead leaf,
that it thereby escape the attacks of its enemies. This is termed a "protective resemblance."
If however the butterfly, being itself savoury morsel to birds, had closely resembled another
butterfly which was disagreeable to birds, and therefore never eaten by them, it would be as
well protected as if it resembled a leaf; and this is what has been happily termed "mimicry"
by Mr. Bates, who first discovered the object of these curious external imitations of one insect
by another belonging to a distinct genus or family, and sometimes even to a distinct order.
The clear-winged moth which resemble wasps and hornets are the best examples of "mimicry" in
our own country.

For a long time all the known cases of exact resemblance of one creature to quite a different
one were confined to insects, and it was therefore with great pleasure that I discovered in
the island of Bouru two birds which I constantly mistook for each other, and which yet belonged
to two distinct and somewhat distant families. One of these is a honeysucker named Tropidorhynchus
bouruensis, and the other a kind of oriole, which has been called Mimeta bouruensis.

In the adjacent island of Ceram we find very distinct species of both these genera, and, strange
to say, these resemble each other quite as closely as do those of Bouru The Tropidorhynchus
subcornutus is of an earthy brown colour, washed with ochreish yellow, with bare orbits, dusky:
cheeks, and the usual recurved nape-ruff: The Mimeta forsteni which accompanies it, is absolutely
identical in the tints of every part of the body, and the details are copied just as minutely
as in the former species.

We have two kinds of evidence to tell us which bird in this case is the model, and which the
copy. The honeysuckers are coloured in a manner which is very general in the whole family to
which they belong, while the orioles seem to have departed from the gay yellow tints so common
among their allies. We should therefore conclude that it is the latter who mimic the former.
If so, however, they must derive some advantage from the imitation, and as they are certainly
weak birds, with small feet and claws, they may require it. It is very probable, therefore,
that the smaller birds of prey have learnt to respect these birds and leave them alone, and
it may thus be a great advantage for the weaker and less courageous Mimetas to be mistaken
for them. This being case, the laws of Variation and Survival of the Fittest, will suffice
to explain how the resemblance has been brought about, without supposing any voluntary action
on the part of the birds themselves; and those who have read Mr. Darwin's "Origin of Species"
will have no difficulty in comprehending the whole process.

The insects of the Moluccas are pre-eminently beautiful, even when compared with the varied
and beautiful productions of other parts of the Archipelago. The grand bird-winged butterflies
(Ornithoptera) here reach their maximum of size and beauty, and many of the Papilios, Pieridae
Danaidae, and Nymphalidae are equally preeminent. There is, perhaps, no island in the world
so small as Amboyna where so many grand insects are to be found. Here are three of the very
finest Ornithopterae--priamus, helena, and remiss; three of the handsomest and largest Papilios--ulysses,
deiphobus, and gambrisius; one of the handsomest Pieridae, Iphias leucippe; the largest of
the Danaidae, Hestia idea; and two unusually large and handsome Nymphalidae--Diadema pandarus,
and Charaxes euryalus. Among its beetles are the extraordinary Euchirus longimanus, whose enormous
legs spread over a space of eight inches, and an unusual number of large and handsome Longicorns,
Anthribidae, and Buprestidae.

The beetles figured on the plate as characteristic of the Moluccas are: 1. A small specimen
of the Euchirus longimanus, or Long-armed Chafer, which has been already mentioned in the account
of my residence at Amboyna (Chapter XX.). The female has the fore legs of moderate length.
2. A fine weevil, (an undescribed species of Eupholus,) of rich blue and emerald green colours,
banded with black. It is a native of Ceram and Goram, and is found on foliage. 3. A female
of Xenocerus semiluctuosus, one of the Anthribidae of delicate silky white and black colours.
It is abundant on fallen trunks and stumps in Ceram and Amboyna. 4. An undescribed species
of Xenocerus; a male, with very long and curious antenna, and elegant black and white markings.
It is found on fallen trunks in Batchian. 5. An undescribed species of Arachnobas, a curious
genus of weevils peculiar to the Moluccas and New Guinea, and remarkable for their long legs,
and their habit of often sitting on leaves, and turning rapidly round the edge to the under-surface
when disturbed. It was found in Gilolo. All these insects are represented of the natural size.

Like the birds, the insects of the Moluccas show a decided affinity with those of New Guinea
rather than with the productions of the great western islands of the Archipelago, but the difference
in form and structure between the productions of the east and west is not nearly so marked
here as in birds. This is probably due to the more immediate dependence of insects on climate
and vegetation, and the greater facilities for their distribution in the varied stages of egg,
pupa, and perfect insect. This has led to a general uniformity in the insect-life of the whole
Archipelago, in accordance with the general uniformity of its climate and vegetation; while
on the other hand the great susceptibility of the insect organization to the action of external
conditions has led to infinite detailed modifications of form and colour, which have in many
cases given a considerable diversity to the productions of adjacent islands.

Owing to the great preponderance among the birds, of parrots, pigeons, kingfishers, and sunbirds,
almost all of gay or delicate colours, and many adorned with the most gorgeous plumage, and
to the numbers of very large and showy butterflies which are almost everywhere to be met with,
the forests of the Moluccas offer to the naturalist a very striking example of the luxuriance
and beauty of animal life in the tropics. Yet the almost entire absence of Mammalia, and of
such wide-spread groups of birds as woodpeckers, thrushes, jays, tits, and pheasants, must
convince him that he is in a part of the world which has, in reality but little in common with
the great Asiatic continent, although an unbroken chain of islands seems to link them to it.

CHAPTER XXVIII. MACASSAR TO THE ARU ISLANDS IN A NATIVE PRAU.

(DECEMBER, 1856.)

IT was the beginning of December, and the rainy season at Macassar had just set in. For nearly
three months had beheld the sun rise daily above the palm-groves, mount to the zenith, and
descend like a globe of fire into the ocean, unobscured for a single moment of his course.
Now dark leaden clouds had gathered over the whole heavens, and seemed to have rendered him
permanently invisible. The strong east winds, warm and dry and dust-laden, which had hitherto
blown as certainly as the sun had risen, were now replaced by variable gusty breezes and heavy
rains, often continuous for three days and nights together; and the parched and fissured rice
stubbles which during the dry weather had extended in every direction for miles around the
town, were already so flooded as to be only passable by boats, or by means of a labyrinth of
paths on the top of the narrow banks which divided the separate properties.

Five months of this kind of weather might be expected in Southern Celebes, and I therefore
determined to seek some more favourable climate for collecting in during that period, and to
return in the next dry season to complete my exploration of the district. Fortunately for me
I was in one of the treat emporiums of the native trade of the archipelago. Rattans from Borneo,
sandal-wood and bees'-was from Flores and Timor, tripang from the Gulf of Carpentaria, cajputi-oil
from Bouru, wild nutmegs and mussoi-bark from New Guinea, are all to be found in the stores
of the Chinese and Bugis merchants of Macassar, along with the rice and coffee which are the
chief products of the surrounding country. More important than all these however is the trade
to Aru, a group of islands situated on the south-west coast of New Guinea, and of which almost
the whole produce comes to Macassar in native vessels. These islands are quite out of the track
of all European trade, and are inhabited only by black mop-headed savages, who yet contribute
to the luxurious tastes of the most civilized races. Pearls, mother-of-pearl, and tortoiseshell
find their way to Europe, while edible birds' nests and "tripang" or sea-slug are obtained
by shiploads for the gastronomic enjoyment of the Chinese.

The trade to these islands has existed from very early times, and it is from them that Birds
of Paradise, of the two kinds known to Linnaeus were first brought The native vessels can only
make the voyage once a year, owing to the monsoons. They leave Macassar in December or January
at the beginning of the west monsoon, and return in July or August with the full strength of
the east monsoon. Even by the Macassar people themselves, the voyage to the Aru Islands is
looked upon as a rather wild and romantic expedition, fall of novel sights and strange adventures.
He who has made it is looked up to as an authority, and it remains with many the unachieved
ambition of their lives. I myself had hoped rather than expected ever to reach this "Ultima
Thule" of the East: and when I found that I really could do so now, had I but courage to trust
myself for a thousand miles' voyage in a Bugis prau, and for six or seven months among lawless
traders and ferocious savages, I felt somewhat as I did when, a schoolboy, I was for the first
time allowed to travel outside the stage-coach, to visit that scene of all that is strange
and new and wonderful to young imaginations-London!

By the help of some kind friends I was introduced to the owner of one of the large praus which
was to sail in a few days. He was a Javanese half-caste, intelligent, mild, and gentlemanly
in his manners, and had a young and pretty Dutch wife, whom he was going to leave behind during
his absence. When we talked about passage money he would fix no sum, but insisted on leaving
it entirely to me to pay on my return exactly what I liked. "And then," said he, "whether you
give me one dollar or a hundred, I shall be satisfied, and shall ask no more."

The remainder of my stay was fully occupied in laying in stores, engaging servants, and making
every other preparation for an absence of seven months from even the outskirts of civilization.
On the morning of December 13th, when we went on board at daybreak, it was raining hard. We
set sail and it came on to blow. Our boat was lost astern, our sails damaged, and the evening
found us hack again in Macassar harbour. We remained there four days longer, owing to its raining
all the time, thus rendering it impossible to dry and repair the huge mat sails. All these
dreary days I remained on board, and during the rare intervals when it didn't rain, made myself
acquainted with our outlandish craft, some of the peculiarities of which I will now endeavour
to describe.

It was a vessel of about seventy tons burthen, and shaped something like a Chinese junk. The
deck sloped considerably downward to the bows, which are thus the lowest part of the ship.
There were two large rudders, but instead of being planed astern they were hung on the quarters
from strong cross beams, which projected out two or three feet on each side, and to which extent
the deck overhung the sides of the vessel amidships. The rudders were not hinged but hung with
slings of rattan, the friction of which keeps them in any position in which they are placed,
and thus perhaps facilitates steering. The tillers were not on deck, but entered the vessel
through two square openings into a lower or half deck about three feet high, in which sit the
two steersmen. In the after part of the vessel was a low poop, about three and a half feet
high, which forms the captain's cabin, its furniture consisting of boxes, mats, and pillows.
In front of the poop and mainmast was a little thatched house on deck, about four feet high
to the ridge; and one compartment of this, forming a cabin six and a half feet long by five
and a half wide, I had all to myself, and it was the snuggest and most comfortable little place
I ever enjoyed at sea. It was entered by a low sliding door of thatch on one side, and had
a very small window on the other. The floor was of split bamboo, pleasantly elastic, raised
six inches above the deck, so as to be quite dry. It was covered with fine cane mats, for the
manufacture of which Macassar is celebrated; against the further wall were arranged my guncase,
insect-boxes, clothes, and books; my mattress occupied the middle, and next the door were my
canteen, lamp, and little store of luxuries for the voyage; while guns, revolver, and hunting
knife hung conveniently from the roof. During these four miserable days I was quite jolly in
this little snuggery more so than I should have been if confined the same time to the gilded
and uncomfortable saloon of a first-class steamer. Then, how comparatively sweet was everything
on board--no paint, no tar, no new rope, (vilest of smells to the qualmish!) no grease, or
oil, or varnish; but instead of these, bamboo and rattan, and coir rope and palm thatch; pure
vegetable fibres, which smell pleasantly if they smell at all, and recall quiet scenes in the
green and shady forest.

Our ship had two masts, if masts they can be called c which were great moveable triangles.
If in an ordinary ship you replace the shrouds and backstay by strong timbers, and take away
the mast altogether, you have the arrangement adopted on board a prau. Above my cabin, and
resting on cross-beams attached to the masts, was a wilderness of yards and spars, mostly formed
of bamboo. The mainyard, an immense affair nearly a hundred feet long, was formed of many pieces
of wood and bamboo bound together with rattans in an ingenious manner. The sail carried by
this was of an oblong shape, and was hung out of the centre, so that when the short end was
hauled down on deck the long end mounted high in the air, making up for the lowness of the
mast itself. The foresail was of the same shape, but smaller. Both these were of matting, and,
with two jibs and a fore and aft sail astern of cotton canvas, completed our rig.

The crew consisted of about thirty men, natives of Macassar and the adjacent coasts and islands.
They were mostly young, and were short, broad-faced, good-humoured looking fellows. Their dress
consisted generally of a pair of trousers only, when at work, and a handkerchief twisted round
the head, to which in the evening they would add a thin cotton jacket. Four of the elder men
were "jurumudis," or steersmen, who had to squat (two at a time) in the little steerage before
described, changing every six hours. Then there was an old man, the "juragan," or captain,
but who was really what we should call the first mate; he occupied the other half of the little
house on deck. There were about ten respectable men, Chinese or Bugis, whom our owner used
to call "his own people." He treated them very well, shared his meals with them, and spoke
to them always with perfect politeness; yet they were most of them a kind of slave debtors,
bound over by the police magistrate to work for him at mere nominal wages for a term of years
till their debts were liquidated. This is a Dutch institution in this part of the world, and
seems to work well. It is a great boon to traders, who can do nothing in these thinly-populated
regions without trusting goods to agents and petty dealers, who frequently squander them away
in gambling and debauchery. The lower classes are almost all in a chronic state of debt. The
merchant trusts them again and again, till the amount is something serious, when he brings
them to court and has their services allotted to him for its liquidation. The debtors seem
to think this no disgrace, but rather enjoy their freedom from responsibility, and the dignity
of their position under a wealthy and well-known merchant. They trade a little on their own
account, and both parties seem to get on very well together. The plan seems a more sensible
one than that which we adopt, of effectually preventing a man from earning anything towards
paying his debts by shutting him up in a jail.

My own servants were three in number. Ali, the Malay boy whom I had picked up in Borneo, was
my head man. He had already been with me a year, could turn his hand to anything, and was quite
attentive and trustworthy. He was a good shot, and fond of shooting, and I had taught him to
skin birds very well. The second, named Baderoon, was a Macassar lad; also a pretty good boy,
but a desperate gambler. Under pretence of buying a house for his mother, and clothes, for
himself, he had received four months' wages about a week before we sailed, and in a day or
two gambled away every dollar of it. He had come on board with no clothes, no betel, or tobacco,
or salt fish, all which necessary articles I was obliged to send Ali to buy for him. These
two lads were about sixteen, I should suppose; the third was younger, a sharp little rascal
named Baso, who had been with me a month or two, and had learnt to cook tolerably. He was to
fulfil the important office of cook and housekeeper, for I could not get any regular servants
to go to such a terribly remote country; one might as well ask a chef de cuisine to go to Patagonia.

On the fifth day that I had spent on board (Dec. 15th) the rain ceased, and final preparations
were made for starting. Sails were dried and furled, boats were constantly coming and going,
and stores for the voyage, fruit, vegetables, fish, and palm sugar, were taken on board. In
the afternoon two women arrived with a large party of friends and relations, and at parting
there was a general noserubbing (the Malay kiss), and some tears shed. These were promising
symptoms for our getting off the next day; and accordingly, at three in the morning, the owner
came on board, the anchor was immediately weighed, and by four we set sail. Just as we were
fairly off and clear of the other praus, the old juragan repeated some prayers, all around
responding with "Allah il Allah," and a few strokes on a gong as an accompaniment, concluding
with all wishing each other "Salaamat jalan," a safe and happy journey. We had a light breeze,
a calm sea, and a fine morning, a prosperous commencement of our voyage of about a thousand
miles to the far-famed Aru Islands.

The wind continued light and variable all day, with a calm in the evening before the land breeze
sprang up, were then passing the island of "Tanakaki" (foot of the land), at the extreme south
of this part of Celebes. There are some dangerous rocks here, and as I was standing by the
bulwarks, I happened to spit over the side; one of the men begged I would not do so just now,
but spit on deck, as they were much afraid of this place. Not quite comprehending, I made him
repeat his request, when, seeing he was in earnest, I said, "Very well, I suppose there are
'hantus' (spirits) here." "Yes," said he, "and they don't like anything to be thrown overboard;
many a prau has been lost by doing it." Upon which I promised to be very careful. At sunset
the good Mahometans on board all repeated a few words of prayer with a general chorus, reminding
me of the pleasing and impressive "Ave. Maria" of Catholic countries.

Dec. 20th.-At sunrise we were opposite the Bontyne mountain, said to be one of the highest
in Celebes. In the afternoon we passed the Salayer Straits and had a little squall, which obliged
us to lower our huge mast, sails, and heavy yards. The rest of the evening we had a fine west
wind, which carried us on at near five knots an hour, as much as our lumbering old tub can
possibly go.

Dec. 21st.-A heavy swell from the south-west rolling us about most uncomfortably. A steady
wind was blowing however, and we got on very well.

Dec. 22d.-The swell had gone down. We passed Boutong, a large island, high, woody, and populous,
the native place of some of our crew. A small prau returning from Bali to the island of Goram
overtook us. The nakoda (captain) was known to our owner. They had been two years away, but
were full of people, with several black Papuans on board. At 6 P.M. we passed Wangiwangi, low
but not flat, inhabited and subject to Boutong. We had now fairly entered the Molucca Sea.
After dark it was a beautiful sight to look down on our rudders, from which rushed eddying
streams of phosphoric light gemmed with whirling sparks of fire. It resembled (more nearly
than anything else to which I can compare it) one of the large irregular nebulous star-clusters
seen through a good telescope, with the additional attraction of ever-changing form and dancing
motion.

Dec. 23d.-Fine red sunrise; the island we left last evening barely visible behind us. The Goram
prau about a mile south of us. They have no compass, yet they have kept a very true course
during the night. Our owner tells me they do it by the swell of the sea, the direction of which
they notice at sunset, and sail by it during the night. In these seas they are never (in fine
weather) more than two days without seeing land. Of course adverse winds or currents sometimes
carry them away, but they soon fall in with some island, and there are always some old sailors
on board who know it, and thence take a new course. Last night a shark about five feet long
was caught, and this morning it was cut up and cooked. In the afternoon they got another, and
I had a little fried, and found it firm and dry, but very palatable. In the evening the sun
set in a heavy bank of clouds, which, as darkness came on, assumed a fearfully black appearance.
According to custom, when strong wind or rain is expected, our large sails-were furled, and
with their yards let down on deck, and a small square foresail alone kept up. The great mat
sails are most awkward things to manage in rough weather. The yards which support them are
seventy feet long, and of course very heavy, and the only way to furl them being to roll up
the sail on the boom, it is a very dangerous thing to have them standing when overtaken by
a squall. Our crew; though numerous enough for a vessel of 700 instead of one of 70 tons, have
it very much their own way, and there seems to be seldom more than a dozen at work at a time.
When anything important is to be done, however, all start up willingly enough, but then all
think themselves at liberty to give their opinion, and half a dozen voices are heard giving
orders, and there is such a shrieking and confusion that it seems wonderful anything gets done
at all.

Considering we have fifty men of several tribes and tongues onboard, wild, half-savage looking
fellows, and few of them feeling any of the restraints of morality or education, we get on
wonderfully well. There is no fighting or quarrelling, as there would certainly be among the
same number of Europeans with as little restraint upon their actions, and there is scarcely
any of that noise and excitement which might be expected. In fine weather the greater part
of them are quietly enjoying themselves--some are sleeping under the shadow of the sails; others,
in little groups of three or four, are talking or chewing betel; one is making a new handle
to his chopping-knife, another is stitching away at a new pair of trousers or a shirt, and
all are as quiet and well-conducted as on board the best-ordered English merchantman. Two or
three take it by turns to watch in the bows and see after the braces and halyards of the great
sails; the two steersmen are below in the steerage; our captain, or the juragan, gives the
course, guided partly by the compass and partly by the direction of the wind, and a watch of
two or three on the poop look after the trimming of the sails and call out the hours by the
water-clock. This is a very ingenious contrivance, which measures time well in both rough weather
and fine. It is simply a bucket half filled with water, in which floats the half of a well-scraped
cocoa-nut shell. In the bottom of this shell is a very small hole, so that when placed to float
in the bucket a fine thread of water squirts up into it. This gradually fills the shell, and
the size of the hole is so adjusted to the capacity of the vessel that, exactly at the end
of an hour, plump it goes to the bottom. The watch then cries out the number of hours from
sunrise and sets the shell afloat again empty. This is a very good measurer of time. I tested
it with my watch and found that it hardly varied a minute from one hour to another, nor did
the motion of the vessel have any effect upon it, as the water in the bucket of course kept
level. It has a great advantage for a rude people in being easily understood, in being rather
bulky and easy to see, and in the final submergence being accompanied with a little bubbling
and commotion of the water, which calls the attention to it. It is also quickly replaced if
lost while in harbour.

Our captain and owner I find to be a quiet, good-tempered man, who seems to get on very well
with all about him. When at sea he drinks no wine or spirits, but indulges only in coffee and
cakes, morning and afternoon, in company with his supercargo and assistants. He is a man of
some little education, can read and write well both Dutch and Malay, uses a compass, and has
a chart. He has been a trader to Aru for many years, and is well known to both Europeans and
natives in this part of the world.

Dec. 24th.-Fine, and little wind. No land in sight for the first time since we left Macassar.
At noon calm, with heavy showers, in which our crew wash their clothes, anti in the afternoon
the prau is covered with shirts, trousers, and sarongs of various gay colours. I made a discovery
to-day which at first rather alarmed me. The two ports, or openings, through which the tillers
enter from the lateral rudders are not more than three or four feet above the surface of the
water, which thus has a free entrance into the vessel. I of course had imagined that this open
space from one side to the other was separated from the hold by a water-tight bulkhead, so
that a sea entering might wash out at the further side, and do no more harm than give the steersmen
a drenching. To my surprise end dismay, however, I find that it is completely open to the hold,
so that half-a-dozen seas rolling in on a stormy night would nearly, or quite, swamp us. Think
of a vessel going to sea for a month with two holes, each a yard square, into the hold, at
three feet above the water-line,-holes, too, which cannot possibly be closed! But our captain
says all praus are so; and though he acknowledges the danger, "he does not know how to alter
it--the people are used to it; he does not understand praus so well as they do, and if such
a great alteration were made, he should be sure to have difficulty in getting a crew!" This
proves at all events that praus must be good sea-boats, for the captain has been continually
making voyages in them for the last ten years, and says he has never known water enough enter
to do any harm.

Dec.25th.-Christmas-day dawned upon us with gusts of wind, driving rain, thunder and lightning,
added to which a short confused sea made our queer vessel pitch and roll very uncomfortably.
About nine o'clock, however, it cleared up, and we then saw ahead of us the fine island of
Bouru, perhaps forty or fifty miles distant, its mountains wreathed with clouds, while its
lower lands were still invisible. The afternoon was fine, and the wind got round again to the
west; but although this is really the west monsoon, there is no regularity or steadiness about
it, calms and breezes from every point of the compass continually occurring. The captain, though
nominally a Protestant, seemed to have no idea of Christmas-day as a festival. Our dinner was
of rice and curry as usual, and an extra glass of wine was all I could do to celebrate it.

Dec. 26th.--Fine view of the mountains of Bouru, which we have now approached considerably.
Our crew seem rather a clumsy lot. They do not walk the deck with the easy swing of English
sailors, but hesitate and stagger like landsmen. In the night the lower boom of our mainsail
broke, and they were all the morning repairing it. It consisted of two bamboos lashed together,
thick end to thin, and was about seventy feet long. The rigging and arrangement of these praus
contrasts strangely with that of European vessels, in which the various ropes and spars, though
much more numerous, are placed so as not to interfere with each other's action. Here the case
is quite different; for though there are no shrouds or stays to complicate the matter, yet
scarcely anything can be done without first clearing something else out of the way. The large
sails cannot be shifted round to go on the other tack without first hauling down the jibs,
and the booms of the fore and aft sails have to be lowered and completely detached to perform
the same operation. Then there are always a lot of ropes foul of each other, and all the sails
can never be set (though they are so few) without a good part of their surface having the wind
kept out of them by others. Yet praus are much liked even by those who have had European vessels,
because of their cheapness both in first cost and in keeping up; almost all repairs can be
done by the crew, and very few European stores are required.

Dec. 28th.--This day we saw the Banda group, the volcano first appearing,--a perfect cone,
having very much the outline of the Egyptian pyramids, and looking almost as regular. In the
evening the smoke rested over its summit like a small stationary cloud. This was my first view
of an active volcano, but pictures and panoramas have so impressed such things on one's mind,
that when we at length behold them they seem nothing extraordinary.

Dec. 30th.--Passed the island of Teor, and a group near it, which are very incorrectly marked
on the charts. Flying-fish were numerous to-day. It is a smaller species than that of the Atlantic,
and more active and elegant in its motions. As they skim along the surface they turn on their
sides, so as fully to display their beautiful fins, taking a flight of about a hundred yards,
rising and falling in a most graceful manner. At a little distance they exactly resemble swallows,
and no one who sees them can doubt that they really do fly, not merely descend in an oblique
direction from the height they gain by their first spring. In the evening an aquatic bird,
a species of booby (Sula fiber.) rested on our hen-coop, and was caught by the neck by one
of my boys.

Dec. 31st--At daybreak the Ke Islands (pronounced Kay) were in sight, where we are to stay
a few days. About noon we rounded the northern point, and endeavoured to coast along to the
anchorage; but being now on the leeward side of the island, the wind came in violent irregular
gusts, and then leaving us altogether, we were carried back by a strong current. Just then
two boats-load of natives appeared, and our owner having agreed with them to tow us into harbour,
they tried to do so, assisted by our own boat, but could make no way. We were therefore obliged
to anchor in a very dangerous place on a rocky bottom, and we were engaged till nearly dark
getting hawsers secured to some rocks under water. The coast of Ke along which we had passed
was very picturesque. Light coloured limestone rocks rose abruptly from the water to the height
of several hundred feet, everywhere broken into jutting peaks and pinnacles, weather-worn into
sharp points and honeycombed surfaces, and clothed throughout with a most varied and luxuriant
vegetation. The cliffs above the sea offered to our view screw-pines and arborescent Liliaceae
of strange forms, mingled with shrubs and creepers; while the higher slopes supported a dense
growth of forest trees. Here and there little bays and inlets presented beaches of dazzling
whiteness. The water was transparent as crystal, and tinged the rock-strewn slope which plunged
steeply into its unfathomable depths with colours varying from emerald to lapis-lazuli. The
sea was calm as a lake, and the glorious sun of the tropics threw a flood of golden light over
all. The scene was to me inexpressibly delightful. I was in a new world, and could dream of
the wonderful productions hid in those rocky forests, and in those azure abysses. But few European
feet had ever trodden the shores I gazed upon its plants, and animals, and men were alike almost
unknown, and I could not help speculating on what my wanderings there for a few days might
bring to light.

CHAPTER XXIX. THE KE ISLANDS.

(JANUARY 1857)

THE native boats that had come to meet us were three or four in number, containing in all about
fifty men.

They were long canoes, with the bow and stern rising up into a beak six or night feet high,
decorated with shells and waving plumes of cassowaries hair. I now had my first view of Papuans
in their own country, and in less than five minutes was convinced that the opinion already
arrived at by the examination of a few Timor and New Guinea slaves was substantially correct,
and that the people I now had an opportunity of comparing side by side belonged to two of the
most distinct and strongly marked races that the earth contains. Had I been blind, I could
have been certain that these islanders were not Malays. The loud, rapid, eager tones, the incessant
motion, the intense vital activity manifested in speech and action, are the very antipodes
of the quiet, unimpulsive, unanimated Malay These Ke men came up singing and shouting, dipping
their paddles deep in the water and throwing up clouds of spray; as they approached nearer
they stood up in their canoes and increased their noise and gesticulations; and on coming alongside,
without asking leave, and without a moment's hesitation, the greater part of them scrambled
up on our deck just as if they were come to take possession of a captured vessel. Then commenced
a scene of indescribable confusion. These forty black, naked, mop-headed savages seemed intoxicated
with joy and excitement. Not one of them could remain still for a moment. Every individual
of our crew was in turn surrounded and examined, asked for tobacco or arrack, grinned at and
deserted for another. All talked at once, and our captain was regularly mobbed by the chief
men, who wanted to be employed to tow us in, and who begged vociferously to be paid in advance.
A few presents of tobacco made their eyes glisten; they would express their satisfaction by
grins and shouts, by rolling on deck, or by a headlong leap overboard. Schoolboys on an unexpected
holiday, Irishmen at a fair, or mid-shipmen on shore, would give but a faint idea of the exuberant
animal enjoyment of these people.

Under similar circumstances Malays could not behave as these Papuans did. If they came on board
a vessel (after asking permission), not a word would be at first spoken, except a few compliments,
and only after some time, and very cautiously, world any approach be made to business. One
would speak at a time, with a low voice and great deliberation, and the mode of making a bargain
would be by quietly refusing all your offers, or even going away without saying another word
about the matter, unless advanced your price to what they were willing to accept. Our crew,
many of whom had not made the voyage before, seemed quite scandalized at such unprecedented
bad manners, and only very gradually made any approach to fraternization with the black fellows.
They reminded me of a party of demure and well-behaved children suddenly broken in upon by
a lot of wild romping, riotous boys, whose conduct seems most extraordinary and very naughty.
These moral features are more striking and more conclusive of absolute diversity than oven
the physical contrast presented by the two races, though that is sufficiently remarkable. The
sooty blackness of the skin, the mop-like head of frizzly hair, and, most important of all,
the marked form of countenance of quite a different type from that of the Malay, are what we
cannot believe to result from mere climatal or other modifying influences on one and the same
race. The Malay face is of the Mongolian type, broad and somewhat flat. The brows are depressed,
the mouth wide, but not projecting, and the nose small and well formed but for the great dilatation
of the nostrils. The face is smooth, and rarely develops the trace of a beard; the hair black,
coarse, and perfectly straight. The Papuan, on the other hand, has a face which we may say
is compressed and projecting. The brows are protuberant and overhanging, the mouth large and
prominent, while the nose is very large, the apex elongated downwards, the ridge thick, and
the nostrils large. It is an obtrusive and remarkable feature in the countenance, the very
reverse of what obtains in the Malay face. The twisted beard and frizzly hair complete this
remarkable contrast. Hero then I had reached a new world, inhabited by a strange people. Between
the Malayan tribes, among whom I had for some years been living, and the Papuan races, whose
country I had now entered, we may fairly say that there is as much difference, both moral and
physical, as between the red Indians of South America and the negroes of Guinea on the opposite
side of the Atlantic.

Jan. 1st, 1857.-This has been a day of thorough enjoyment. I have wandered in the forests of
an island rarely seen by Europeans. Before daybreak we left our anchorage, and in an hour reached
the village of Har, where we were to stay three or four days. The range of hills here receded
so as to form a small bay, and they were broken up into peaks and hummocks with intervening
flats and hollows. A broad beach of the whitest sand lined the inner part of the bay, backed
by a mass of cocoa-nut palms, among which the huts were concealed, and surmounted by a dense
and varied growth of timber. Canoes and boats of various sizes were drawn up on the beach and
one or two idlers, with a few children and a dog, gazed at our prau as we came to an anchor.

When we went on shore the first thing that attracted us was a large and well-constructed shed,
under which a long boat was being built, while others in various stages of completion were
placed at intervals along the beach. Our captain, who wanted two of moderate size for the trade
among the islands at Aru, immediately began bargaining for them, and in a short tine had arranged
the nuns number of brass guns, gongs, sarongs, handkerchiefs, axes, white plates, tobacco,
and arrack, which he was to give for a hair which could be got ready in four days. We then
went to the village, which consisted only of three or four huts, situated immediately above
the beach on an irregular rocky piece of ground overshadowed with cocoa-nuts, palms, bananas,
and other fruit trees. The houses were very rude, black, and half rotten, raised a few feet
on posts with low sides of bamboo or planks, and high thatched roofs. They had small doors
and no windows, an opening under the projecting gables letting the smoke out and a little light
in. The floors were of strips of bamboo, thin, slippery, and elastic, and so weak that my feet
were in danger of plunging through at every step. Native boxes of pandanus-leaves and slabs
of palm pith, very neatly constructed, mats of the same, jars and cooking pots of native pottery,
and a few European plates and basins, were the whole furniture, and the interior was throughout
dark and smoke-blackened, and dismal in the extreme.

Accompanied by Ali and Baderoon, I now attempted to make some explorations, and we were followed
by a train of boys eager to see what we were going to do. The most trodden path from the beach
led us into a shady hollow, where the trees were of immense height and the undergrowth scanty.
From the summits of these trees came at intervals a deep booming sound, which at first puzzled
us, but which we soon found to proceed from some large pigeons. My boys shot at them, and after
one or two misses, brought one down. It was a magnificent bird twenty inches long, of a bluish
white colour, with the back wings and tail intense metallic green, with golden, blue, and violet
reflexions, the feet coral red, and the eyes golden yellow. It is a rare species, which I have
named Carpophaga concinna, and is found only in a few small islands, where, however, it abounds.
It is the same species which in the island of Banda is called the nutmeg-pigeon, from its habit
of devouring the fruits, the seed or nutmeg being thrown up entire and uninjured. Though these
pigeons have a narrow beak, yet their jaws and throat are so extensible that they can swallow
fruits of very large size. I had before shot a species much smaller than this one, which had
a number of hard globular palm-fruits in its crop, each more than an inch in diameter.

A little further the path divided into two, one leading along the beach, and across mangrove
and sago swamps the other rising to cultivated grounds. We therefore returned, and taking a
fresh departure from the village, endeavoured to ascend the hills and penetrate into the interior.
The path, however, was a most trying one. Where there was earth, it was a deposit of reddish
clay overlying the rock, and was worn so smooth by the attrition of naked feet that my shoes
could obtain no hold on the sloping surface. A little farther we came to the bare rock, and
this was worse, for it was so rugged and broken, and so honeycombed and weatherworn into sharp
points and angles, that my boys, who had gone barefooted all their lives, could not stand it.
Their feet began to bleed, and I saw that if I did not want them completely lamed it would
be wise to turn lack. My own shoes, which were rather thin, were but a poor protection, and
would soon have been cut to pieces; yet our little naked guides tripped along with the greatest
ease and unconcern, and seemed much astonished at our effeminacy in not being able to take
a walk which to them was a perfectly agreeable one. During the rest of our stay in the island
we were obliged to confine ourselves to the vicinity of the shore and the cultivated grounds,
and those more level portions of the forest where a little soil had accumulated and the rock
had been less exposed to atmospheric action.

The island of Ke (pronounced exactly as the letter K, but erroneously spelt in our maps Key
or Ki) is long and narrow, running in a north and south direction, and consists almost entirely
of rock and mountain. It is everywhere covered with luxuriant forests, and in its bays and
inlets the sand is of dazzling whiteness, resulting from the decomposition of the coralline
limestone of which it is entirely composed. In all the little swampy inlets and valleys sago
trees abound, and these supply the main subsistence of the natives, who grow no rice, and have
scarcely any other cultivated products but cocoa-nuts, plantains, and yams. From the cocoa-nuts,
which surround every hut, and which thrive exceedingly on the porous limestone soil and under
the influence of salt breezes, oil is made which is sold at a good price to the Aru traders,
who all touch here to lay in their stuck of this article, as well as to purchase boats and
native crockery. Wooden bowls, pans, and trays are also largely made here, hewn out of solid
blocks of wood with knife and adze; and these are carried to all parts of the Moluccas. But
the art in which the natives of Ke pre-eminently excel is that of boat building. Their forests
supply abundance of fine timber, though, probably not more so than many other islands, and
from some unknown causes these remote savages have come to excel in what seems a very difficult
art. Their small canoes are beautifully formed, broad and low in the centre, but rising at
each end, where they terminate in high-pointed beaks more or less carved, and ornamented with
a plume of feathers. They are not hollowed out of a tree, but are regularly built of planks
running from ego to end, and so accurately fitted that it is often difficult to find a place
where a knife-blade can be inserted between the joints. The larger ones are from 20 to 30 tons
burthen, and are finished ready for sea without a nail or particle of iron being used, and
with no other tools than axe, adze, and auger. These vessels are handsome to look at, good
sailers, and admirable sea-boats, and will make long voyages with perfect safety, traversing
the whole Archipelago from New Guinea to Singapore in seas which, as every one who has sailed
much in them can testify, are not so smooth and tempest-free as word-painting travellers love
to represent them.

The forests of Ke produce magnificent timber, tall, straight, and durable, of various qualities,
some of which are said to be superior to the best Indian teak. To make each pair of planks
used in the construction of the larger boats an entire tree is consumed. It is felled, often
miles away from the shore, cut across to the proper length, and then hewn longitudinally into
two equal portions. Each of these forms a plank by cutting down with the axe to a uniform thickness
of three or four inches, leaving at first a solid block at each end to prevent splitting. Along
the centre of each plank a series of projecting pieces are left, standing up three or four
inches, about the same width, and a foot long; these are of great importance in the construction
of the vessel. When a sufficient number of planks have been made, they are laboriously dragged
through the forest by three or four men each to the beach, where the boat is to be built. A
foundation piece, broad in the middle and rising considerably at each end, is first laid on
blocks and properly shored up. The edges of this are worked true and smooth with the adze,
and a plank, properly curved and tapering at each end, is held firmly up against it, while
a line is struck along it which allows it to be cut so as to fit exactly. A series of auger
holes, about as large as one's finger, are then bored along the opposite edges, and pins of
very hard wood are fitted to these, so that the two planks are held firmly, and can be driven
into the closest contact; and difficult as this seems to do without any other aid than rude
practical skill in forming each edge to the true corresponding curves, and in poring the holes
so as exactly to match both in position and direction, yet so well is it done that the best
European shipwright cannot produce sounder or closer-fitting joints. The boat is built up in
this way by fitting plank to plank till the proper height and width are obtained. We have now
a skin held together entirely by the hardwood pins connecting the edges of the planks, very
strong and elastic, but having nothing but the adhesion of these pins to prevent the planks
gaping. In the smaller boats seats, in the larger ones cross-beams, are now fixed. They are
sprung into slight notches cut to receive them, and are further secured to the projecting pieces
of the plank below by a strong lashing of rattan. Ribs are now formed of single pieces of tough
wood chosen and trimmed so as exactly to fit on to the projections from each plank, being slightly
notched to receive them, and securely bound to them by rattans passed through a hole in each
projecting piece close to the surface of the plank. The ends are closed against the vertical
prow and stern posts, and further secured with pegs and rattans, and then the boat is complete;
and when fitted with rudders, masts, and thatched covering, is ready to do battle with, the
waves. A careful consideration of the principle of this mode of construction, and allowing
for the strength and binding qualities of rattan (which resembles in these respects wire rather
than cordage), makes me believe that a vessel carefully built in this manner is actually stronger
and safer than one fastened in the ordinary way with nails.

During our stay here we were all very busy. Our captain was daily superintending the completion
of his two small praus. All day long native boats were coming with fish, cocoa-nuts, parrots
and lories, earthen pans, sirip leaf, wooden bowls, and trays, &c. &e., which every one of
the fifty inhabitants of our prau seemed to be buying on his own account, till all available
and most unavailable space of our vessel was occupied with these miscellaneous articles: for
every man on board a prau considers himself at liberty to trade, and to carry with him whatever
he can afford to buy.

Money is unknown and valueless here--knives, cloth, and arrack forming the only medium of exchange,
with tobacco for small coin. Every transaction is the subject of a special bargain, and the
cause of much talking. It is absolutely necessary to offer very little, as the natives are
never satisfied till you add a little more. They are then far better pleased than if you had
given them twice the amount at first and refused to increase it.

I, too, was doing a little business, having persuaded some of the natives to collect insects
for me; and when they really found that I gave them most fragrant tobacco for worthless black
and green beetles, I soon had scores of visitors, men, women, and children, bringing bamboos
full of creeping things, which, alas! too frequently had eaten each other into fragments during
the tedium of a day's confinement. Of one grand new beetle, glittering with ruby and emerald
tints, I got a large quantity, having first detected one of its wing-cases ornamenting the
outside of a native's tobacco pouch. It was quite a new species, and had not been found elsewhere
than on this little island. It is one of the Buprestidae, and has been named Cyphogastra calepyga.

Each morning after an early breakfast I wandered by myself into the forest, where I found delightful
occupation in capturing the large and handsome butterflies, which were tolerably abundant,
and most of them new to me; for I was now upon the confines of the Moluccas and New Guinea,--a
region the productions of which were then among the most precious and rare in the cabinets
of Europe. Here my eyes were feasted for the first time with splendid scarlet lories on the
wing, as well as by the sight of that most imperial butterfly, the "Priamus" of collectors,
or a closely allied species, but flying so high that I did not succeed in capturing a specimen.
One of them was brought me in a bamboo, bored up with a lot of beetles, and of course torn
to pieces. The principal drawback of the place for a collector is the want of good paths, and
the dreadfully rugged character of the surface, requiring the attention to be so continually
directed to securing a footing, as to make it very difficult to capture active winged things,
who pass out of reach while one is glancing to see that the next step may not plunge one into
a chasm or over a precipice. Another inconvenience is that there are no running streams, the
rock being of so porous a nature that the surface-water everywhere penetrates its fissures;
at least such is the character of the neighbourhood we visited, the only water being small
springs trickling out close to the sea-beach.

In the forests of Ke, arboreal Liliaceae and Pandanaceae abound, and give a character to the
vegetation in the more exposed rocky places. Flowers were scarce, and there were not many orchids,
but I noticed the fine white butterfly-orchis, Phalaenopsis grandiflora, or a species closely
allied to it. The freshness and vigour of the vegetation was very pleasing, and on such an
arid rocky surface was a sure indication of a perpetually humid climate. Tall clean trunks,
many of them buttressed, and immense trees of the fig family, with aerial roots stretching
out and interlacing and matted together for fifty or a hundred feet above the ground, were
the characteristic features; and there was an absence of thorny shrubs and prickly rattans,
which would have made these wilds very pleasant to roam in, had it not been for the sharp honeycombed
rocks already alluded to. In damp places a fine undergrowth of broadleaved herbaceous plants
was found, about which swarmed little green lizards, with tails of the most "heavenly blue,"
twisting in and out among the stalks and foliage so actively that I often caught glimpses of
their tails only, when they startled me by their resemblance to small snakes. Almost the only
sounds in these primeval woods proceeded from two birds, the red lories, who utter shrill screams
like most of the parrot tribe, and the large green nutmeg-pigeon, whose voice is either a loud
and deep boom, like two notes struck upon a very large gong, or sometimes a harsh toad-like
croak, altogether peculiar and remarkable. Only two quadrupeds are said by the natives to inhabit
the island--a wild pig and a Cuscus, or Eastern opossum, of neither of which could I obtain
specimens.

The insects were more abundant, and very interesting. Of butterflies I caught thirty-five species,
most of them new to me, and many quite unknown in European collections. Among them was the
fine yellow and black Papilio euchenor, of which but few specimens had been previously captured,
and several other handsome butterflies of large size, as well as some beautiful little "blues,"
and some brilliant dayflying moths. The beetle tribe were less abundant, yet I obtained some
very fine and rare species. On the leaves of a slender shrub in an old clearing I found several
fine blue and black beetles of the genus Eupholus, which almost rival in beauty the diamond
beetles of South America. Some cocoa-nut palms in blossom on the beach were frequented by a
fine green floral beetle (Lomaptera) which, when the flowers were shaken, flew off like a small
swarm of bees. I got one of our crew to climb up the tree, and he brought me a good number
in his hand; and seeing they were valuable, I sent him up again with my net to shake the flowers
into, and thus secured a large quantity. My best capture, however, was the superb insect of
the Buprestis family, already mentioned as having been obtained from the natives, who told
me they found it in rotten trees in the mountains.

In the forest itself the only common and conspicuous coleoptera were two tiger beetles. One,
Therates labiata, was much larger than our green tiger beetle, of a purple black colour, with
green metallic glosses, and the broad upper lip of a bright yellow. It was always found upon
foliage, generally of broad-leaned herbaceous plants, and in damp and gloomy situations, taking
frequent short flights from leaf to leaf, and preserving an alert attitude, as if always looking
out for its prey. Its vicinity could be immediately ascertained, often before it was seen,
by a very pleasant odour, like otto of roses, which it seems to emit continually, and which
may probably be attractive to the small insects on which it feeds. The other, Tricondyla aptera,
is one of the most curious forms in the family of the Cicindelidae, and is almost exclusively
confined to the Malay islands. In shape it resembles a very large ant, more than an inch long,
and of a purple black colour. Like an ant also it is wingless, and is generally found ascending
trees, passing around the trunks in a spiral direction when approached, to avoid capture, so
that it requires a sudden run and active fingers to secure a specimen. This species emits the
usual fetid odour of the ground beetles. My collections during our four days' stay at Ke were
as follow:--Birds, 13 species; insects, 194 species; and 3 kinds of land-shells.

There are two kinds of people inhabiting these islands--the indigenes, who have the Papuan
characters strongly marked, and who are pagans; and a mixed race, who are nominally Mahometans,
and wear cotton clothing, while the former use only a waist cloth of cotton or bark. These
Mahometans are said to have been driven out of Banda by the early European settlers. They were
probably a brown race, more allied to the Malays, and their mixed descendants here exhibit
great variations of colour, hair, and features, graduating between the Malay and Papuan types.
It is interesting to observe the influence of the early Portuguese trade with these countries
in the words of their language, which still remain in use even among these remote and savage
islanders. "Lenco" for handkerchief, and "faca" for knife, are here used to the exclusion of
the proper Malay terms. The Portuguese and Spaniards were truly wonderful conquerors and colonizers.
They effected more rapid changes in the countries they conquered than any other nations of
modern times, resembling the Romans in their power of impressing their own language, religion,
and manners on rode and barbarous tribes.

The striking contrast of character between these people and the Malays is exemplified in many
little traits. One day when I was rambling in the forest, an old man stopped to look at me
catching an insect. He stood very quiet till I had pinned and put it away in my collecting
box, when he could contain himself no longer, but bent almost double, and enjoyed a hearty
roar of laughter. Every one will recognise this as a true negro trait. A Malay would have stared,
and asked with a tone of bewilderment what I was doing, for it is but little in his nature
to laugh, never heartily, and still less at or in the presence of a stranger, to whom, however,
his disdainful glances or whispered remarks are less agreeable than the most boisterous open
expression of merriment. The women here were not so much frightened at strangers, or made to
keep themselves so much secluded as among the Malay races; the children were more merry and
had the "nigger grin," while the noisy confusion of tongues among the men, and their excitement
on very ordinary occasions, are altogether removed from the general taciturnity and reserve
of the Malay.

The language of the Ke people consists of words of one, two, or three syllables in about equal
proportions, and has many aspirated and a few guttural sounds. The different villages have
slight differences of dialect, but they are mutually intelligible, and, except in words that
have evidently been introduced during a long-continued commercial intercourse, seem to have
no affinity whatever with the Malay languages.

Jan. 6th.-The small boats being finished, we sailed for Aru at 4 P.M., and as we left the shores
of Ke had a line view of its rugged and mountainous character; ranges of hills, three or four
thousand feet high, stretching southwards as far as the eye could reach, everywhere covered
with a lofty, dense, and unbroken forest. We had very light winds, and it therefore took us
thirty hours to make the passage of sixty miles to the low, or flat, but equally forest-covered
Aru Islands, where we anchored in the harbour of Dobbo at nine in the evening of the next day.

My first voyage in a prau being thus satisfactorily terminated, I must, before taking leave
of it for some months, bear testimony to the merits of the queer old-world vessel. Setting
aside all ideas of danger, which is probably, after all, not more than in any other craft,
I must declare that I have never, either before or since, made a twenty days' voyage so pleasantly,
or perhaps, more correctly speaking, with so little discomfort. This I attribute chiefly to
having my small cabin on deck, and entirely to myself, to having my own servants to wait upon
me, and to the absence of all those marine-store smells of paint, pitch, tallow, and new cordage,
which are to me insupportable. Something is also to be put down to freedom from all restraint
of dress, hours of meals, &c., and to the civility and obliging disposition of the captain.
I had agreed to have my meals with him, but whenever I wished it I had them in my own berth,
and at what hours I felt inclined. The crew were all civil and good-tempered, and with very
little discipline everything went on smoothly, and the vessel was kept very clean and in pretty
good order, so that on the whole I was much delighted with the trip, and was inclined to rate
the luxuries of the semi-barbarous prau as surpassing those of the most magnificent screw-steamer,
that highest result of our civilisation.

CHAPTER XXX. THE ARU ISLANDS--RESIDENCE IN DOBBO

(JANUARY TO MARCH 1857.)

On the 8th of January, 1857, I landed at Dobbo, the trading settlement of the Bugis and Chinese,
who annually visit the Aru Islands. It is situated on the small island of Wamma, upon a spit
of sand which projects out to the north, and is just wide enough to contain three rows of houses.
Though at first sight a most strange and desolate-looking place to build a village on, it has
many advantages. There is a clear entrance from the west among the coral reefs that border
the land, and there is good anchorage for vessels, on one side of the village or the other,
in both the east and west monsoons. Being fully exposed to the sea-breezes in three directions
it is healthy, and the soft sandy heath offers great facilities for hauling up the praus, in
order to secure them from sea-worms and prepare them for the homeward voyage. At its southern
extremity the sand-bank merges in the beach of the island, and is backed by a luxuriant growth
of lofty forest. The houses are of various sizes, but are all built after one pattern, being
merely large thatched sheds, a small portion of which, next the entrance, is used as a dwelling,
while the rest is parted oft; and often divided by one or two floors, in order better to stow
away merchandise and native produce.

As we had arrived early in the season, most of the houses were empty, and the place looked
desolate in the extreme--the whole of the inhabitants who received us on our landing amounting
to about half-a-dozen Bugis and Chinese. Our captain, Herr Warzbergen, had promised to obtain
a house for me, but unforeseen difficulties presented themselves. One which was to let had
no roof; and the owner, who was building it on speculation, could not promise to finish it
in less than a month. Another, of which the owner was dead, and which I might therefore take
undisputed possession of as the first comer, wanted considerable repairs, and no one could
be found to do the work, although about four times its value was offered. The captain, therefore,
recommended me to take possession of a pretty good house near his own, whose owner was not
expected for some weeks; and as I was anxious to be on shore, I immediately had it cleared
out, and by evening had all my things housed, and was regularly installed as an inhabitant
of Dobbo. I had brought with me a cane chair, and a few light boards, which were soon rigged
up into a table and shelves. A broad bamboo bench served as sofa and bedstead, my boxes were
conveniently arranged, my mats spread on the floor, a window cut in the palm-leaf wall to light
my table, and though the place was as miserable and gloomy a shed as could be imagined, I felt
as contented as if I had obtained a well-furnished mansion, and looked forward to a month's
residence in it with unmixed satisfaction.

The next morning, after an early breakfast, I set off to explore the virgin forests of Aru,
anxious to set my mind at rest as to the treasures they were likely to yield, and the probable
success of my long-meditated expedition. A little native imp was our guide, seduced by the
gift of a German knife, value three-halfpence, and my Macassar boy Baderoon brought his chopper
to clear the path if necessary.

We had to walk about half a mile along the beach, the ground behind the village being mostly
swampy, and then turned into the forest along a path which leads to the native village of Wamma,
about three miles off on the other side of the island. The path was a narrow one, and very
little used, often swampy and obstructed by fallen trees, so that after about a mile we lost
it altogether, our guide having turned back, and we were obliged to follow his example. In
the meantime, however, I had not been idle, and my day's captures determined the success of
my journey in an entomological point of view. I had taken about thirty species of butterflies,
more than I had ever captured in a day since leaving the prolific banks of the Amazon, and
among them were many most rare and beautiful insects, hitherto only known by a few specimens
from New Guinea. The large and handsome spectre butterfly, Hestia durvillei; the pale-winged
peacock butterfly, Drusilla catops; and the most brilliant and wonderful of the clear-winged
moths, Cocytia durvillei, were especially interesting, as well, as several little "blues,"
equalling in brilliancy and beauty anything the butterfly world can produce. In the other groups
of insects I was not so successful, but this was not to be wondered at in a mere exploring
ramble, when only what is most conspicuous and novel attracts the attention. Several pretty
beetles, a superb "bug," and a few nice land-shells were obtained, and I returned in the afternoon
well satisfied with my first trial of the promised land.

The next two days were so wet and windy that there was no going out; but on the succeeding
one the sun shone brightly, and I had the good fortune to capture one of the most magnificent
insects the world contains, the great bird-winged butterfly, Ornithoptera Poseidon. I trembled
with excitement as I saw it coming majestically towards me, and could hardly believe I had
really succeeded in my stroke till I had taken it out of the net and was gazing, lost in admiration,
at the velvet black and brilliant green of its wings, seven inches across, its bolder body,
and crimson breast.

Jan. 26th.--Having now been here a fortnight, I began to understand a little of the place and
its peculiarities. Praus continually arrived, and the merchant population increased almost
daily. Every two or three days a fresh house was opened, and the necessary repairs made. In
every direction men were bringing in poles, bamboos, rattans, and the leaves of the nipa palm
to construct or repair the walls, thatch, doors, and shutters of their houses, which they do
with great celerity. Some of the arrivals were Macassar men or Bugis, but more from the small
island of Goram, at the east end of Ceram, whose inhabitants are the petty traders of the far
East. Then the natives of Aru come in from the other side of the islands (called here "blakang
tana," or "back of the country") with the produce they have collected during the preceding
six months, and which they now sell to the traders, to some of whom they are most likely in debt.

Almost all, or I may safely say all, the new arrivals pay me a visit, to see with their own
eyes the unheard-of phenomenon of a person come to stay at Dobbo who does not trade! They have
their own ideas of the uses that may possibly be made of stuffed birds, beetles, and shells
which are not the right shells--that is, "mother-of-pearl." They every day bring me dead and
broken shells, such as I can pick up by hundreds on the beach, and seem quite puzzled and distressed
when I decline them. If, however, there are any snail shells among a lot, I take them, and
ask for more--a principle of selection so utterly unintelligible to them, that they give it
up in despair, or solve the problem by imputing hidden medical virtue to those which they see
me preserve so carefully.

These traders are all of the Malay race, or a mixture of which Malay is the chef ingredient,
with the exception of a few Chinese. The natives of Aru, on the other hand, are, Papuans, with
black or sooty brown skims, woolly or frizzly hair, thick-ridged prominent noses, and rather
slender limbs. Most of them wear nothing but a waist-cloth, and a few of them may be seen all
day long wandering about the half-deserted streets of Dobbo offering their little bit of merchandise
for sale.

Living in a trader's house everything is brought to me as well as to the rest,--bundles of
smoked tripang, or "beche de mer," looking like sausages which have been rolled in mud and
then thrown up the chimney; dried sharks' fins, mother-of-pearl shells, as well as birds of
Paradise, which, however, are so dirty and so badly preserved that I have as yet found no specimens
worth purchasing. When I hardly look at the articles, and make no offer for them, they seem
incredulous, and, as if fearing they have misunderstood me, again offer them, and declare what
they want in return--knives, or tobacco, or sago, or handkerchiefs. I then have to endeavour
to explain, through any interpreter who may be at hand, that neither tripang nor pearl oyster
shells have any charms for me, and that I even decline to speculate in tortoiseshell, but that
anything eatable I will buy--fish, or turtle, or vegetables of any sort. Almost the only food,
however, that we can obtain with any regularity, are fish and cockles of very good quality,
and to supply our daily wants it is absolutely necessary to be always provided with four articles--tobacco,
knives, sago-cakes, and Dutch copper doits--because when the particular thing asked for is
not forthcoming, the fish pass on to the next house, and we may go that day without a dinner.
It is curious to see the baskets and buckets used here. The cockles are brought in large volute
shells, probably the Cymbium ducale, while gigantic helmet-shells, a species of Cassis, suspended
by a rattan handle, form the vessels in which fresh water is daily carried past my door. It
is painful to a naturalist to see these splendid shells with their inner whorls ruthlessly
broken away to fit them for their ignoble use.

My collections, however, got on but slowly, owing to the unexpectedly bad weather, violent
winds with heavy showers having been so continuous as only to give me four good collecting
days out of the first sixteen I spent here. Yet enough had been collected to show me that with
time and fine weather I might expect to do something good. From the natives I obtained some
very fine insects and a few pretty land-shells; and of the small number of birds yet shot more
than half were known New Guinea species, and therefore certainly rare in European collections,
while the remainder were probably new. In one respect my hopes seemed doomed to be disappointed.
I had anticipated the pleasure of myself preparing fine specimens of the Birds of Paradise,
but I now learnt that they are all at this season out of plumage, and that it is in September
and October that they have the long plumes of yellow silky feathers in full perfection. As
all the praus return in July, I should not be able to spend that season in Aru without remaining
another whole year, which was out of the question. I was informed, however, that the small
red species, the "King Bird of Paradise," retains its plumage at all seasons, and this I might
therefore hope to get.

As I became familiar with the forest scenery of the island, I perceived it to possess some
characteristic features that distinguished it from that of Borneo and Malacca, while, what
is very singular and interesting, it recalled to my mind the half-forgotten impressions of
the forests of Equatorial America. For example, the palms were much more abundant than I had
generally found them in the East, more generally mingled with the other vegetation, more varied
in form and aspect, and presenting some of those lofty and majestic smooth-stemmed, pinnate-leaved
species which recall the Uauassu (Attalea speciosa) of the Amazon, but which I had hitherto
rarely met with in the Malayan islands.

In animal life the immense number and variety of spiders and of lizards were circumstances
that recalled the prolific regions of south America, more especially the abundance and varied
colours of the little jumping spiders which abound on flowers and foliage, and are often perfect
gems of beauty. The web-spinning species were also more numerous than I had ever seen them,
and were a great annoyance, stretching their nets across the footpaths just about the height
of my face; and the threads composing these are so strong and glutinous as to require much
trouble to free oneself from them. Then their inhabitants, great yellow-spotted monsters with
bodies two inches long, and legs in proportion, are not pleasant to o run one's nose against
while pursuing some gorgeous butterfly, or gazing aloft in search of some strange-voiced bird.
I soon found it necessary not only to brush away the web, but also to destroy the spinner;
for at first, having cleared the path one day, I found the next morning that the industrious
insects had spread their nets again in the very same places.

The lizards were equally striking by their numbers, variety, and the situations in which they
were found. The beautiful blue-tailed species so abundant in Ke was not seen here. The Aru
lizards are more varied but more sombre in their colours--shades of green, grey, brown, and
even black, being very frequently seen. Every shrub and herbaceous plant was alive with them,
every rotten trunk or dead branch served as a station for some of these active little insect-hunters,
who, I fear, to satisfy their gross appetites, destroy many gems of the insect world, which
would feast the eyes and delight the heart of our more discriminating entomologists. Another
curious feature of the jungle here was the multitude of sea-shells everywhere met with on the
ground and high up on the branches and foliage, all inhabited by hermit-crabs, who forsake
the beach to wander in the forest. I lave actually seen a spider carrying away a good-sized
shell and devouring its (probably juvenile) tenant. On the beach, which I had to walls along
every morning to reach the forest, these creatures swarmed by thousands. Every dead shell,
from the largest to the most minute, was appropriated by them. They formed small social parties
of ten or twenty around bits of stick or seaweed, but dispersed hurriedly at the sound of approaching
footsteps. After a windy night, that nasty-looking Chinese delicacy the sea-slug was sometimes
thrown up on the beach, which was at such times thickly strewn with some of the most beautiful
shells that adorn our cabinets, along with fragments and masses of coral and strange sponges,
of which I picked up more than twenty different sorts. In many cases sponge and coral are so
much alike that it is only on touching them that they can be distinguished. Quantities of seaweed,
too, are thrown up; but strange as it may seem, these are far less beautiful and less varied
than may be found on any favourable part of our own coasts.

The natives here, even those who seem to be of pare Papuan race, were much more reserved and
taciturn than those of Ke. This is probably because I only saw them as yet among strangers
and in small parties, One must see the savage at home to know what he really is. Even here,
however, the Papuan character sometimes breaks out. Little boys sing cheerfully as they walk
along, or talk aloud to themselves (quite a negro characteristic); and try all they can, the
men cannot conceal their emotions in the true Malay fashion. A number of them were one day
in my house, and having a fancy to try what sort of eating tripang would be, I bought a couple,
paying for them with such an extravagant quantity of tobacco that the seller saw I was a green
customer. He could not, however, conceal his delight, but as he smelt the fragrant weed, and
exhibited the large handful to his companions, he grinned and twisted and gave silent chuckles
in a most expressive pantomime. I had often before made the same mistake in paying a Malay
for some trifle. In no case, however, was his pleasure visible on his countenance--a dull and
stupid hesitation only showing his surprise, which would be exhibited exactly in the same way
whether he was over or under paid. These little moral traits are of the greatest interest when
taken in connexion with physical features. They do not admit of the same ready explanation
by external causes which is so frequently applied to the latter. Writers on the races of mankind
have too often to trust to the information of travellers who pass rapidly from country to country,
and thus have few opportunities of becoming acquainted with peculiarities of national character,
or even of ascertaining what is really the average physical conformation of the people. Such
are exceedingly apt to be deceived in places where two races have long, intermingled, by looking
on intermediate forms and mixed habits as evidences of a natural transition from one race to
the other, instead of an artificial mixture of two distinct peoples; and they will be the more
readily led into this error if, as in the present case, writers on the subject should have
been in the habit of classing these races as mere varieties of one stock, as closely related
in physical conformation as from their geographical proximity one might suppose they ought
to be. So far as I have yet seen, the Malay and Papuan appear to be as widely separated as
any two human races that exist, being distinguished by physical, mental, and moral characteristics,
all of the most marked and striking kind.

Feb 5th.--I took advantage of a very fine calm day to pay a visit to the island of Wokan, which
is about a mile from us, and forms part of the "canna busar," or mainland of Aru. This is a
large island, extending from north to south about a hundred miles, but so low in many parts
as to be intersected by several creeks, which run completely through it, offering a passage
for good-sized vessels. On the west side, where we are, there are only a few outlying islands,
of which ours (Wamma) is the principal; but on the east coast are a great number of islands,
extending some miles beyond the mainland, and forming the "blakang tang," or "back country,"
of the traders, being the principal seat of the pearl, tripang, and tortoiseshell fisheries.
To the mainland many of the birds and animals of the country are altogether confined; the Birds
of paradise, the black cockatoo, the great brush-turkey, and the cassowary, are none of them
found on Wamma or any of the detached islands. I did not, however, expect in this excursion
to see any decided difference in the forest or its productions, and was therefore agreeably
surprised. The beach was overhung with the drooping branches of lame trees, loaded with Orchideae,
ferns, and other epiphytal plants. In the forest there was more variety, some parts being dry,
and with trees of a lower growth, while in others there were some of the most beautiful palms
I have ever seen, with a perfectly straight, smooth, slender stem, a hundred feet high, and
a crown of handsome drooping leaves. But the greatest novelty and most striking feature to
my eyes were the tree-ferns, which, after seven years spent in the tropics, I now saw in perfection
for the first time. All I had hitherto met with were slender species, not more than twelve
feet high, and they gave not the least idea of the supreme beauty of trees bearing their elegant
heads of fronds more than thirty feet in the air, like those which were plentifully scattered
about this forest. There is nothing in tropical vegetation so perfectly beautiful.

My boys shot five sorts of birds, none of which we had obtained during a month's shooting in
Wamma. Two were very pretty flycatchers, already known from New Guinea; one of them (Monarcha
chrysomela), of brilliant black and bright orange colours, is by some authors considered to
be the most beautiful of all flycatchers; the other is pure white and velvety black, with a
broad fleshy ring round the eye of are azure blue colour; it is named the "spectacled flycatcher"
(Monarcha telescopthalma), and was first found in New Guinea, along with the other, by the
French naturalists during the voyage of the discovery-ship Coquille.

Feb. 18th.--Before leaving Macassar, I had written to the Governor of Amboyna requesting him
to assist me with the native chiefs of Aru. I now received by a vessel which had arrived from
Amboyna a very polite answer informing me that orders had been sent to give me every assistance
that I might require; and I was just congratulating myself on being at length able to get a
boat and men to go to the mainland and explore the interior, when a sudden check came in the
form of a piratical incursion. A small prau arrived which had been attacked by pirates and
had a man wounded. They were said to have five boats, but more were expected to be behind and
the traders were all in consternation, fearing that their small vessels sent trading to the
"blakang tana" would be plundered. The Aru natives were of course dreadfully alarmed, as these
marauders attack their villages, burn and murder, and carry away women and children for slaves.
Not a man will stir from his village for some time, and I must remain still a prisoner in Dobbo.
The Governor of Amboyna, out of pure kindness, has told the chiefs that they are to be responsible
for my safety, so that they have au excellent excuse for refusing to stir.

Several praus went out in search of the pirates, sentinels were appointed, and watch-fires
lighted on the beach to guard against the possibility of a night attack, though it was hardly
thought they would be bold enough to attempt to plunder Dobbo. The next day the praus returned,
and we had positive information that these scourges of the Eastern seas were really among us.
One of Herr Warzbergen's small praus also arrived in a sad plight. It had been attacked six
days before, just as it was returning, from the "blakang tana." The crew escaped in their small
boat and hid in the jungle, while the pirates came up and plundered the vessel. They took away
everything but the cargo of mother-of-pearl shell, which was too bulky for them. All the clothes
and boxes of the men, and the sails and cordage of the prau, were cleared off. They had four
large war boats, and fired a volley of musketry as they came up, and sent off their small boats
to the attack. After they had left, our men observed from their concealment that three had
stayed behind with a small boat; and being driven to desperation by the sight of the plundering,
one brave fellow swam off armed only with his parang, or chopping-knife, and coming on them
unawares made a desperate attack, killing one and wounding the other two, receiving himself
numbers of slight wounds, and then swimming off again when almost exhausted. Two other prams
were also plundered, and the crew of one of them murdered to a man. They are said to be Sooloo
pirates, but have Bugis among them. On their way here they have devastated one of the small
islands east of Ceram. It is now eleven years since they have visited Aru, and by thus making
their attacks at long and uncertain intervals the alarm dies away, and they find a population
for the most part unarmed and unsuspicious of danger. None of the small trading vessels now
carry arms, though they did so for a year or two after the last attack, which was just the
time when there was the least occasion for it. A week later one of the smaller pirate boats
was captured in the "blakang tana." Seven men were killed and three taken prisoners. The larger
vessels have been often seen but cannot be caught, as they have very strong crews, and can
always escape by rowing out to sea in the eye of the wind, returning at night. They will thus
remain among the innumerable islands and channels, till the change of the monsoon enables them
to sail westward.

March 9th.-For four or five days we have had a continual gale of wind, with occasional gusts
of great fury, which seem as if they would send Dobbo into the sea. Rain accompanies it almost
every alternate hour, so that it is not a pleasant time. During such weather I can do little,
but am busy getting ready a boat I have purchased, for an excursion into the interior. There
is immense difficulty about men, but I believe the "Orang-kaya," or head man of Wamma, will
accompany me to see that I don't run into danger.

Having become quite an old inhabitant of Dobbo, I will endeavour to sketch the sights and sounds
that pervade it, and the manners and customs of its inhabitants. The place is now pretty full,
and the streets present a far more cheerful aspect than when we first arrived. Every house
is a store, where the natives barter their produce for what they are most in need of. Knives,
choppers, swords, guns, tobacco, gambier, plates, basins, handkerchiefs, sarongs, calicoes,
and arrack, are the principal articles wanted by the natives; but some of the stores contain
also tea, coffee, sugar, wine, biscuits, &c., for the supply of the traders; and others are
full of fancy goods, china ornaments, looking-glasses, razors, umbrellas, pipes, and purses,
which take the fancy of the wealthier natives. Every fine day mats are spread before the doors
and the tripang is put out to dry, as well as sugar, salt, biscuit, tea, cloths, and other
things that get injured by an excessively moist atmosphere. In the morning and evening, spruce
Chinamen stroll about or chat at each other's doors, in blue trousers, white jacket, and a
queue into which red silk is plaited till it reaches almost to their heels. An old Bugis hadji
regularly takes an evening stroll in all the dignity of flowing green silk robe and gay turban,
followed by two small boys carrying his sirih and betel boxes.

In every vacant space new houses are being built, and all sorts of odd little cooking-sheds
are erected against the old ones, while in some out-of-the-way corners, massive log pigsties
are tenanted by growing porkers; for how can the Chinamen exist six months without one feast
of pig?

Here and there are stalls where bananas are sold, and every morning two little boys go about
with trays of sweet rice and crated cocoa-nut, fried fish, or fried plantains; and whichever
it may be, they have but one cry, and that is "Chocolat-t--t!" This must be a Spanish or Portuguese
cry, handed down for centuries, while its meaning has been lost. The Bugis sailors, while hoisting
the main sail, cry out, "Vela a vela,--vela, vela, vela!" repeated in an everlasting chorus.
As "vela" is Portuguese a sail, I supposed I had discovered the origin of this, but I found
afterwards they used the same cry when heaving anchor, and often chanted it to "hela," which
is so much an universal expression of exertion and hard breathing that it is most probably
a mere interjectional cry.

I daresay there are now near five hundred people in Dobbo of various races, all met in this
remote corner of the East, as they express it, "to look for their fortune;" to get money any
way they can. They are most of them people who have the very worst reputation for honesty as
well as every other form of morality,--Chinese, Bugis, Ceramese, and half-caste Javanese, with
a sprinkling of half-wild Papuans from Timor, Babber, and other islands, yet all goes on as
yet very quietly. This motley, ignorant, bloodthirsty, thievish population live here without
the shadow of a government, with no police, no courts, and no lawyers; yet they do not cut
each other's throats, do not plunder each other day and night, do not fall into the anarchy
such a state of things might be supposed to lead to. It is very extraordinary! It puts strange
thoughts into one's head about the mountain-load of government under which people exist in
Europe, and suggests the idea that we may be over-governed. Think of the hundred Acts of Parliament
annually enacted to prevent us, the people of England, from cutting each other's throats, or
from doing to our neighbour as we would not be done by. Think of the thousands of lawyers and
barristers whose whole lives are spent in telling us what the hundred Acts of Parliament mean,
and one would be led to infer that if Dobbo has too little law England has too much.

Here we may behold in its simplest form the genius of Commerce at the work of Civilization.
Trade is the magic that keeps all at peace, and unites these discordant elements into a well-behaved
community. All are traders, and know that peace and order are essential to successful trade,
and thus a public opinion is created which puts down all lawlessness. Often in former year,
when strolling along the Campong Glam in Singapore, I have thought how wild and ferocious the
Bugis sailors looked, and how little should like to trust myself among them. But now I find
them to be very decent, well-behaved fellows; I walk daily unarmed in the jungle, where I meet
them continually; I sleep in a palm-leaf hut, which any one may enter, with as little fear
and as little danger of thieves or murder as if I were under the protection of the Metropolitan
police. It is true the Dutch influence is felt here. The islands are nominally under the government
of the Moluccas, which the native chiefs acknowledge; and in most years a commissioner arrives
from Amboyna, who makes the tour of the islands, hears complaints, settle disputes, and carries
away prisoner any heinous offender. This year he is not expected to come, as no orders have
yet been received to prepare for him; so the people of Dobbo will probably be left to their
own devices. One day a man was caught in the act of stealing a piece of iron from Herr Warzbergen's
house, which he had entered by making a hole through the thatch wall. In the evening the chief
traders of the place, Bugis and Chinese, assembled, the offender was tried and found guilty,
and sentenced to receive twenty lashes on the spot. They were given with a small rattan in
the middle of the street, not very severely, the executioner appeared to sympathise a little
with the culprit. The disgrace seemed to be thought as much of as the pain; for though any
amount of clever cheating is thought rather meritorious than otherwise, open robbery and housebreaking
meet with universal reprobation.

CHAPTER XXXI. THE ARU ISLANDS.--JOURNEY AND RESIDENCE IN THE INTERIOR.

(MARCH TO MAY 1857.)

MY boat was at length ready, and having obtained two men besides my own servants, after an
enormous amount of talk and trouble, we left Dobbo on the morning of March 13th, for the mainland
of Aru. By noon we reached the mouth of a small river or creek, which we ascended, winding
among mangrove, swamps, with here and there a glimpse of dry land. In two hours we reached
a house, or rather small shed, of the most miserable description, which our steersman, the
"Orang-kaya" of Wamma, said was the place we were to stay at, and where he had assured me we
could get every kind of bird and beast to be found in Aru. The shed was occupied by about a
dozen men, women, and children; two cooking fires were burning in it, and there seemed little
prospect of my obtaining any accommodation. I however deferred inquiry till I had seen the
neighbouring forest, and immediately started off with two men, net, and guns, along a path
at the back of the house. In an hour's walk I saw enough to make me determine to give the place
a trial, and on my return, finding the "Orang-kaya" was in a strong fever-fit and unable to
do anything, I entered into negotiations with the owner of the house for the use of a slip
at one end of it about five feet wide, for a week, and agreed to pay as rent one "parang,"
or chopping-knife. I then immediately got my boxes and bedding out of the boat, hung up a shelf
for my bird-skins and insects, and got all ready for work next morning. My own boys slept in
the boat to guard the remainder of my property; a cooking place sheltered by a few mats was
arranged under a tree close by, and I felt that degree of satisfaction and enjoyment which
I always experience when, after much trouble and delay, I am on the point of beginning work
in a new locality.

One of my first objects was to inquire for the people who are accustomed to shoot the Paradise
birds. They lived at some distance in the jungle, and a man was sent to call them. When they
arrived, we had a talk by means of the "Orang-kaya" as interpreter, and they said they thought
they could get some. They explained that they shoot the birds with a bow and arrow, the arrow
having a conical wooden cap fitted to the end as large as a teacup, so as to kill the bird
by the violence of the blow without making any wound or shedding any blood. The trees frequented
by the birds are very lofty; it is therefore necessary to erect a small leafy covering or hut
among the branches, to which the hunter mounts before daylight in the morning and remains the
whole day, and whenever a bird alights they are almost sure of securing it. (See Frontispiece.)
They returned to their homes the same evening, and I never saw anything more of them, owing,
as I afterwards found, to its being too early to obtain birds in good plumage.

The first two or three days of our stay here were very wet, and I obtained but few insects
or birds, but at length, when I was beginning to despair, my boy Baderoon returned one day
with a specimen which repaid me for months of delay and expectation. It was a small bird a
little less than a thrush. The greater part of its plumage was of an intense cinnabar red,
with a gloss as of spun glass. On the head the feathers became short and velvety, and shaded
into rich orange. Beneath, from the breast downwards, was pure white, with the softness and
gloss of silk, and across the breast a band of deep metallic green separated this colour from
the red of the throat. Above each eye was a round spot of the same metallic green; the bill
was yellow, and the feet and legs were of a fine cobalt óille, strikingly contrasting with
all the other parts of the body. Merely in arrangement of colours and texture of plumage this
little bird was a gem of the first water, yet there comprised only half its strange beauty.
Springing from each side of the breast, and ordinarily lying concealed under the wings, were
little tufts of greyish feathers about two inches long, and each terminated by a broad band
of intense emerald green. These plumes can be raised at the will of the bird, and spread out
into a pair of elegant fans when the wings are elevated. But this is not the only ornament.
The two middle feathers of the tail are in the form of slender wires about five inches long,
and which diverge in a beautiful double curve. About half an inch of the end of this wire is
webbed on the outer side only, awe coloured of a fine metallic green, and being curled spirally
inwards form a pair of elegant glittering buttons, hanging five inches below the body, and
the same distance apart. These two ornaments, the breast fans and the spiral tipped tail wires,
are altogether unique, not occurring on any other species of the eight thousand different birds
that are known to exist upon the earth; and, combined with the most exquisite beauty of plumage,
render this one of the most perfectly lovely of the many lovely productions of nature. My transports
of admiration and delight quite amused my Aru hosts, who saw nothing more in the "Burong raja"
than we do in the robin of the goldfinch.

Thus one of my objects in coming to the far fast was accomplished. I had obtained a specimen
of the King Bird of Paradise (Paradisea regia), which had been described by Linnaeus from skins
preserved in a mutilated state by the natives. I knew how few Europeans had ever beheld the
perfect little organism I now gazed upon, and how very imperfectly it was still known in Europe.
The emotions excited in the minds of a naturalist, who has long desired to see the actual thing
which he has hitherto known only by description, drawing, or badly-preserved external covering--especially
when that thing is of surpassing rarity and beauty, require the poetic faculty fully to express
them. The remote island in which I found myself situated, in an almost unvisited sea, far from
the tracks of merchant fleets and navies; the wild luxuriant tropical forest, which stretched
far away on every side; the rude uncultured savages who gathered round me,--all had their influence
in determining the emotions with which I gazed upon this "thing of beauty." I thought of the
long ages of the past, during which the successive generations of this little creature had
run their course--year by year being born, and living and dying amid these dark and gloomy
woods, with no intelligent eye to gaze upon their loveliness; to all appearance such a wanton
waste of beauty. Such ideas excite a feeling of melancholy. It seems sad, that on the one hand
such exquisite creatures should live out their lives and exhibit their charms only in these
wild inhospitable regions, doomed for ages yet to come to hopeless barbarism; while on the
other hand, should civilized man ever reach these distant lands, and bring moral, intellectual,
and physical light into the recesses of these virgin forests, we may be sure that he will so
disturb the nicely-balanced relations of organic and inorganic nature as to cause the disappearance,
and finally the extinction, of these very beings whose wonderful structure and beauty he alone
is fitted to appreciate and enjoy. This consideration must surely tell us that all living things
were not made for man. Many of them have no relation to him. The cycle of their existence has
gone on independently of his, and is disturbed or broken by every advance in man's intellectual
development; and their happiness and enjoyment, their loves and hates, their struggles for
existence, their vigorous life and early death, would seem to be immediately related to their
own well-being and perpetuation alone, limited only by the equal well-being and perpetuation
of the numberless other organisms with which each is more or less intimately connected.

After the first king-bird was obtained, I went with my men into the forest, and we were not
only rewarded with another in equally perfect plumage, but I was enabled to see a little of
the habits of both it and the larger species. It frequents the lower trees of the less dense
forests: and is very active, flying strongly with a whirring sound, and continually hopping
or flying from branch to branch. It eats hard stone-bearing fruits as large as a gooseberry,
and often flutters its wings after the manner of the South American manakins, at which time
it elevates and expands the beautiful fans with which its breast is adorned. The natives of
Aru call it "Goby-goby."

One day I get under a tree where a number of the Great Paradise birds were assembled, but they
were high up in the thickest of the foliage, and flying and jumping about so continually that
I could get no good view of them. At length I shot one, but it was a young specimen, and was
entirely of a rich chocolate-brown colour, without either the metallic green throat or yellow
plumes of the full-grown bird. All that I had yet seen resembled this, and the natives told
me that it would be about two months before any would be found in full plumage. I still hoped,
therefore, to get some. Their voice is most extraordinary. At early morn, before the sun has
risen, we hear a loud cry of "Wawk-wawk-wawk, wók-wók-wók," which resounds through the forest,
changing its direction continually. This is the Great Bird of Paradise going to seek his breakfast.
Others soon follow his example; lories and parroquets cry shrilly, cockatoos scream, king-hunters
croak and bark, and the various smaller birds chirp and whistle their morning song. As I lie
listening to these interesting sounds, I realize my position as the first European who has
ever lived for months together in the Aru islands, a place which I had hoped rather than expected
ever to visit. I think how many besides my self have longed to reach these almost fairy realms,
and to see with their own eyes the many wonderful and beautiful things which I am daily encountering.
But now Ali and Baderoon are up and getting ready their guns and ammunition, and little Brio
has his fire lighted and is boiling my coffee, and I remember that I had a black cockatoo brought
in late last night, which I must skin immediately, and so I jump up and begin my day's work
very happily.

