"But the doctor will stay, my dear? I hope I may look on that as fixed." Miss Dunstable, in
making this demand on the doctor's time, showed an energy quite equal to that with which she
invoked the gods that Tom Towers might not be absent. Now, to tell the truth, Dr. Thorne had
at first thought it very unreasonable that he should be asked to remain up in London in order
that he might be present at an evening party, and had for a while pertinaciously refused; but
when he learned that three or four prime ministers were expected, and that it was possible
that even Tom Towers might be there in the flesh, his philosophy also had become weak, and
he had written to Lady Arabella to say that his prolonged absence for two days further must
be endured, and that the mild tonics, morning and evening, might be continued. But why should
Miss Dunstable be so anxious that Dr. Thorne should be present on this grand occasion? It should not be your shame, "he added, giving him a Milreis squeezed
in the hand, "but I'm in a hurry, I must change my clothes and the Director still pay my respects.
"

"Waiting," asked Jeremy, who joined a movement thanks to the money, looked at and then shoved into
his pocket - "Waiting is the matter here - but no matter, do Everything already get, "and that
he disappeared from the door of Jeremiah was not the way the Man to do something half-begun, no further
reason to ask the owner of the house; he went into Oscar's room where he knew two tables, took
one of them and carried him upstairs. Then he was looking into Helen's room, and bedroom two
chairs, and the captured only once, He was also Oscar's basin and towel, with a comb, soap, toothbrush
and everything that it lay, and carried it to his guests quartered.

"The deuce also called" consoles life, when he got it, "that's already
used a towel!"

"Lord My goodness, you own," said Jeremiah;! "I do not even need, I always my handkerchief. What
is missing now? "

»Water and a clean towel."

Jeremiah shook his head, but still got down again and soon came to
the Demanded back.

Only instead of the towel he had brought a clean napkin, which he
Helen's dressing table found and taken immediately as good loot.

"And, as with the bed's," asked the stranger, as he took off his coat and shirt sleeves slipped
into the air.

»Bed? gives's not, "said Jeremiah dry," at least not now.

They want to but not yet put to sleep now? "

"No - but the evening."

"Well, by then all will be worried."

"And you can get something to eat in the house?"

To eat "?

Hm, "- said Jeremiah, who was also not very clear with him - 'then
we need to ask.

For now, people may still not equipped to. But since you prefer to go into the guest house to Bodenlos
- who's. "

"And what is the name of the owner of this house?"

»Spenke, master baker."

"Well, send him up to me after once - I will wash me first - so that I can talk to him. This is
a cursed barren stay here, and if he is not me wants to set up a
little more comfortable, I take off again.

"

"On the road," said Jeremiah;? "For further gives's no place you would have for perhaps to hire
in one of the gardens, an arbor.

"But get this, as if he's now Duty was done, he withdrew and pressed softly to the room of the
woman Countess over, which he now did not encounter much. The stranger could see up there now as
he finished with "the old man" was.

8.

The billeting.

Oskar and Helene had taken a walk through the small town to get used to the confusion to amuse
the newly arrived foreigners, and were the tired home returned.

As soon as Helen entered her room, she could not, of course there
alteration .

Escape The napkin was missing from her dressing table and sorted
out those submissions were wildly scattered, two chairs were missing
in addition to which they had been accustomed to store their things.

She rang her girls to learn who was in her room was.

Dorothea had not left in the whole time her kitchen and she could
therefore not give the slightest information.

Oscar, however, sought his room, threw his hat into a corner, himself
on the sofa and went on smoking his cigar in this position when he
was in the room above it the heard heavy footsteps of a man.

The house was built only slightly, and it sounded so clear down to him that he finally sat up
and listened.

"Who the hell up there because" he finally muttered quietly to himself
- "the Jeremiah am but I just with his empty carts in the city and
met Dorothy has no such Step.

"

He listened for a while, but since it did not fail to see that up
there a stranger However, he jumped up and finally climbed the stairs.

The door of the otherwise always empty Chamber was open and slightly
ajar, and curious about who might have to do something up there, pushed
them a little further and looked into it.

Lord of consoles life had just finished washing and was standing outside
one of the open casement, he provisionally used as a mirror to the
wohlgeölten hair, as well go the same wanted to arrange.

But when he heard the creaking of the door, he turned his head around and saw hardly come looking
Oscar, when he exclaimed:

"Ah, there is still someone living in the house. Do you live here? "

"Good morning," said Oscar, who found, on the stranger's extreme surprise here, now to him, now
on his case and box staring - "I suppose I live here!"

"Where is the only rotten waiter gone?"

? "The waiter said Oscar, still not trusting his eyes -" about the Jeremiah "

"I do not know his name and he wanted to come back still the same. Go back down? "

"I had the intention," replied Oscar.

"Oh, then you are so kind and send me a glass of up to tooth brushing. It is still do not set
up. This seems a good husbandry to be here!

"

"Please," said Oscar, who came out of his astonishment, no, "do not
geniren - With whom I have since actually the honor "?

"Stands of life," said the young man, his hair just the last line
of print - "to Clock how much is eaten here?

"

"A clock," said Oscar, the rest of tourism more and more encouraged that he at any rate must
be a guest of his mother if he could find no conceivable connection to it. Who would have the stranger
may be?

"Do you have a veritable Clock" asked this more at length.

"Yes," replied Oscar, as he looked then, "it will be a dozen clock."

"Oh, the better, then I can go over before that as Director.

Please, remember not to send me the glass is the same. "

"With the greatest pleasure," replied Oscar, pushed the door back into the castle, sent the girl
from the bottom with a glass up and then went to his mother's room to to inquire about the
stranger.

The Countess shut up her last letter when Oscar entered the room, and looked after her son did
not.

"Who is the Lord, Mama, you gave us because the quartered top," said
Oskar now;?

"The yes seems to be a queer fellow! "

The countess, who just wrote an address, turned his head in amazement over his shoulder and said:

"And
you ask me?

First you bring me, without the slightest first obtaining permission, a complete stranger into
the house, and then you do not even know himself who he is? Oskar, It gets worse with you
every week, and I fear that things can not be long! "

"I've brought in a stranger's house?" Said Oskar but now its part, surprised and with a certain
satisfaction that he was finally completely in a crime he imposed
was innocent - I'm gone for a walk with Helen and have the people,
because of the above Toilets were not seen in my entire life.

"

It was now to be amazed at the countess, and completely turning against Oscar, she exclaimed: "But
Helen can not have invited him!"

Helene - nonsense! - Helene was indeed the whole morning with me,
and we have no soul spoken, other than the Baron.

"

"But after all the Jeremiah has brought his luggage into the house and told me that everything in
Order is. "

"The Jeremiah?" Repeated Oscar, who only became more and more confused.

"And you have no idea who the stranger is?"

"He told me his name was on consoles life."

"And from where?"

"God knows - I do not know him, and Jeremiah - but the deuce again what we break our heads quite
unnecessarily, but we are truly the stranger, has accommodated the
so sans façon # # we may ask where it comes from and what he will!

"And with these words he shot also easily out of the door and was
just the stairs up, as he looked down Jeremiah enter into the vestibule.

"Jeremiah,"

he called down, "Come 'up again - but quickly!"

"I fly already," replied the latter, who hastened not there, for he
knew very well what awaited him now.

Oskar stood on top of the stairs, and as the old man had come up only so far as to it could reach
with his hand, he caught him in one ear and pulled him to the room his mother.

"Gosh, sir," cried the old man quietly, "you tear me from the left so spoon - What's that tender
for a reception? "

"Wait, you rascal shouted," Oscar, "he should still be tender!

Now only come with you and confessed to what you have done for damn
jokes today!

Then I bring it, Mom - Now down on his knees, villain, and now admit
that the kind of story with the Strangers!

"

"But, you cry but not only so," whispered Jeremy who is not in the least was put out of countenance
- "the city's needs but do not know what we are here talk to each
other, and the stranger has ears like a deer up there.

"

"Who is the stranger, and where does it come from?" Asked the countess strict.

"So let it go just my ear," asked Jeremy, "I will not run even more of it and it interferes
in the conversation. "

"Who is the stranger? I want to know, "repeated the Countess, by Oskar the ear of the ancients let go,
but he disguised the way out.

"Can not serve you, Madame," replied the old rascal with a shrug - "found him on the road today between
a whole mountain of suitcases and hat boxes, and there he could find no shelter, however, we have
space and I liked him, so I brought him home. "

"You liked, you called a halter," Oscar, "you liked it! And what right you have, the foreign Guest
lead here in the house? "

"Now you are even reasonable," said Jeremiah, without in the slightest
from his can be brought to rest.

"The strange young man is certainly a great man, for he has some very excellent leather case,
which must have cost a shameful money.

He is also rich as butter and thrown with the milreis all over the place. "

"But what is that to us?" Cried Oscar, while the Countess with surprise still not could be expressed.

"What
concerns you," Jeremiah repeated in complete peace of mind - "I want you . Say The room above
....«

! "Hey, husbandry," she cried at that moment, according to top-down,
"can be for no one look?

The whole house is so deserted - heh, HOLLAH! "

Jeremiah, who had interrupted his speech up as he heard the voice,
opened the door a little, stuck his head, cried aloud: "Be right,"
and then closed them again! that he, without turning a hair, quietly
continued:

»Stand but also empty and was not used."

Oscar laughed out just because the whole thing began to occur to him endlessly funny.

"I want to know just now actually," said the countess with a dark look at Oskar and Jeremiah,
"who still master here in the house.

They will in any case ensure Jeremiah that the stranger immediately leave our house again and does
another apartment. "

"Hast's not," Jeremiah said quietly, "You listen to me only. What's the matter of the empty box
up there? The stranger is a decent young man who will give you a good Miethe paid, and also
should have logiren on the road. "

"But who has he given permission to teach it?" Asked the countess.

"Only practical," said Jeremiah, "that's the main thing. Also, you're not with each other married,
and if he will not after two or three months like, you can billet out so it still again. "

"After
two or three months?" Cried the countess surprised.

"Or even later,"
said Jeremiah dry, but now I really must go up and see what does the
young man, he gave me is otherwise quite impatient and end up still
rough "- and no more waiting for an answer, he left the room and went
up the stairs.

"Such impudence to me but have not yet occurred,"
Oscar laughed, "and the simplest thing will be, I go up and ask the
Lord to his things at once back to pack up and vacate the house. "

"Wait
again," said his mother, who had meanwhile been thoughtfully at the
window, by stretching out a hand against him, "as you said that was
the Lord"?

"He called from consoles life."

"How old are about?"

"Well,
maybe three-or twenty-four years."

"Hmm - and he seems a good family?
Since we must not rude to at least be him, because in all probability,
he believes himself here in his full rights to are located and would
be moved hardly, if he knew how everything behaves. "

He said at
least quite naive, would be fed at what hour with us, "laughed Oskar.

The
countess was in the room and down and finally stopped in front of
her son.

"The thing can not last," she said, "for a lodger is allowed
to not just bring violence into the house. But as the young stranger
here probably in the colony remains, so it is just acting as wise,
not in strife, but in peace to separate again. Go up and invite him
for lunch today to be our guest - we 're alone - and at dinner he
may then learn how extraordinary way he was introduced to us. He is
then the whole afternoon, after another quarters look around. "

"The
Jeremiah is a divine man," Oscar said with a laugh.

"And the sooner
you fortschickst the back, the better as well," said his mother, "for
I'm not inclined to expose myself to the danger of such an arbitrary
servant God brought into even know what to be for unpleasant situations.
With such a stupid stock People is also nothing at all to start -
I would rather have to deal with a rogue, because before one can be
careful. "

Oscar had his doubts as to Jeremiah's stupidity, but things
went with the stranger him in the head around, and leaving the room,
he was just up to him when he made his Rooms come back Jeremiah saw
that on his head an armchair in the left hand while a boot-jack and
bore in his right hand a small mirror.

! "You are but a very vile,
cunning rascal," said Oscar, "who has for you allowed to plunder my
whole room? "

"Make no stories," Jeremiah replied, blinking his eyes,
is "the one splendid young man, and do already, as if he were quite
at home. "

Oskar, which made things fun, jumped up the stairs ahead
now. When he opened the door, was lord of life consoles already dressed,
with a pair of shiny leather boots in hand, in the middle of the room.

"Come
on, you - ah, it's you - sorry, I thought it was the rope that Servant,
who remains an eternity. "

"He's coming behind me," said Oscar, "Lord
of the consoles life, I should inform you that on time ate a clock
is. "

"Really? Very comfortable, I'll eat in my room. "

"This is
taken the necessary means have not yet," replied Oscar; "I have the
Order to ask you to dine with us. "

"Well," said panels of life,
who had already made at home, the American "freedom and equality "as
much as possible to get out of the way, and not just with the clear
Was whether he might forgive his future position in the colony something,
if he "With the" baker family dined, - "I eat a lot rather be alone."

"Then
let's now fallen at least once with us," Oscar laughed, "tomorrow
They at least can eat alone. "

"Well," replied desks of life - "Well
at last," he then turned to those just entering Jeremiah, giving him
the boot-jack and took off his dusty boots took off - and share "
The chair just then - oh, and a small mirror. This I must confess,
my dear Friend, to score, you appear to be not set up in the house.
The disorder is truly abysmal and the service even worse. What is
your name, eh? "

Jeremiah, on command, "said this worthy individual
in a stiff stance and looked a little uneasy glance over to Oscar,
which he did not know how to save the judge of the husbandry would
take. This amused but wonderfully well, and as the young man's boots
moved and then took his hat, he sat on a chair upside supporting himself
with both arms on the back and saw him smiling. But if there were, every tenant at Framley would vote
on the right side; I can assure you of that. Lord Lufton was saying so to me only this morning."
Frank Gresham made a pretty little speech in reply, such as young sucking politicians are expected
to make; and this, with sundry other small courteous murmurings, detained the Lufton party
for a minute or two in the ante-chamber. In the meantime the world was pressing on and passing
through to the four or five large reception-rooms--the noble suite which was already piercing
poor Mrs. Proudie's heart with envy to the very core. "These are the sort of rooms," she said
to herself unconsciously, "which ought to be provided by the country for the use of its bishops."

"But the people are not brought enough together," she said to her lord.

"No, no; I don't think they are," said the bishop.

"And that is so essential for a conversazione," continued Mrs. Proudie. "Now in Gloucester
Place--" But we will not record all her adverse criticisms, as Lady Lufton is waiting for us
in the ante-room. And now another arrival of moment had taken place;--an arrival indeed of
very great moment. To tell the truth, Miss Dunstable's heart had been set upon having two special
persons; and though no stone had been left unturned,--no stone which could be turned with discretion,--she
was still left in doubt as to both these two wondrous potentates. At the very moment of which
we are now speaking, light and airy as she appeared to be--for it was her character to be light
and airy--her mind was torn with doubts. If the wished-for two would come, her evening would
be thoroughly successful; but if not, all her trouble would have been thrown away, and the
thing would have been a failure; and there were circumstances connected with the present assembly
which made Miss Dunstable very anxious that she should not fail. That the two great ones of
the earth were Tom Towers of the Jupiter, and the Duke of Omnium, need hardly be expressed
in words. And now, at this very moment, as Lady Lufton was making her civil speeches to young
Gresham, apparently in no hurry to move on, and while Miss Dunstable was endeavouring to whisper
something into the doctor's ear, which would make him feel himself at home in this new world,
a sound was heard which made that lady know that half her wish had at any rate been granted
to her. A sound was heard--but only by her own and one other attentive pair of ears. Mrs. Harold
Smith had also caught the name, and knew that the duke was approaching. There was great glory
and triumph in this; but why had his grace come at so unchancy a moment? Miss Dunstable had
been fully aware of the impropriety of bringing Lady Lufton and the Duke of Omnium into the
same house at the same time; but when she had asked Lady Lufton, she had been led to believe
that there was no hope of obtaining the duke; and then, when that hope had dawned upon her,
she had comforted herself with the reflection that the two suns, though they might for some
few minutes be in the same hemisphere, could hardly be expected to clash, or come across each
other's orbits. Her rooms were large and would be crowded; the duke would probably do little
more than walk through them once, and Lady Lufton would certainly be surrounded by persons
of her own class. Thus Miss Dunstable had comforted herself. But now all things were going
wrong, and Lady Lufton would find herself in close contiguity to the nearest representative
of Satanic agency, which, according to her ideas, was allowed to walk this nether English world
of ours. Would she scream? or indignantly retreat out of the house?--or would she proudly raise
her head, and with outstretched hand and audible voice, boldly defy the devil and all his works?
In thinking of these things as the duke approached Miss Dunstable almost lost her presence
of mind. But Mrs. Harold Smith did not lose hers. "So here at last is the duke," she said,
in a tone intended to catch the express attention of Lady Lufton.

Mrs. Smith had calculated that there might still be time for her ladyship to pass on and avoid
the interview. But Lady Lufton, if she heard the words, did not completely understand them.
At any rate they did not convey to her mind at the moment the meaning they were intended to
convey. She paused to whisper a last little speech to Frank Gresham, and then looking round,
found that the gentleman who was pressing against her dress was--the Duke of Omnium! On this
great occasion, when the misfortune could no longer be avoided, Miss Dunstable was by no means
beneath herself or her character. She deplored the calamity, but she now saw that it was only
left to her to make the best of it. The duke had honoured her by coming to her house, and she
was bound to welcome him, though in doing so she should bring Lady Lufton to her last gasp.
"Duke," she said, "I am greatly honoured by this kindness on the part of your grace. I hardly
expected that you would be so good to me."

"The goodness is all on the other side," said the duke, bowing over her hand. And then in the
usual course of things this would have been all. The duke would have walked on and shown himself,
would have said a word or two to Lady Hartletop, to the bishop, to Mr. Gresham, and such like,
and would then have left the rooms by another way, and quietly escaped. This was the duty expected
from him, and this he would have done, and the value of the party would have been increased
thirty per cent. by such doing; but now, as it was, the news-mongers of the West End were likely
to get much more out of him.

Circumstances had so turned out that he had absolutely been pressed close against Lady Lufton,
and she, when she heard the voice, and was made positively acquainted with the fact of the
great man's presence by Miss Dunstable's words, turned round quickly, but still with much feminine
dignity, removing her dress from the contact. In doing this she was brought absolutely face
to face with the duke, so that each could not but look full at the other. "I beg your pardon,"
said the duke. They were the only words that had ever passed between them, nor have they spoken
to each other since; but simple as they were, accompanied by the little by-play of the speakers,
they gave rise to a considerable amount of ferment in the fashionable world. Lady Lufton, as
she retreated back on to Dr. Easyman, curtsied low; she curtsied low and slowly, and with a
haughty arrangement of her drapery that was all her own; but the curtsy, though it was eloquent,
did not say half so much,--did not reprobate the habitual iniquities of the duke with a voice
nearly as potent as that which was expressed in the gradual fall of her eye and the gradual
pressure of her lips. When she commenced her curtsy she was looking full in her foe's face.
By the time that she had completed it her eyes were turned upon the ground, but there was an
ineffable amount of scorn expressed in the lines of her month. She spoke no word, and retreated,
as modest virtue and feminine weakness must ever retreat, before barefaced vice and virile
power; but nevertheless she was held by all the world to have had the best of the encounter.
The duke, as he begged her pardon, wore in his countenance that expression of modified sorrow
which is common to any gentleman who is supposed by himself to have incommoded a lady. But
over and above this,--or rather under it,--there was a slight smile of derision, as though
it were impossible for him to look upon the bearing of Lady Lufton without some amount of ridicule.
All this was legible to eyes so keen as those of Miss Dunstable and Mrs. Harold Smith, and
the duke was known to be a master of this silent inward sarcasm; but even by them,--by Miss
Dunstable and Mrs. Harold Smith,--it was admitted that Lady Lufton had conquered. When her
ladyship again looked up, the duke had passed on; she then resumed the care of Miss Grantly's
hand, and followed in among the company.

"That is what I call unfortunate," said Miss Dunstable, as soon as both belligerents had departed
from the field of battle, "The Fates sometimes will be against one."

"But they have not been at all against you here," said Mrs. Harold Smith. "If you could arrive
at her ladyship's private thoughts to-morrow morning, you would find her to be quite happy
in having met the duke. It will be years before she has done boasting of her triumph, and it
will be talked of by the young ladies of Framley for the next three generations."

The Gresham party, including Dr. Thorne, had remained in the ante-chamber during the battle.
The whole combat did not occupy above two minutes, and the three of them were hemmed off from
escape by Lady Lufton's retreat into Dr. Easyman's lap; but now they, too, essayed to pass on.

"What, you will desert me," said Miss Dunstable. "Very well; but I shall find you out by and
by. Frank, there is to be some dancing in one of the rooms,--just to distinguish the affair
from Mrs. Proudie's conversazione. It would be stupid, you know, if all conversaziones were
alike; wouldn't it? So I hope you will go and dance."

"There will, I presume, be another variation at feeding time," said Mrs. Harold Smith.

"Oh yes, certainly; I am the most vulgar of all wretches in that respect. I do love to set
people eating and drinking--Mr. Supplehouse, I am delighted to see you; but do tell me--" and
then she whispered with great energy into the ear of Mr. Supplehouse, and Mr. Supplehouse again
whispered into her ear. "You think he will, then?" said Miss Dunstable. Mr. Supplehouse assented;
he did think so; but he had no warrant for stating the circumstance as a fact. And then he
passed on, hardly looking at Mrs. Harold Smith as he passed.

"What a hang-dog countenance he has," said that lady.

"Ah, you're prejudiced, my dear, and no wonder; as for myself I always liked Supplehouse. He
means mischief; but then mischief is his trade, and he does not conceal it. If I were a politician
I should as soon think of being angry with Mr. Supplehouse for turning against me as I am now
with a pin for pricking me. It's my own awkwardness, and I ought to have known how to use the
pin more craftily."

"But you must detest a man who professes to stand by his party, and then does his best to ruin it."

"So many have done that, my dear; and with much more success than Mr. Supplehouse! All is fair
in love and war,--why not add politics to the list? If we could only agree to do that, it would
save us from such a deal of heartburning, and would make none of us a bit the worse."

Miss Dunstable's rooms, large as they were--"a noble suite of rooms certainly, though perhaps
a little too--too--too scattered, we will say, eh, bishop?"--were now nearly full, and would
have been inconveniently crowded, were it not that many who came only remained for half an
hour or so. Space, however, had been kept for the dancers--much to Mrs. Proudie's consternation.
Not that she disapproved of dancing in London, as a rule; but she was indignant that the laws
of a conversazione, as re-established by herself in the fashionable world, should be so violently
infringed.

"Conversaziones will come to mean nothing," she said to the bishop, putting great stress on
the latter word, "nothing at all, if they are to be treated in this way."

"No, they won't; nothing in the least," said the bishop.

"Dancing may be very well in its place," said Mrs. Proudie.

"I have never objected to it myself; that is, for the laity," said the bishop.

"But when people profess to assemble for higher objects," said Mrs. Proudie, "they ought to
act up to their professions."

"Otherwise they are no better than hypocrites," said the bishop.

"A spade should be called a spade," said Mrs. Proudie.

"Decidedly," said the bishop, assenting.

"And when I undertook the trouble and expense of introducing conversaziones," continued Mrs.
Proudie, with an evident feeling that she had been ill-used, "I had no idea of seeing the word
so--so--so misinterpreted;" and then observing certain desirable acquaintances at the other
side of the room, she went across, leaving the bishop to fend for himself.

Lady Lufton, having achieved her success, passed on to the dancing, whither it was not probable
that her enemy would follow her, and she had not been there very long before she was joined
by her son. Her heart at the present moment was not quite satisfied at the state of affairs
with reference to Griselda. She had gone so far as to tell her young friend what were her own
wishes; she had declared her desire that Griselda should become her daughter-in-law; but in
answer to this Griselda herself had declared nothing. It was, to be sure, no more than natural
that a young lady so well brought up as Miss Grantly should show no signs of a passion till
she was warranted in showing them by the proceedings of the gentleman; but notwithstanding
this, fully aware as she was of the propriety of such reticence--Lady Lufton did think that
to her Griselda might have spoken some word evincing that the alliance would be satisfactory
to her. Griselda, however, had spoken no such word, nor had she uttered a syllable to show
that she would accept Lord Lufton if he did offer. Then again she had uttered no syllable to
show that she would not accept him; but, nevertheless, although she knew that the world had
been talking about her and Lord Dumbello, she stood up to dance with the future marquess on
every possible occasion. All this did give annoyance to Lady Lufton, who began to bethink herself
that if she could not quickly bring her little plan to a favourable issue, it might be well
for her to wash her hands of it. She was still anxious for the match on her son's account.
Griselda would, she did not doubt, make a good wife; but Lady Lufton was not so sure as she
once had been that she herself would be able to keep up so strong a feeling for her daughter-in-law
as she had hitherto hoped to do. "Ludovic, have you been here long?" she said, smiling as she
always did smile when her eyes fell upon her son's face.

"This instant arrived; and I hurried on after you, as Miss Dunstable told me that you were
here. What a crowd she has! Did you see Lord Brock?"

"I did not observe him."

"Or Lord De Terrier? I saw them both in the centre room."

"Lord De Terrier did me the honour of shaking hands with me as I passed through."

"I never saw such a mixture of people. There is Mrs. Proudie going out of her mind because
you are all going to dance."

"The Miss Proudies dance," said Griselda Grantly.

"But not at conversaziones. You don't see the difference. And I saw Spermoil there, looking
as pleased as Punch. He had quite a circle of his own round him, and was chattering away as
though he were quite accustomed to the wickedness of the world."

"There certainly are people here whom one would not have wished to meet, had one thought of
it," said Lady Lufton, mindful of her late engagement.

"But it must be all right, for I walked up the stairs with the archdeacon. That is an absolute
proof, is it not, Miss Grantly?"

"I have no fears. When I am with your mother I know I must be safe."

"I am not so sure of that," said Lord Lufton, laughing. "Mother, you hardly know the worst
of it yet. Who is here, do you think?"

"I know whom you mean; I have seen him," said Lady Lufton, very quietly.

"We came across him just at the top of the stairs," said Griselda, with more animation in her
face than ever Lord Lufton had seen there before.

"What; the duke?"

"Yes, the duke," said Lady Lufton. "I certainly should not have come had I expected to be brought
in contact with that man. But it was an accident, and on such an occasion as this it could
not be helped." Lord Lufton at once perceived, by the tone of his mother's voice and by the
shades of her countenance that she had absolutely endured some personal encounter with the
duke, and also that she was by no means so indignant at the occurrence as might have been expected.
There she was, still in Miss Dunstable's house, and expressing no anger as to Miss Dunstable's
conduct. Lord Lufton could hardly have been more surprised had he seen the duke handing his
mother down to supper; he said, however, nothing further on the subject.

"Are you going to dance, Ludovic?" said Lady Lufton.

"Well, I am not sure that I do not agree with Mrs. Proudie in thinking that dancing would contaminate
a conversazione. What are your ideas, Miss Grantly?" Griselda was never very good at a joke,
and imagined that Lord Lufton wanted to escape the trouble of dancing with her. This angered
her. For the only species of love-making, or flirtation, or sociability between herself as
a young lady, and any other self as a young gentleman, which recommended itself to her taste,
was to be found in the amusement of dancing. She was altogether at variance with Mrs. Proudie
on this matter, and gave Miss Dunstable great credit for her innovation. In society Griselda's
toes were more serviceable to her than her tongue, and she was to be won by a rapid twirl much
more probably than by a soft word. The offer of which she would approve would be conveyed by
two all but breathless words during a spasmodic pause in a waltz; and then as she lifted up
her arm to receive the accustomed support at her back, she might just find power enough to
say, "You--must ask--papa." After that she would not care to have the affair mentioned till
everything was properly settled.

"I have not thought about it," said Griselda, turning her face away from Lord Lufton.

It must not, however, be supposed that Miss Grantly had not thought about Lord Lufton, or that
she had not considered how great might be the advantage of having Lady Lufton on her side if
she made up her mind that she did wish to become Lord Lufton's wife. She knew well that now
was her time for a triumph, now in this very first season of her acknowledged beauty; and she
knew also that young, good-looking bachelor lords do not grow on hedges like blackberries.
Had Lord Lufton offered to her, she would have accepted him at once without any remorse as
to the greater glories which might appertain to a future Marchioness of Hartletop. In that
direction she was not without sufficient wisdom. But then Lord Lufton had not offered to her,
nor given any signs that he intended to do so; and to give Griselda Grantly her due, she was
not a girl to make a first overture. Neither had Lord Dumbello offered; but he had given signs,--dumb
signs, such as birds give to each other, quite as intelligible as verbal signs to a girl who
preferred the use of her toes to that of her tongue. "I have not thought about it," said Griselda,
very coldly, and at that moment a gentleman stood before her and asked her hand for the next
dance. It was Lord Dumbello; and Griselda, making no reply except by a slight bow, got up and
put her hand within her partner's arm.

"Shall I find you here, Lady Lufton, when we have done?" she said; and then started off among
the dancers. When the work before one is dancing the proper thing for a gentleman to do is,
at any rate, to ask a lady; this proper thing Lord Lufton had omitted, and now the prize was
taken away from under his very nose.

There was clearly an air of triumph about Lord Dumbello as he walked away with the beauty.
The world had been saying that Lord Lufton was to marry her, and the world had also been saying
that Lord Dumbello admired her. Now this had angered Lord Dumbello, and made him feel as though
he walked about, a mark of scorn, as a disappointed suitor. Had it not been for Lord Lufton,
perhaps he would not have cared so much for Griselda Grantly; but circumstances had so turned
out that he did care for her, and felt it to be encumbent upon him, as the heir to a marquisate,
to obtain what he wanted, let who would have a hankering after the same article. It is in this
way that pictures are so well sold at auctions; and Lord Dumbello regarded Miss Grantly as
being now subject to the auctioneer's hammer, and conceived that Lord Lufton was bidding against
him. There was, therefore, an air of triumph about him as he put his arm round Griselda's waist
and whirled her up and down the room in obedience to the music. Lady Lufton and her son were
left together looking at each other. Of course, he had intended to ask Griselda to dance, but
it cannot be said that he very much regretted his disappointment. Of course also Lady Lufton
had expected that her son and Griselda would stand up together, and she was a little inclined
to be angry with her protégée. "I think she might have waited a minute," said Lady Lufton.

"But why, mother? There are certain things for which no one ever waits: to give a friend, for
instance, the first passage through a gate out hunting, and such like. Miss Grantly was quite
right to take the first that offered." Lady Lufton had determined to learn what was to be the
end of this scheme of hers. She could not have Griselda always with her, and if anything were
to be arranged it must be arranged now, while both of them were in London. At the close of
the season Griselda would return to Plumstead, and Lord Lufton would go--nobody as yet knew
where. It would be useless to look forward to further opportunities. If they did not contrive
to love each other now, they would never do so. Lady Lufton was beginning to fear that her
plan would not work, but she made up her mind that she would learn the truth then and there--at
least as far as her son was concerned.

"Oh, yes; quite so;--if it is equal to her with which she dances," said Lady Lufton.

"Quite equal, I should think--unless it be that Dumbello is longer-winded than I am."

"I am sorry to hear you speak of her in that way, Ludovic."

"Why sorry, mother?"

"Because I had hoped--that you and she would have liked each other." This she said in a serious
tone of voice, tender and sad, looking up into his face with a plaintive gaze, as though she
knew that she were asking of him some great favour.

"Yes, mother, I have known that you have wished that."

"You have known it, Ludovic!"

"Oh, dear, yes; you are not at all sharp at keeping your secrets from me. And, mother, at one
time, for a day or so, I thought that I could oblige you. You have been so good to me, that
I would almost do anything for you."

"Oh, no, no, no," she said, deprecating his praise, and the sacrifice which he seemed to offer
of his own hopes and aspirations. "I would not for worlds have you do so for my sake. No mother
ever had a better son, and my only ambition is for your happiness."

"But, mother, she would not make me happy. I was mad enough for a moment to think that she
could do so--for a moment I did think so. There was one occasion on which I would have asked
her to take me, but--"

"But what, Ludovic?"

"Never mind; it passed away; and now I shall never ask her. Indeed I do not think she would
have me. She is ambitious, and flying at higher game than I am. And I must say this for her,
that she knows well what she is doing, and plays her cards as though she had been born with
them in her hand."

"You will never ask her?"

"No, mother; had I done so, it would have been for love of you--only for love of you."

"I would not for worlds that you should do that."

"Let her have Dumbello; she will make an excellent wife for him, just the wife that he will
want. And you, you will have been so good to her in assisting her to such a matter."

"But, Ludovic, I am so anxious to see you settled."

"All in good time, mother!"

"Ah, but the good time is passing away. Years run so very quickly. I hope you think about marrying,
Ludovic."

"But, mother, what if I brought you a wife that you did not approve?"

"I will approve of anyone that you love; that is--"

"That is, if you love her also; eh, mother?"

"But I rely with such confidence on your taste. I know that you can like no one that is not
ladylike and good."

"Ladylike and good; will that suffice?" said he, thinking of Lucy Robarts.

"Yes; it will suffice, if you love her. I don't want you to care for money. Griselda will have
a fortune that would have been convenient; but I do not wish you to care for that." And thus,
as they stood together in Miss Dunstable's crowded room, the mother and son settled between
themselves that the Lufton-Grantly alliance treaty was not to be ratified. "I suppose I must
let Mrs. Grantly know," said Lady Lufton to herself, as Griselda returned to her side. There
had not been above a dozen words spoken between Lord Dumbello and his partner, but that young
lady also had now fully made up her mind that the treaty above mentioned should never be brought
into operation.

We must go back to our hostess, whom we should not have left for so long a time, seeing that
this chapter is written to show how well she could conduct herself in great emergencies. She
had declared that after awhile she would be able to leave her position near the entrance door,
and find out her own peculiar friends among the crowd; but the opportunity for doing so did
not come till very late in the evening. There was a continuation of arrivals; she was wearied
to death with making little speeches, and had more than once declared that she must depute
Mrs. Harold Smith to take her place. That lady stuck to her through all her labours with admirable
constancy, and made the work bearable. Without some such constancy on a friend's part, it would
have been unbearable; and it must be acknowledged that this was much to the credit of Mrs.
Harold Smith. Her own hopes with reference to the great heiress had all been shattered, and
her answer had been given to her in very plain language. But, nevertheless, she was true to
her friendship, and was almost as willing to endure fatigue on the occasion as though she had
a sister-in-law's right in the house. At about one o'clock her brother came. He had not yet
seen Miss Dunstable since the offer had been made, and had now with difficulty been persuaded
by his sister to show himself.

"What can be the use?" said he. "The game is up with me now;" --meaning, poor ruined ne'er-do-well,
not only that that game with Miss Dunstable was up, but that the great game of his whole life
was being brought to an uncomfortable termination.

"Nonsense," said his sister; "do you mean to despair because a man like the Duke of Omnium
wants his money? What has been good security for him will be good security for another;" and
then Mrs. Harold Smith made herself more agreeable than ever to Miss Dunstable.

When Miss Dunstable was nearly worn out, but was still endeavouring to buoy herself up by a
hope of the still-expected great arrival--for she knew that the hero would show himself only
at a very late hour if it were to be her good fortune that he showed himself at all--Mr. Sowerby
walked up the stairs. He had schooled himself to go through this ordeal with all the cool effrontery
which was at his command; but it was clearly to be seen that all his effrontery did not stand
him in sufficient stead, and that the interview would have been embarrassing had it not been
for the genuine good-humour of the lady. "Here is my brother," said Mrs. Harold Smith, showing
by the tremulousness of the whisper that she looked forward to the meeting with some amount
of apprehension.

"How do you do, Mr. Sowerby?" said Miss Dunstable, walking almost into the doorway to welcome
him. "Better late than never."

"I have only just got away from the House," said he, as he gave her his hand.

"Oh, I know well that you are sans reproche among senators--as Mr. Harold Smith is sans peur;--eh,
my dear?"

"I must confess that you have contrived to be uncommonly severe upon them both," said Mrs.
Harold, laughing; "and as regards poor Harold, most undeservedly so: Nathaniel is here, and
may defend himself."

"And no one is better able to do so on all occasions. But, my dear Mr. Sowerby, I am dying
of despair. Do you think he'll come?"

"He? who?"

"You stupid man--as if there were more than one he! There were two, but the other has been."

"Upon my word, I don't understand," said Mr. Sowerby, now again at his ease. "But can I do
anything? shall I go and fetch anyone? Oh, Tom Towers; I fear I can't help you. But here he
is at the foot of the stairs!" And then Mr. Sowerby stood back with his sister to make way
for the great representative man of the age.

"Angels and ministers of grace assist me!" said Miss Dunstable. "How on earth am I to behave
myself? Mr. Sowerby, do you think that I ought to kneel down? My dear, will he have a reporter
at his back in the royal livery?" And then Miss Dunstable advanced two or three steps--not
into the doorway, as she had done for Mr. Sowerby--put out her hand, and smiled her sweetest
on Mr. Towers, of the Jupiter.

"Mr. Towers," she said, "I am delighted to have this opportunity of seeing you in my own house."

"Miss Dunstable, I am immensely honoured by the privilege of being here," said he.

"The honour done is all conferred on me," and she bowed and curtsied with very stately grace.
Each thoroughly understood the badinage of the other; and then, in a few moments, they were
engaged in very easy conversation.

"By the by, Sowerby, what do you think of this threatened dissolution?" said Tom Towers.

"We are all in the hands of Providence," said Mr. Sowerby, striving to take the matter without
any outward show of emotion. But the question was one of terrible import to him, and up to
this time he had heard of no such threat. Nor had Mrs. Harold Smith, nor Miss Dunstable, nor
had a hundred others who now either listened to the vaticinations of Mr. Towers, or to the
immediate report made of them. But it is given to some men to originate such tidings, and the
performance of the prophecy is often brought about by the authority of the prophet. On the
following morning the rumour that there would be a dissolution was current in all high circles.
"They have no conscience in such matters; no conscience whatever," said a small god, speaking
of the giants--a small god, whose constituency was expensive. Mr. Towers stood there chatting
for about twenty minutes, and then took his departure without making his way into the room.
He had answered the purpose for which he had been invited, and left Miss Dunstable in a happy
frame of mind.

"I am very glad that he came," said Mrs. Harold Smith, with an air of triumph.

"Yes, I am glad," said Miss Dunstable, "though I am thoroughly ashamed that I should be so.
After all, what good has he done to me or to anyone?" And having uttered this moral reflection,
she made her way into the rooms, and soon discovered Dr. Thorne standing by himself against
the wall.

"Well, doctor," she said, "where are Mary and Frank? You do not look at all comfortable, standing
here by yourself."

"I am quite as comfortable as I expected, thank you," said he. "They are in the room somewhere,
and, as I believe, equally happy."

"That's spiteful in you, doctor, to speak in that way. What would you say if you were called
on to endure all that I have gone through this evening?"

"There is no accounting for tastes, but I presume you like it."

"I am not so sure of that. Give me your arm and let me get some supper. One always likes the
idea of having done hard work, and one always likes to have been successful."

"We all know that virtue is its own reward," said the doctor.

"Well, that is something hard upon me," said Miss Dunstable, as she sat down to table. "And
you really think that no good of any sort can come from my giving such a party as this?"

"Oh, yes; some people, no doubt, have been amused."

"It is all vanity in your estimation," said Miss Dunstable; "vanity and vexation of spirit.
Well; there is a good deal of the latter, certainly. Sherry, if you please. I would give anything
for a glass of beer, but that is out of the question. Vanity and vexation of spirit! And yet
I meant to do good."

"Pray, do not suppose that I am condemning you, Miss Dunstable."

"Ah, but I do suppose it. Not only you, but another also, whose judgement I care for, perhaps,
more than yours; and that, let me tell you, is saying a great deal. You do condemn me, Dr.
Thorne, and I also condemn myself. It is not that I have done wrong, but the game is not worth
the candle."

"Ah; that's the question."

"The game is not worth the candle. And yet it was a triumph to have both the duke and Tom Towers.
You must confess that I have not managed badly." Soon after that the Greshams went away, and
in an hour's time or so, Miss Dunstable was allowed to drag herself to her own bed.

That is the great question to be asked on all such occasions, "Is the game worth the candle?"

CHAPTER XXX

The Grantly Triumph

It has been mentioned cursorily--the reader, no doubt, will have forgotten it--that Mrs. Grantly
was not specially invited by her husband to go up to town with a view of being present at Miss
Dunstable's party. Mrs. Grantly said nothing on the subject, but she was somewhat chagrined;
not on account of the loss she sustained with reference to that celebrated assembly, but because
she felt that her daughter's affairs required the supervision of a mother's eye. She also doubted
the final ratification of that Lufton-Grantly treaty, and, doubting it, she did not feel quite
satisfied that her daughter should be left in Lady Lufton's hands. She had said a word or two
to the archdeacon before he went up, but only a word or two, for she hesitated to trust him
in so delicate a matter. She was, therefore, not a little surprised at receiving, on the second
morning after her husband's departure, a letter from him desiring her immediate presence in
London. She was surprised; but her heart was filled rather with hope than dismay, for she had
full confidence in her daughter's discretion. On the morning after the party, Lady Lufton and
Griselda had breakfasted together as usual, but each felt that the manner of the other was
altered. Lady Lufton thought that her young friend was somewhat less attentive, and perhaps
less meek in her demeanour than usual; and Griselda felt that Lady Lufton was less affectionate.
Very little, however, was said between them, and Lady Lufton expressed no surprise when Griselda
begged to be left alone at home, instead of accompanying her ladyship when the carriage came
to the door. Nobody called in Bruton Street that afternoon--no one, at least, was let in--except
the archdeacon. He came there late in the day, and remained with his daughter till Lady Lufton
returned. Then he took his leave, with more abruptness than was usual with him, and without
saying anything special to account for the duration of his visit. Neither did Griselda say
anything special; and so the evening wore away, each feeling in some unconscious manner that
she was on less intimate terms with the other than had previously been the ease.

On the next day also Griselda would not go out, but at four o'clock a servant brought a letter
to her from Mount Street. Her mother had arrived in London and wished to see her at once. Mrs.
Grantly sent her love to Lady Lufton, and would call at half-past five, or at any later hour
at which it might be convenient for Lady Lufton to see her. Griselda was to stay and dine in
Mount Street; so said the letter. Lady Lufton declared that she would be very happy to see
Mrs. Grantly at the hour named; and then, armed with this message, Griselda started for her
mother's lodgings. "I'll send the carriage for you," said Lady Lufton. "I suppose about ten
will do."

"Thank you," said Griselda, "that will do very nicely;" and then she went. Exactly at half-past
five Mrs. Grantly was shown into Lady Lufton's drawing-room. Her daughter did not come with
her, and Lady Lufton could see by the expression of her friend's face that business was to
be discussed. Indeed, it was necessary that she herself should discuss business, for Mrs. Grantly
must now be told that the family treaty could not be ratified. The gentleman declined the alliance,
and poor Lady Lufton was uneasy in her mind at the nature of the task before her.

"Your coming up has been rather unexpected," said Lady Lufton, as soon as her friend was seated
on the sofa.

"Yes, indeed; I got a letter from the archdeacon only this morning, which made it absolutely
necessary that I should come."

"No bad news, I hope?" said Lady Lufton.

"No; I can't call it bad news. But, dear Lady Lufton, things won't always turn out exactly
as one would have them."

"No, indeed," said her ladyship, remembering that it was incumbent on her to explain to Mrs.
Grantly now at this present interview the tidings with which her mind was fraught. She would,
however, let Mrs. Grantly first tell her own story, feeling, perhaps, that the one might possibly
bear upon the other.

"Poor dear Griselda!" said Mrs. Grantly, almost with a sigh. "I need not tell you, Lady Lufton,
what my hopes were regarding her."

"Has she told you anything--anything that--"

"She would have spoken to you at once--and it was due to you that she should have done so--but
she was timid; and not unnaturally so. And then it was right that she should see her father
and me before she quite made up her own mind. But I may say that it is settled now."

"What is settled?" asked Lady Lufton. "If only the man with any Deal would
be, I would suggest that we stopped him and at least said hello. Too bad most delightful to
the girl who holds the old grouch here as a nun caught. "

"A brunette? Asked rounders.

"Yes," replied the director, "but how the hell you have already been found? You are still, as
far as I know, for the first time in the colony. "

"It Had the men not just made as the previous land surveyor," laughed
talent, "And the variation on the wrong side of the needle being sought,
then you would, just a few Strokes from the Cours, a most charming
young lady have seen in the forest that are out there with any perusal
of the time distribution.

"

"And this you have not said a word?" Said Guenther.

"I was allowed to disturb you but not," smiled the young man, "the way, I also believed that
we would pass on their way here, they must also have very rushed to us to come forward. "

"Strange
people," said the Director, shaking his head, "but in any case with the Old ones are known Schwartzau,
because you need to see it when you land on his Surveying the start, so he is aware of the limits
and learn.

He will also probably not take leave to call the Eckbäume to himself
constantly, and this saves You like a job.

"

"Then I will accompany you," said talent, "I am to interest of all original."

"Especially when there are brunettes, it seems to me," laughed the director, "but at least you
like make this area a small hunting party, because if you do not disturb the thick forest to find
You surely here and there a piece of red or black-game, or maybe even a tapir; that occur here
occasionally as well.

But now, gentlemen, we must not waste our time more waste, if we want to visit the other line
also. As soon as we earlier the ordinary road have been reached, we also reaching out our animals
can be better " - And the spores giving his own, he trotted as fast as he of the still rather
uneven Soil, allowed to enter the narrow way out in the woods.

So little had they seen it but by the inhabitants of the place, they were not yet just as it ignored
over ridden because the owner of the house seemed to be for all Stranger
to interest vividly when he does not come into personal contact with
them wanted.

For this purpose he had built himself a neat little waiting, in which a corner his garden, without
noticeable from the outside to be expired. This was also a favorite place have happened if
he was planning another job, and he read or wrote just there on loved ones, because he knew here
totally undisturbed.

The last conversation of the men was held just before the lookout,
and Meier, with a Book in hand, sitting in his bower, thereby become
aware of the strangers.

As long they were out there, he also listened to their conversation, and only when they continued
their path, He took his book again. But he seemed no real desire to read, too, for he put the
book down again after some time, for a while was on his back with
hands down and bowed his head in his arbor up and down, sighed a few
times, quite deep, and walked then slowly to his apartment and in
his wife's room, which deals with a work sat at the window.

His eyes sought Elise, but she was not in the room, and after a while
they came through the little garden gate that led out into the woods,
in and to the mother, where she hat and the book took off and was
about to sit quietly standing there on the instrument.

You were in the woods, Liza, "asked the father.

"Yes, Daddy."

"And there are strangers meet?"

The young girl looked up at him quickly and surprised, blushed easily,
but then said smile:

How do you know that already, dad?

"

"And you have not the same walk in the garden?"

Said the father, without their question to answer, "I have asked
you so many times not to go out there, at least not on Sundays, where
idle people out of the settlement only accessible in the neighborhood
swarming, "

The mother had had at the beginning of the conversation
her work fall in her lap, and their Face darkened more and more.

But now she was the daughter of the response to and said:

"And you want it not rather be locked up in a monastery?

That would in any case the simplest so that they at least not a human
would get to see more - not even one of the Sunday running around
farmers.

"

"But, Bertha," said Mr. Meier, amazed, looking up to his wife.

"Oh," replied they, "what is too much is too much!

The girl is now twenty years grown old and is kept hidden, as if we should be ashamed of us, the
young blood of the to show the world. "

"But, Bertha, You know ....« the man said reproachfully.

"Ah, I know everything," replied the woman, "but one thing you can overdo it, too, and I am not
in a position that is still more so calm to see. Here in this remote Corner of the world but you
have not truly ....« She stopped quickly and was angry resumed her work, which kept it but undecided
in his hand, while Elise friendly said:

his "Cease, mother, if the father happens to a favor, I can, too small Walk very well do without.
He is right, it is really just so pretty in the garden like out there, and I can make the same
movement. "

"Oh, you do not understand," continued the woman once irritated;! "I've got it now myself satisfied.
Seven years we sit here now, as the prisoners between bushes and trees jammed, while the settlers
down there looking forward to their lives and only their joyful noise sometimes over to us
sounds, seven years we have led a life that is a stone's mercy like
and I see no reason why we are now even longer as a hermit in our
Klause are buried.

I do all you argue the other hand, I could, Franz, "said them, a look of her husband's encountering,
"Everything I have ten times, hundred times considered but I myself can not stand it any longer. I want
to be free or I would rather be equal properly buried, and set a stone with name and date on top
of it. After white I do not even need different and yet here, at least not an eternity to sit
alone and indulge my own thoughts about which one end could be even more mad. "

Her husband did not answer. He had turned against the table, then head on his arm supported
and hid her face in her left hand.

Finally picked up a heavy sigh, his chest, and Elise, to his father stepping, put her arm around
his shoulder, leaned her forehead on his head and said gently:

"Do not be sad, Daddy - mother says not so very bad. You is what it is your loneliness become
so dear that you are afraid of any interference in it and you more
and more into yourself pulling back.

Just try it once out among the people, perhaps like you's own with them, because You feel so happy
here in your loneliness is not always where I often connected have been surprised in very sad
and depressed mood. - Go back between the people - communicate with them and let them communicate
with you, and if more do not get You surely this distraction, and have for quiet hours when you
feel the need of to be alone, so whatever your confidential place
up here.

"

"Let him go," the woman said angrily, "What good is it to us - to you or to me if He has set itself
only a cricket in the head, which he indulges, his own pleasure sake. "

"And you say to me, Bertha," the man asked, amazed at her looking up;? "Whose lament You remember
me? "

"Only a cricket's, is nothing more," replied the woman, without answering
directly the question "A fixed idea that you have set you in the head,
and what you do yourself and us miserable.

I have so much intelligence, too, that I realize how you torture us all quite in vain, and in
short, a life like this I can not stand it longer, it may now be what may. "

"What will," repeated softly, with a sigh, the man then got up and left Slowly the room.

"Do not quarrel with the father, mother," asked Eliza, as he the door
behind him to the castle pressed, had he "is already sad enough, and
that pushes him only after more down.

"

"Oh," replied the woman sullenly, "I finally got tired of the boring life, and even more Deinet
as I care! "

"But I'm longing so also did not, Mother, I ask not no better when I'm with you. "

"Since you just do not know better, and here will dry up gradually like a flower between blotting
paper, "was the reply. "You're a young girl and have to go out into the World, that's you
your father, I owe you, and if you understand nothing of the world,
I'm here, that I have to represent your rights or you had a right
to me later to make the most bitter complaints about it.

"

"But the father ....«

"Is a dreamer who sees ghosts everywhere, nothing more, and now the
windows imposed and will have only themselves to night.

If the first real sunshine came to him, he will also see that he has only dreamed of. The fact that you told
him this nor the Word talking about, the silliest is what you can do, and I had exactly the
opposite of you expected. - You're old enough, Elise, that you can think of a marriage, and who shall
You know because here in our garden to learn who you can find out where your father want to hide
even a few idle strollers? "

"But, dear mother," said Elise with a deep blush, for she had a strange way, just think in
this moment the young stranger in the forest and its flower theft "That is because surely a
long, long time, and if the father -"

"Oh," interrupted her mother, "You talk like the blind man by the color - you're twenty Years of age,
Lisa, and if we survive the next seven years or so, like the last,
so you're twenty-seven and can also be thirty-seven and forty-seven,
without anyone more worried about you.

No, I must make your mother, and - Leave that to you I just, I would have done with your father.
"

And the call was canceled for now. The mother began again, however, neglected their Work, and
Elise went up to her little room for a lot of different Things to think that today it went through
his mind confused and his head almost did. Strange, that her thoughts flew back again and again
to the young stranger whom they had only the brief moment seen. Why had the mother talk just
now of her marriage and say here is that it is high time to think
of something like this? - -

It was evening and night when the sun
hardly behind the light blue ridge West had set and before that the
slight overlapping clouds above trains with her most beautiful and
most rosy light had poured.

Rapidly turned pale, but only to the instantaneous Life tinged fog images, and how they only
barely in a magnificent silver gray over went those already accepted the dead lead-gray color,
the darkness in the tropics almost immediately follows.

The Comtesse Baule had left her room and went yet again, his arms on the Breast crossed, her
chin lowered to the delicate strings of beads that adorned her neck, with rapid, restless steps
in the small room up and down. She did not look at it, that it grew dark, and gradually become
totally night was, they did not hear that her mother had knocked out twice and called her name.
Only his own troubled thoughts occupied their minds, only their own,
anxious throbbing heart she was often desperately with both hands
until it is finally exhausted, physically, in a chair and threw there
well again a full hour sitting in a dull brooding.

But the night she was last intolerable. She stood up, turned on the light and attacked then the
first good book in order to distract themselves and their thoughts in a different path directing
it. Then suddenly they listened, because from the garden, or at least out of the bushes, him tightly
enclosed, met the melodic sounds of a violin her ear.

It was the quiet and plaintive melody speaking to the heart of the
Thuringian folk song, "Oh, how is it possible that I can "let you,
and how a sharp shot through her grief the simple touching song.

But who was playing there? First, they believed that someone from the Settlement was that pass
by there by chance - but the player remained on the same spot and through the open windows sounded
the tones, so softly he was playing well, come and clarity. -

Now all was quiet - only the crickets were chirping, and out of the
wood sounded the croaking the frogs.

Helene breathed a deep breath properly when the melancholy tune had ended, it was as whether
a load was taken from her soul, she stood at the window to the wonderful, starry night outside
our own.

Since swelled anew the sounds from the same place up but this time in a wild Capriccio, played
by a master hand, the wildest in the Variations passed and yet again recently in the simple,
first-hinged Theme of the popular song broke.

Helen was shy and frightened away from the window. Was it to her?

And who was it that the brought her here in this way his homage? Vollrath, perhaps, but they knew
exactly that he was not playing violin - and then who? The young schoolmaster in the place, they
often was annoyed with his attention, was a violinist, but a bungler, and this Strings revived
a master hand.

Hardly knowing what she did, she put out the light, thereby the attention of the unknown to distract
from their back window - but that she could not. The mysterious Player was not unsettled by,
as only the Capriccio melted gradually into ever softer tunes, till the last notes faded more and
more, and again, as before, the Silence of the night to lay the wood.

Helen did not know what was happening. That that was serenaded her, she could not conceal, and
melted in the melodic games in the native ways of rigid Despite the beautiful girl. As the
tune faded out there for a long time, she sat still covered by the curtain, at the open window,
and did not even know how to pay the Tears dripped between the delicate fingers through full
and heavy in her lap.

Below the house was left of the mysterious musician, however, not
be ignored.

Oskar, the dark until its new "slaves" - had been taught - as he called Jeremiah to treat his
horse, lay down on the sofa in the room stretched out, and whistled, to the annoyance of his
mother, but without the fact to be bothered in the least, a waltz,
began as that peculiar serenade.

At first he had also believed that there was any one from the settlement,
with the his violin since passed. When the music but always remained
in the same place, only silent for a while and then started again,
he became suspicious that the end even a serenade could be what his
sister would do, and his wantonness, of course, he had no Rest then
to get on the track.

As he listened, first out of the window, he
deceived the loud sound just like Helen, and he suspected the player
in the garden itself. He slipped out of the house that is only favors
behind the next bush, and behind them, his dark clothes, always Next
ago. But at last he came to the hedge and found now that the virtuoso,
however, outside its jurisdiction, but not out of his reach was because
he recognized Over the Hedge by the star light is also a dark-clad
figure, there leaned on a young palm tree.

The face itself, however,
admit he could not, for a partly shaded it the hat, and then the tops
of the lower palm itself, but also remained the same, and to exercise
a wanton trick, for that he was friend and foe as good enough.

In
the room of his sister was also carrying light shortly before the
window was burned and open, a proof that they favored the serenade
charm, and therefore reason enough for him him to play every Schabernak,
who was only in his power.

"To tell you the truth, I think they're too fine; but that'll do; take them in. And now, Mark,
if you're at leisure, we'll take a turn round the place." Mark, of course, was at leisure,
and so they started on their walk.

"You're too difficult to please about your stable," Robarts began.

"Never mind the stable now," said Lord Lufton. "The truth is, I am not thinking about it. Mark,"
he then said, very abruptly, "I want you to be frank with me. Has your sister ever spoken to
you about me?"

"My sister; Lucy?"

"Yes; your sister Lucy."

"No, never; at least nothing especial; nothing that I can remember at this moment."

"Nor your wife?"

"Spoken about you!--Fanny? Of course she has, in an ordinary way. It would be impossible that
she should not. But what do you mean?"

"Have either of them told you that I made an offer to your sister?"

"That you made an offer to Lucy?"

"Yes, that I made an offer to Lucy."

"No; nobody has told me so. I have never dreamed of such a thing; nor, as far as I believe,
have they. If anybody has spread such a report, or said that either of them have hinted at
such a thing, it is a base lie. Good heavens! Lufton, for what do you take them?"

"But I did," said his lordship.

"Did what?" said the parson.

"I did make your sister an offer."

"You made Lucy an offer of marriage!"

"Yes, I did;--in as plain language as a gentleman could use to a lady."

"And what answer did she make?

"She refused me. And now, Mark, I have come down here with the express purpose of making that
offer again. Nothing could be more decided than your sister's answer. It struck me as being
almost uncourteously decided. But still it is possible that circumstances may have weighed
with her which ought not to weigh with her. If her love be not given to anyone else, I may
still have a chance of it. It's the old story of faint heart, you know: at any rate, I mean
to try my luck again; and thinking over it with deliberate purpose, I have come to the conclusion
that I ought to tell you before I see her."

Lord Lufton in love with Lucy! As these words repeated themselves over and over again within
Mark Robarts's mind, his mind added to them notes of surprise without end. How had it possibly
come about,--and why? In his estimation his sister Lucy was a very simple girl--not plain indeed,
but by no means beautiful; certainly not stupid, but by no means brilliant. And then, he would
have said, that of all men whom he knew, Lord Lufton would have been the last to fall in love
with such a girl as his sister. And now, what was he to say or do? What views was he bound
to hold? In what direction should he act? There was Lady Lufton on the one side, to whom he
owed everything. How would life be possible to him in that parsonage--within a few yards of
her elbow--if he consented to receive Lord Lufton as the acknowledged suitor of his sister?
It would be a great match for Lucy, doubtless; but-- Indeed, he could not bring himself to
believe that Lucy could in truth become the absolute reigning queen of Framley Court.

"Do you think that Fanny knows anything of all this?" he said after a moment or two.

"I cannot possibly tell. If she does it is not with my knowledge. I should have thought that
you could best answer that."

"I cannot answer it at all," said Mark. "I, at least, have had no remotest idea of such a thing."

"Your ideas of it now need not be at all remote," said Lord Lufton, with a faint smile; "and
you may know it as a fact. I did make her an offer of marriage; I was refused; I am going to
repeat it; and I am now taking you into my confidence, in order that, as her brother, and as
my friend, you may give me such assistance as you can." They then walked on in silence for
some yards, after which Lord Lufton added: "And now I'll dine with you to-day if you wish it."
Mr. Robarts did not know what to say; he could not bethink himself what answer duty required
of him. He had no right to interfere between his sister and such a marriage, if she herself
should wish it; but still there was something terrible in the thought of it! He had a vague
conception that it must come to evil; that the project was a dangerous one; and that it could
not finally result happily for any of them. What would Lady Lufton say? That undoubtedly was
the chief source of his dismay.

"Have you spoken to your mother about this?" he said.

"My mother? no; why speak to her till I know my fate? A man does not like to speak much of
such matters if there be a probability of his being rejected. I tell you because I do not like
to make my way into your house under a false pretence."

"But what would Lady Lufton say?"

"I think it probable that she would be displeased on the first hearing it; that in four-and-twenty
hours she would be reconciled; and that after a week or so Lucy would be her dearest favourite
and the Prime Minister of all her machinations. You don't know my mother as well as I do. She
would give her head off her shoulders to do me a pleasure."

"And for that reason," said Mark Robarts, "you ought, if possible, to do her pleasure."

"I cannot absolutely marry a wife of her choosing, if you mean that," said Lord Lufton. They
went on walking about the garden for an hour, but they hardly got any farther than the point
to which we have now brought them. Mark Robarts could not make up his mind on the spur of the
moment; nor, as he said more than once to Lord Lufton, could he be at all sure that Lucy would
in any way be guided by him. It was, therefore, at last settled between them that Lord Lufton
should come to the parsonage immediately after breakfast on the following morning. It was agreed
also that the dinner had better not come off, and Robarts promised that he would, if possible,
have determined by the morning as to what advice he would give his sister. He went direct home
to the parsonage from Framley Court, feeling that he was altogether in the dark till he should
have consulted his wife. How would he feel if Lucy were to become Lady Lufton? and how would
he look Lady Lufton in the face in telling her that such was to be his sister's destiny? On
returning home he immediately found his wife, and had not been closeted with her five minutes
before he knew, at any rate, all that she knew. "And you mean to say that she does love him?"
said Mark.

"Indeed she does; and is it not natural that she should? When I saw them so much together I
feared that she would. But I never thought that he would care for her." Even Fanny did not
as yet give Lucy credit for half her attractiveness. After an hour's talking the interview
between the husband and wife ended in a message to Lucy, begging her to join them both in the
book-room.

"Aunt Lucy," said a chubby little darling, who was taken up into his aunt's arms as he spoke,
"papa and mamma 'ant 'oo in te tuddy, and I musn't go wis 'oo." Lucy, as she kissed the boy
and pressed his face against her own, felt that her blood was running quick to her heart.

"Musn't 'oo go wis me, my own one?" she said as she put her playfellow down; but she played
with the child only because she did not wish to betray, even to him, that she was hardly mistress
of herself. She knew that Lord Lufton was at Framley; she knew that her brother had been to
him; she knew that a proposal had been made that he should come there that day to dinner. Must
it not, therefore, be the case that this call to a meeting in the study had arisen out of Lord
Lufton's arrival at Framley? and yet, how could it have done so? Had Fanny betrayed her in
order to prevent the dinner invitation? It could not be possible that Lord Lufton himself should
have spoken on the subject! And then she again stooped to kiss the child, rubbed her hands
across her forehead to smooth her hair, and erase, if that might be possible, the look of care
which she wore, and then descended slowly to her brother's sitting-room. Her hand paused for
a second on the door ere she opened it, but she had resolved that, come what might, she would
be brave. She pushed it open and walked in with a bold front, with eyes wide open, and a slow
step. "Frank says that you want me," she said. Mr. Robarts and Fanny were both standing up
by the fireplace, and each waited a second for the other to speak, when Lucy entered the room,
and then Fanny began,--

"Lord Lufton is here, Lucy."

"Here! Where? At the parsonage?"

"No, not at the parsonage; but over at Framley Court," said Mark.

"And he promises to call here after breakfast to-morrow," said Fanny. And then again there
was a pause. Mrs. Robarts hardly dared to look Lucy in the face. She had not betrayed her trust,
seeing that the secret had been told to Mark, not by her, but by Lord Lufton; but she could
not but feel that Lucy would think that she had betrayed it.

"Very well," said Lucy, trying to smile; "I have no objection in life."

"But, Lucy, dear,"--and now Mrs. Roberts put her arm round her sister-in-law's waist--"he is
coming here especially to see you."

"Oh; that makes a difference. I am afraid that I shall be--engaged."

"He has told everything to Mark," said Mrs. Roberts. Lucy now felt that her bravery was almost
deserting her. She hardly knew which way to look or how to stand. Had Fanny told everything
also? There was so much that Fanny knew that Lord Lufton could not have known. But, in truth,
Fanny had told all--the whole story of Lucy's love, and had described the reasons which had
induced her to reject her suitor; and had done so in words which, had Lord Lufton heard them,
would have made him twice as passionate in his love. And then it certainly did occur to Lucy
to think why Lord Lufton should have come to Framley and told all this history to her brother.
She attempted for a moment to make herself believe that she was angry with him for doing so.
But she was not angry. She had not time to argue much about it, but there came upon her a gratified
sensation of having been remembered, and thought of, and--loved. Must it not be so? Could it
be possible that he himself would have told this tale to her brother, if he did not still love
her? Fifty times she had said to herself that his offer had been an affair of the moment, and
fifty times she had been unhappy in so saying. But this new coming of his could not be an affair
of the moment. She had been the dupe, she had thought, of an absurd passion on her own part;
but now--how was it now? She did not bring herself to think that she should ever be Lady Lufton.
She had still, in some perversely obstinate manner, made up her mind against that result. But
yet, nevertheless, it did in some unaccountable manner satisfy her to feel that Lord Lufton
had himself come down to Framley and himself told this story. "He has told everything to Mark,"
said Mrs. Roberts; and then again there was a pause for a moment, during which these thoughts
passed through Lucy's mind.

"Yes," said Mark, "he has told me all, and he is coming here to-morrow morning that he may
receive an answer from yourself."

"What answer?" said Lucy, trembling.

"Nay, dearest; who can say that but yourself?" and her sister-in-law, as she spoke, pressed
close against her. "You must say that yourself." Mrs. Robarts, in her long conversation with
her husband, had pleaded strongly on Lucy's behalf, taking as it were a part against Lady Lufton.
She had said that if Lord Lufton persevered in his suit, they at the parsonage could not be
justified in robbing Lucy of all that she had won for herself, in order to do Lady Lufton's
pleasure.

"But she will think," said Mark, "that we have plotted and intrigued for this. She will call
us ungrateful, and will make Lucy's life wretched." To which the wife bad answered, that all
that must be left in God's hands. They had not plotted or intrigued. Lucy, though loving the
man in her heart of hearts, had already once refused him, because she would not be thought
to have snatched at so great a prize. But if Lord Lufton loved her so warmly that he had come
down there in this manner, on purpose, as he himself had put it, that he might learn his fate,
then--so argued Mrs. Robarts--they two, let their loyalty to Lady Lufton be ever so strong,
could not justify it to their consciences to stand between Lucy and her lover. Mark had still
somewhat demurred to this, suggesting how terrible would be their plight if they should now
encourage Lord Lufton, and if he, after such encouragement, when they should have quarrelled
with Lady Lufton, should allow himself to be led away from his engagement by his mother. To
which Fanny had answered that justice was justice, and that right was right. Everything must
be told to Lucy, and she must judge for herself.

"But I do not know what Lord Lufton wants," said Lucy, with her eyes fixed upon the ground,
and now trembling more than ever. "He did come to me, and I did give him an answer."

"And is that answer to be final?" said Mark--somewhat cruelly, for Lucy had not yet been told
that her lover had made any repetition of his proposal. Fanny, however, determined that no
injustice should be done, and therefore she at last continued the story.

"We know that you did give him an answer, dearest; but gentlemen sometimes will not put up
with one answer on such a subject. Lord Lufton has declared to Mark that he means to ask again.
He has come down here on purpose to do so."

"And Lady Lufton--" said Lucy, speaking hardly above a whisper, and still hiding her face as
she leaned against her sister's shoulder.

"Lord Lufton has not spoken to his mother about it," said Mark; and it immediately became clear
to Lucy, from the tone of her brother's voice, that he, at least, would not be pleased, should
she accept her lover's vow.

"You must decide out of your own heart, dear," said Fanny, generously. "Mark and I know how
well you have behaved, for I have told him everything." Lucy shuddered and leaned closer against
her sister as this was said to her. "I had no alternative, dearest, but to tell him. It was
best so; was it not? But nothing has been told to Lord Lufton. Mark would not let him come
here to-day, because it would have flurried you, and he wished to give you time to think. But
you can see him to-morrow morning--can you not? and then answer him."

Lucy now stood perfectly silent, feeling that she dearly loved her sister-in-law for her sisterly
kindness--for that sisterly wish to promote a sister's love; but still there was in her mind
a strong resolve not to allow Lord Lufton to come there under the idea that he would be received
as a favoured lover. Her love was powerful, but so also was her pride; and she could not bring
herself to bear the scorn which would lay in Lady Lufton's eyes. "His mother will despise me,
and then he will despise me too," she said to herself; and with a strong gulp of disappointed
love and ambition she determined to persist. "Shall we leave you now, dear; and speak of it
again to-morrow morning before he comes?" said Fanny.

"That will be the best," said Mark. "Turn it in your mind every way to-night. Think of it when
you have said your prayers--and, Lucy, come here to me;"--then, taking her in his arms, he
kissed her with a tenderness that was not customary with him towards her. "It is fair," said
he, "that I should tell you this: that I have perfect confidence in your judgement and feeling;
and that I will stand by you as your brother in whatever decision you may come to. Fanny and
I both think that you have behaved excellently, and are both of us sure that you will do what
is best. Whatever you do I will stick to you;--and so will Fanny."

"Dearest, dearest Mark!"

"And now we will say nothing more about it till to-morrow morning," said Fanny. But Lucy felt
that this saying nothing more about it till to-morrow morning would be tantamount to an acceptance
on her part of Lord Lufton's offer. Mrs. Robarts knew, and Mr. Robarts also now knew, the secret
of her heart; and if, such being the case, she allowed Lord Lufton to come there with the acknowledged
purpose of pleading his own suit, it would be impossible for her not to yield. If she were
resolved that she would not yield, now was the time for her to stand her ground and make her
fight. "Do not go, Fanny; at least not quite yet," she said.

"Well, dear?"

"I want you to stay while I tell Mark. He must not let Lord Lufton come here to-morrow."

"Not let him!" said Mrs. Robarts. Mr. Robarts said nothing, but he felt that his sister was
rising in his esteem from minute to minute.

"No; Mark must bid him not come. He will not wish to pain me when it can do no good. Look here,
Mark;" and she walked over to her brother, and put both her hands upon his arm. "I do love
Lord Lufton. I had no such meaning or thought when I first knew him. But I do love him--I love
him dearly;--almost as well as Fanny loves you, I suppose. You may tell him so if you think
proper--nay, you must tell him so, or he will not understand me. But tell him this, as coming
from me: that I will never marry him, unless his mother asks me."

"She will not do that, I fear," said Mark, sorrowfully.

"No; I suppose not," said Lucy, now regaining all her courage. "If I thought it probable that
she should wish me to be her daughter-in-law, it would not be necessary that I should make
such a stipulation. It is because she will not wish it; because she would regard me as unfit
to--to--to mate with her son. She would hate me, and scorn me; and then he would begin to scorn
me, and perhaps would cease to love me. I could not bear her eye upon me, if she thought that
I had injured her son. Mark, you will go to him now; will you not? and explain this to him;--as
much of it as is necessary. Tell him, that if his mother asks me I will--consent. But that
as I know that she never will, he is to look upon all that he has said as forgotten. With me
it shall be the same as though it were forgotten." Such was her verdict, and so confident were
they both of her firmness--of her obstinacy Mark would have called it on any other occasion,--that
they neither of them sought to make her alter it.

"You will go to him now--this afternoon; will you not?" she said; and Mark promised that he
would. He could not but feel that he himself was greatly relieved. Lady Lufton might, probably,
hear that her son had been fool enough to fall in love with the parson's sister; but under
existing circumstances she could not consider herself aggrieved either by the parson or by
his sister. Lucy was behaving well, and Mark was proud of her. Lucy was behaving with fierce
spirit, and Fanny was grieving for her.

"I'd rather be by myself till dinner-time," said Lucy, as Mrs. Robarts prepared to go with
her out of the room. "Dear Fanny, don't look unhappy; there's nothing to make us unhappy. I
told you I should want goat's milk, and that will be all." Robarts, after sitting for an hour
with his wife, did return again to Framley Court; and, after a considerable search, found Lord
Lufton returning home to a late dinner.

"Unless my mother asks her," said he, when the story had been told him. "That is nonsense.
Surely you told her that such is not the way of the world." Robarts endeavoured to explain
to him that Lucy could not endure to think that her husband's mother should look on her with
disfavour.

"Does she think that my mother dislikes her; her specially?" asked Lord Lufton. No; Robarts
could not suppose that that was the case; but Lady Lufton might probably think that a marriage
with a clergyman's sister would be a mésalliance.

"That is out of the question," said Lord Lufton; "as she has especially wanted me to marry
a clergyman's daughter for some time past. But, Mark, it is absurd talking about my mother.
A man in these days is not to marry as his mother bids him." Mark could only assure him, in
answer to all this, that Lucy was very firm in what she was doing, that she had quite made
up her mind, and that she altogether absolved Lord Lufton from any necessity to speak to his
mother, if he did not think well of doing so. But all this was to very little purpose. "She
does love me then?" said Lord Lufton.

"Well," said Mark, "I will not say whether she does or does not. I can only repeat her own
message. She cannot accept you, unless she does so at your mother's request." And having said
that again, he took his leave, and went back to the parsonage. Poor Lucy, having finished her
interview with so much dignity, having fully satisfied her brother, and declined any immediate
consolation from her sister-in-law, betook herself to her own bedroom. She had to think over
what she had said and done, and it was necessary that she should be alone to do so. It might
be that, when she came to reconsider the matter, she would not be quite so well satisfied as
was her brother. Her grandeur of demeanour and slow propriety of carriage lasted her till she
was well into her own room. There are animals who, when they are ailing in any way, contrive
to hide themselves, ashamed, as it were, that the weakness of their suffering should be witnessed.
Indeed, I am not sure whether all dumb animals do not do so more or less; and in this respect
Lucy was like a dumb animal. Even in her confidences with Fanny she made a joke of her own
misfortunes, and spoke of her heart ailments with self-ridicule. But now, having walked up
the staircase with no hurried step, and having deliberately locked the door, she turned herself
round to suffer in silence and solitude--as do the beasts and birds. She sat herself down on
a low chair, which stood at the foot of her bed, and, throwing back her head, held her handkerchief
across her eyes and forehead, holding it tight in both her hands; and then she began to think.
She began to think and also to cry, for the tears came running down from beneath the handkerchief;
and low sobs were to be heard--only that the animal had taken itself off, to suffer in solitude.
Had she not thrown from her all her chances of happiness? Was it possible that he should come
to her yet again--a third time? No; it was not possible. The very mode and pride of this, her
second rejection of him, made it impossible. In coming to her determination, and making her
avowal, she had been actuated by the knowledge that Lady Lufton would regard such a marriage
with abhorrence. Lady Lufton would not and could not ask her to condescend to be her son's
bride. Her chance of happiness, of glory, of ambition, of love, was all gone. She had sacrificed
everything, not to virtue, but to pride; and she had sacrificed not only herself, but him.
When first he came there--when she had meditated over his first visit--she had hardly given
him credit for deep love; but now--there could be no doubt that he loved her now. After his
season in London, his days and nights passed with all that was beautiful, he had returned there,
to that little country parsonage, that he might again throw himself at her feet. And she--she
had refused to see him, though she loved him with all her heart, she had refused to see him
because she was so vile a coward that she could not bear the sour looks of an old woman! "I
will come down directly," she said, when Fanny at last knocked at the door, begging to be admitted.
"I won't open it, love, but I will be with you in ten minutes; I will, indeed." And so she
was; not, perhaps, without traces of tears, discernible by the experienced eye of Mrs. Robarts,
but yet with a smooth brow, and voice under her own command.

"I wonder whether she really loves him," Mark said to his wife that night.

"Love him!" his wife had answered: "indeed she does; and, Mark, do not be led away by the stern
quiet of her demeanour. To my thinking she is a girl who might almost die for love."

On the next day Lord Lufton left Framley; and started, according to his arrangements, for the
Norway salmon fishing.

CHAPTER XXXII

The Goat and Compasses

Harold Smith had been made unhappy by that rumour of a dissolution; but the misfortune to him
would be as nothing compared to the severity with which it would fall on Mr. Sowerby. Harold
Smith might or might not lose his borough, but Mr. Sowerby would undoubtedly lose his county;
and, in losing that, he would lose everything. He felt very certain now that the duke would
not support him again, let who would be master of Chaldicotes; and as he reflected on these
things he found it very hard to keep up his spirits. Tom Towers, it seems, had known all about
it, as he always does. The little remark which had dropped from him at Miss Dunstable's, made,
no doubt, after mature deliberation, and with profound political motives, was the forerunner,
only by twelve hours, of a very general report that the giants were going to the country. It
was manifest that the giants had not a majority in Parliament, generous as had been the promises
of support disinterestedly made to them by the gods. This indeed was manifest, and therefore
they were going to the country, although they had been deliberately warned by a very prominent
scion of Olympus that if they did do so that disinterested support must be withdrawn. This
threat did not seem to weigh much, and by two o'clock on the day following Miss Dunstable's
party, the fiat was presumed to have gone forth. The rumour had begun with Tom Towers, but
by that time it had reached Buggins at the Petty Bag Office. "It won't make no difference to
hus, sir; will it, Mr. Robarts?" said Buggins, as he leaned respectfully against the wall near
the door, in the room of the private secretary at that establishment.

A good deal of conversation, miscellaneous, special, and political, went on between young Robarts
and Buggins in the course of the day; as was natural, seeing that they were thrown in these
evil times very much upon each other. The Lord Petty Bag of the present ministry was not such
a one as Harold Smith. He was a giant indifferent to his private notes, and careless as to
the duties even of patronage; he rarely visited the office, and as there were no other clerks
in the establishment--owing to a root and branch reform carried out in the short reign of Harold
Smith--to whom could young Robarts talk, if not to Buggins? "No; I suppose not," said Robarts,
as he completed on his blotting-paper an elaborate picture of a Turk seated on his divan.

"'Cause, you see, sir, we're in the Upper 'Ouse, now--as I always thinks we hought to be. I
don't think it ain't constitutional for the Petty Bag to be in the Commons, Mr. Robarts. Hany
ways, it never usen't."

"They're changing all those sort of things nowadays, Buggins," said Robarts, giving the final
touch to the Turk's smoke.

"Well; I'll tell you what it is, Mr. Robarts: I think I'll go. I can't stand all these changes.
I'm turned of sixty now, and don't want any 'stifflicates. I think I'll take my pension and
walk. The hoffice ain't the same place at all since it come down among the Commons." And then
Buggins retired sighing, to console himself with a pot of porter behind a large open office
ledger, set up on end on a small table in the little lobby outside the private secretary's
room. Buggins sighed again as he saw that the date made visible in the open book was almost
as old as his own appointment; for such a book as this lasted long in the Petty Bag Office.
A peer of high degree had been Lord Petty Bag in those days; one whom a messenger's heart could
respect with infinite veneration, as he made his unaccustomed visits to the office with much
solemnity--perhaps four times during the session. The Lord Petty Bag then was highly regarded
by his staff, and his coming among them was talked about for some hours previously and for
some days afterwards; but Harold Smith had bustled in and out like the managing clerk in a
Manchester house. "The service is going to the dogs," said Buggins to himself, as he put down
the porter pot, and looked up over the book at a gentleman who presented himself at the door.
"Mr. Robarts in his room?" said Buggins, repeating the gentleman's words. "Yes, Mr. Sowerby;
you'll find him there--first door to the left." And then, remembering that the visitor was
a county member--a position which Buggins regarded as next to that of a peer--he got up, and,
opening the private secretary's door, ushered in the visitor.

Young Robarts and Mr. Sowerby had, of course, become acquainted in the days of Harold Smith's
reign. During that short time the member for East Barset had on most days dropped in at the
Petty Bag Office for a minute or two, finding out what the energetic Cabinet minister was doing,
chatting on semi-official subjects, and teaching the private secretary to laugh at his master.
There was nothing, therefore, in his present visit which need appear to be singular, or which
required any immediate special explanation. He sat himself down in his ordinary way, and began
to speak of the subject of the day. "We're all to go," said Sowerby.

"So I hear," said the private secretary. "It will give me no trouble, for, as the respectable
Buggins says, we're in the Upper House now."

"What a delightful time those lucky dogs of lords do have!" said Sowerby. "No constituents,
no turning out, no fighting, no necessity for political opinions; and, as a rule, no such opinions
at all!"

"I suppose you're tolerably safe in East Barsetshire?" said Robarts. "The duke has it pretty
much his own way there."

"Yes; the duke does have it pretty much his own way. By the by, where is your brother?"

"At home," said Robarts; "at least I presume so."

"At Framley or at Barchester? I believe he was in residence at Barchester not long since."

"He's at Framley now, I know. I got a letter only yesterday from his wife, with a commission.
He was there, and Lord Lufton had just left."

"Yes; Lufton was down. He started for Norway this morning. I want to see your brother. You
have not heard from him yourself, have you?"

"No; not lately. Mark is a bad correspondent. He would not do at all for a private secretary."

"At any rate, not to Harold Smith. But you are sure I should not catch him at Barchester?"

"Send down by telegraph, and he would meet you."

"I don't want to do that. A telegraph message makes such a fuss in the country, frightening
people's wives, and setting all the horses about the place galloping."

"What is it about?"

"Nothing of any great consequence. I didn't know whether he might have told you. I'll write
down by to-night's post, and then he can meet me at Barchester to-morrow. Or do you write.
There's nothing I hate so much as letter-writing; just tell him that I called, and that I shall
be much obliged if he can meet me at the Dragon of Wantly--say at two to-morrow. I will go
down by the express."

Mark Robarts, in talking over this coming money trouble with Sowerby, had once mentioned that
if it were necessary to take up the bill for a short time he might be able to borrow the money
from his brother. So much of the father's legacy still remained in the hands of the private
secretary as would enable him to produce the amount of the latter bill, and there could be
no doubt that he would lend it if asked. Mr. Sowerby's visit to the Petty Bag Office had been
caused by a desire to learn whether any such request had been made--and also by a half-formed
resolution to make the request himself if he should find that the clergyman had not done so.
It seemed to him to be a pity that such a sum should be lying about, as it were, within reach,
and that he should not stoop to put his hands upon it. Such abstinence would be so contrary
to all the practice of his life that it was as difficult to him as it is for a sportsman to
let pass a cock-pheasant. But yet something like remorse touched his heart as he sat there
balancing himself on his chair in the private secretary's room, and looking at the young man's
open face. It actually looks from up here from
much closer. "

"Yes," laughed the behind the hedge, "if the bridge is not broken again by the Leadfoot has since
only recently rebuilt, then it would not much more than a half-hour into the valley. But as you
must here right under my Chagra to the canyon from the road to go, and the path runs the length
in terms of murder.

But from rising, we discuss better at home. "

"All right," said Gunther, when he easily swung from the saddle, "our
prey Packt We are still ridden ahead, and to meet the, we can pretty
well for half an hour .

Chat "

His companion followed, without a word to reciprocate, the examples, because it forced him myself to
see the inside of the cottage, which is already on the outside of such a friendly impression
it made. The two travelers bound therefore their horses outside of the hedge down to the hanging
Branches of a stately orange tree, and stepped out into the garden,
where they were the host, A young, gorgeous tall man with open, honest
facial features, blue eyes and blond hair, came to meet them and welcomed.

"It's

clever," he said this, "Sunday morning, have you not so much in the colony to fail and is still
early enough for lunch if your not here too . Want to eat "

He shook his hand vigorously and two strangers led them easily into into his house, where both
are amazed and surprised but involuntarily on the threshold remained.

The small room that opened to them, shone with cleanliness, and the simple wooden table was snow-white
frayed, but not whiter than the floor itself, the light in the middle of a braided Mat covered. Even hung
curtains on the windows, and a nicely crafted sewing table seemed of polished wood with them,
a luxury furniture concurriren to do. But the friends Everything looked the less, as they felt
it in the impression of the whole, because of both eyes hung in the first moments of a wonderfully
beautiful young woman, and a child on the Lap and held, when the stranger entered the hut,
the little boys took up kicking and they came to meet with a friendly smile.

"Greet God" she said warmly, as they both shook hands after the other, "and sets Makes you comfortable
and please you - the Father, have you seen the horses? "

"Werd's get on, darling," laughed the man, "bring 'you only once a
couple of glasses of milk, because the two men will have become thirsty.

"

"Yes, then you must take, however, the rascal there," said the young woman by her Husband, the
restless little boy handed over so easily, as if no two pounds would
have weighed, as he weighed sure twenty, - "which I can not usually
rest or peace the Milchnäpfen.

"

"Whether he will keep the peace?" The man smiled, took off her little boy, gave him a few rough
kisses and put him in the left arm. "And now does, as if your home If you were, he drove by again
at the door, turned away from the stranger, "I am right back to drink, and you will bring
the Trine in the moment. "The"

Trine " had long been out of the door out, and the two friends found themselves in the next few
moments alone in the small space.

"Is not that a true Madonna's face?" But broke out the younger, as the young farmer hardly had
left the room, "you have ever in your life a pair of such eyebrows, seen such a mouth? "

"A very handsome couple, indeed," replied Gunther, of the view, however,
inquiring tossed around, "and how nice and clean it looks like with
them!

Yes, "- he took a deep sigh continued, "who's very well off, and
pulls like us now so about the world, sees the forbidden fruit hung
on the trees, wipes his mouth and resigned - just walk on.

"

"Whether it is because it really German?" Said his friend.

"What else? But really no Portuguese! "

"In my life I have never seen a farm boy who emigrated," said the
Younger, "had such a casual yet decent behavior, and the young woman
would in a heavy silks are just as at home as simple in their Kattunröckchen.

But they speak perfectly good German. "

He moreover with the Rhine, she said something to the Tyrolese dialect, "Günther," but because
it comes back.

It will tell us of where they originate. "

"So - here I am again - has it lasted long," said the young woman, when she and a small Salver
came into the room, "and now set forth, and you long for - 's not
much, but we have it up yet better here, because we only been here
for almost six months on the Chagra.

"

As she spoke - and as quickly turned and that everything seemed to arrange themselves almost by
themselves - They had brought in, however, the spread on the table, and fresh, sweet milk, white
bread, butter and cheese, all blinking on Dish laughed the stranger soon contrary, and called
them already in yourself, zuzulangen only brave.

"And you are just such a short time up here," said the older residents;? "The pines and oranges
but must be planted many years ago. "

"That they are," replied the man, who appeared at this moment back in the door and the woman held
out the child.

"There, mother, take the rascal," he then went to this continued;
"whether the kid has hardly been alone until I put it on the Grey,
and as above he remained until I had fed the animals.

"

"But the gray is a restless animal," said Guenther.

"Bah, who holds on already," laughed the man, "yes, I wanted to say
that I Chagra I recently bought, from a German who had so let run
wild, that it was hardly the trees that stood on it.

It had been a distinguished gentleman, who, like he said, had Brazilian "planters want to be"
the thing but probably a little different and might easily have thought, and also elsewhere
hinpaßte better than behind Plow and harrow.

"

"And you're not German," asked the elder residents.

"We? - No, "laughed the man, -" that is, yes, we're German, but not yet Born in Germany over
there, but here in Brazil. My father comes from the Rhine, and the woman her father of Innsbruck,
both about thirty years, come over here and were settled in San Leopoldo had. "

"Brazilians, then?" Said Guenther disappointed.

"Ah, no, we're German," the woman laughed good-naturedly, "and keep
us ever so to Germans, as you see, because with the lead foot it's
nothing, and they do nothing work and create.

"

? "Lead feet - what the hell just laughed of a stranger," a lead foot
has to absorb the poor have built bridges.

"

"Ih, yes," the man said with a grin, "the lead's feet gives a great many - indeed, more than
good, and we particularly call the real Portuguese way over keep
coming and want to do as if Brazil was theirs.

But really why they named be, I do not own right, but the names they have, that's for sure,
and be keep him well also. But you are yourself first so short a time in the country that you
have not once the word you heard foot down?

I should have thought that would be called often enough in all places. "

"I myself am a long time in the country and know its name, smiled Günther," but my Companion
is there only recently from the United States of America to Rio, and from then on horseback came
here for the south to the country once regarded. "

"And what is your business? if one may ask. "

"I am a surveyor," replied Gunther, "and ordered by the government here to the colonies for newly
arriving refugees measure it. "

"It's clever," said the young peasant, "the country's lack of surveying forever, and the poor
Devil must often months to loiter in the so-called emigration houses before they get their
own ground and a solid home.

Now that you are getting enough work, it's missing - but not eat you "?

"We are grateful," replied Gunther, the brave yet been reached with
his companions, "it tasted excellent and was delicate.

Now we can already up in the colony's down Can take it. "

"And you do already gone," asked the woman-friendly, as the two strangers from their seats and
stood up to the hats attacked -. "that was even a short visit"

"If you allow it," said the younger stranger, "I'm coming forth once again. I myself have nothing
to miss and I will still probably a few months near hanging around the colony. But here that I like
about you, you can me on my word . Believe My friend is tied with his time and still has much
lower with the Director to discuss. Out there are also just arrived our pack horses, and we
therefore want to start better. "

"Apropos," said Guenther, "what a man is the director anyway? I have in the other Colonies on Chebaja
not a lot of good things from him. "

"I do not know," laughed the man - "it is probably always on whom you ask. The One scold him, others
praise him, and Allen's can not just make right on the world. He is very strict, that is true,
and often be a bit stubborn.

With the poor people he is at work and is good with them. "

"And that's the main thing," said Günther - "Now, I'll be finished with him - So, thank you for
the picture. If I can once again do well, I am at your service! "

"That might happen sooner than you think," laughed the young peasant, "because our Boundaries
are all in confusion, and I've long agreed about the mine can also look up to. But we'll talk
later, I would not now staying longer than necessary, and I'm perhaps these days even to the
colony down. "

He handed the woman and the stranger's hand warmly at parting.

Held outside in fact, the two native servants of the friends, a few brown, rough-looking enough
Boys, with three pack horses, two of the surveyor, but one belonged
to his friends, and immediately trotted the little cavalcade, which
the young peasant still the way to his Chagra was around this thalein.

And yet it was a wonderful path that led them down here in the valley,
because it is on this mountain slope, the almost tropical vegetation
of the country was in its full Splendor and glory.

The tree growth, however, was not nearly as powerful as in the north lying parts of Brazil,
but the lush undergrowth, with its graceful palm tree and Subjects,
formed with its creepers and tendrils everywhere, where it allows
the eye to penetrate, the most charming and festoons groups that make
up the green, slender shafts of different wild species of palms were
lifted boldly.

Here and there, where a torn ravine or a wide river bed to look into
the depth allowed, could be seen small settlement in the valley with
its lights and buildings bright green grass stains, which ran through
the yellow routes as threads, always in different Form and lighting,
but always friendly, so that the riders and their animals often stopped
a few seconds looked down in silence on the image to spread among
them.

Here, since the road was too narrow, however, or the rain but in the soil in various Bodies
had been tears, had to keep their horses in a row, and thus the conversation was interrupted.
Only later, reached the final incline, turned the Beipfad back in
the sunken bridge interrupted by the main path, and now they had the
actual colony Santa Clara soon reached the foothills in small, stand-alone
settlements have ranged up to here.

"The course is all really love," said Guenther, who had ridden forward
to now by He stopped his horse to return to stay next to the friends.

"As for the scenery, yes," replied the latter, "but the ground does not seem to me here in
particular, and the corn over there in the field is thin and thin enough - at least leaner,
I'm used to seeing now. "

"The better land will be older in the plane," said Guenther, "in any
case has the place is not far at sea, and that's always been a huge
advantage for a colony.

"

"If the port space is good, yes, and where are we now want first?"

"Direct to the Director," laughed Günther, "which we will then have the best information on where
we can stay. We must now ask his home in the next apartment. "

"That's not necessary," said his friend - "the house over there, where the German flag, In any event
the inn, and the larger building next to it just as surely, the Church,
- where the German built one next to the other is not?

But there is also just south still a very large house with a new fence, and there is also the Director
his stay. We want peaceful break in it. "

"You may be right," laughed Günther, "but maybe he still lives over there in the small most
beloved buildings, where the many orange trees. The place I would have anyway to my apartment selected.
"

"That certainly is the presbytery," but assured his comrade, "You do not see the wide, trodden path that
leads down from there to the church. I do not think of any Director has pushed the tracks
after the church in the sand. Follow me only, I take you the right way. "And no more waiting
for an answer, he gave his horse the easy Spores blew up and now closely followed by Günther, previously
referred to the home front door, he stopped and easily jumped from the saddle.

2.

The Director.

Just when Gunther was at his companion's side and followed his example,
was a phenomenon from the house, both young people here in the middle
of suspected Brazilian forest, hardly had, and therefore all the more
surprised, - a European lady in full dress, with a large green and
black carrirten silk dress, crinoline and very important at all primarily
to provide necessaries and due to a very proud, almost majestic attitude
rushed out the door, looked surprised for a moment the stranger and
then, with a slight, barely perceptible nod their greeting erwiedernd,
past and in the small town into floating.

"All the devil," murmured the younger of the two out softly to himself as the lady out of earshot
was, "of all things in the world I would have expected a crinoline here, least of all. That
must be the wife or a relative of the Directors, as seen by a colonist-wife but it is not
enough.

It does the eye but extremely well for a bit of wild life to come again on such a broad trail
of civilization. This gives evidence to So here it is anyway haute volée a # #: our rough
forest did not suit the lady to please most, as they greeted very posh and neglect. "

"Well, we'll learn, soon, with whom we get to do it here," said Guenther. "Anyway we must now
ask first whether the Director actually lives here, and if so, whether
to Home is. - Hey, fellow, "he then turned to a colonist, whose appearance,
with the long blue coat and narrow neck, wandered out of the hat and
the hymn-book under the arms of his country no doubt allowed - "this
is the home of the Directors'

"Good morning to each other," replied
the host, while the strangers who head to walk looked - "surely the
Lord Director lives here - he's upstairs in his room - You want what?

"

"Thank you, yes, we want to speak to him."

"You only go up, it's up alone, but - not just a good mood.

They are probably far away? "

"Not much."

"And you want to stay here in the colony?"

"We place the watch at least once," said Guenther, no intention here
before engage the door into a long conversation.

His friend had entered the house already, Both now and walked up the stairs slowly. On top of the
stairs was the Younger suddenly stopped and said:

"Comrade, I've considered the matter, I will now not go in with. If the Mr. Director, are a bad
mood, I would not like him get in the way, because I want Nothing of him, and I therefore do
not intend to suspend its evils spirits. You have Business with him, that's different, I will
however go into the inn and expected there.

Take your things off as soon as you can "-. He wanted no Another turn and descend again, but
grabbed his arm and Guenther said.

"You do me a favor and stay, at least for a moment you come in with him to align your job. "

»Order
- it's just a greeting."

"And though.

He will not bite the same, and I myself have also for the present only a few words to talk
to him, for our animals need to be unpacked and placed to be. "

"All right," the friend said with a shrug, "if you absolutely do's.
I would prefer course in the inn.

"

A few steps higher than they stood before the door of the Directors, it nailed a simple Business
card described. The card also bore no further description, as "Louis Sarno" not even the title
of "director" was added, and the younger stranger nodded, satisfied with the head. Guenther,
meanwhile, had easily knocked at the door, and a little bit churlish
"Come in," she invited to enter the lions den.

The director, a slim but handsome man, also with a military coats,
strong, slightly reddish beard and a full, curly hair, went with the
back down Hands up and down in his office, which is particularly characterized
by a set of ranging risk with actenartig distinguished in blue paper
folded folio folders. The waiting had He interrupted his walk and
stood, turned half to the open door in the middle in the room. Günter
him but not for long go on in doubt, but to him, He said:

"Mr. Director,
I am compelled to introduce myself to you. My name is Günther of Schwartzau,
engineering officer, and I am the President of the Province ordered
here, make such measurements become necessary. "

"Some have become
necessary?" Repeated the Director by the stranger looked surprised.
"As whether or not I the Lord President for six months on every possible
occasion with inputs bombard that he finally once for a year almost
compel urgent surveys let make! About compel ....«

"I am sorry, Mr.
Director, if you have to wait," Guenther said quietly, "but It was
not my fault, because it was five days ago, I received on Chebaja
the President's letter, the summoned me here, and you'll allow me,
that I from there, in the removal and the routes have truly missed
no time. "

"The Lord is your assistant?"

"I beg your pardon," said
the stranger, however, a slight, barely noticeable Smile, the conversation
was followed - "I do not belong into the business and have to actually
consider as a Aufdringling, your time will also no longer in Entitled
to take, as is absolutely necessary, you and me applied down to my
heart To order greetings. "

»Greetings? Mr. Sowerby was not the friend with whom he now intended to hold
consultation in such matters. "I am not at present prepared," he said, "to declare what I may
do; I must first see what steps others take." And then he took his hat and went off; and mounting
his horse in the yard of the Dragon of Wantly--that horse which he had now so many reasons
to dislike--he slowly rode back home.

Many thoughts passed through his mind during that ride, but only one resolution obtained for
itself a fixture there. He must now tell his wife everything. He would not be so cruel as to
let it remain untold until a bailiff were at the door, ready to walk him off to the county
jail, or until the bed on which they slept was to be sold from under them. Yes, he would tell
her everything,--immediately, before his resolution could again have faded away. He got off
his horse in the yard, and seeing his wife's maid at the kitchen door, desired her to beg her
mistress to come to him in the book-room. He would not allow one half-hour to pass towards
the waning of his purpose. If it be ordained that a man shall drown, had he not better drown
and have done with it? Mrs. Robarts came to him in his room, reaching him in time to touch
his arm as he entered it. "Mary says you want me. I have been gardening, and she caught me
just as I came in."

"Yes, Fanny, I do want you. Sit down for a moment." And walking across the room, he placed
his whip in its proper place.

"Oh, Mark, is there anything the matter?"

"Yes, dearest; yes. Sit down, Fanny: I can talk to you better if you will sit." But she, poor
lady, did not wish to sit. He had hinted at some misfortune, and therefore she felt a longing
to stand by him and cling to him.

"Well, there; I will if I must; but, Mark, do not frighten me. Why is your face so very wretched?"

"Fanny, I have done very wrong," he said. "I have been very foolish. I fear that I have brought
upon you great sorrow and trouble." And then he leaned his head upon his hand and turned his
face away from her.

"Oh, Mark, dearest Mark, my own Mark! what is it?" and then she was quickly up from her chair,
and went down on her knees before him. "Do not turn from me. Tell me, Mark! tell me, that we
may share it."

"Yes, Fanny, I must tell you now; but I hardly know what you will think of me when you have
heard it."

"I will think that you are my own husband, Mark; I will think that--that chiefly, whatever
it may be." And then she caressed his knees, and looked up in his face, and, getting hold of
one of his hands, pressed it between her own. "Even if you have been foolish, who should forgive
you if I cannot?" And then he told it her all, beginning from that evening when Mr. Sowerby
had got him into his bedroom, and going on gradually, now about the bills, and now about the
horses, till his poor wife was utterly lost in the complexity of the accounts. She could by
no means follow him in the details of his story; nor could she quite sympathize with him in
his indignation against Mr. Sowerby, seeing that she did not comprehend at all the nature of
the renewing of a bill. The only part to her of importance in the matter was the amount of
money which her husband would be called upon to pay; that, and her strong hope, which was already
a conviction, that he would never again incur such debts.

"And how much is it, dearest, altogether?"

"These men claim nine hundred pounds of me."

"Oh, dear! that is a terrible sum."

"And then there is the hundred and fifty which I have borrowed from the bank--the price of
the horse, you know; and there are some other debts,--not a great deal, I think; but people
will now look for every shilling that is due to them. If I have to pay it all, it will be twelve
or thirteen hundred pounds."

"That will be as much as a year's income, Mark; even with the stall." That was the only word
of reproach she said--if that could be called a reproach.

"Yes," he said; "and it is claimed by men who will have no pity in exacting it at any sacrifice,
if they have the power. And to think that I should have incurred all this debt without having
received anything for it. Oh, Fanny, what will you think of me!" But she swore to him that
she would think nothing of it--that she would never bear it in her mind against him--that it
could have no effect in lessening her trust in him. Was he not her husband? She was so glad
she knew it, that she might comfort him. And she did comfort him, making the weight seem lighter
and lighter on his shoulders as he talked of it. And such weights do thus become lighter. A
burden that will crush a single pair of shoulders will, when equally divided--when shared by
two, each of whom is willing to take the heavier part--become light as a feather. Is not that
sharing of the mind's burdens one of the chief purposes for which a man wants a wife? For there
is no folly so great as keeping one's sorrows hidden. And this wife cheerfully, gladly, thankfully
took her share. To endure with her lord all her lord's troubles was easy to her; it was the
work to which she had pledged herself. But to have thought that her lord had troubles not communicated
to her,--that would have been to her the one thing not to be borne. And then they discussed
their plans; what mode of escape they might have out of this terrible money difficulty. Like
a true woman, Mrs. Robarts proposed at once to abandon all superfluities. They would sell all
their horses; they would not sell their cows, but would sell the butter that came from them;
they would sell the pony-carriage, and get rid of the groom. That the footman must go was so
much a matter of course, that it was hardly mentioned. But then, as to that house at Barchester,
the dignified prebendal mansion in the close--might they not be allowed to leave it unoccupied
for one year longer--perhaps to let it? The world of course must know of their misfortune;
but if that misfortune was faced bravely, the world would be less bitter in its condemnation.
And then, above all things, everything must be told to Lady Lufton.

"You may, at any rate, believe this, Fanny," said he, "that for no consideration which can
be offered to me will I ever put my name to another bill." The kiss with which she thanked
him for this was as warm and generous as though he had brought to her that day news of the
brightest; and when he sat, as he did that evening, discussing it all, not only with his wife,
but with Lucy, he wondered how it was that his troubles were now so light. Whether or no a
man should have his own private pleasures, I will not now say; but it never can be worth his
while to keep his sorrows private.

CHAPTER XXXIV

Lady Lufton Is Taken by Surprise

Lord Lufton, as he returned to town, found some difficulty in resolving what step he would
next take. Sometimes, for a minute or two, he was half inclined to think--or rather to say
to himself--that Lucy was perhaps not worth the trouble which she threw in his way. He loved
her very dearly, and would willingly make her his wife, he thought or said at such moments;
but-- Such moments, however, were only moments. A man in love seldom loves less because his
love becomes difficult. And thus, when those moments were over, he would determine to tell
his mother at once, and urge her to signify her consent to Miss Robarts. That she would not
be quite pleased he knew; but if he were firm enough to show that he had a will of his own
in this matter, she would probably not gainsay him. He would not ask this humbly, as a favour,
but request her ladyship to go through the ceremony as though it were one of those motherly
duties which she as a good mother could not hesitate to perform on behalf of her son. Such
was the final resolve with which he reached his chambers in the Albany. On the next day he
did not see his mother. It would be well, he thought, to have his interview with her immediately
before he started for Norway, so that there might be no repetition of it; and it was on the
day before he did start that he made his communication, having invited himself to breakfast
in Brook Street on the occasion.

"Mother," he said, quite abruptly, throwing himself into one of the dining-room arm-chairs,
"I have a thing to tell you." His mother at once knew that the thing was important, and with
her own peculiar motherly instinct imagined that the question to be discussed had reference
to matrimony. Had her son desired to speak to her about money, his tone and look would have
been different; as would also have been the case--in a different way--had he entertained any
thought of a pilgrimage to Pekin, or a prolonged fishing excursion to the Hudson Bay Territories.

"A thing, Ludovic! well, I am quite at liberty."

"I want to know what you think of Lucy Robarts?" Lady Lufton became pale and frightened, and
the blood ran cold to her heart. She had feared more than rejoiced in conceiving that her son
was about to talk of love, but she had feared nothing so bad as this.

"What do I think of Lucy Robarts?" she said, repeating her son's words in a tone of evident dismay.

"Yes, mother; you have said once or twice lately that you thought I ought to marry, and I am
beginning to think so too. You selected one clergyman's daughter for me, but that lady is going
to do much better with herself--"

"Indeed she is not," said Lady Lufton sharply.

"And therefore I rather think I shall select for myself another clergyman's sister. You don't
dislike Miss Robarts, I hope?"

"Oh, Ludovic!" It was all that Lady Lufton could say at the spur of the moment.

"Is there any harm in her! Have you any objection to her? Is there anything about her that
makes her unfit to be my wife?"

For a moment or two Lady Lufton sat silent, collecting her thoughts. She thought that there
was very great objection to Lucy Robarts, regarding her as the possible future Lady Lufton.
She could hardly have stated all her reasons, but they were very cogent. Lucy Robarts had,
in her eyes, neither beauty, nor style, nor manner, nor even the education which was desirable.
Lady Lufton was not herself a worldly woman. She was almost as far removed from being so as
a woman could be in her position. But, nevertheless, there were certain worldly attributes
which she regarded as essential to the character of any young lady who might be considered
fit to take the place which she herself had so long filled. It was her desire in looking for
a wife for her son to combine these with certain moral excellences which she regarded as equally
essential. Lucy Robarts might have the moral excellences, or she might not; but as to the other
attributes Lady Lufton regarded her as altogether deficient. She could never look like a Lady
Lufton, or carry herself in the county as a Lady Lufton should do. She had not that quiet personal
demeanour--that dignity of repose--which Lady Lufton loved to look upon in a young married
woman of rank. Lucy, she would have said, could be nobody in a room except by dint of her tongue,
whereas Griselda Grantly would have held her peace for a whole evening, and yet would have
impressed everybody by the majesty of her presence. Then again Lucy had no money--and, again,
Lucy was only the sister of her own parish clergyman. People are rarely prophets in their own
country, and Lucy was no prophet at Framley; she was none, at least, in the eyes of Lady Lufton.
Once before, as may be remembered, she had had fears on this subject--fears, not so much for
her son, whom she could hardly bring herself to suspect of such a folly, but for Lucy, who
might be foolish enough to fancy that the lord was in love with her. Alas! alas! her son's
question fell upon the poor woman at the present moment with the weight of a terrible blow.
"Is there anything about her which makes her unfit to be my wife?" Those were her son's last words.

"Dearest Ludovic, dearest Ludovic!" and she got up and came over to him, "I do think so; I
do, indeed."

"Think what?" said he, in a tone that was almost angry.

"I do think that she is unfit to be your wife. She is not of that class from which I would
wish to see you choose."

"She is of the same class as Griselda Grantly."

"No, dearest. I think you are in error there. The Grantlys have moved in a different sphere
of life. I think you must feel that they are--"

"Upon my word, mother, I don't. One man is Rector of Plumstead, and the other is Vicar of Framley.
But it is no good arguing that. I want you to take to Lucy Robarts. I have come to you on purpose
to ask it of you as a favour."

"Do you mean as your wife, Ludovic?"

"Yes; as my wife."

"Am I to understand that you are--are engaged to her?"

"Well, I cannot say that I am--not actually engaged to her. But you may take this for granted,
that, as far as it lies in my power, I intend to become so. My mind is made up, and I certainly
shall not alter it."

"And the young lady knows all this?"

"Certainly."

"Horrid, sly, detestable, underhand girl," Lady Lufton said to herself, not being by any means
brave enough to speak out such language before her son. What hope could there be if Lord Lufton
had already committed himself by a positive offer? "And her brother, and Mrs. Robarts; are
they aware of it?"

"Yes; both of them."

"And both approve of it?"

"Well, I cannot say that. I have not seen Mrs. Robarts, and do not know what may be her opinion.
To speak my mind honestly about Mark, I do not think he does cordially approve. He is afraid
of you, and would be desirous of knowing what you think."

"I am glad, at any rate, to hear that," said Lady Lufton, gravely. "Had he done anything to
encourage this, it would have been very base." And then there was another short period of silence.
Lord Lufton had determined not to explain to his mother the whole state of the case. He would
not tell her that everything depended on her word--that Lucy was ready to marry him only on
condition that she, Lady Lufton, would desire her to do so. He would not let her know that
everything depended on her--according to Lucy's present verdict. He had a strong disinclination
to ask his mother's permission to get married; and he would have to ask it were he to tell
her the whole truth. His object was to make her think well of Lucy, and to induce her to be
kind, and generous, and affectionate down at Framley. Then things would all turn out comfortably
when he again visited that place, as he intended to do on his return from Norway. So much he
thought it possible he might effect, relying on his mother's probable calculation that it would
be useless for her to oppose a measure which she had no power of stopping by authority. But
were he to tell her that she was to be the final judge, that everything was to depend on her
will, then, so thought Lord Lufton, that permission would in all probability be refused.

"Well, mother, what answer do you intend to give me?" he said. "My mind is positively made
up. I should not have come to you had not that been the case. You will now be going down home,
and I would wish you to treat Lucy as you yourself would wish to treat any girl to whom you
knew that I was engaged."

"But you say that you are not engaged."

"No, I am not; but I have made my offer to her, and I have not been rejected. She has confessed
that she--loves me,--not to myself, but to her brother. Under these circumstances, may I count
upon your obliging me?" There was something in his manner which almost frightened his mother,
and made her think that there was more behind than was told to her. Generally speaking, his
manner was open, gentle, and unguarded; but now he spoke as though he had prepared his words,
and was resolved on being harsh as well as obstinate.

"I am so much taken by surprise, Ludovic, that I can hardly give you an answer. If you ask
me whether I approve of such a marriage, I must say that I do not; I think that you would be
throwing yourself away in marrying Miss Robarts."

"That is because you do not know her."

"May it not be possible that I know her better than you do, dear Ludovic? You have been flirting
with her--"

"I hate that word; it always sounds to me to be vulgar."

"I will say making love to her, if you like it better; and gentlemen under these circumstances
will sometimes become infatuated."

"You would not have a man marry a girl without making love to her. The fact is, mother, that
your tastes and mine are not exactly the same; you like silent beauty, whereas I like talking
beauty, and then--"

"Do you call Miss Robarts beautiful?"

"Yes, I do; very beautiful; she has the beauty that I admire. Good-bye now, mother; I shall
not see you again before I start. It will be no use writing, as I shall be away so short a
time, and I don't quite know where we shall be. I shall come down to Framley immediately I
return, and shall learn from you how the land lies. I have told you my wishes, and you will
consider how far you think it right to fall in with them." He then kissed her, and without
waiting for her reply he took his leave. Poor Lady Lufton, when she was left to herself, felt
that her head was going round and round. Was this to be the end of all her ambition,--of all
her love for her son? and was this to be the result of all her kindness to the Robartses? She
almost hated Mark Robarts as she reflected that she had been the means of bringing him and
his sister to Framley. She thought over all his sins, his absences from the parish, his visit
to Gatherum Castle, his dealings with reference to that farm which was to have been sold, his
hunting, and then his acceptance of that stall, given, as she had been told, through the Omnium
interest. How could she love him at such a moment as this? And then she thought of his wife.
Could it be possible that Fanny Robarts, her own friend Fanny, would be so untrue to her as
to lend any assistance to such a marriage as this; as not to use all her power in preventing
it? She had spoken to Fanny on this very subject--not fearing for her son, but with a general
idea of the impropriety of intimacies between such girls as Lucy and such men as Lord Lufton,
and then Fanny had agreed with her. Could it be possible that even she must be regarded as
an enemy? And then by degrees Lady Lufton began to reflect what steps she had better take.
In the first place, should she give in at once, and consent to the marriage? The only thing
quite certain to her was this, that life would be not worth having if she were forced into
a permanent quarrel with her son. Such an event would probably kill her. When she read of quarrels
in other noble families--and the accounts of such quarrels will sometimes, unfortunately, force
themselves upon the attention of unwilling readers--she would hug herself, with a spirit that
was almost pharisaical, reflecting that her destiny was not like that of others. Such quarrels
and hatreds between fathers and daughters, and mothers and sons, were in her eyes disreputable
to all the persons concerned. She had lived happily with her husband, comfortably with her
neighbours, respectably with the world, and, above all things, affectionately with her children.
She spoke everywhere of Lord Lufton as though he were nearly perfect,--and in so speaking,
she had not belied her convictions. Under these circumstances, would not any marriage be better
than a quarrel? But, then, again, how much of the pride of her daily life would be destroyed
by such a match as that! And might it not be within her power to prevent it without any quarrel?
That her son would be sick of such a chit as Lucy before he had been married to her six months--of
that Lady Lufton entertained no doubt, and therefore her conscience would not be disquieted
in disturbing the consummation of an arrangement so pernicious. It was evident that the matter
was not considered as settled even by her son; and also evident that he regarded the matter
as being in some way dependent on his mother's consent. On the whole, might it not be better
for her--better for them all--that she should think wholly of her duty, and not of the disagreeable
results to which that duty might possibly lead? It could not be her duty to accede to such
an alliance? and therefore she would do her best to prevent it. Such, at least, should be her
attempt in the first instance.

Having so decided, she next resolved on her course of action. Immediately on her arrival at
Framley, she would send for Lucy Robarts, and use all her eloquence--and perhaps also a little
of that stern dignity for which she was so remarkable--in explaining to that young lady how
very wicked it was on her part to think of forcing herself into such a family as that of the
Luftons. She would explain to Lucy that no happiness could come of it, that people placed by
misfortune above their sphere are always miserable; and, in short, make use of all those excellent
moral lessons which are so customary on such occasions. The morality might perhaps be thrown
away; but Lady Lufton depended much on her dignified sternness. And then, having so resolved,
she prepared for her journey home. Very little had been said at Framley parsonage about Lord
Lufton's offer after the departure of that gentleman; very little, at least, in Lucy's presence.
That the parson and his wife should talk about it between themselves was a matter of course;
but very few words were spoken on the matter either by or to Lucy. She was left to her own
thoughts, and possibly to her own hopes. And then other matters came up at Framley which turned
the current of interest into other tracks. In the first place there was the visit made by Mr.
Sowerby to the Dragon of Wantly, and the consequent revelation made by Mark Robarts to his
wife. And while that latter subject was yet new, before Fanny and Lucy had as yet made up their
minds as to all the little economies which might be practised in the household without serious
detriment to the master's comfort, news reached them that Mrs. Crawley of Hogglestock had been
stricken with fever. Nothing of the kind could well be more dreadful than this. To those who
knew the family it seemed impossible that their most ordinary wants could be supplied if that
courageous head were even for a day laid low; and then the poverty of poor Mr. Crawley was
such that the sad necessities of a sick bed could hardly be supplied without assistance. "I
will go over at once," said Fanny.

"My dear!" said her husband, "it is typhus, and you must first think of the children. I will go."

"What on earth could you do, Mark?" said his wife. "Men on such occasions are almost worse
than useless; and then they are so much more liable to infection."

"I have no children, nor am I a man," said Lucy, smiling: "for both of which exemptions I am
thankful. I will go, and when I come back I will keep clear of the bairns."

So it was settled, and Lucy started in the pony-carriage, carrying with her such things from
the parsonage storehouse as were thought to be suitable to the wants of the sick lady at Hogglestock.
When she arrived there, she made her way into the house, finding the door open, and not being
able to obtain the assistance of the servant girl in ushering her in. In the parlour she found
Grace Crawley, the eldest child, sitting demurely in her mother's chair nursing an infant.
She, Grace herself, was still a young child, but not the less, on this occasion of well-understood
sorrow, did she go through her task, not only with zeal but almost with solemnity. Her brother,
a boy of six years old, was with her, and he had the care of another baby. There they sat in
a cluster, quiet, grave, and silent, attending on themselves, because it had been willed by
fate that no one else should attend on them. "How is your mamma, dear Grace?" said Lucy, walking
up to her, and holding out her hand.

"Poor mamma is very ill, indeed," said Grace.

"And papa is very unhappy," said Bobby, the boy.

"I can't get up because of baby," said Grace; "but Bobby can go and call papa out."

"I will knock at the door," said Lucy; and so saying she walked up to the bedroom door, and
tapped against it lightly. She repeated this for the third time before she was summoned in
by a low hoarse voice, and then on entering she saw Mr. Crawley standing by the bedside with
a book in his hand. He looked at her uncomfortably, in a manner which seemed to show that he
was annoyed by this intrusion, and Lucy was aware that she had disturbed him while at prayers
by the bedside of his wife. He came across the room, however, and shook hands with her, and
answered her inquiries in his ordinary grave and solemn voice. "Mrs. Crawley is very ill,"
he said--"very ill. God has stricken us heavily, but His will be done. But you had better not
go to her, Miss Robarts. It is typhus."

The caution, however, was too late; for Lucy was already by the bedside, and had taken the
hand of the sick woman, which had been extended on the coverlid to greet her. "Dear Miss Robarts,"
said a weak voice; "this is very good of you; but it makes me unhappy to see you here." Lucy
lost no time in taking sundry matters into her own hands, and ascertaining what was most wanted
in that wretched household. For it was wretched enough. Their only servant, a girl of sixteen,
had been taken away by her mother as soon as it became known that Mrs. Crawley was ill with
fever. The poor mother, to give her her due, had promised to come down morning and evening
herself, to do such work as might be done in an hour or so; but she could not, she said, leave
her child to catch the fever. And now, at the period of Lucy's visit, no step had been taken
to procure a nurse, Mr. Crawley having resolved to take upon himself the duties of that position.
In his absolute ignorance of all sanatory measures, he had thrown himself on his knees to pray;
and if prayers--true prayers--might succour his poor wife, of such succour she might be confident.
Lucy, however, thought that other aid also was wanting to her. "If you can do anything for
us," said Mrs. Crawley, "let it be for the poor children."

"I will have them all moved from this till you are better," said Lucy, boldly.

"Moved!" said Mr. Crawley, who even now--even in his present strait--felt a repugnance to the
idea that any one should relieve him of any portion of his burden.

"Yes," said Lucy; "I am sure it will be better that you should lose them for a week or two,
till Mrs. Crawley may be able to leave her room."

"But where are they to go?" said he, very gloomily. As to this Lucy was not as yet able to
say anything. Indeed when she left Framley parsonage there had been no time for discussion.
She would go back and talk it all over with Fanny, and find out in what way the children might
be best put out of danger. Why should they not all be harboured at the parsonage, as soon as
assurance could be felt that they were not tainted with the poison of the fever? An English
lady of the right sort will do all things but one for a sick neighbour; but for no neighbour
will she wittingly admit contagious sickness within the precincts of her own nursery. Lucy
unloaded her jellies and her febrifuges, Mr. Crawley frowning at her bitterly the while. It
had come to this with him, that food had been brought into his house, as an act of charity,
in his very presence, and in his heart of hearts he disliked Lucy Robarts in that she had brought
it. He could not cause the jars and the pots to be replaced in the pony-carriage, as he would
have done had the position of his wife been different. In her state it would have been barbarous
to refuse them, and barbarous also to have created the fracas of a refusal; but each parcel
that was introduced was an additional weight laid on the sore withers of his pride, till the
total burden became almost intolerable. All this his wife saw and recognized even in her illness,
and did make some slight ineffectual efforts to give him ease; but Lucy in her new power was
ruthless, and the chicken to make the chicken-broth was taken out of the basket under his very
nose. But Lucy did not remain long. She had made up her mind what it behoved her to do herself,
and she was soon ready to return to Framley. "I shall be back again, Mr. Crawley," she said,
"probably this evening, and I shall stay with her till she is better." "Nurses don't want rooms,"
she went on to say, when Mr. Crawley muttered something as to there being no bed-chamber. "I
shall make up some sort of a litter near her; you'll see that I shall be very snug." And then
she got into the pony-chaise, and drove herself home.

CHAPTER XXXV

The Story of King Cophetua

Lucy as she drove herself home had much as to which it was necessary that she should arouse
her thoughts. That she would go back and nurse Mrs. Crawley through her fever she was resolved.
She was free agent enough to take so much on herself, and to feel sure that she could carry
it through. But how was she to redeem her promise about the children? Twenty plans ran through
her mind, as to farm-houses in which they might be placed, or cottages which might be hired
for them; but all these entailed the want of money; and at the present moment, were not all
the inhabitants of the parsonage pledged to a dire economy? This use of the pony-carriage would
have been illicit under any circumstances less pressing than the present, for it had been decided
that the carriage, and even poor Puck himself, should be sold. She had, however, given her
promise about the children, and though her own stock of money was very low, that promise should
be redeemed.

When she reached the parsonage she was of course full of her schemes, but she found that another
subject of interest had come up in her absence, which prevented her from obtaining the undivided
attention of her sister-in-law to her present plans. Lady Lufton had returned that day, and
immediately on her return had sent up a note addressed to Miss Lucy Robarts, which note was
in Fanny's hands when Lucy stepped out of the pony-carriage. The servant who brought it had
asked for an answer, and a verbal answer had been sent, saying that Miss Robarts was away from
home, and would herself send a reply when she returned. It cannot be denied that the colour
came to Lucy's face, and that her hand trembled when she took the note from Fanny in the drawing-room.
Everything in the world to her might depend on what that note contained; and yet she did not
open it at once, but stood with it in her hand, and when Fanny pressed her on the subject,
still endeavoured to bring back the conversation to the subject of Mrs. Crawley. But yet her
mind was intent on the letter, and she had already augured ill from the handwriting and even
from the words of the address. Had Lady Lufton intended to be propitious, she would have directed
her letter to Miss Robarts, without the Christian name; so at least argued Lucy--quite unconsciously,
as one does argue in such matters. One forms half the conclusions of one's life without any
distinct knowledge that the premises have even passed through one's mind. They were now alone
together, as Mark was out. "Won't you open her letter?" said Mrs. Robarts.

"Yes, immediately; but, Fanny, I must speak to you about Mrs. Crawley first. I must go back
there this evening, and stay there; I have promised to do so, and shall certainly keep my promise.
I have promised also that the children shall be taken away, and we must arrange about that.
It is dreadful, the state she is in. There is no one to see to her but Mr. Crawley, and the
children are altogether left to themselves."

"Do you mean that you are going back to stay?"

"Yes, certainly; I have made a distinct promise that I would do so. And about the children;
could not you manage for the children, Fanny--not perhaps in the house; at least not at first,
perhaps?" And yet during all the time that she was thus speaking and pleading for the Crawleys,
she was endeavouring to imagine what might be the contents of that letter which she held between
her fingers.

"And is she so very ill?" asked Mrs. Robarts.

"I cannot say how ill she may be, except this, that she certainly has typhus fever. They have
had some doctor or doctor's assistant from Silverbridge; but it seems to me that they are greatly
in want of better advice."

"But, Lucy, will you not read your letter? It is astonishing to me that you should be so indifferent
about it." Lucy was anything but indifferent, and now did proceed to tear the envelope. The
note was very short, and ran in these words--

   MY DEAR MISS ROBARTS,

   I am particularly anxious to see you, and shall feel much
   obliged to you if you can step over to me here, at Framley
   Court. I must apologize for taking this liberty with you,
   but you will probably feel that an interview here would
   suit us both better than one at the parsonage.

   Truly yours,

   M. LUFTON.

"There: I am in for it now," said Lucy, handing the note over to Mrs. Robarts. "I shall have
to be talked to as never poor girl was talked to before: and when one thinks of what I have
done, it is hard."

"Yes; and of what you have not done."

"Exactly; and of what I have not done. But I suppose I must go," and she proceeded to re-tie
the strings of her bonnet, which she had loosened.

"Do you mean that you are going over at once?"

"Yes; immediately. Why not? it will be better to have it over, and then I can go to the Crawleys.
But, Fanny, the pity of it is that I know it all as well as though it had been already spoken;
and what good can there be in my having to endure it? Can't you fancy the tone in which she
will explain to me the conventional inconveniences which arose when King Cophetua would marry
the beggar's daughter? how she will explain what Griselda went through;--not the archdeacon's
daughter, but the other Griselda?"

"But it all came right with her."

"Yes; but then I am not Griselda, and she will explain how it would certainly all go wrong
with me. But what's the good when I know it all beforehand? Have I not desired King Cophetua
to take himself and sceptre elsewhere?" And then she started, having first said another word
or two about the Crawley children, and obtained a promise of Puck and the pony-carriage for
the afternoon. It was also almost agreed that Puck on his return to Framley should bring back
the four children with him; but on this subject it was necessary that Mark should be consulted.
The present scheme was to prepare for them a room outside the house, once the dairy, at present
occupied by the groom and his wife; and to bring them into the house as soon as it was manifest
that there was no danger from infection. But all this was to be matter for deliberation. Fanny
wanted her to send over a note, in reply to Lady Lufton's, as harbinger of her coming; but
Lucy marched off, hardly answering this proposition.

"What's the use of such a deal of ceremony?" she said. "I know she's at home; and if she is
not, I shall only lose ten minutes in going." And so she went, and on reaching the door of
Framley Court house found that her ladyship was at home. Her heart almost came to her mouth
as she was told so, and then, in two minutes' time, she found herself in the little room upstairs.
In that little room we found ourselves once before--you and I, O my reader;--but Lucy had never
before visited that hallowed precinct. There was something in its air calculated to inspire
awe in those who first saw Lady Lufton sitting bolt upright in the cane-bottomed arm-chair,
which she always occupied when at work at her books and papers; and this she knew when she
determined to receive Lucy in that apartment. But there was there another arm-chair, an easy,
cosy chair, which stood by the fireside; and for those who had caught Lady Lufton napping in
that chair of an afternoon, some of this awe had perhaps been dissipated. "Miss Robarts," she
said, not rising from her chair, but holding out her hand to her visitor, "I am much obliged
to you for having come over to me here. You, no doubt, are aware of the subject on which I
wish to speak to you, and will agree with me that it is better that we should meet here than
over at the parsonage." In answer to which Lucy merely bowed her head, and took her seat on
the chair which had been prepared for her. "My son," continued her ladyship, "has spoken to
me on the subject of-- I think I understand, Miss Robarts, that there has been no engagement
between you and him?"

"None whatever," said Lucy. "He made me an offer and I refused him." This she said very sharply;--more
so undoubtedly than the circumstances required; and with a brusqueness that was injudicious
as well as uncourteous. Rut at the moment, she was thinking of her own position with reference
to Lady Lufton--not to Lord Lufton; and of her feelings with reference to the lady--not to
the gentleman.

"Oh," said Lady Lufton, a little startled by the manner of the communication. "Then I am to
understand that there is nothing now going on between you and my son; that the whole affair
is over?"

"That depends entirely upon you."

"On me; does it?"

"I do not know what your son may have told you, Lady Lufton. For myself, I do not care to have
any secrets from you in this matter; and as he has spoken to you about it, I suppose that such
is his wish also. Am I right in presuming that he has spoken to you on the subject?"

"Yes, he has; and it is for that reason that I have taken the liberty of sending for you."

"And may I ask what he has told you? I mean, of course, as regards myself," said Lucy. Lady
Lufton, before she answered this question, began to reflect that the young lady was taking
too much of the initiative in this conversation, and was, in fact, playing the game in her
own fashion, which was not at all in accordance with those motives which had induced Lady Lufton
to send for her. "He has told me that he made you an offer of marriage," replied Lady Lufton:
"a matter which, of course, is very serious to me, as his mother; and I have thought, therefore,
that I had better see you, and appeal to your own good sense and judgement and high feeling.
Of course you are aware--"

Now was coming the lecture to be illustrated by King Cophetua and Griselda, as Lucy had suggested
to Mrs. Robarts; but she succeeded in stopping it for awhile. "And did Lord Lufton tell you
what was my answer?"

"Not in words. 

When he met the two men, he raised his hat with a very formal, but also very distinguished bow,
and then went to make a face without farther greeting to be proud over.

"And who was that?"

"The Baron Jeorgy, according to his report from a very old family,
over the idea came to be Brazilian planters.

He accepted a charmingly situated colony - you this morning it must be over come. "

"Ah, the house up there on the mountain, where a charming young couple of Brazilian origin lives?
"

That's right, Keller's Chagra how the place is called now - and he verwirthschaftete the estate in
an incredibly short time so that it has recently been little more than a wilderness. He had
sell it at last, for he no longer bore the costs, and of course no one could further be to
blame as the director, since he still do this even more money on
wanted to advance.

He has been the time furiously at me, in the manner of such people but also to become so much
more polite, and just annoyed that I was facing from his slander I do not take the slightest notice.
"

"Good morning, Mr. Director," broke in at that moment a young man
talking, had overtaken her and quickly walked over to them.

He greeted it very respectfully, seemed to be not long in his boss standing nearby to do, he
may unexpectedly ran into the cast, for he turned quickly into the
next side street and disappeared in one of the gardens.

"The young gentleman," said talent, "seems to have had breakfast strong. His whole appearance
saw at least after this period. "

"Another curse of our colony," Sarno sighed, "that was our school teacher."

"The school teacher? He can be up to twenty-two. "

"And not only is he anyway, but that is why teachers," said the Director; "Our German Bauer has
been namely used by house and on so small because the "school masters to be regarded" as a very
minor character, then of course to measure the education of his children, that he repents for it at
any milreis he to spend, and he must be compelled formally to send
their children to school. The lot of a school teacher is enviable
in any country in the world, and only at home, where people from youth
to be educated on this and then later pursue any other career more
can always find enough workers. Here, however, find any bread to be
far better and can earn worries, only some will use his bones thinks
no one does it to give away to the fatal and also still badly paid
off office of a school teacher, nothgedrungen not have. Much as I
loved him, much as I do love him, dearly as I prize the generous offer which he came down here
to repeat to me, I could not live with him to be made the object of your scorn. I sent him
word, therefore, that I would have him when you would ask me, and not before." And, then, having
thus pleaded her cause--and pleaded, as she believed, the cause of her lover also--she ceased
from speaking, and prepared herself to listen to the story of King Cophetua. But Lady Lufton
felt considerable difficulty in commencing her speech. In the first place she was by no means
a hard-hearted or a selfish woman; and were it not that her own son was concerned, and all
the glory which was reflected upon her from her son, her sympathies would have been given to
Lucy Robarts. As it was, she did sympathize with her, and admire her, and to a certain extent
like her. She began also to understand what it was that had brought about her son's love, and
to feel that but for certain unfortunate concomitant circumstances the girl before her might
have made a fitting Lady Lufton. Lucy had grown bigger in her eyes while sitting there and
talking, and had lost much of that missish want of importance--that lack of social weight--which
Lady Lufton in her own opinion had always imputed to her. A girl that could thus speak up and
explain her own position now, would be able to speak up and explain her own, and perhaps some
other positions at any future time. But not for all or any of these reasons did Lady Lufton
think of giving way. The power of making or marring this marriage was placed in her hands,
as was very fitting, and that power it behoved her to use, as best she might use it, to her
son's advantage. Much as she might admire Lucy, she could not sacrifice her son to that admiration.
The unfortunate concomitant circumstances still remained, and were of sufficient force, as
she thought, to make such a marriage inexpedient. Lucy was the sister of a gentleman who by
his peculiar position as parish clergyman of Framley was unfitted to be the brother-in-law
of the owner of Framley. Nobody liked clergymen better than Lady Lufton or was more willing
to live with them on terms of affectionate intimacy, but she could not get over the feeling
that the clergyman of her own parish,--or of her son's,--was a part of her own establishment,
of her own appanage,--or of his,--and that it could not be well that Lord Lufton should marry
among his own dependants. Lady Lufton would not have used the word, but she did think it. And
then, too, Lucy's education had been so deficient. She had had no one about her in early life
accustomed to the ways of,--of what shall I say without making Lady Lufton appear more worldly
than she was? Lucy's wants in this respect, not to be defined in words, had been exemplified
by the very way in which she had just now stated her case. She had shown talent, good temper,
and sound judgement; but there had been no quiet, no repose about her. The species of power
in young ladies which Lady Lufton most admired was the vis inertiæ belonging to beautiful and
dignified reticence; of this poor Lucy had none. Then, too, she had no fortune, which, though
a minor evil, was an evil; and she had no birth, in the high-life sense of the word, which
was a greater evil. And then, though her eyes had sparkled when she confessed her love, Lady
Lufton was not prepared to admit that she was possessed of positive beauty. Such were the unfortunate
concomitant circumstances which still induced Lady Lufton to resolve that the match must be marred.

But the performance of her part in this play was much more difficult than she had imagined,
and she found herself obliged to sit silent for a minute or two, during which, however, Miss
Robarts made no attempt at further speech. "I am greatly struck," Lady Lufton said at last,
"by the excellent sense you have displayed in the whole of this affair; and you must allow
me to say, Miss Robarts, that I now regard you with very different feelings from those which
I entertained when I left London." 

"You see, Madame," cried M. de consoles life through these communications to a full Degrees of
sincerity driven, "that's just what I want. At home they always have me Accused that I would be
impractical, that I would never be able to myself from me to create a carrier. Now I want it
once to see if it is not possible, they lie to punish. You should experience, with what energy
I attack everything that I undertake. - If only I knew what "!

»About ropes you in it not, my young friend," said the countess. "There is indeed a lot of paths
that lead to the goal, but one is longer than the other, and if for but still has the choice,
why should not there looking for the shortest take? By the way, be Please be assured that I myself
have a little will keep your ears open. You are now our once supplied to such an adventurous
way that I take some interest in it. "

"My dear Countess, you are infinitely good."

"Let the, I will be honest, it is perhaps even selfishness of myself; because you would not believe
how slowly time passes when you absolutely nothing on the God's world
has to do.

A small job, a particular activity is the last really a necessity,
and a little worried and looking around is one of our lives.

"

"But by what I've earned that you are just so very friendly I suppose?"

"Dear God, we are here once in Brazil, live in conditions comparable to those of old world
may not have the slightest similarity, and because some designs often surprising and wonderful.
But all this you will know much better if you first even over long periods of time in the
country. "

Oskar had thoroughly bored with the conversation because he hated nothing more on the World, as
if from a specific life purpose, the speech was - and his mother
held him this chapter very common.

But he allowed it now, but also the heart of his new Household, and amused the time, with his blow-pipe
from an elevated stand to the hedge off after passing to shoot dogs. When he hit, they were
usually his tail between his legs and ran down the street in full flight, and Oscar wanted
then laugh about half dead.

To the pleasant way to combine business with pleasure, he took Mr. desks of life after with his
horses out of which he told him a lot and he also convinced had taught that a man without a
horse in Brazil could not possibly exist - not once a woman, and there learned of Mr. consoles
life that it used to Helen's favorite horse WAS, which is now a more
peaceful horror - the horror was the wildest horse in the settlement
- had bought, bought it at a young stranger, as he thought, very moderate
prices (Oscar had, in fact, more than hundred per cent because earned)
and reveled in it the hope of tomorrow, because Helen had promised
him walk with him to ride.

9.

An evening in the colony.
Why should she have been so romantic and chivalrous and self-sacrificing, seeing that her romance
and chivalry had all been to his detriment as well as to hers,--seeing that she sacrificed
him as well as herself? Why should she have been so anxious to play into Lady Lufton's hands?
It was not because she thought it right, as a general social rule, that a lady should refuse
a gentleman's hand, unless the gentleman's mother were a consenting party to the marriage.
She would have held any such doctrine as absurd. The lady, she would have said, would have
had to look to her own family and no further. It was not virtue but cowardice which had influenced
her, and she had none of that solace which may come to us in misfortune from a consciousness
that our own conduct has been blameless. Lady Lufton had inspired her with awe, and any such
feeling on her part was mean, ignoble, and unbecoming the spirit with which she wished to think
that she was endowed. That was the accusation which she brought against herself, and it forbade
her to feel any triumph as to the result of her interview. When she reached the parsonage,
Mark was there, and they were of course expecting her. "Well," said she, in her short, hurried
manner, "is Puck ready again? I have no time to lose, and I must go and pack up a few things.
Have you settled about the children, Fanny?"

"Yes; I will tell you directly; but you have seen Lady Lufton?"

"Seen her! Oh, yes, of course I have seen her. Did she not send for me? and in that case it
was not on the cards that I should disobey her."

"And what did she say?"

"How green you are, Mark; and not only green, but impolite also, to make me repeat the story
of my own disgrace. Of course she told me that she did not intend that I should marry my lord,
her son; and of course I said that under those circumstances I should not think of doing such
a thing."

"Lucy, I cannot understand you," said Fanny, very gravely. "I am sometimes inclined to doubt
whether you have any deep feeling in the matter or not. If you have, how can you bring yourself
to joke about it?"

"Well, it is singular; and sometimes I doubt myself whether I have. I ought to be pale, ought
I not? and very thin, and to go mad by degrees? I have not the least intention of doing anything
of the kind, and, therefore, the matter is not worth any further notice."

"But was she civil to you, Lucy?" asked Mark: "civil In her manner, you know?"

"Oh, uncommonly so. You will hardly believe it, but she actually asked me to dine. She always
does, you know, when she wants to show her good humour. If you'd broken your leg, and she wished
to commiserate you, she'd ask you to dinner."

"I suppose she meant to be kind," said Fanny, who was not disposed to give up her old friend,
though she was quite ready to fight Lucy's battle, if there were any occasion for a battle
to be fought.

"Lucy is so perverse," said Mark, "that it is impossible to learn from her what really has
taken place."

"Upon my word, then, you know it all as well as I can tell you. She asked me if Lord Lufton
had made me an offer. I said, yes. She asked next, if I meant to accept it. Not without her
approval, I said. And then she asked us all to dinner. That is exactly what took place, and
I cannot see that I have been perverse at all." After that she threw herself into a chair,
and Mark and Fanny stood looking at each other.

"Mark," she said, after a while, "don't be unkind to me. I make as little of it as I can, for
all our sakes. It is better so, Fanny, than that I should go about moaning, like a sick cow;"
and then they looked at her, and saw that the tears were already brimming over from her eyes.

"Dearest, dearest Lucy," said Fanny, immediately going down on her knees before her, "I won't
be unkind to you again." And then they had a great cry together.

CHAPTER XXXVI

Kidnapping at Hogglestock

