BRED IN THE BONE; OR, LIKE FATHER, LIKE SON

A Novel.

BY THE AUTHOR OF

"A BEGGAR ON HORSEBACK," "GWENDOLINE'S HARVEST," "CARLYON'S YEAR," "ONE OF THE FAMILY," "WON--NOT
WOOED," &c.

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS.

NEW YORK: 1872.

CHAPTER I.

CAREW OF CROMPTON.

Had you lived in Breakneckshire twenty years ago, or even any where in the Midlands, it would
be superfluous to tell you of Carew of Crompton. Every body thereabout was acquainted with
him either personally or by hearsay. You must almost certainly have known somebody who had
had an adventure with that eccentric personage--one who had been ridden down by him, for that
mighty hunter never turned to the right hand nor to the left for any man, nor paid attention
to any rule of road; or one who, more fortunate, had been "cleared" by him on his famous black
horse Trebizond, an animal only second to his master in the popular esteem. There are as many
highly colored pictures of his performance of this flying feat in existence as there are of
"Dick Turpin clearing the Turnpikegate." Sometimes it is a small tradesman cowering down in
his cart among the calves, while the gallant Squire hurtles over him with a "Stoop your head,
butcher." Sometimes it is a wagoner, reminding one of Commodore Trunnion's involuntary deed
of "derring-do," who, between two high banks, perceives with marked astonishment this portent
flying over himself and convoy. But, at all events, the thing was done; perhaps on more than
one occasion, and was allowed on all hands not only as a fact, but as characteristic of their
sporting idol. It was "Carew all over," or "Just like Carew."

This phrase was also applied to many other heroic actions. The idea of "keel-hauling," for
instance, adapted from the nautical code, was said to be practically enforced in the case of
duns, attorneys, and other objectionable persons, in the lake at Crompton; while the administration
of pommelings to poachers and agriculturists generally, by the athletic Squire, was the theme
of every tongue. These punishments, though severe, were much sought after by a certain class,
the same to which the purchased free and independent voter belongs, for the clenched fist invariably
became an open hand after it had done its work--a golden ointment, that is, was always applied
after these inflictions, such as healed all wounds.

Carew of Crompton might at one time have been member for the county, if he had pleased; but
he desired no seat except in the saddle, or on the driving-box. He showed such skill in riding,
and with "the ribbons," that some persons supposed that his talents must be very considerable
in other matters, and affected to regret their misuse; there were reports that he knew Latin
better than his own chaplain; and was, or had been, so diligent a student of Holy Writ, that
he could give you chapter and verse for every thing. But it must be allowed that others were
not wanting to whisper that these traits of scholarship were greatly exaggerated, and that
all the wonder lay in the fact that the Squire knew any thing of such matters at all; nay,
a few even ventured to express their opinion that, but for his recklessness and his money,
there was nothing more remarkable in Carew than in other spendthrifts; but this idea was never
mooted within twenty miles of Crompton. The real truth is, that the time was unsuitable to
the display of the Squire's particular traits. He would have been an eminent personage had
he been a Norman, and lived in the reign of King John. Even now, if he could have removed his
establishment to Poland, and assumed the character of a Russian proprietor, he would doubtless
have been a great prince. There was a savage magnificence about him, and also certain degrading
traits, which suggested the Hetman Platoff. Unfortunately, he was a Squire in the Midlands.
The contrast, however, of his splendid vagaries with the quiet time and industrious locality
in which he lived, while it diminished his influence, did, on the other hand, no doubt enhance
his reputation. He was looked upon (as Waterford and Mytton used to be) as a lusus naturae,
an eccentric, an altogether exceptional personage, to whom license was permitted; and the charitable
divided the human race, for his sake, into Men, Women, and Carew.

The same philosophic few, however, who denied him talent, averred that he was half mad; and
indeed Fortune had so lavishly showered her favors on him from his birth, that it might well
be that they had turned his head. His father had died while Carew was but an infant, so that
the surplus income from his vast estates had accumulated to an enormous sum when he attained
his majority. In the mean time, his doting mother had supplied him with funds out of all proportion
to his tender years. At ten years old, he had a pack of harriers of his own, and hunted the
county regularly twice a week. At the public school, where he was with difficulty persuaded
to remain for a short period, he had an allowance the amount of which would have sufficed for
the needs of a professional man with a wife and family, and yet it is recorded of him that
he had the audacity--"the boy is father to the man," and it was "so like Carew," they said--to
complain to his guardian, a great lawyer, that his means were insufficient. He also demanded
a lump sum down, on the ground that (being at the ripe age of fourteen) he contemplated marriage.
The reply of the legal dignitary is preserved, as well as the young gentleman's application:
"If you can't live upon your allowance, you may starve, Sir; and if you marry, you shall not
have your allowance."

You had only--having authority to do so--to advise Carew, and he was positively certain to
go counter to your opinion; and did you attempt to oppose him in any purpose, you would infallibly
insure its accomplishment. He did not marry at fourteen, indeed, but he did so clandestinely
in less than three years afterward, and had issue; but at the age of five-and-thirty, when
our stage opens, he had neither wife nor child, but lived as a bachelor at Crompton, which
was sometimes called "the open house," by reason of its profuse hospitalities; and sometimes
"Liberty Hall," on account of its license; otherwise it was never, called any thing but Crompton;
never Crompton Hall, or Crompton Park--but simply Crompton, just like Stowe or Blenheim. And
yet the park at Crompton was as splendid an appanage of glade and avenue, of copse and dell,
as could be desired. It was all laid out upon a certain plan--somewhere in the old house was
the very parchment on which the chase was ordered like a garden; a dozen drives here radiated
from one another like the spokes of a wheel, and here four mighty avenues made a St. Andrew's
cross in the very centre--but the area was so immense, and the stature of the trees so great,
that nothing of this formality could be observed in the park itself. Not only were the oaks
and beeches of large, and often of giant proportions, but the very ferns grew so tall that
whole herds of fallow deer were hidden in it, and could only be traced by their sounds. There
were red deer also, almost as numerous, with branching antlers, curiously mossed, as though
they had acquired that vegetation by rubbing, as they often did, against the high wooden pale--itself
made picturesque by age--which hedged them in their sylvan prison for miles. Moreover, there
were wild-cattle, as at Chartley (though not of the same breed), the repute of whose fierceness
kept the few public paths that intersected this wild domain very unfrequented. These animals,
imported half a century ago, were of no use nor of particular beauty, and would have dwindled
away, from the unfitness of the locality for their support, but that they were recruited periodically,
and at a vast expense. It was enough to cause their present owner to strain every nerve to
retain them, because they were so universally objected to. They had gored one man to death,
and occasionally maimed others, but, as Carew, to do him justice, was by no means afraid of
them himself, and ran the same risk, and far oftener than other people, he held he had a right
to retain them. Nobody was obliged to come into his park unless they liked, he said, and if
they did, they must "chance a tossing." The same detractors, whose opinion we have already
quoted, affirmed that the Squire kept these cattle for the very reason that was urged against
their existence; the fear of these horned police kept the park free from strangers, and thereby
saved him half a dozen keepers.

That his determination in the matter was pig-headed and brutal, there is no doubt; but the
Squire's nature was far from exclusive, and the idea of saving in any thing, it is certain,
never entered into his head. The time, indeed, was slowly but surely coming when the park should
know no more not only its wild-cattle, but many a rich copse and shadowy glade. Not a stately
oak nor far-spreading beech but was doomed, sooner or later, to be cut down, to prop for a
moment the falling fortunes of their spendthrift owner; but at the time of which we speak there
was no visible sign of the coming ruin. It is recorded of a brother prodigal, that after enormous
losses and expenses, his steward informed him that if he would but consent to live upon seven
thousand a year for the next ten years, the estate would recover itself. "Sir," returned he
in anger, "I would rather die than live on seven thousand a year." Our Carew would have given
the same reply had twice that income been suggested to him, and been applauded for the gallant
answer. The hint of any necessity for curtailment would probably have caused him to double
his expenditure forthwith, though, indeed, that would have been difficult to effect. He had
already two packs of hounds, with which he hunted on alternate days, and he had even endeavored
to do so on the Sunday; but the obsequious "county" had declined to go with him to that extent,
and this anomaly of the nineteenth century had been compelled to confine himself on the seventh
day to cock-fighting in the library. He kept a bear to bait (as well as a chaplain to bully),
and ferrets ran loose about Crompton as mice do in other houses. He had a hunter for every
week in the year, yet he often rode his horses to death. He had a stud of racers, and it was
this, or rather his belief in their powers, which eventually drained his vast resources. Not
one of them ever won a great race. This was not their fault, nor that of their trainer, but
his own; he interfered in their management, and would have things his own way; he would command
every thing, except success, which was beyond his power, and in missing that he lost all. Otherwise,
he was lucky as a mere gambler. His audacity, and the funds he always had at his disposal,
carried him triumphantly, where many a more prudent but less wealthy player withdrew from the
contest. Games of skill had no attraction for him, but at an earlier date in his career he
had been a terror to the club-keepers in St. James's, where his luck and obstinacy had broken
a dozen banks. It was said--and very likely with truth--that he had once cut double or quits
for ten thousand pounds.

His moral character, as respected the softer sex, was such as you might expect from these traits.
No modest woman had been seen at Crompton for many a year; although not a few such--if at least
good birth and high position include modesty--had, since his majority, striven to give a lawful
mistress to the place. His eccentricities had not alarmed them, and his shamelessness had not
abashed them. Though his constitution was said to be breaking up through unparalleled excesses,
his heart, it was currently reported in domestic circles, was sound: and what a noble feat
would it be to reclaim him! It was also reckoned impossible that any amount of extravagance
could have seriously embarrassed such a property as he had inherited, indeed long since, but
of which he had had the sole control only a few years. At the time of which we speak Carew
was but thirty-five, though he looked much older. His muscles were still firm, his limbs yet
active, and his hand and eye as steady with the gun or bridle as ever. But his bronzed face
showed signs of habitual intemperance; his head was growing prematurely bald; and once or twice,
though the fact was known to himself only, his iron nerve had of late failed him. The secret
consciousness of this last fact made him more venturesome and reckless than ever. "Time," he
swore, "should never play him tricks. He was as good a man as ever he was. There was a quarter
of a million, more or less, to be got through yet, and, by Jove, he would see it out!" Of course
he did not swear by Jove; for, as we have said, he kept a chaplain, and was therefore no heathen.

One of the arguments that the mothers of those young ladies who sought his hand were wont to
make use of, to their great comfort, was that Mr. Carew was a churchman. There was a private
chapel at Crompton, the existence of which, of course, explained why his presence did not grace
the parish church. Then his genealogy was of the most satisfactory description. Carews had
dwelt at Crompton in direct succession for many a century. Charles I., it is almost unnecessary
to state, had slept there--that most locomotive of monarchs seems to have honored all old English
mansions with a night's visit--and had hunted in the chase next morning. Queen Elizabeth had
also been most graciously pleased to visit her subject, John Carew, on which occasion a wooden
tower had been erected for her in the park, from which to see "ten buckes, all having fayre
lawe, pulled down with grey-houndes;" she shot deer, too, with her own virgin hands, for which
purpose "a cross-bowe was delivered to her by a nymph with a sweet song." These things, however,
were in no way commemorated. Carew was all in all: his devouring egotism swallowed up historical
association. His favorite female bull-dog, with her pups, slept in the royal martyr's apartment.
The places in Crompton Chase held remarkable were those where its present owner had made an
unprecedentedly long shot, or had beaten off one of the wild cattle without a weapon, or had
run down a stag on foot. There was no relic of ancient times preserved whatever, except that
at midsummer, as in Lyme, that very curious custom was kept of driving the red deer round the
park, and then swimming them through the lake before the house--a very difficult feat, by-the-by,
to any save those who have been accustomed to "drive deer." One peculiar virtue of Carew--he
was addressed, by-the-way, by all his inferiors, and some of his equals, as "Squire" only--was,
we had almost forgotten to say, his regard for truth, which may truly be said to have been
"passionate," if we consider the effect produced in him when he discovered that any one had
told him a falsehood. He would fall upon them tooth and nail, if they were menials; and if
guests, he would forbid them his house. This was surely one excellent trait. Yet it was maintained
by those carpers already alluded to, that to tell truth was comparatively easy in one who was
as careless of all opinion as he was independent in means; moreover, that a love of truth is
sometimes found to exist in very bad company, as in the case of the Spartan boy who stole the
fox, and if the veracious Squire did not steal foxes (which he did, by-the-by, indirectly,
for a bagged one was his delight), he was guilty of much worse things. However, this is certain,
that Carew of Crompton never told a lie.

CHAPTER II.

WAITING FOR AN INTRODUCTION.

We have said that Carew was not exclusive; so long as he had his own way in every thing he
was good-tempered, and so very good-natured that he permitted not only his friends but his
dependents to do pretty much as they would. He was a tyrant only by fits and starts, and in
the mean time there was anarchy at Crompton. Every soul in the place, from the young lords,
its master's guests, down to the earth-stopper's assistant, who came for his quantum of ale
to the back-door, did pretty much as seemed right in his own eyes. There were times when every
thing had to be done in a moment under the master's eye, no matter at what loss, or even risk
to limb or life; but usually there was no particular time for any thing--except dinner. The
guests arose in the morning, or lay in bed all day, exactly as they pleased, and had their
meals in public or in their own rooms; but when the great dinner-gong sounded for the second
time it was expected that every man should be ready for the feast, and wearing (with the single
exception of the chaplain) a red coat. The dinner-parties at Crompton--and there was a party
of the most heterogeneous description daily--were literally, therefore, very gay affairs; the
banquet was sumptuous, and the great cellars were laid under heavy contribution. Only, if a
guest did happen to be unpunctual, from whatever cause, even if it were illness, the host would
send for his bear, or his half-dozen bull-dogs, and proceed to the sick man's room, with the
avowed intention (and he always kept his word) of "drawing the badger." In spite of his four-legged
auxiliaries, this was not always an easy task. His recklessness, though not often, did sometimes
meet with its match in that of the badger; and in one chamber door at Crompton we have ourselves
seen a couple of bullet-holes, which showed that assault on one side had met with battery upon
the other. With such rough manners as Carew had, it may seem strange that he was never called
to account for them at twelve paces; but, in the first place, it was thoroughly understood
that he would have "gone out" (a fact which has doubtless given pause to many a challenge),
and would have shot as straight as though he were partridge-shooting; and secondly, as we have
said, he had a special license for practical jokes; the subjects of them, too, were not men
of delicate susceptibilities, for none such, by any accident, could have been his guests. In
consideration of good fare, good wine, a good mount in the hunting-field, excellent shooting,
and of a loan from the host whenever they were without funds, men even of good position were
found to "put up" very good-naturedly with the eccentricities of the master of Crompton, and
he had his house full half the year. It is not to be wondered at, therefore, that his servants
were found willing to compound for some occasional ill usage, in return for general laxity
of rule, and many unconsidered trifles in the way of perquisites. His huntsmen and whips got
now and then a severe beating; his grooms found it very inconvenient when "Squire" took it
into his mad head to sally forth on horseback across country by moonlight; and still worse,
when he would have the whole stud out, and set every servant in his employ, not excepting his
fat French cook, in the saddle, to see how they would comport themselves under the unaccustomed
excitement of a steeple-chase. But upon the whole, the retainers at Crompton had an easy berth
of it, and seldom voluntarily took their discharge.

Perhaps the best situations, as being less liable to the per contras in the shape of the master's
passionate outbursts, were those of the park-keepers, of whom old Walter Grange was one. He
was a bachelor, as almost all of them were. It was not good for any one with wife or daughter
(if these were young, at least) to take service with Carew at all; and living in a pleasant
cottage, far too large for him, in the very heart of the chase, Grange thought it no harm to
take a lodger. The same old woman who cooked his victuals and kept his rooms tidy would do
the same office for another who was not very particular in his food, and could rough it a little
in other respects; and such a one had Walter lately found in the person of a young landscape-painter,
Richard Yorke. This gentleman was a stranger to Crompton and its neighborhood; but having (as
he said) happened to see a certain guarded advertisement in the Times headed, "To Artists and
Others," that lodgings in the midst of forest scenery could be procured for what seemed next
to nothing, he had come down from London in the autumn on the chance, and found them suitable.

To poet or painter's eye, indeed, the lodge was charming; it was small, of course, but very
picturesquely built, and afforded the new tenant a bow-windowed sitting-room, with an outlook
such as few dwellings in England, and probably none elsewhere, could offer. In the fore-ground
was an open lawn, on which scores of fine-plumaged pheasants strutted briskly, and myriads
of rabbits came forth at eve to play and nibble--bordered by crops of fern, above which moved
statelily the antlered deer. A sentry oak or two of mighty girth guarded this open space; but
on both sides vast glades shut in the prospect with a wall of checkered light and shadow that
deepened into sylvan gloom. But right in front the expanding view seemed without limit, and
exhibited all varieties of forest scenery; coppices with "Autumn's fiery finger" on their tender
leaves; still, shining pools, where water-fowl bred and dwelt; broad pathways, across which
the fallow deer could bound at leisure; or one would leap in haste, and half a hundred follow
in groundless panic. The wealth of animal life in that green solitude, where the voice of man
was hardly ever heard, was prodigious; the rarest birds were common there; even those who had
their habitations by the sea were sometimes lured to this as silent spot, and skimmed above
its undulating dells as o'er the billow. The eagle and the osprey had been caught there; and,
indeed, a specimen of each was caged in a sort of aviary, which Grange had had constructed
at the back of the lodge; while Yorke's sitting-room was literally stuffed full of these strange
feathered visitants, which had fallen victims to the keeper's gun. The horse-hair sofa had
a noble cover of deer-skin; the foot-stool and the fire-rug were made of furs, or skins that
would have fetched their price elsewhere, and been held rare, although once worn by British
beast or "varmint." The walls were stuck with antlers, and the very handle of the bell-rope
was the fore-foot of a stag. Each of these had its story; and nothing pleased the old man better
than to have a listener to his long-winded tales of how and where and when the thing was slain.
All persons whose lives are passed in the open air, and in comparative solitude, seem in this
respect to be descendants of Dame Quickly; their wearisome digressions and unnecessary preciseness
as to date and place try the patience of all other kinds of men, and this was the chief cross
which Grange's lodger had to bear as an offset to the excellence of his quarters. It must be
confessed that he did not bear it meekly. To stop old Walter in mid-talk--without an open quarrel--was
an absolute impossibility; but his young companion would turn the stream of his discourse,
without much ceremony, from the records of slaughter into another channel (almost as natural
to it)--the characteristics and peculiarities of his master Carew. Of this subject, notwithstanding
that that other made him fret and fume so, Yorke never seemed to tire.

"I should like to know your master," he had said, half musingly, after listening to one of
these strange recitals, soon after his arrival; to which Grange had answered, laughing: "Well,
Squire's a very easy one to know. He picks up friends by every road-side, without much troubling
himself as to who they are, I promise you."

The young man's face grew dark with anger; but the idea of self-respect, far less of pride,
was necessarily strange to a servant of Carew's. So Grange went on, unconscious of offense:
"Now, if you were a young woman," he chuckled, "and as good-looking as you are as a lad, there
would be none more welcome than yourself up at the big house. Pretty gals, bless ye, need no
introduction yonder; and yet one would have thought that Squire would know better than to meddle
with the mischievous hussies--he took his lesson early enough, at all events. Why, he married
before he was your age, and not half so much of a man to look at, neither. You have heard talk
of that, I dare say, however, in London?"

Richard Yorke, as the keeper had hinted, was a very handsome lad--brown-cheeked, blue eyed,
and with rich clustering hair as black as a sloe; but at this moment he did not look prepossessing.
He frowned and flashed a furious glance upon the speaker; but old Grange, who had an eye like
a hawk, for the objects that a hawk desires, was as blind as a mole to any evidence of human
emotion short of a punch on the head, and went on unheeding:

"Well, I thought you must ha' heard o' that too. We folk down here heard o' nothing else for
all that year. She got hold o' Squire, this ere woman did, though he was but a school-boy,
and she old enough to be his mother, bless ye, and was married to him. And they kep' it secret
for six months; and that's what bangs me most about it all. For Carew, he can keep nothing
secret--nothing: he blurts all out; and that's why he seems so much worse than he is to some
people. Oh, she must have been a deep one, she must!"

"You never saw her, then?" asked Yorke, carelessly shading his eyes, as though from the westering
sun, which Midas-like, was turning every thing it touched in that broad landscape into gold.

"Oh yes, I see her; she was here with Squire near half a year. Mrs. Carew--the old lady, I
mean--was at Crompton then; and the young one--though she was no chicken neither--she tried
to get her turned out; but she wasn't clever enough, clever as she was, for that job. Carew
loved his mother, as indeed he ought, for she had never denied him any thing since he was born;
and so, in that pitched battle between the women, he took his mother's side. And in the end
the old lady took his, and with a vengeance. I do think that if it had not been for her, young
madam would have held on--Why, what's the matter, young gentleman? That was an oath fit for
the mouth of Squire hisself."

"It's this cursed toothache," exclaimed Yorke, passionately. "It has worried me so ever since
you began to speak that I should have gone mad if I had not let out at it a bit. Never mind
me; I'm better now."

"Well, that's like the Squire again," returned the keeper, admiringly. "He seems allus to find
hisself better for letting out at things, and at people too, for the matter of that. To hear
him sometimes, one would almost think the ground must open; not that he means any harm, but
it's a way he's got; but it does frighten them as is not used to him, surely. I mind that day
when he first took the fox-hounds out, and Mr. Howard the sheriff as was that year--he's dead
and gone long since, and his grandson is sheriff now again, which is cur'ous--well, he happened
to ride a bit too forward with the dogs, and our young master--Oh dear, dear," and the old
man began to chuckle like a hen that has laid two eggs at a time, "how he did swear at the
old man!"

"You were talking about Mrs. Carew the elder," observed the artist, coolly.

"Was I? True, so I was. Well, she and the young Squire was for all the world like a deer with
her fawn--all tenderness and timidity, so long as he was let alone; but when this 'ere woman
came, as she considered his enemy, she was as bold as a red stag--nay, as one of our wild-cattle.
It was through her, I say, that the bride got the sack at last; and when that was done the
old lady seemed to have done her work, and was content enough when her son portioned her off,
and persuaded her to live at the dower-house at Morden; and indeed she could hardly have staid
at Crompton, with such goings on as there are now--feastings and fightings and flirtings--"

"Just so," interrupted the young painter; "she got her way, I know. But with respect to the
younger lady, Mrs. Charles Carew, what was she like, and what did people say of her?"

"Well, not much good, I reckon. What could they say of a school-mistress who marries her pupil?"

"A school-mistress, was she?" said Yorke, in a strange husky voice. "We never heard that in
London."

"Well, she was summut of that sort, Sir, though I don't know exactly what. Young as he was,
Carew was not quite child enough to be at a dame's school, that's true. But she was not a mere
servant-girl, as some said, any way, for she could play and sing--ay, songs that pleased him
too--and she had book-learning, I've heard, such as would have astonished you; so that some
folks said she was a witch, and had the devil's help to catch Carew. But a woman don't want
magic, bless you, to come over a lad of seventeen--not she. What nonsense people talk! If any
pretty girl about Crompton was to take a fancy to you now, as is like enough, do you suppose--"

"But I thought you said that Mrs. Charles Carew was not a girl?"

"Nor more she was: she was five-and-thirty if she was a day; and yet--there was the wonder
of it--she did not look much over twenty! I've heard our gentlemen, when out shooting, liken
her to some fine Frenchwoman as never grew old, and was fell in love with unbeknown by her
grandson. Now, what was her name? I got it written down somewhere in my old pocket-book; it
was summut like Longclothes."

"Ninon de l'Enclos?" suggested Yorke, without a smile.

"Ay, that's the name. Well, Mrs. Charles Carew, as you call her, was just like her, and a regular
everlasting! She was not what you would call pretty, but very "taking" looking, and with a
bloom and freshness on her as would have deceived any man. Her voice was like music itself,
and she moved like a stag o' ten; and the Squire being always manly looking and swarthy, like
yourself, there was really little difference between them to look at. I dare say she's gone
all to pieces now, as women will do, while the Squire looks much the same as he did then."

"I have never even seen him," said the landscape-painter, moodily.

"Well, don't you stare at him, young master, when you do get that chance, that's all. Some
comes down here merely to look at him, as if he was a show, and that puts him in a pretty rage,
I promise you; though to get to know him, as I say, is easy enough, if you go the right way
about it. If you were a good rider, for instance, and could lead the field one day when the
hunting begins, he'd ask you to dinner to a certainty; or if you could drive stags--why, he
would have given you a hundred pounds last midsummer, when we couldn't get the beasts to swim
the lake. There's a pretty mess come o' that, by-the-by; for, out of the talk there was among
the gentlemen about that difficulty, the Squire laid a bet as he would drive stags; not as
we do, mind you, but in harness, like carriage-horses; and, cuss me, if he hasn't had the break
out half a dozen times with four red deer in it, and you may see him tearing through the park,
with mounted grooms and keepers on the right and left of him, all galloping their hardest,
and the Squire with the ribbons, a-holloaing like mad! For my part, I don't like such pranks,
and would much sooner not be there to see 'em. There will be mischief some day with it yet,
for all that old Lord Orford, down at Newmarket some fifty years ago, used to do the same thing,
they say. It ain't in nature that stags should be druv four-in-hand, even by Carew. However,
the Squire won his wager; and we haven't seen none o' that wild work o' late weeks, though
we may see it again any day."

"I have heard of that strange exploit," observed Yorke; "but as driving deer, even in the ordinary
way, is not my calling, and as I am no great rider, even if I had a horse, I don't see how
I am to introduce myself to your mad Squire, and yet I have a great fancy for his acquaintance.
Do you think he'd buy any of these drawings, taken in his own park, from his own timber?" The
young man touched a portfolio, already well stocked with studies of oak and beech. "Here is
a sketch of the Decoy Pond, for instance, with the oldest tree in the chase beside it; would
not that interest him, think you? You think not?"

"Well, young gentleman," said the keeper, frankly, "if I say no, it ain't that I mean any slight
to your drawing. It's like the tree enough, for certain, with the very hoop of iron as I put
round it with my own hands twenty years ago--and, by the same token, it will want another before
this winter's out; but I don't think the Squire cares much for such matters. He might, maybe,
just give a look at it, or he might bid you go to the devil for a paper-staining son of a--well--what
you will. He does not care a farthing, bless 'ee, for all the great pictures in his own gallery,
though they cost his grandfather a mint of money, and are certainly a fine sight--so far as
the frames go. And, on the other hand, if he happens to be cross-grained that day, he might
tear it up before you could say 'Hold,' and kick you down the Hall steps into the bargain,
as he has done to many a one. That's where it is, you see, the Squire is so chancy."

"I don't think he would kick me down his Hall steps," said Yorke, grimly.

The keeper grinned. "Well, you see, nobody can tell that till it's tried. The Squire is a regular
bruiser, I promise you, though I grant you are a strapping young fellow, and you have told
me that you know how to use your fists. That's a great thing, mind you, for a man to ha' learnt;
a deal better than Latin or such-like, in my opinion. Folks talk of life-preservers and pistols,
but there's nothing like a good pair of well-handled fists when one has to tackle a poacher.
I've been at Crompton, man and boy, these fifty years, and had a good many rough-and-tumbles
with that sort, and I have never had the worst of it yet. It prevents bloodshed on both sides;
for if you haven't no shooting-iron, there's few Englishmen, poachers or not, who will draw
trigger on you; and as for a bludgeon, it's as likely to be in my hand as another's after the
first half minute."

"Is there much poaching now at Crompton?" inquired Yorke, mechanically. It would have been
plain to any less obtuse observer than his companion that he no longer gave him his attention.

"Well, no; nothing to be called serious has happened lately; though I dare say we shall have
some scrimmages as the winter comes on; there's allus a good deal of what I calls hanky-panky
work in the fawn season. Women and children--especially children--will come into the park,
under pretense o' picking up sticks; and they'll put away a new dropped fawn in their bundles,
if they get the chance; and then they take it home, to be reared until it grows up, and can
be sold for venison."

"I should have thought there would have been no market for such a commodity--that is, in the
case of people such as you describe," observed Yorke, yawning.

"Market!" echoed the keeper, contemptuously; "there'd be a market to-morrow morning for the
whole herd o' our wild-cattle, if they were stolen to-night; there'd be a market for a rhinoceros
or a halligator, if we happened to keep 'em, bless 'ee, as easy as for a sucking pig! But I
don't call that poaching--I mean the fawn-stealing. It's the professionals from the Midland
towns as come by tens and twenties at a time as is our trouble. We generally gets wind of 'em
beforehand, and then out we all goes, and Squire with us--for he dearly loves a fight--and
then there's broken crowns and bloody noses; but, thank God, there's been no murder done, at
least, not in my time, at Crompton. And that reminds me, Sir, that it's time for me to start
on my evening rounds."

"Well, when you next have any news of such an incursion, Grange, I hope you will let me make
one of your party," said Yorke, good-humoredly. "I can hit out straight from the shoulder;
and perhaps I might get to know the Squire that way."

"And as likely a road to lead you into his good graces, Sir," said the keeper, rising, "as
any I know. Are you for a walk round the park this fine evening, Sir?"

"No; not to-night, thank you, Grange. I have got to fill in this sketch a bit that I took this
morning."

"Then, good-night, Sir, for I sha'n't return before daylight."

But it was not till long after the keeper had taken his departure that Richard Yorke turned
hand or eye to his unfinished drawing. He sat staring straight before him with steadfast eyes
and thoughtful face, for hours, murmuring to himself disjointed sentences; and ever and anon
he started up and paced the little room with rapid strides. "He shall see me, and know me,
too," muttered he, at last, between his clenched teeth, "though it should cost one of us our
lives. She shall not say I came down to this wilderness, like some hunted beast to covert,
for nothing."

CHAPTER III.

THE NIGHT-WATCH.

It was an easy thing enough, as Walter Grange had said, to make acquaintance with Carew of
Crompton, and possible even to become his bosom friend at a short notice, for his friendships,
all made in wine, at play, or in the hunting-field, were soon cemented; but then, if the introduction
was effected in an unpropitious time or manner, it was like enough to end in affront or downright
insult. A gulf might be fixed just where you wanted a causeway, and of this--though he had
feigned to inquire about it so innocently of the honest park-keeper--Richard Yorke was well
aware. He had, as has been hinted, come down to Crompton with the express view of throwing
himself in the way of its eccentric master, and to do so opportunely, and he was content to
bide his time. Thus, though the autumn had far advanced, and the time had come for men of his
craft to hasten from the dropping, dripping woods, no longer fair, to hive at home their sweet
memorials of the summer time, Richard remained at Crompton, not willingly, indeed, nor even
patiently, but with that sort of dogged resolve which is engendered, even in a restless spirit,
by long watching. He had stopped so long that he would not now give up his watch; the fortress,
indeed, showed no more sign of breach than when he first sat down before it; but still he would
not raise the siege. This persistency excited no surprise in his house companion; Walter Grange
was no gossip, nor curious about other men's affairs; it was easy, even for him, to see that
his tenant had a proud stomach, and he had set down his talk about desiring an introduction
to Carew as merely another phrase for wishing for a good chance of disposing of his wares to
best advantage in that market to which so many of such various callings thronged. He did not
think, as he had honestly confessed, that there was much chance of the Squire becoming a patron
of the fine arts, but he wished the young fellow luck, and was glad, for more than one reason,
that he staid on.

It was at least three months after his young lodger's arrival that Walter burst into his sitting-room
one afternoon, without his usual knock at the door, with the great news that he had just had
word, by a safe hand, that a gang of poachers would be in the Home Park that very night, and
that all the staff of keepers would be out in waiting for them.

"You know," said he, quite indignant that the young man did not show his enthusiasm, "you told
me I was to be sure and let you know, Mr. Yorke; but, of course, you needn't make one of us
unless you like."

"Oh yes, I'll come," laughed the young fellow--"that is, provided it is fine. I can't fight
in the rain, even for the game laws."

"It'll be a lovely night, Sir, with just enough of moonlight to know friends from foes," went
on the keeper, rubbing his hands, and unconsciously moistening them in his excitement. "I knew
you'd come. I said to myself: 'Mr. Yorke'll never turn tail;' and we shall be really glad of
your help, for the fact is we are short-handed. Napes is down with the rheumatics, and two
of our men are away from home, and there ain't time to send to the out-beaters. So we shall
be only nine--including yourself--in all. Let's see," continued the old man, counting on his
fingers: "there'll be Bill Nokes, and Robert Sloane, and--"

"Spare me the roll-call, Grange," interrupted the painter; "and tell me where I am to be, and
when, and I'll be there."

"Very good, Sir," said the keeper, musing. "I'll put you at the Squire's oak--the one as you
drawed so nicely--that'll be at the Decoy down yonder, and close to home. You have only to
use this whistle, and you'll get help enough if you chance to be set upon; there will be a
fight, no doubt. They must be a daring lot to poach the near park, within sound of the house:
they ain't a done that these ten year; for the last time they brought Squire and his bull-dogs
out, which was a lesson to one or two of 'em. However, he's for town, they say, to-day."

"All right, Grange; we must do without him, then," returned the young man, cheerfully. "What
time am I to be on guard?"

"You should be there at ten at latest, Sir. There'll be plenty of us within whistle-call, you
understand. But nobody will come aneist you as has any business there; so whoever you see you
must go in at."

Yorke nodded, smiling, and doubling his white fists, hit out scientifically with his right.

"You're one after the Squire's own heart," exclaimed the keeper, admiringly; "and I do wish
you could foregather with him. What a reach of arm you've got, and what a play of muscle! The
fist is the weapon for a poacher--that is, I mean agin him--if you only know how to use it.
I can depend on the Decoy being guarded by ten, Sir, can I? for I must be off to the head-keeper's
with the rest."

"Yes, you can."

"Then, good-by, Sir, for the present."

"Now what a poor fool is that!" soliloquized the young painter, contemptuously, as the door
closed upon his late companion. "To think that I should risk my life against a poacher's on
even terms! Of course, if they suffice, I shall only treat him to my knuckles; but if not--if
he be a giant, or there be more than one of them--then here is a better ally than mere bone
and sinew." Yorke took out of a drawer a life-preserver, made of lead and whalebone, struck
with it once, to test its weight and elasticity, then slipped it into his shooting-jacket pocket.
"That will enlarge their organs of locality," said he, grimly; "they will not forget the Decoy
Pond in a hurry whose heads knock against this." ----------------------------------------------- That ^ 31 not full citizens community
limited jurisdiction over state is identified. It is remarkable, however, from what Caesar's
municipal code for the shows Cisalpine Gaul determined that the beyond the municipal competence
underlying processes of this province not before the Governor same, but the Roman praetor go, for
the rest of the governor is indeed in his diocese as well instead of the praetor, who between
citizens, as instead of the one between citizens and non citizens right, speaks well and competently
for all processes. Without doubt, this is a remnant of pre-ulla American policy, where in
the whole continental Area of ​​competence to the Alps, only the city officials here were, and
therefore all Processes, where they exceeded the municipal competence, necessary before the
praetor in Rome came. In contrast, in Narbo, Gades, Carthage, Corinth, the processes were
safe in this case to the relevant governor, as they not already, for practical considerations
probably can be thought of a court, after Rome. ^ 32 Why is the grant of Roman citizenship
of a landscape as a whole and the maintenance of the provincial administration for the same as thought
to be mutually exclusive opposites to maintain, is not in sight. Moreover, was notoriously
the Cisalpine Gaul by the end of 11 people Roscischen March 705 (49) Civität while province, while
Caesar was alive, and only after his death was combined with Italy (Dio 48, 12), and the governor
to 711 (43) are detectable. The very fact that the Caesarian Municipal Code, the landscape
never as Italy, but as Cisalpine Gaul was known to lead to the right. -----------------------------------------------
Clearly, all these ups and individual municipal systems, at least at the Plan, though perhaps not all
of the design go back to Caesar, a certain System. Italy was converted from the mistress of the conquered
peoples in the mother the tapered Italo-Hellenic nation. The fully assimilated the mother country
Cisalpine province promised and guaranteed it that in the monarchy of Caesar, in the ebenwie fresher
era of the Republic, could expect any Latinized landscape, the older sisters and the mother herself
connect equal to the page. On the precursor to the full national and political harmony with
its adjoining countries were Italy, the Greek Sicily and the rapidly Latinisation southern Gaul.
On a distant stage to this Equalizing the other landscapes of the Empire, in which, as before in southern
Gaul Narbo been a Roman colony, was now the great maritime cities: Emporia, Gades, Carthage, Corinth,
Heraclea in Pontus, Sinope, Berytos, Alexandria, Italic or Hellenic-Italic Communities were the
bases of Italian civilization itself in the Greek East, the foundations of future national
and political leveling of the empire. The rule the City of Rome on the coast of the Mediterranean
was at an end, took its place of new Mediterranean state, and his first act was the expiation
of the two greatest outrages which that Municipality had made to civilization. If the destruction
of the two largest trading centers in the Roman area called the turning point where the protective
power of the Roman community in political tyranny and economic exploitation of the humble landscapes
passed, so now described the immediate and brilliant recovery of Carthage and Corinth the creation
of the new, all landscapes in the Mediterranean to the national and political equality, truly
national approach to agreement forming large community. Probably could of Caesar City of Corinth to her
much the new name of the famous old "Julian honor" award. So when the new single kingdom was equipped
with a nationality, to be sure necessarily the popular lacked individuality and more a lifeless
artifact was when a fresh impulse of nature, so that the same unit also needed in those Institutions
in which the general life of nations on the move: in the constitution and administration, in religion
and justice, in coin, Weights and Measures, which, of course, local features varied kinds of
substantial agreement is completely intolerant. Everywhere can be these areas are only the
beginnings of speech, since the uniform through the formation of the monarchy Caesar was in
the future and he did nothing but lay in the construction of hundreds of the reason. But of the lines
drawn by the great man in these areas, nor can some be identified, and it is gratifying to
follow him here, as in the Trümmerbau of nationalities. With regard to the constitution and administration
were in another context, the most important moments of the new unit highlighted: the transition
of sovereignty from the Roman council to the supreme ruler of the Mediterranean monarchy and
the transformation of that In a supreme council, Italy and the provinces representing the Imperial
Parliament: before all started in the transfer of Roman and even the Italian municipal code at the
provincial communes. It resulted in the latter way, the ceremony and Latin Thus the Roman law
to the full entry into the unified state mature communities even local regulations gradually from self-inflicted.
was only in one respect you do not wait for this. The new kingdom was needed now an institution
that the government the main principles of management, population and assets of individual
communities, clearly laid before our eyes, that is an improved census. First was the Italic
reformed. After Caesar ^ Regulation 33, which admittedly probably only as a result of the
Social War, at least in principle, arrangements made for execution brought, should in the
future, if held in the estimation of the Roman community, while in every Italian, the name
of each municipality and the citizen of his father or leave blank his district, his age and his property
from the highest authority of the municipality recorded and these lists are delivered to the
Roman Treasurer so early that this the general list of Roman citizens and Roman possessions could
finish on time. That it was Caesar's intention to similar institutions in the provinces to
introduce this guarantees part of the survey ordered by Caesar and Katastrierung of the entire
kingdom, partly the institution itself, for it was that the standard formula was found to
so well in the Italian, as in the municipalities of the State nichtitalischen necessary for the central
administration Recordings to produce. Apparently it was Caesar's intention here, to the traditions
of the older go back and re-establish the republican period Reichsschatzung, which the earlier Republic,
in much the same way as the Italic Caesar, by analogous extension the Institute of Municipal
censorship with its deadlines and other key standards to all subjects had caused the communities
of Italy and Sicily. This was a the first institutes have been forfeited to the aristocracy, and
thus solidifying the top Administrative authority of any review of the disposable teams and
control forces, and therefore any possibility to go for effective control was lost. The existing
tracks and the connection of things shows itself incontrovertibly that Caesar since the renewal
of the Centuries lost Reichsschatzung prepared. -------------------------------------------------- - ^
33 The existence of the municipal Schatzungsbehörden suggests that the local organization already
as a result of the census of the Social War in Italy had been continued (Roman Constitutional Law,
Vol 2, 3 Edition, p. 368), but probably is the implementation of this system Caesar's work.
-------------------------------------------------- - That in religion and in the administration
of justice in a radical leveling could not be thought, is hardly Needless to say, but required
the new state, with all faith and tolerance to local Munizipalstatute a joint, the Italo-Hellenic
Culture and the nationality of a general Munizipalstatuten the overall regulatory statutes. He
needed her, for both were actually already there. In the religious sphere we had worked for
centuries, the Italian and the Hellenic cult partly by external recording, and partly by internal
adjustment together elaborate the deity of the soft terms and in formlessness of the Italian Gods had not even
made great difficulty in the Zeus Jupiter, Venus of Aphrodite, and so any significant idea of ​​the
Latin faith in their Hellenic Counterpart should be repealed. The Italo-Hellenic religion was already
done in the Broad because, however much one level in this area itself was aware of the specific
Roman advanced beyond and to a quasi Italo-Hellenic nationality to be proved, For example, the
established theology in Varro's already mentioned distinction of the "common", ie the particular
by the Romans as the Greeks recognized gods of the Roman Community. In law it had in the field of criminal
law and Police, where the government directly engages the legal and need considerably by an intelligent
Legislation enough is no difficulty in the way of legislative activity that degree to achieve uniformity
of material which, however, also necessary for the Imperial unit was. In civil law, however,
where the initiative of the market, the legislature only the formulation deserve, was the single
realm of civil law, the legislature did not create the course able, would have long since developed
already on most natural way through the traffic itself been. The Roman city of legislation is
based on the law is still in the Twelve Tables contained formulation of the Latin land rights.
The later laws had probably in detail liked many modern improvements introduced, among which are
easily the most important the abolition of the old clumsy opening process by standing award formulas
of the parties and their replacement by a process of conducting the official writing worded
instruction for the individual jurors (formula), but in the main, had the only Volkslegislation
Based on those hoary a setting similar to the English statute Argentina immeasurable Wust largely
defunct and forgotten special laws piled up. The experiments scientific formulation and systematization
were the intricate corridors of the old Civil law, however, made accessible and evident: but the
fundamental defect that a prior Four hundred years ago, drawn up with its urban Weistum as diffuse
as addendums confused should now serve as the right of a large country, remedy could no Roman Blackstone.
Thorough helped the traffic itself Rome had long been in the busy traffic between the Romans and
non-Romans a private international law (jus gentium, 1, 167) developed, that is a set of statutes,
including on traffic conditions, according to which Roman Richter then said if one thing neither
their own nor to any other land rights could be decided, but they were forced by the Roman, Hellenistic,
Phoenician and disregarding other legal peculiarities of the particular underlying transport return
to common law conceptions. This follows on the recent legal education. First as a guide for the
legal movement of Roman citizens among themselves they set them in the Site of the old, virtually
unusable in fact a new city charter, the material was based on a compromise between the national
law and international Twelve Tables or the so-called rights of peoples. That was essential, though
of course with contemporary modifications recorded in the marriage, family and inheritance law, however,
was in all of the provisions that affected the property market, that is for property and contracts,
The International law prevail, yes even here was the local provincial law, some important Device
borrowed from, for example, usury laws and the mortgage. Whether once or gradually, whether
by one or more authors, by whom, when and how this radical innovation came into being, are questions
to which we owe a satisfactory answer must remain, and we know that this reform, as of course, went
out first by the city court, that they are formulated in the first year of the new An incoming
municipal judge for Nachachtung the parties above shall be issued teachings of the most important,
beginning in the judicial year legal principles to be followed (or edictum annuum perpetuum praetoris
Urbani de juris diction) and that, although some preparatory steps may be done in the past, certainly
found only in this epoch its completion. The new legal statute was theoretically abstract inasmuch as
the Roman legal opinion is their national characteristic to that extent alienated had when
they had been aware of the same, but it was virtually the same time positively by they in no way
in the dim twilight of general equity, or even in the pure nothingness of so-called natural law
became blurred, but by certain authorities for certain specific Cases was applied according to fixed
standards and a statutory formulation is not only capable but in the city edict had already
become much more advantageous. This statute also corresponded the material needs of the time
in that they process for the property acquisition, contract termination the increased traffic
required by the more convenient forms of prey. She was finally ready essentially the entire
circumference of the Roman Empire in general has become subsidiary legislation, by the many local
statutes for those legal relationships that are not initially Traffic conditions, as well as
for local traffic between members of the same legal Sprengel maintained, however, the transport
capacity between the rich members of different jurisdictions consistently, the model of legally
applicable to these cases of course not, city edict regulated both in Italy and in the provinces. The right
of the city edict had so much the same position at that time in our development of the rule of Roman
law has taken: this is also where can such opposites unite, at once abstract and positive, this
also suggested by its compared to the older statute law, smooth forms of transport and joined together
with the local statutes as a public utility legislation. Only in the Roman legal development had
before ours a significant advantage denationalized that the legislation did not, as with us,
through art and early birth but time and nature are assembled at. This state law was against Caesar.
If he designed the plan for a new law book, it is not hard to tell what he so intended. It could
be summarized this code only the right of Roman citizenship and general imperial law book are
not as far as a modern code of the ruling nation had to be by itself throughout the whole
extent of the empire general Subsidiarrecht. In Criminal law, if any, the plan miterstreckte
on this, it needed only a revision and editors of Sulla orders. In civil law was a State whose nationality
actually the humanity was the necessary and only possible formulation of that already from the
legal market voluntarily produce grown city edict in legal protection and Clarification. The first
step towards this was done the Cornelian Act of 687 (67) by the judge at the beginning of his
office and his band laid down maxims prescribed, not to talk at random another law - a provision
that comfortable with the Twelve Tables may be compared and to fix the recent municipal law almost
as important become like that is to fix the older ones. But if Cornelian also since Finally, the
People's edict was not under the judge, but by law for the court to the edict, even if the new Code
for use in court as in the old education law Charter had actually displaced, it was still open to
any municipal judge, in Taking office the edict to change freely and voluntarily, and outweighed
the Twelve Tables Law formally with its additives is still the city edict, so that in every single
case of collision the outdated statute by arbitrary action of officials, so strictly speaking,
by injury the formal law, had to be removed. The subsidiary application of the edict in the city
Foreign court in Rome and in the various county courts was now even totally placed in the
mercy of the individual top officials.
 If only the harness held, they would be at the lodge gate in a very few minutes;
but, on the other hand, the hounds were nearer to that point, which they were approaching diagonally.
They were running, of course, by sight, like greyhounds, and with greyhounds' speed. Above
their eager mellow notes, and the mad shouting of the excited sportsmen, and the ceaseless
winding of the disregarded horn, above the thunder of his own wheels, and of the hoofs of his
strange steeds upon the wintry road, rang out Carew's hoarse tones: "The gate, the gate!" If
only that wooden wall could be interposed between his stags and their pursuers, all might yet
be well. But, though the lodge-keeper had been drawn by the tumult to his door, he stood there
like one amazed and fascinated by the spectacle before him, and paralyzed with the catastrophe
that seemed impending.

"Gate, gate, you gaping idiot!" roared the Squire, with a frightful curse; but the poor shaking
wretch had not the power to stir; it was Yorke himself who dashed at the latch, and threw the
long gate wide to let the madman pass, and then slammed it back upon the very jaws of the hounds.
They rushed against the solid wood like a living battering-ram, and howled with baffled rage;
and some leaped up and got their fore-paws over it, and would have got in yet, but that Richard
beat them back with his bare hands.

In the mean time Carew and his stags swept up the park like a whirlwind, and presently, coming
to a coppice, the frightened creatures dashed into it, doubtless for covert, where wheel and
rein and antler, tangling with trunk and branch, soon brought them to a full stop.

"Good lad!" exclaimed Carew, as Yorke hurried up to help him; "you are a good plucked one,
you are; you shall keep the lodge, if you will, instead of that lily-livered scoundrel who
was too frightened to move. Oh, I ask pardon; you are a gentleman, are you?"

"Sir, I hope so," answered the young man, stiffly, his anger only half subdued by the necessity
for conciliation.

"Then, come up to the house and dine, whoever you are; I'll lend you a red coat. Curse those
grooms! what keeps them? One can't sit upon a stag's head to quiet him as though he were a
horse." (Two of the stags were down, and butting, at one another with their horns.) "What a
pace we came up White Hill! I tried to time them, but I could not get my watch out. You moved
yourself like a flash of lightning, else I thought we must have pinned you against the gate.
It was well done, my lad, well done; and I'm your debtor."

The Squire held out his hand, for the first time, for Yorke to shake.

"Why, what's this?" said he, peering into the other's eyes. "I have seen your face before,
my friend."

"Yes, Sir; a week or two ago I played the part of night-watcher in your preserves--it was a
mad prank; but"--and here the young fellow smiled roguishly--"it was better than poaching,
you must admit."

"What!" cried the Squire, delighted, "are you the fellow that had that bout with me in the
Decoy Pond? Why, I thought you were one of my own men, and sent you something; but, of course,
my scoundrels drank it. I'm glad to see you, Sir, by daylight. It was the uncertain moonshine
that hampered me, else, by Jove, I'd have given you 'one, two!' We must have it out another
day, for a drawn battle is just the thing I hate. What's your name, young gentleman, and where
do you live?"

"I live close by, Sir; I am in lodgings for the present."

"Ay, ay, for the hunting, I suppose," said the impetuous Squire. "Hark to those devils of dogs;
they are howling yet; they would have had my stags by this time but for you. Well, well; send
for your portmanteau, and take up your quarters at Crompton; you shall have a hearty welcome;
only don't be late for dinner--seven, Sir, sharp. Here are my knavish grooms at last."

And, under cover of the fire of imprecations which the Squire poured upon his approaching retainers,
the young landscape-painter withdrew. He had obtained his end at last, and he wished to retire
before Carew should put that question to him for a second time--what is your name?--which,
at such a moment, it would, for certain reasons, have been embarrassing to answer.

He betook himself at once to the keeper's lodge, and packing up his wardrobe, which, though
of modest dimensions, comprised all that was requisite for a gentleman's costume, dispatched
it to the great house. He followed it himself shortly afterward, only waiting to dash off a
note by the afternoon's post for town. It was literally a "hurried line," and would have better
suited these later telegraphic days, when thoughts, though wire-drawn, are compressed, and
brevity is the soul of cheapness, as of wit. "I have got my foot in, and however it may be
pinched, will keep the door open. Direct to me at Crompton."

It was not a nice trait in the young man, if it was a characteristic one, that he did not take
the trouble even to leave so much word as that for the old keeper, who was engaged in his outdoor
duties, but simply inclosed the few shillings in which he was indebted to him inside an envelope,
addressed to Walter Grange. The old man liked him, as he well knew, and would have prized a
few words of farewell; but Yorke was in a hurry to change his quarters for the better; he had
climbed from low to high, and gave no further thought to the ladder which had so far served
him. But yet he had some prudence too. Though he had dwelled so long in the Carew domains,
so careful had he been not to intrude his presence inopportunely on its master, that he had
never so much as seen, except at a distance, the mansion to which he was now an invited guest.
How grand it showed, as his elastic step drew near it, with tower and turret standing up against
the gloomy November sky, and all its broad-winged front alive with light! How good it would
be to call so fine a place his home! How excellent to be made heir to the childless man who
ruled it, and who could leave it to whomsoever his whim might choose!

It was unusual for a guest to approach Crompton for the first time on foot. The Squire's jovial
friends used for the most part strange conveyances, such as tandems and randoms, and the great
flower-beds in the lawn in front gave sign that some such equipage had been lately driven up
not altogether with dexterity. It is difficult at all times to drive "unicorn," and more so
if the horses are not used to that method of progression, and still more so if the charioteer
is somewhat inebriated; and all these conditions had been fulfilled a few minutes previously
in the case of Mr. Frederick Chandos, a young gentleman of twenty-one years of age, but of
varied experience, who had just arrived that day on his first visit. But when Yorke appeared
at the front-door, there was no less attention paid to him than if he had driven up with four-in-hand.
Obsequious footmen assisted him to take off his wrappers in the great hall, whose vastness
dwarfed the billiard-table in its centre to bagatelle proportions. A profusion of wax-lights--and
no others were permitted at Crompton, save in the servants' offices--showed eight shining pillars
of rare marble, and a grand staircase broad enough for a coach-and-four, and up which, indeed,
Carew had ridden horses for a wager; while all the walls were hung with huge-figured tapestry--"The
Tent of Darius" and "The Entry of Alexander into Babylon," both miracles of patient art. The
grandeur of the stately place was marred, however, by signs of revel and rough usage. The Persian
monarch, spared by his Grecian conqueror, had been deprived, by some more modern barbarian,
of his eyes; while the face of his royal consort had been cut out of the threaded picture,
to judge by the ragged end of the canvas, by a penknife. The very pillars were notched in places,
as though some mad revelers had striven to climb to the pictured ceiling, from which gods and
men looked down upon them with amaze; the thick-piled carpet of the stairs was cut and torn,
doubtless by horses' hoofs; and here and there a gap in the gilt balusters showed where they
had been torn away in brutal frolic. A groom of the chambers preceded the new guest up stairs,
and introduced him to a bachelor's apartment, small, but well furnished in the modern style,
whither his portmanteau had been already taken. "Squire has given orders, Sir," said he, respectfully,
"that he should be informed as soon as you arrived. What name shall I say, Sir? But here he
is himself."

As the groom withdrew, Carew made his appearance at the open door. He was smoking a cigar,
although it was within an hour of dinner-time; and at his heels slouched a huge bull-dog, who
immediately began to growl and sniff at the new guest. "Quiet, you brute!" exclaimed the Squire,
with his customary garnish of strong expletive. "Welcome to Crompton, Mr.--I forget your name;
or rather you forgot, I think, to favor me with it."

"My name is Richard Yorke, Sir."

"Yorke, Yorke--that sounds easterly. You are of the Cambridgeshire stock, I reckon, are you not?"

"No, Sir," returned the other, with a slight tremor in his voice, which he could not control;
"I come from nearer home. Your wife's first husband was called Yorke, if you remember, and
I bear his name, although I am her lawful son, by you, Sir."

CHAPTER V.

AT CROMPTON.

After the bold avowal made at the conclusion of the last chapter, Richard Yorke and his father
(for such indeed he was) stood confronting one another, for near a minute, without a word.
A tempest of evil passions swept over Carew's swarthy face, and his eyes flashed with a fire
that seemed to threaten personal violence. The bull-dog, too, as though perceiving his master's
irritation with the stranger, began to growl again; and this, perhaps, was fortunate for the
young man, as affording a channel for the Squire's pent-up wrath. With a great oath, leveled
alike at man and brute, he raised his foot, and kicked the latter to the other side of the room.

"Impudent bastard!" cried he; "how dare you show your face beneath my roof?"

"How dare I?" responded the young man, excitedly, and with his handsome face aglow. "Because
there was naught to fear; and if there were, I should not have feared it."

"Tut, tut! so bold a game could never have entered into your young head. Your mother must have
set you on to do it--come, Sir, the truth, the truth."

"She did not set me on, father," insisted the other, earnestly. "I came here of my own will.
I have been dwelling within a stone's-throw of your house these six months, in hopes to see
you face to face. She told me not to come--I swear she did."

"So much the better for her," ejaculated the Squire, grimly. "If I thought that she had any
hand in this, not another shilling of my money should she ever touch. It was agreed between
us," he continued, passionately--"and I, for my part, am a man who keeps his word--that she
and hers should never meddle more with me and mine; and now she has broken faith."

"Nay, Sir, but she has not," returned the young man, firmly. "I tell you it was against her
will that I came hither."

"The devil it was!" exclaimed the Squire, suddenly bursting into a wild laugh. "If you get
your way with her, when she says 'no,' you must be a rare one. You are my son for certain,
however, or you would never dare to stand here. It was a rash step, young Sir, and might have
ended in the horse-pond. I had half a mind to set my bull-dog at you. Since you are here, however,
you can stay. But let us understand one another. I am your father, in a sense, as I am father,
for aught I know, to half the parish; but as to being lawfully so, the law has happened to
have decided otherwise. I know what you would say about 'the rights of it;' but that's beside
the question; the law, I say, for once, is on my side, and I stand by it. Egad, I have good
reason to do so; and if your mother had been your wife, as she was mine, you would be with
me so far. Now, look you," and here again the speaker's manner changed with his shifting mood,
"if ever again you venture to address me as your father, or to boast of me as such, I will
have you turned out neck and crop; but as Mr. Richard Yorke, my guest, you will be welcome
at Crompton, so long as we two suit each other; only beware, young Sir, that you tell me no
lies. I shall soon get rid of you on these terms," continued the Squire, with a chuckle; "for
to speak truth must be as difficult to you, considering the stock you come of, as dancing on
the tight-rope. Your mother, indeed, was a first-rate rope-dancer in that way, and I rarely
caught her tripping; but you--"

"Sir," interrupted the young man, passionately, "is this your hospitality?"

"True, lad, true," answered the Squire, good-humoredly; "I had intended to have forgotten Madam
Yorke's existence. Well, Sir, what are you?--what do you do, I mean, for a livelihood--beside
'night-watching?'"

"I am a landscape-painter, Sir."

"Umph!" grunted Carew, contemptuously; "you don't get fat on that pasture, I reckon. Have you
never done any thing else?"

For a single instant the young man hesitated to reply; then answered, "Never."

"You are quite sure of that?" inquired the other, suspiciously.

"Quite sure."

"Good! Here, come with me."

His host led the way along an ample corridor, hung with tall pictures of their common ancestors,
and opened the door of another bedroom. It was of a vast size; and even when the Squire had
lit the candles upon the mantle-piece, and those which clustered on either side of the great
pier-glass, the darkness did but give place to a sort of shining gloom: the cause of this strange
effect was the peculiarity of the furniture; the walls were of bog-oak, relieved, like those
of a ball-room, by silver sconces; the chairs were of the same material. The curiosity of the
room was, however, the bedstead; this was of an immense size, and adorned above with ostrich
feathers, which gave it the appearance of a funeral car; the pillars were of solid ebony, as
were also the carved head and foot boards; it was hung with crimson damask curtains, trimmed
with gold braid; and upon its coverlet of purple silk lay a quilt of Brussels point lace of
exquisite design.

"I will have your traps brought in here," said Carew, throwing away the end of his cigar, and
drawing from his pocket a heap of filberts; "it will be more convenient. You will find a room
through yonder door, where you can sit and paint to your heart's content."

"You lodge me so splendidly, Sir, that I shall feel like Christopher Sly," observed the young
fellow, gratefully.

"Ay, sly enough, I'll warrant," returned the Squire, who had just cracked a nut and found it
a bad one. "That's Bred in the Bone with you, I reckon. Look yonder!" As he spoke, a porcelain
vase clock upon the chimney-piece struck the half hour, and a gilt serpent sprang from the
pedestal, showing its fang, which was set in brilliants. "That's my serpent clock, which always
reminds me of Madam, your mother, and the more so, because it goes for a twelvemonth, which
was just the time she and I went in double harness. But here are your clothes, and you must
be quick in getting into them, for we dine sharp at Crompton.--Watson, go to my man, and bid
him fetch a red coat for this gentleman.--You'll hear the gong, Mr. Yorke, five minutes before
dinner is served." And with a careless nod to his guest, and a whistle to his four-footed companion,
Carew sauntered off.

The young man would have given much to have had half an hour at his disposal to think over
the events of the last few minutes, and to reflect upon his present position; but there was
no time to lose, if he would avoid giving umbrage to his host by being late. He therefore dressed
in haste, and before the first note of the gong was heard was fully equipped. If the Squire,
in introducing him to this splendid lodging, had had it in his mind to overcome him by a mere
exhibition of magnificence, the design had failed; it was only Yorke's artistic sense that
had been impressed; the fact was that the young fellow was of that character on whom superiority
of any sort has small effect; while in the present case the signs of wealth about him gave
him self-confidence, rather than any feeling of inferiority; insomuch as he considered himself
"by rights," as the Squire had said, the heir of all he saw, and by no means despaired of becoming
so, not only de jure, but de facto. Certainly, as he now regarded himself in the pier-glass
in his scarlet coat, it was not to be wondered at that he reflected complacently that, so far
as personal appearance went, he was not likely to find a superior in any of the company he
was about to meet. A handsomer young fellow had indeed never answered the importunate summons
of the Crompton gong.

He had no difficulty about finding his way to the drawing-room, for a stream of red-coated
guests was already setting thither from their respective chambers, and he entered it with them
unannounced. This was the only apartment in the house which did not bear traces of mischievous
damage, because, as on the present occasion, it was used for exactly five minutes every evening,
and at no other time whatever. After dinner the Squire's guests invariably adjourned to the
billiard-table or the library, and the yellow drawing-room was left alone in its magnificence.
This neglected apartment had probably excited more envy in the female mind than any at Crompton,
although there were drawing-rooms galore there, as well as one or two such exquisite boudoirs
as might have tempted a nun from her convent. It was a burning shame, said the matrons of Breakneckshire,
that the finest room in the county should not have a lawful mistress to grace it; and it was
not their fault (as has been hinted) that that deficiency had not been supplied. It was really
a splendid room, not divided in any way, as is usual with rooms of such vast extent, but comprehending
every description of architectural vagary--bay-windows, in each of which half a dozen persons
might sit and move, and recesses where as many could ensconce themselves, without their presence
being dreamed of by the occupants of the central space.

At present, however, the flood of light that poured from chandelier and bracket, and flashed
upon the gorgeous furniture and on the red coats of the guests, seemed to forbid concealment,
and certainly afforded a splendid spectacle--a diplomatic reception, or a fancy-ball, could
for brilliancy scarcely have exceeded it, though the parallel went no farther; for, with all
this pomp and circumstance, there was not the slightest trace of ceremony. New guests, like
Yorke himself, flocked in, and stood and stared, or paraded the room; while the less recent
arrivals laughed and chatted together noisily, with their backs to the fires--of which there
were no less than three alight--or lolled at full length upon the damask sofas. These persons
were not, upon the whole, of an aristocratic type; many of them, indeed, were of good birth,
and all had taken the usual pains with their costume, but a life of dissipation had set its
vulgarizing mark on them: on the seniors the pallid and exhausted look of the roué was indeed
rarely seen--country air and rough exercise had forbidden that--but drink and hard living had
written their autographs upon them in another and worse handwriting. Blotches and pimples had
indeed so erased their original likeness to gentlemen that it was even whispered by the scandalous
that it was to prevent the confusion with his menials, that must needs have otherwise arisen,
that the Squire of Crompton compelled his guests to wear red coats. The habitués of the place,
who were the contemporaries of the Squire, had, as it were, gone to seed. But there was a sprinkling
of a better class, or, at all events, of a class that had not as yet sunk so low as they in
the mire of debauchery: a young lord or two in their minority, whom their parents or guardians
could not coerce into keeping better company; and other young gentlemen of fashion, in whose
eyes Carew was "A devilish good fellow at bottom;" "Quite a character, by Jove!" and "A sort
of man to know." Among these last was Mr. Frederick Chandos, who had so lately got among the
chrysanthemums with his gig-wheels, and Mr. Theodore Fane, his bosom friend, who always sat
beside him on his driving-seat, and in return for sharing his perils, was reported to have
the whip-hand of him. Nor was old age itself without its representative in the person of Mr.
Byam Byll, once a master of fox-hounds, now a pauperized gourmand, who, in consideration of
his coarse wit and "gentlemen's stories," was permitted to have the run of his teeth at Crompton.
This Falstaff to the Squire's Prince Hal was a rotund and portly man, like his great prototype,
but singularly handsome. His smile was winning yet, and, in spite of his load of years and
fat, he still considered himself agreeable to the fair sex.

For this information and much more, respecting the character of his fellow-guests, Yorke was
indebted to a very singular personage, who had introduced himself to him as "Parson Whymper,"
and whom he now knew to be the Squire's chaplain. The reverend divine was as proud of that
office (and infinitely more comfortable in it) as though he had been chaplain to an archbishop.
He was the only man present who wore a black coat, and he had a grave voice and insinuating
manner, which really did smack something of the pulpit.

"Mr. Yorke," said he, blandly, "I make no apology for introducing myself to you; Carew and
I have been just having a talk about you, and he has no secrets from his ghostly adviser. I
take your hand with pleasure. I seem to feel it is the flesh and blood of my best friend. Sooner
or later, mark me, he will own as much, and, be sure, no effort of mine shall be wanting to
insure so desirable a consummation."

Yorke flushed with pleasure, not at the honeyed terms, nor the good-will they evidenced, but
at the news itself--the fact of his father having revealed their relationship to him seemed
so full of promise--and yet he resented the man's professions, the audacity of which seemed
certainly to imply that he was taken for a fool.

"I am sure, Mr. Whymper," said he, stiffly, "I ought to be greatly obliged to you."

"Hush! Not Mr. Whymper, if you please, for that's a fine here. Every body at Crompton calls
me 'Parson.' Obliged, Sir! Not at all. It is only natural that, being what I am, I should wish
you well. The law, it is true, has decided against your legitimacy, but the Church is bound
to think otherwise. In my eyes you are the Squire's only son"--here he made a whispering-trumpet
of his brawny hands, and added with great significance--"and heir."

"I see," said Yorke, smiling in spite of himself.

"Of course you do; did you think I was trifling with your intelligence? I tell you that it
is quite on the cards that you may recover your lost position, and regain what is morally your
own again. Carew is delighted with you, not so much because you saved his stags as because
you fought such a good battle with him by the Decoy Pond. He has been consulting me professionally
as to whether it would be contrary to the tables of affinity to have another set-to with you.
I am sorry my reply was in the negative, for, now I look at you, I do believe you would have
thrashed him; but I was so afraid of his getting the better of you, which might have ruined
your fortunes."

Richard could only repeat his thanks for the good clergyman's kindness. "You know nobody here,
I suppose," observed the latter, "and, with a few exceptions, which I will name to you, that
is not of much consequence. It is a shifting lot: they are here to-day and gone to-morrow,
as says the Scripture, and I wish they were all going to-morrow except Byam Ryll. That's old
Byam yonder, with the paunch and his hands behind him; he has nowhere else to put them, poor
fellow." And here Parson Whymper launched into biography as aforesaid.

The clock on the chimney-piece, on which the two were leaning, broke in upon the divine's scarcely
less dulcet accents with its silver quarter.

"This is the first time," said Whymper, "that I have ever known your father late; and to you
belongs the honor of having caused him to transgress his own immutable rule."

While he was yet speaking a hunting-horn was blown in the hall beneath, and the whole company
turned en masse, like a field of poppies before a sudden wind, to the door where Carew was
standing.

CHAPTER VI.

THE FEAST OF LAPITHAE

The host himself led the way down stairs; while the rear of the party was brought up by Mr.
Whymper, to whom Yorke attached himself.

When they reached the dining-room, and before they took their seats at the ample table, the
chaplain, with sonorous voice, gave a view holloa! which was the Crompton grace.

"It is very distressing to me to have to act in this way," whispered he to his young friend,
whose countenance betrayed considerable astonishment; but it is the custom of the house; and,
after all, there is no great harm in it. De minimis non curat lex, you know."

"That does not hold good with respect to the law of affiliation, parson," observed Mr. Byam
Ryll, who sat on the other side of him, "if, at least, I have not forgotten my Burns."

"I always understood that Burns had very loose views upon such matters," returned the chaplain,
demurely.

"My dear parson, your remark is like that excellent condiment which I wish I could see at this
otherwise well-provided table--caviare to the multitude. Why is it not furnished? You have
only to say the word." But if the single old men who have the first storms of the Revolution
had seen, heard the words of the Gracchi, that time and this together compared, they found everything
changed in the meantime, the landscape and citizenship, state law smile and discipline, life and
manners, and well liked painful, who are the ideals of the Gracchi compared with their implementation.
However, such considerations were part of the past. For now and probably for the future was
the overthrow of the aristocracy, an accomplished fact. The oligarchs were like a completely dissolved
army, the scattered clusters or a other Army mass increase, but nowhere even take the field, or
on their own account could risk a battle. But in the old struggle was over, prepared at the same time,
a new Just imagine: the struggle of the two previously to overthrow the aristocratic constitution
allied Powers of the bourgeois democratic opposition and the ever-powerful emerging Military force.
Pompey's special position was after the Gabinian, how much more Manil incompatible, under
the law with a republican system of government. He was, as Even then the opponent with good
reason said, by the law not to Gabinian Admiral, but had been appointed imperial rulers, not
without reason he is called an eastern with the Conditions familiar Greek "king of kings". If
he one day, again victorious and return with increased fame, with coffers, with quick-witted and
loyal troops from the east, to the crown, the hand stretched out - who would then drop him
in the arm? If the first instance against the commander of his time and tried his legions of Consular
Quintus Catulus summon the Senators? Gaius Caesar, or the nominee aedile the urban Crowd, whose
eyes he just grazed his three hundred and twenty pairs of silver-armed swordsman had? Soon you
will, called Catulus must flee again on the rocks of the Capitol, to save freedom. It was not
the fault of the Prophet, when the storm is not as he said, came from the east, but the fate, literally
as he himself knew his Words fulfilling the devastating storm a few years later approach led
from the Gaul. 4. Chapter Pompey and the East we have seen earlier how bleak the east by land
and at sea the affairs of Rome were, as in the beginning of the year 687 (67) Pompey's first
the conduct of the war against the pirates with almost unlimited power of perfection took over.
He began to share the vast territory assigned to him in thirteen districts and each to remit
the same to one of his lieutenants to ships and crews there to prepare to search the shores and apply
the pirate boats or one of the colleagues to chase into the net. He took the best part of the existing
warships, under including this time the Rhodian distinguished themselves early in the year in
the lake and cleaned first the Sicilian, Sardinian and African waters, particularly around
the supply of grain from these provinces to Italy to bring back on track. To clean the Spanish
and Gallic coasts now provided under the generals. It was at this point that the consul Gaius
Piso from Rome to inhibit from the levies tried that Pompey's legate Marcus Pomponius Gabinian
virtue of the law in the province Narbo organized - an unwise Begin to control this and also
the just indignation of the crowd against the consul in legal barriers to keep the Pompey temporarily
reappeared in Rome. When, after forty days in the western basin of the Mediterranean, the shipping
was all cleared, Pompey went with his sixty best vehicles further into the eastern sea, first
the origin and headquarters of piracy, the Lycian and Cilician waters. On the news of the approach
of the Roman fleet, not just the pirate boats disappeared from everywhere the open sea, the
strong Lycian festivals Antikragos Kragos and surrendered, without to make serious resistance.
More than the fear of opening Pompey's well-calculated Mild the gates of this hard to reach
Seeburger. His predecessors had each caught pirates can attach to the cross, he gave without
hesitation all quarters, including treated the found on the pirate boats taken common rowers
with unusual indulgence. Only the bold sea-kings Cilician ventured a try, at least in their
own waters to assert by arms against the Romans after their children and women and their rich
treasures had fled into the mountain castles of the Taurus, they expected the Roman fleet on
the western border of Cilicia, at the height of Korakesion. But Pompey wohlbemannte 'and all
war stuff here probably provided ships gained a complete victory. Readily Obstacle he landed on
it and began the mountain castles of the pirates to storm and break, as he continued to offer
them even as the price of freedom and subjugation of life. Soon was the large amount of it
in their castles and mountains continue a hopeless war and condescended to surrender. Forty-nine
days after Pompey appeared in the eastern lake Cilicia was subjected and the war ended. The rapid
defeat of the piracy was a great relief, but not a great fact, with the tools of the Roman state,
in lavish dimensions were summoned, the pirates could be as little as the combined bands of thieves,
a large city with a well-organized police measure. It was naive to celebrate such a raid as a victory.
But compared with the long-term Existence and unlimited, daily-expanding border expansion
of the evil it is explained that the surprisingly quick defeat of the fearsome pirate on the audience
the most powerful impression was made, the more so since this is the first test of the centralized in
one hand Regiment was, and the parties were waiting anxiously to understand whether it will
improve as the collegial govern. About 400 ships and boats, including 90 real war vehicles were
partly taken by Pompey, partly his company delivered to the whole pirate to 1300 vehicles
ruined and also the richly filled arsenals and armories of the filibusters in Flames have risen.
Of the pirates killed to 10,000, more than 20,000 to the winner Live fallen into the hands, while
Publius Clodius, the fleet leader standing in Cilicia Roman army, and a lot of the pirates led
away, some at home already individuals believed to be dead by Pompey regained their freedom. In the
summer of 687 (67) three months after the beginning of the campaign, went back to their trade and business
as usual and instead of the earlier famine in Italy abundance. A sullen interlude on the island
of Crete, however, clouded somewhat gratifying that the success of Roman arms. There was already
in the second year Quintus Metellus employed, which is essentially already brought to complete submission
of the island, as Pompey appeared in the eastern waters. A collision was obvious, because after
the Gabinian law stretched Pompey's command competitive with that of Metellus to the whole Ianggestreckte,
but nowhere more than twenty German miles wide island, but Pompey was so considerate, they none of
his lieutenants to transfer. But the more reluctant Cretan communities, their subject Compatriots
of Metellus with the most cruel severity had the responsibility to see and draw however, heard
the mild conditions that Pompey to him resulting settlements of southern Asia Minor used to make,
have preferred to their total submission to Pompey enter, they also in Pamphylia, where he was just
himself, receiving their ambassadors them and taking home his legate Lucius Octavius, Metellus
to see the conclusion of contracts and to take over the cities. Collegial process, this was
of course not: but the formal Was quite right on the part of Pompey and Metellus in the most obvious
wrong in the Treaty of cities with Pompey completely ignoring them as hostile to treat continued.
Octavius ​​protested in vain, in vain he cried, that he himself had no troops was brought from
Achaia standing there under the generals of Pompey, Lucius Sisenna; Metellus, neither Octavius ​​yet to
bekümmernd Sisenna to Eleutherna besieged and took Lappa Forward, where Octavius ​​himself
was taken prisoner and abused dismissed the prisoners with him Cretans but the executioners were
handed down. So it came to formal engagements between Sisennas Troops, headed by leader of this
death proved Octavius, and those of Metellus; even when those had been ordered back to Achaia,
Octavius ​​was in Community with the Cretans Aristion the war continued, and Hierapytna, where the
two talked, was by Metellus defeated only after the most stubborn resistance. In fact it was the
zealous Optimat Metellus against the supreme commander of democracy on their own formal civil war
begun, and it testifies to the unspeakable destruction of the Roman state conditions that these
performances led to nothing other than a bitter correspondence between the two generals, who a
few years later, again in peace and even "friendly" side by side sat in the Senate. Pompey was during
these operations in Cilicia, and for the next year, as it seemed, preparing a campaign against the
Cretans, or rather against Metellus, awaiting, in fact, the hint, him to intervene in the
affairs thoroughly confused of the continent called Asia Minor. What of Lucullus' army to the
losses suffered and the adoption of Fimbrianischen legions had left, stood idle at the top Halys
in the landscape of Trokmer on the border of the Pontic region. The supreme command led time being
still Lucullus, as his appointed successor Glabrio continued in the Middle East to hem. Similarly,
inactive stored in Cilicia, the three commanded by Quintus Marcius Rex Legions. The Pontic area
was again entirely in the power of King Mithridates, who individual men and communities which
had joined the Romans, such as Eupatoria the city, pay for it with their waste was cruel severity.
A serious offensive against the Romans walked the kings of the East, not that it was that they
did not in their Plan was, was what was also claimed that Pompey's landing in Cilicia, the
kings Mithradates Tigranes and persuaded to desist from further action. Pompey even faster than it hoped
have liked, Manil realized the law in his breast-fed hopes: Glabrio and Rex were recalled
and the government of Bithynia-Pontus and Cilicia, with the is the troops and the leadership
of the Pontic-Armenian war along with the power to to do with the dynasties of the East as they see
fit war, peace and alliance, to Pompey transfer. About the prospect of such rich spoils and
honors like Pompey forgot the punishment of a bad-tempered and his economical bay leaves jealous
guarding Optimates, gave the train on Crete and the further pursuit of the pirates and also defined
its Fleet to support the attack, he designed against the kings of Pontus and Armenia. But he got
over this country to war again and again her head elevating piracy not completely out of sight.
Before he left Asia (691 63), he left there or the necessary Repair of ships against pirates,
was at his request the following year for Italy a similar measure adopted and the necessary
amount approved by the Senate. They drove on the shores with small crews and squadrons of horsemen
cover. If you also like already to be mentioned later expeditions against Cyprus 696 (58) and
against Egypt 699 (55) prove that piracy was not quite Lord, so has the same but after the expedition
Pompey in all the vicissitudes and political crises of Rome never again focus their lift up
and thus displace entirely the Romans on the sea can, as under the rule the rotten oligarchy had
happened. The few months before the start of the Asia Minor Campaign were left were from the
new in-chief with strenuous activity to diplomatic and military preparations used. There were
ambassadors of Mithridates, longer to scout than a serious attempt at mediation. At the Pontic
court was hoped that the king of the Parthians, Phraates, the last major successes had won
the allies of Rome, to join in the Pontic-Armenian Alliance would be determined. To counter Roman
messengers went to the court of Ctesiphon; and give them the inner turmoil came to the rescue,
who tore the Armenian dynasty. Of Great King Tigranes eponymous son had rebelled against his father,
except that he wait for the death of the old man did not like it was that the suspicion of it
which has several his brother's life had cost him the only way of salvation in the open see outrage
was. overcome by his father, he had a number of distinguished Armenians themselves to the court
of Arsacids fled there and intrigued against his father. It was his part Work that Phraates
the reward for the candidate who offered him from both sides was, the secured Possession of
Mesopotamia, was rather out of the hands of the Romans and the trends with Lucullus the Euphrates
signed contract with Pompey renewed, and even received it, to operate jointly with the Romans
against Armenia. Even greater damage than the promotion of the alliance between the Romans and
the Parthians did the younger Tigranes the kings Mithradates and Tigranes the fact that his
rebellion is a division between them self-caused. The Great King approached the secret suspicion that
the father-in the insurrection of his grandson - the mother of the younger Tigranes, Cleopatra
was the daughter Mithradates - may have had a hand in the game, and although it is not about
to open Rupture occurred, yet was the good agreement of the two monarchs just at the moment
disturbed when they needed it most. At the same time operating the armor Pompey with energy.
The Federal Asian clientele and communities were warned, the conventional to provide reinforcements.
Public notices demanded the legions of veterans discharged Fimbria to be a volunteer again to the colors
to resign, and by great promises and the name of Pompey had a sizable chunk of them in fact,
determine, the call to follow. The entire force that was under Pompey 'commands combined might,
to the exclusion of the auxiliary, people are on about man estimated 40-50000 ^ 1 ----------------------------------------------
^ 1 Pompey distributed among his soldiers and officers as testimonial 384 sesterces (= 16,000
talents;. Mithr App 116th), because the officers received 100 million (Pliny nat 37, 2. 16),
of the common soldier, but every 6000 sesterces (Pliny, ext.), It was one of the army nor in the
triumph of about 40,000 men ------------------------------------------ --- In the spring 688 (66) to
Pompey went to Galatia to take over the command of the army of Lucullus and indent with them
in the Pontic region, where the Cilician legions dependent were to follow. In Danala, a city
of Trokmer, met the two generals; reconciliation, however, the mutual friends had hoped to bring
it about was not achieved. The introductory pleasantries were soon in bitter debate and this
in heated argument, would retire out of tune, had come as a man. As Lucullus continued same
as if he were still in office, to do honor to distribute gifts and estates, declared Pompey
all after his arrival from his predecessor completed actions to be void. Formally, he was in his
right, moral clock in the treatment of a deserved and more than enough to hurt opponent could
not look at him man. And allowed the season Roman troops crossed the Pontic frontier. Against
them stood there with 30,000 men on foot and 3000 horsemen King Mithridates. Let down by its
allies and with increased power and energy of Rome attacked, he made an attempt to obtain peace;
only on unconditional surrender, the Pompey claimed he wanted to hear anything - which could the
unfortunate campaign to bring him worse?
 Nor had he
boasted without reason, a while ago, of his powers of self-denial, for he would often forego
a glass of generous wine (when he felt that he had had enough), in order to keep his hand steady
for the game at pool, which invariably took place at Crompton after dinner. His extreme obesity,
though it deprived him of some advantages in the way of "reach," was, upon the whole, a benefit
to him. His antagonists lost the sense of his superiority of skill in their enjoyment of the
ridiculous and constrained postures in which he was compelled to place himself, and he was
well content to see them laugh and lose. None but a first-rate player could have held his own
among that company, whose intelligence had been directed to this particular pursuit for most
of their natural lives; and even "Tub Ryll," as they called him, had to supplement his dexterity
by other means to make success secure. His liveliest sallies, his bitterest jests, were all
reserved for these occasions, so that mirth or anger was forever unstringing the nerves of
his competitors, and diminishing their chance of gain. It was difficult to unstring the nerves
of Parson Whymper, who ran him very close in skill, and sometimes divided the spoil with him;
but on the present occasion he had a wordy weapon to baffle even that foe. This consisted in
constant allusion to the latter's supposed reversionary interest in the living at Crompton,
the incumbent whereof was ancient and infirm, and which was in the Squire's gift. This piece
of preferment was the object of the chaplain's dearest hopes, and the last subject he would
have chosen to jest upon, especially in the presence of its patron.

"Is he to have it, Squire, or is he not?" would be Tub Ryll's serious inquiry, just as it was
the parson's turn to play on him, or, "Who backs the vicar elect?"--observations which seldom
failed to cost that expectant divine a sovereign, for the play at the Hall table, although
not so high as was going on in the Library with those who patronized cards, was for considerable
stakes. Carew, who enjoyed, above all things, this embarrassing pleasantry, would return an
ambiguous reply, so that the problem remained without a solution. But when the disgusted chaplain
at last threw up his cue, in a most unusual fit of dudgeon, the Squire put the question to
the company, as a case of church preferment of which he was unwilling to take the sole responsibility.
"The sum," he said, "which had been offered to him for the next presentation would exactly
defray the cost of his second pack of hounds, which his chaplain himself had advised him to
put down; so the point to be considered--"

"The hounds, the hounds!" broke in this impatient audience, amidst roars of laughter. And nobody
knew better than poor Parson Whymper that this verdict would be more final than that of most
other ecclesiastical synods, and that he had lost his preferment. It was Carew's humor to take
jest for earnest (as it was to turn into ridicule what was serious), and to pretend that his
word was pledged to decisions to which nobody else would have attached the slightest weight;
it pleased him to feel that his lightest word was law, or perhaps it was a part of the savage
adoration which he professed to pay to truth.

Byam Ryll felt a genuine regret that he had pushed matters so far, though Whymper himself was
to blame for having shown temper, and thereby precipitated the catastrophe. But he did not
play the less skillfully on that account; and, moreover, had no rival to divide the pool with him.

"I would give five pounds if somebody would beat him," muttered the discontented parson within
Yorke's hearing, who was standing aloof with his cigar watching the game.

"I think I could," said the young man, quietly, "if I had five pounds."

As the pool was two pounds, and the lives were one, this was exactly the amount of pecuniary
risk to be run, and which want of the necessary funds had alone prevented the young man from
incurring.

"Here is a fiver," replied the parson, softly.

"But I really have no money," remonstrated Yorke, though his fine face lit up for a moment
with delight (for he was a gambler to the core), "nor any expectation of--"

"Yes, yes; you have expectations enough," answered the other, hurriedly. "You may give me that
living yet yourself--who knows? Take a ball, man--take a ball."

So, when another game commenced, the young landscape-painter, who had spent at least as much
of his short life at those boards of green cloth called "public tables" as in studying the
verdant hues of nature, made one of the combatants, and not a little astonished them by his
performance. He had the eye of a hawk, with the litheness of a young panther; and his prudence
during the late debauch had preserved his steadiness of hand. Mr. Theodore Fane had the misfortune
to be his immediate predecessor, and was "potted" at long distances.

"By Jove!" exclaimed he, sulkily, upon losing his last life by a double, "you must have lived
by your wits, young gentleman, to have learned to play pool like that."

"I have," returned Yorke, without moving a muscle, and preparing to strike again. "You will
come to do the same, if you play much at this game--but your sad end will not be protracted.
You will starve to death with considerable rapidity."

"My dear Mr. Yorke," said Byam Ryll, approvingly, "you have won my heart, though I can't afford
to let you win my sovereigns; I like you, but I must kill you off, I see."

"Unless--" said Yorke.

"Unless what?" inquired Ryll, as he made his stroke at Yorke's ball, which was quite safe,
and grazed it with his own, which, gliding off another ball, found its way into a pocket. For
once, he had really allowed himself to be "put off" his aim.

"Unless you commit suicide," replied the young fellow, smiling. "I was about to warn you of
the danger of that kiss."

"You are worse than a highway robber, young Sir," said the annoyed old gentleman.

"That's true," returned Yorke, "for I take your money and your 'life.'"

The young fellow repaid his loan that night, besides putting half a dozen sovereigns into his
own pocket; and there was other fruit from that investment.

Carew was delighted with his son's skill, though his wit was somewhat wasted on him. "Why the
deuce did you not play in the first game?" said he, when the party broke up to adjourn to the
hazard-table. "I suppose it was your confounded cunning" (and here his face grew dark, as though
with some recollection of the past); "you wanted to see how they played before you pitted yourself
against them--did you? How like, how like!"

"I had no money, Sir, until Parson Whymper lent me some."

"Oh, that was it--was it?" said the Squire. "Well, well, that was not your fault, lad, nor
shall it be mine--here, catch," and out of his breeches-pocket he took a roll of crumpled notes
and flung them at him; then suddenly turned upon his heels, with what sounded like a muttered
execration at his own folly.

Yorke did not risk this unexpected treasure on the chances of the dice, but retired to his
own room. It was a dainty chamber, as we have said, and offered in its appointments a curious
contrast to his late sleeping-room in the keeper's lodge. He opened the door of communication
to which the Squire had referred, and found himself in a sort of boudoir, in which, as in his
own room, a good fire was burning. By the lover of art-furniture, this latter apartment would
have been pronounced a perfect gem. Here also every article was of ebony, and flashed back
the blaze from the red coals like dusky mirrors. Yorke lit the candles--huge waxen ones, such
as the pious soul in peril sees in his mind's eye, and promises to his saint--and looked around
him with curiosity. Like the little Marchioness of Mr. Richard Swiveller, he had never seen
such things, "except in shops;" or rather, he had seen single specimens of such exposed in
windows of great furniture warehouses, rather as a wonder and a show than with any hope to
tempt a purchaser. On one hand stood an ebony cabinet, elaborately carved with fruit and flowers;
it was divided into three parts, and their shut doors faced with plate-glass gave it the appearance
of a tripartite altar with its sacred fire kindled. A casket almost as large glowed close beside
it, enriched with figures and landscapes, and with shining locks and hinges, as he afterward
discovered, of solid gold. A book-case of the same precious wood was filled with volumes bound
in scarlet--all French novels, superbly if not very decorously illustrated. But the article
which astonished the new tenant of this chamber most was the ebony escritoire that occupied
its centre, with every thing set out for ornament or use that is seen on a lady's writing-table.
It was impossible that such nick-nacks as he there beheld could be intended for male use, and
still less for such men as were the Squire's guests. Did this chamber and its neighbor apartment
usually own a female proprietress? and if so, why was he placed there? This idea by no means
alarmed the young landscape-painter, who had no more mauvaise honte, nor dislike to adventures
of gallantry, than Gil Blas de Santillane. He sat down at the escritoire, and, taking up a
gilt pen with a ridiculous silk tassel, began a letter to the same person to whom that day
he had already dispatched a missive; but this time it was not so brief: the day of brilliant
dies and illuminated addresses had not as yet set in, so he wrote at the top of the little
scented sheet, in a bold free hand, the word Crompton! and put a note of admiration after it.
Had you seen his face as he did so, you would have said it was a note of triumph.

"My DEAR MOTHER,--Veni, vidi, vici--I have come, I have seen him, and I am at all events tolerated.
The perilous moment was when I told him who I was. He said he was half disposed to set his
bull-dog at me, but he didn't; on the contrary, he at once bid me exchange my bachelor's quarters
for the two chambers I at present occupy, and which remind me of the Arabian Nights. I have
never seen any thing like them; the furniture of both is of ebony; but the most curious part
of the affair is, that they are evidently designed for a lady. Imagine your Richard sleeping
under a coverlet of real Brussels lace! Every thing in the house, however, is magnificent,
or was so once, before it was damaged by barbarous revel. Such orgies as I have witnessed to-night
would seem incredible, if I wrote them; the Modern Midnight Entertainment of old Hogarth will
supply you with the dramatis personae; but the splendor of the surroundings immensely heightened
the effect of it all. Carew and his friends might have sat for Alaric and his Goths carousing
amidst the wreck of the art treasures of Rome. Nothing that he has affords him any satisfaction;
though, if it is of great cost, Chaplain Whymper tells me that he derives a momentary pleasure
from its willful damage. This man and one other are the only persons of intelligence about
Carew; but even they have no influence with him that can be depended on. If madness were always
hereditary indeed, I might consider myself doomed. You were right there, I own; but you must
needs allow that in undertaking this adventure contrary to your advice I have effected something.
The chaplain is already speculating upon my future fortunes, and he knows his patron better
than any body; at all events, if I am turned out of doors to-morrow (which I am aware is quite
on the cards), I shall have three hundred pounds in my pocket, which Carew, with a 'Catch that,'
threw me in notes, exactly as you throw a chicken-bone to Dandy as he sits on his hind-legs,
though I did not 'beg' for them, I do assure you. The immediate cause of my being invited hither
was as follows [here the writer described his exploit with the stags]. This, with our match
at fisticuffs by moonlight, had greatly inclined Carew to favor me; yet, when the disclosure
of my identity was made, I thought for a moment all my pains were lost. He resented the intrusion
exceedingly; but then he had himself invited me to be his guest; and he holds his word as good
as his bond. Indeed, by what the chaplain tells me, it will soon be held something better,
for even his vast estate is crumbling away, acre by acre, beneath the load of lavish expenditure
it has to bear. There must be much, however, at the worst, to be picked up among the debris
of such a fortune."

"I am aware that it is in the last degree improbable that Carew will be persuaded to make a
will in any body's favor at present. He imagines, I think, that the whole world is made for
his sole enjoyment--it almost might be so, for all he sees to the contrary--and never dreams
that he will die. But it is also certain that he will die early; and more than likely that
he will come to grief, when he has lost his nerve, in one or other of the mad exploits which
he will be too proud to discontinue. Then will your Richard become the most assiduous and painstaking
of nurses that ever humored crack-brained patient. But there! I have made a dozen programmes
of what is to happen, and this is but a specimen. Who can tell? I may be heir of Crompton yet,
or I may come back to you to-morrow like a bad penny, and with what the vulgar describe as
a flea in my ear."

"It will not surprise you to learn that you are personally held in great disfavor here, though
the chaplain (who has heard all from the Squire's lips) speaks of you with due respect. The
last thing that is desired at Crompton is, of course, the return of its lawful mistress. Carew
himself is very bitter against you, which is doubtless owing to the good offices of grandmamma.
The clock has just struck four, which bids me close this letter, though of all the Squire's
guests, to judge by the wrangling that is going on in the Library below stairs, the first to
retire will be your affectionate son, RICHARD YORKE."

"P.S.--I forgot to say that Carew made the most pointed inquiries as to whether I had any other
profession than that of landscape-painting. Would it not be strangely comical if he should
bestir himself to get me some Civil appointment! I almost fancied he must have been thinking
of doing so, from some scraps of talk I heard him let fall at dinner. Curiously enough, by-the-by,
who should have been sitting at his right-hand, but Frederick Chandos, Jack's brother! 'Good
Heaven!' (you will say), 'suppose it had been Jack himself;' however, it was not."

CHAPTER VIII.

HOW BENEDICT BECAME A BACHELOR.

Notwithstanding the late hour at which Yorke retired to his sumptuous couch, he was up the
next morning betimes. He was restless, and eager to explore the splendors of the house, that
had been so nearly his inheritance, for it was not without a stubborn contest that the law
had deprived him of what he still believed to be his rights. Nor had Crompton, in his eyes
(as we have hinted), only the interest of Might-have-been; it had that of Might-be also. If
not absolutely sanguine, he was certainly far from hopeless of fortune making him that great
amends; at all events, while the opportunity was afforded him, which he well knew might be
lost forever by his own imprudence, or through the caprice of another, he resolved not to neglect
it. It was broad daylight, yet not a soul was stirring in all the stately place; nothing but
the echo of his own footsteps, as he trod the corridor, and entered the great Picture-gallery,
met his attentive ear. The collection of old masters at Crompton was varied and valuable; he
could have spent hours among them with infinite pleasure, if the intoxicating thought that
they all might be one day his own had not been present to mar their charms. He regarded them
less as an admiring disciple, or a connoisseur, than as an appraiser. The homely life-scenes
of Jan Stein, the saintly creations of Paul Veronese, the warmth of Rubens, and the stateliness
of Vandyck, were all measured by one standard--that of price. The contents of this one room
alone, thought he, "represent no moderate fortune."

When his eye strayed to the tall windows, and rested on the wooded acres which owned in mad
Carew a nominal master, the beauty of dale and upland touched him not at all. "I wonder now,"
sighed he, "how much of this is dipped?" It was a good sign, he thought, that in one room he
found a cabinet containing no less than fifty antique cameos; for, if the pressure of pecuniary
difficulty had really begun to be severe, the Squire would surely have parted with what must
have been in his view useless lumber, and was so easily convertible into cash. The Library
offered a strange spectacle: chairs thrown down, and broken glasses, bore witness to the wildness
of last night's revel; the splendid carpet was strewn with the ends and ashes of cigars, and
with packs of cards; and on the table, scratched in all directions by the sharp spurs of fighting-cocks,
still lay the dice and caster. The atmosphere was so heavy with the fumes of wine and smoke
that Yorke was glad to escape from it, through a half-opened window, into the morning air.

How bright and fresh it was! How much there was of bracing enjoyment, of wholesome gayety,
in the mere breath of it; how much of invigorating delight in the mere sight of the glittering
turf, the beaded trees, to which the hoar-frost had lent its jewels! Richard Yorke enjoyed
them not, save that he felt his lungs play more freely. A couple of gardeners were at work
upon the lawn, of one of whom he asked the way to the stables, the report of the completeness
and perfection of which had often reached him. The house and its furniture--nay, the house
and its inmates--were of less consequence in the Squire's eyes than the arrangements of his
loose-boxes. The old dynasty of Houyhnhnms was re-established at Crompton; the Horse bare sway,
or was at least held in higher account than the Human. The Horse, the Hound, the Pheasant,
the Bag-fox, and, fifthly, Man, were there the gradations of rank; and a compound being--half
man, half brute--was, by a not unparalleled freak of fortune, the master of all. Carew had
never fed his mares with human flesh, but there was a legend that he had rubbed a friend over
with anise-seed, and offered that dainty morsel to his dogs. The victim was snatched away again,
however, by some officious underling, who justified his interference upon the ground that the
hounds would have been spoiled by such an indulgence; and the Squire had pardoned him. This
was one of the stories about the Master of Crompton which divided the country into those who
believed it and those who did not; but Walter Grange had told it to Richard as a characteristic
fact.

The stables were indeed a marvel, not only of cleanliness and comfort, but, if it had been
possible by any arts of daintiness to make them cox-combs, such would Carew's horses have become.
They had looking-glasses in their own glossy coats, and yet it was not well for one of them
to be an especial favorite with its master, for it more than once happened that he would ride
such so often and so long that it fell under him, killed with kindness, overwhelmed with his
oppressive favor. On such occasions, if the Squire happened to have been as devoted as usual
to his brandy flask, he would shed copious tears, which many instanced as a proof that he was
neither selfish nor cold-hearted.

The kennels were of vast proportions, hedged in by high palisades, through the interstices
of which many a black muzzle now protruded, sniffing like ill-tempered women, or uttering shrill
whines of despair. As Yorke, with his hands buried in his pockets, for they were cold, though
his head was too well provided with clustering hair to be conscious of the absence of a hat,
was contemplating this spectacle with cynical amusement, up strode the chaplain, wholesome
and ruddy-looking.

"You are up betimes--as Crompton hours go--Mr. Yorke; I hope such good habits will not be undermined
by evil associations. How I envy you your constitution, to be able to face this November mist
with a bare head!"

"Nay, parson," rejoined the young man, "you must have risen early yourself to know that there
was a mist. It's clear enough now all round. I suppose our impatient friends yonder," pointing
to the kennel, where all the dogs, hearing the chaplain's voice, were now in full chorus, "will
have their will this morning?"

"Yes; it is this pack's turn to hunt."

"I wish, for your sake, Mr. Whymper, that there was only one pack," observed Yorke, with good-natured
earnestness.

"Ah, you are referring to that foolish talk about the living last night. Poor Ryll is quite
broken-hearted about it this morning; and, in fact, he did do me an ill turn, though, I am
sure, without intending it. It is the misfortune of a professed wit--and especially of a poor
one--that he can not afford to be silent."

"You take it more good-humoredly than I should," said Yorke. "I should be inclined to charge
something for a joke made at my own expense, where the loss was so considerable."

"You don't look of a very revengeful disposition, neither," returned the chaplain, critically.

"I have never experienced the feeling of revenge," answered the young man, frankly; "but I
know what it is to feel wronged, and I think it is lucky that it is the law, and not an individual,
that has done me the mischief--one can't have a vendetta against the law, you know. But, if
it were a man, ay, though he were my own flesh and blood, he should pay for it--yes, sevenfold.
I would not put up with injustice from any human being; and where I could, if the law would
not help me, I would right myself with the strong hand."

It was curious to see the effect which this objectless passion wrought upon the young man's
face, and even figure. His lithe limbs seemed to grow rigid; his right hand was clenched convulsively;
his handsome Spanish countenance was lit up with a sort of dusky glow.

"My dear young friend," said the chaplain, quietly, "my profession, perhaps, ought to suggest
to me some serious arguments against the disposition which you so unmistakably evince; but
I will confine myself to saying that such a temper as yours is not to be kept for nothing.
It is only men in your father's position who can indulge themselves in such a luxury, I do
assure you. You'll come to grief with it some day."

Yorke laughed, good-humoredly. "What must be, will be. Let us hope there will be no occasion
for the display of my fire-works. I suppose, what with his two packs of hounds and the rest
of it, even my father will be brought to behave himself demurely, sooner or later."

"I should like to see Carew demure," said the chaplain, smiling; "although not reduced to that
state by the extremities of poverty. Yes, as you say," he added, in a graver tone, "the pace
at which he has been going these twenty years has begun to tell on his fortune. But it is not
the dogs that will ruin him (as they ruined poor Ryll, with his few thousands), nor yet his
hunters. It is his race-horses on the Downs yonder that will bring him to his piece of bread."

"I suppose so," said Yorke, sighing, not so much on Carew's account as on his own; "he backs
a horse because it is his own. That is his confounded egotism."

"Your tie of relationship, Mr. Yorke, does not, I perceive, make you blind to your father's
foibles."

"Why should it?" rejoined the young man, passionately. "Am I to feel grateful to him for begetting
me? What has he done to make me feel that I owe him aught? Do you suppose I thank him for being
admitted here, unacknowledged, uninvited in my own proper person? For being permitted to take
my fill at the common trough along with his drunken swine?"

"Nay, my friend," interposed the chaplain, coldly; "the food and wine are of the best; and
we should never scoff at good victual. If you have so proud a stomach, why are you here? It
embarrasses you to answer the question. Let me, then, shape the reply. 'I have a sense of my
own dignity,' you would say, 'far keener than that of my father's flatterers and favorites;
but, on the other hand, I humiliate myself for a much greater stake.'"

"I humiliate myself?" reiterated the young man, angrily.

"You take money that is not very gracefully offered for your acceptance, my young friend,"
said the chaplain, quietly.

"You saw him, did you?" cried Richard, hoarse with shame and passion.

"No; I did not; but I heard him swearing at you at the hazard-table for having emptied his
pockets; and I am familiar with his mode of bestowing presents. You must forgive me, Mr. Yorke,"
added Parson Whymper, dryly; "but you ought to know that when a man has lost his own self-respect,
he is, naturally averse to the profession of independence in another."

"If you deem yourself a dependent, Mr. Chaplain," replied Yorke, bitterly, "you still permit
yourself some frankness."

"Yes; that is one of the few virtues which are practiced at Crompton. You will find me speak
the truth."

There was irony in Parson Whymper's tone; and yet the young man felt that he was not the subject
of its cynicism. Was it possible that this hard-drinking, hard-riding, hard-headed divine was
scornful of himself, and of his own degraded position? Yorke did not credit him with any such
fine feeling. He had read of Swift at Temple's, and could understand the great Dean's bitterness
against a shallow master and his insolent guests, but that a man should become despicable to
himself, was unintelligible to him.

"Of course," continued the chaplain, smiling at his evident bewilderment, "I could have been
as smooth-spoken as you please, my young friend; but I had estimated your good sense too highly
to endeavor to conciliate you by such vapid arts."

"I thank you," said Yorke, thoughtfully. "I hope you were right there; I am sure at least that
from your mouth I could hear home truths, which from another's would be very unpalatable. You
are good enough to speak as though you would wish us to be friends. I am going to ask you,
therefore, to do me a favor."

"I will do any thing that lies in my power; but do not, for your own sake, press me to influence
your father----"

"No, no; it is not that," broke in the other, hastily. "It lies with yourself to grant my request.
I wish to hear from you the true story of Carew's marriage with my mother."

"The true story?" echoed Parson Whymper. "Nay; I can not vouch for being possessed of that.
I have only heard it from your grandmother: the counsel for the prosecution is scarcely a reliable
authority for the facts of a case."

"And I have only heard the defense," said Yorke. "Let me now, for the first time, know what
was urged upon the other side, and so weightily," the young man gloomily added, "that it made
my mother an outcast, and myself a disgraced and penniless lad. You see, I know exactly what
was the end of it all, so do not fear to shock me."

"There can be no disgrace where one has not one's self to blame," urged the chaplain.

"You think so?" broke in the other, bitterly. "What! not when one's mother is to blame, for
instance? Well, please begin."

"I had much rather not," said the chaplain. "It would be much better for you to get the newspaper
report of the case--I can tell you the exact date--and read both pro and con."

"No report was ever published, Mr. Whymper; the case was heard with closed doors, or suppressed
by Carew's influence. So much, perhaps--to judge by your face--the better for me."

"I think it would be better for you not to hear it, even now, Mr. Yorke," returned the chaplain,
not without a touch of tenderness in his tone. "But, if you insist upon it, come to my private
room, and let us breakfast together first, then we will have the story over our cigars."

Accordingly, the two repaired to the apartment in question--a very snug one, on the ground-floor,
but so strewn with documents and letters that it resembled a lawyer's sanctum. The morning
meal--which, in the host's case, consisted of a game-pie and a tankard of strong ale--having
been here dispatched, and their cigars lighted, Parson Whymper began as follows:

"It must have been in the autumn of 1821 that Carew finally left school--the public school
of Harton. He got into some difficulties with the authorities--refused, I believe, to apologize
for some misdemeanor--so that he had to be privately withdrawn----"

"I beg your pardon there," remarked Yorke, hastily. "He was expelled, as I happen to know for
certain."

"Very likely," said the chaplain, slowly expelling the smoke from his lips; "indeed, I should
say most likely. But remember mine is professedly an ex parte statement. Mrs. Carew--I mean
Mrs. Carew the elder--is solely responsible for it. Of course, she softened down the facts
against her son, and I have no doubt made compensation for so doing by highly coloring the
offenses of her daughter-in-law. I told you, you would not like the story. Is it still your
wish that I should proceed with it?"

"Yes, yes," said Yorke; "go on. I was a fool to interrupt you." But the chaplain noticed that
the young man held his open palm before his face, under pretense of shielding it from the fire,
and that his cheeks grew scarlet as the tale went on, nevertheless.

"Carew was not seventeen then, when he left school for the house of a gentleman of the name
of Hardcastle, in Berkshire, as his private pupil. It was understood that he was to have his
particular care and attention, but not his exclusive services. There were one or two other
pupils--rather queer ones as it would seem; but Mr. Hardcastle advertised in the newspapers
for lads of position, but neglected education--young fellows, in short, who had proved unmanageable
at home--and undertook to reform them by his system. It was no wonder, then, that Carew found
some strange companions. The strangest of all, however, under the circumstances, was surely
the tutor's niece, Miss Hardcastle herself."

"Why strangest?" interrupted Yorke.

"I think Mrs. Carew the elder meant to imply that this young lady, being possessed of great
physical advantages, should have been the last person selected by Mr. Hardcastle as his housekeeper,
and the companion of his pupils, and the more so since he was well aware, as it afterward turned
out, that she had already succeeded in victimizing (such was Mrs. Carew's expression) one of
these very lads. That was years ago, it is true; and it might well be imagined that a lady
of the mature age of five-and-thirty might have outlived her charms; but in her particular
case this was not so. Miss Hardcastle, as she was called, was still very beautiful, high-spirited,
and an excellent horsewoman. She was also--if that had been necessary to obtain her purpose--well-read
and accomplished. Being clever, good-looking, and not easily shocked, however, she was more
than competent to secure the affections of young Carew. She was, nevertheless, as I have said,
literally old enough to be his mother; and the idea of the affair having been a love-match,
in the usual sense of the expression, was simply preposterous. That Miss Hardcastle was herself
of this opinion seems evident from her having enjoined secrecy upon her youthful bridegroom.
They lived together as man and wife, under Mr. Hardcastle's roof, for near six months before
their marriage was proclaimed. Then young Mrs. Carew took a bold step: she persuaded her husband
to bring her to his house, under the roof of which his mother was then residing. But they did
not come (as one might have imagined) in the fashion of two runaway lovers, who seek forgiveness
for their youthful ardor with penitence and submission. The bridegroom was full of wild mirth
at having at last done something seriously to astonish the world. He was fond of his mother,
after his own fashion; but so far from entreating her forgiveness, he did not even perceive
any particular necessity for conciliation. The bride was full of triumph; she had not risked
much, and she had won a great stake. It would have been better for her could she have borne
her success with more modesty. Her mother-in-law was transported with rage, which she was too
wise to exhibit. She knew her son far better than his new wife did; and she felt that opposition
was for the present hopeless; but she took counsel with her son's guardian, and bided her time.
It came at last, though very slowly. Carew was devoted to his spouse for a whole twelvemonth--a
longer time than youth and beauty combined have ever enthralled him since. Even when her tender
tones--for she had the sweetest voice that ever woman possessed--failed to thrill him, and
her queenly form to charm, he would probably not have consented to take part against her, but
for her own imprudence. She lost her temper with him upon a matter where it is difficult for
the wisest of her sex to keep it: she grew jealous."

"Without cause?" inquired Yorke, gloomily. His cigar had gone out, though he still held it
between his white lips.

"No; not without cause. That is a point, I fancy, about which my informant had her reasons
for not being explicit."

"What!" cried the young man, indignantly. "She threw some one in her son's way, to divert his
attention from his lawful wife?"

"Perhaps; I can't say for certain. I am not defending her, Mr. Yorke; but remember, she loved
her son. She beheld him a victim to an artful woman. He was not in her eyes as he is in mine,
and perhaps in yours. He had, she argued, capabilities of good, an affectionate and trustful
nature; he was the best parti in the county, and had chosen his tutor's niece--a woman old
enough to have borne him. Besides, she was not his lawful wife. The dowager had secretly taken
legal opinion upon that matter, and was only waiting for an opportunity to test it. It was
essential for this that her son should desire his own freedom; and at last he did so. I have
told you the occasion. In the whirlwind of her wrath, your mother told Carew some home truths;
above all, let him know she despised him, and had inveigled him into marriage. He had no other
name for her, henceforth, but Serpent."

"I know," said Yorke. "Go on."

"It was within two months of your birth that this quarrel took place. Had you been born, and
especially here at Crompton, I think the rupture would never have happened. Your grandmother
felt that too, and did her utmost to precipitate matters, and, as you know, she was successful.
Her daughter-in-law was compelled to leave the house, and an action was commenced in an ecclesiastical
court. The validity of the marriage was contested on the ground of undue publication of the
bans, both parties having a knowledge of the fact. I am a parson, you know, and this bit of
law lies in my way. The bride appeared in the register as spinster, whereas she was the widow
of an old pupil of her uncle's, whose surname you bear. It was not an easy victory by any means.
The judge of the Consistory Court held that the inaccuracy in question was insufficient to
invalidate the ceremony; but Carew, or rather your grandmother, appealed to the Court of Arches,
and got the decision reversed. The marriage was therefore declared null and void. Very hard
lines it was for you, Mr. Yorke; and--and that's the whole story."

"I thank you," said the young man, gravely. "I can easily imagine that it might have been told
by other lips in harsher terms."

They were silent for full a minute, Yorke busying himself with the titles of the documents
upon the table, written out in the chaplain's sprawling hand.

"Your mother must be a most remarkable woman," observed the latter, thoughtfully. "Is she still
young-looking for her age?"

"Yes; very. What a queer docket is here! 'Tin Mine. Refused:' What does that mean?"

"It is an application from one Trevethick, an inn-keeper, to purchase a disused mine at Gethin,
on the west coast of Cornwall, which Carew has declined. Two thousand pounds was offered on
the nail, a sum far beyond its value; but it is one of his crazes that his property there is
very valuable, and it's evident that this Trevethick thinks so too--whereas it is only picturesque.
For grandeur of position, Gethin Castle, or rather what is left of it, for it is a ruin, is
indeed unequaled! You should take your sketch-book down there, some day. May I ask, by-the-by,
are you only an amateur in that way, or a professional?"

"I am an artist by profession. I live by my pencil, save for what my mother allows me out of
Carew's pittance. That is small enough, you know. Hollo! there are the hounds coming round
to the front! I suppose Carew and the rest of them will soon be in the saddle?"

"And you have never made money by any other means?" pursued the chaplain, thoughtfully.

"Never. Why do you ask?"

"Well, it seemed so strange that a lad like you should find purchasers for his works," returned
the chaplain, carelessly. "The Picture-gallery here will be of service to you, no doubt."

"Yes. I shall get my education at Crompton, if I get nothing else," said Yorke; "and indeed,
as I have no desire to peril my neck out hunting, I shall set to work at once. Good-morning,
Mr. Chaplain, and many thanks." And with a nod and a smile, the young man left the room.

Parson Whymper looked after him with a grave face. "I wonder whether Fane was right," he muttered.
"He seemed quite positive; though, 'tis true, he owed him a grudge for potting him at pool.
There was something wrong in that young fellow's face as he said 'Never,' when I asked him
that question as to whether he gained money by other means. If he lied, the lying must have
come from the mother's side. That woman must be a marvel. Well, I'm sorry, for I should have
liked Richard Yorke to have had his chance here."

CHAPTER IX.

IN BLOOMSBURY.

It was the evening of the day after Yorke had listened to his own biography, and night had
long fallen upon the shivering woods of Crompton; the rain fell heavily also upon roof and
sky-light with thud and splash. It was a wretched night, even in town, where man has sought
out so many inventions to defy foul weather and the powers of darkness. The waste-pipes could
not carry off the water from the houses fast enough, choke and gurgle as they would; the contents
of the gutters overflowed the streets; and wherever the gas-lights shone was reflected a damp
glimmer. In a large room on the ground-floor of Rupert Street, Bloomsbury, sat a woman writing,
and undisturbed by the dull beating of the rain without. She often raised her head, intermitted
her occupation, and appeared to listen; but it was to the voices of her Past that she was giving
heed, and not to the ceaseless patter of the rain. What power they have with us, those voices!
While they speak to us we hear nothing else; we know of nothing that is taking place; there
is no Present at all; we are living our lives again. If purely, so much the better for us;
if vilely, viciously, there is no end to the contaminating association. It is to escape this
that some men work, and others pray. The furniture of the room was peculiar to the neighborhood;
massive, yet cheap. It had been good once; but long before it came into the hands of her who
now owned it. There was the round bulging looking-glass; the side-board was adapted for quite
a magnificent show of plate and tankards--only there were none; a horse-hair sofa, from which
you would have seen the intestines protruding had it not been for the continuous gloom. If
the sun ever visited Rupert Street, it shone on the other side of the way. On the mantel-piece
were two of those huge shells in which the tropic deep is ever murmuring. Who that has taken
lodgings in London does not know them? Who has not sometimes forgotten the commonplaces of
his life in listening to those cold lifeless lips? If you take them up on their own tropic
shore, they will tell you of the roar of London streets.

There were two articles in the room, however, which were peculiar to itself. The one was a
human skull--to all appearance, the same as all other skulls, the virtue of which has gone
out of them, though it had once belonged to no common man. The second object could still less
be termed an ornament than the first, although it was a picture. It depicted a woman of frightful
aspect, having but one eye, and a hare-lip; she was standing up, and appeared to be declaiming
or dictating; while an old cripple, at a table beside her, took down her words in writing.
If you had gone all over the rest of the house--and it was a large one--you would have found
nothing else remarkable, or which did not smack of Bloomsbury. It was, indeed, nothing but
a lodging-house, and the room we have described was the private apartment of its mistress.
She might consult her own private taste, she considered, in her own room, else the skull and
the picture occasionally rather shocked "the daintier sense" of the new lodgers, to whom the
landlady gave audience in this apartment. She is as little like a lodging-house keeper, to
look at, as can be imagined. Her cheeks are firm and fresh-colored, her teeth white and shining,
her eyes quite bright, and her hands plump. To one who knows her age, as we do--she is fifty-three--she
looks like an old woman who has found out the secret of perpetual youth, but has kept it for
her own use, as, in such a case, every woman probably would do. There is only one piece of
deception in her appearance; her black hair, which clusters over her forehead like a girl's,
is dyed of that color: it is in reality as white as snow. By lamp-light, as you see her now,
she might be a woman of five-and-twenty, penning a letter to her love. But she is, in fact,
writing to her son; for it is Mrs. Yorke. Writing to him, but not thinking of him, surely,
when she frowns as now, and leans back in her chair with that menacing and angry look. No;
her anger is not directed against him, although he has left her and home, long since, upon
an adventure of which she disapproved.

"You will gain nothing for yourself, Richard," was her warning; "and, perhaps, may wreck even
my scanty fortunes." But, as we know, her son had taken his own way (as he was wont to do),
and had so far prospered. She was writing a reply to the letter she had received from him from
Crompton that very morning, and the task was one that naturally evoked some bitter memories.

"So he put him in the ebony chamber, did he?" they ran on. "Ay, that was my room once. What
a pretty chime that serpent-clock had; and how often have I heard it in the early morning as
I lay there--alone! If it had not been for that hateful woman, I might have been listening
to it now! He seems as mad as ever, by Dick's account, and, I do not doubt, as brutal and as
selfish! And yet it was he that suffered, he that was wronged, he that was to be pitied! His
wife was the adventuress, forsooth! who deserved all she got. Oh, these men, these men, that
treat us as they please, because they are so sure of sympathy, even from our fellow-slaves
and sisters!"

She bent again to her occupation, but only for a minute. "All this is labor in vain, Dick,"
muttered she, laying down her pen; "the luck is gone both from you and from me. If I were thirty
years younger, indeed, and might have my chance once more, I would tame your father yet. I
ought to have beaten his meek-faced mother out of doors; I ought to have trained his bold-eyed
girl to work my will with him. She should have been my accomplice, and not hers; but, now,
what boots it that old age has spared me? Yonder is the only woman!"--she looked toward the
picture--"who has found a way to win mankind, save as their toy. My reign has been longer than
that of most; but it is over." She rose, and, holding up the lamp, surveyed herself, with a
mocking face, in the round glass. "And this was once Jane Hardcastle, was it? This was her
face, and this her figure! No drunkard, staggering home through such a night as this, could
take me for her now! She had wits too; and better for me had I lost them with all the rest;
then I should not have the sense to be so bitter! What a future she must once have had before
her, if she had but known what men were made of! It is only when too late that such women discover
what they have missed. This mad Carew was tinder to a flash of these bright eyes; and the fool
Yorke, except in his wild creeds, as pliant as a hazel twig. I used to think yonder woman was
an idiot, because she believed in a place of torment; but she was right there. Yes, Joanna,"
she continued, apostrophizing the picture, "I'm compelled to confess that you are right; for,
being in hell, it is idle to deny its existence."

She placed the lamp once more upon the table, yet did not seat herself beside it, but walked
hastily up and down the room. "To be young no more, to be poor and powerless, to have no hope
in this world nor belief in a better, to have lost even belief in one's self--is not that to
be in Gehenna? I am punished for my sins, men say. Hypocrites! liars! Why is he not punished?
Why is he proud, and strong, and prosperous? Sins? If Judgment-day should come to-morrow, my
soul would be as pure as snow beside that man's! ay, and beside most men's! Joanna here knew
that--I suppose by inspiration; for how else should she? What's that?"

Amidst the pelting of the rain, which had increased within the last few hours rather than diminished,
the pulling of the house-bell could be heard. Mrs. Yorke drew forth her watch--a jeweled trinket
of exquisite beauty, one of the few relics of her palmy time. "Past midnight," she murmured,
"and all the lodgers are within. Who can it be?"

The bell pealed forth again.

She went into the hall, where the gas was burning, and unlocked the door. At the same time
somebody flung himself violently against it, but the chain was up.

"Who is it?" inquired she; and it was strange, at such a moment, to hear how very soft and
musically she spoke, although, when talking to herself a while ago, her tones had been harsh
and bitter as her mood.

"It is I, mother," returned the voice from outside.

She unhitched the chain and let him in. "I knew it would be so, Dick," said she, quietly.

Richard was pale and haggard, and shone from head to foot with the rain, which poured off his
water-proof coat in streams.

"You were right, mother," said he, as he kissed her cheek. "No reproaches. Let me have food
and fire."

She brought him socks and slippers, made a cheerful blaze, and set cold meat and spirits upon
the table.

He ate voraciously, and drank his hot brandy-and-water, while Mrs. Yorke worked busily at an
antimacassar, in silence.

"You are not disappointed at seeing me, that's one thing, mother?"

"No. Read that." She pushed across to him the letter she had been writing to him that evening,
and pointed to this sentence: "You have my good wishes, but not my hopes--I have no hopes.
I shall be surprised if I do not have you back again before the week is out."

"Just so," said the young man, cynically. "You have the pleasure, then, which your dear friend
Joanna there never enjoyed, of seeing your own prophecy accomplished; and I, for my part, have
three hundred pounds to solace myself with for what has certainly been a disappointment."

"I am glad you are so philosophic, Dick. It is the best thing we can be, if we can't be religious.
How did it all happen?"

"I scarcely know the plot (for there was a plot), but only the dénouement. I had offended a
certain Mr. Fane, toady-in-ordinary to Frederick Chandos."

"Ah!" cried Mrs. Yorke, shaking her head.

"Yes; you were right again, mother, there--the whole affair is a tribute to your sagacity,
if you will only permit me to narrate it to you. I say that this fellow Fane, when walking
with his patron's brother, stupid Jack, had me pointed out to him in town one day as the man
who had 'pulled him through,' as he called it. Can you imagine how even such a fool as he could
have been so mad? It was an act of suicide, which, so far as I know, fools never commit. Well,
Fane was pretty certain of the identity of your humble servant, which he was, moreover, anxious
to establish, because I had beaten him at pool, and given him the rough side of my tongue."

"Oh, Dick, Dick! have skillful hand and ready speech been only given you to make enemies?"

Richard laughed, and lighted a cigar.

"Well, sometimes, mother, the most prudent of us are carried away by our own genius. I am told
that even you, for instance, lost your temper upon a certain occasion down at Crompton--gave
a 'piece of your mind' to my father, which, it seems, he took as a sample of the whole of it.
There, don't be angry: the provocation, it must be allowed, was in your case greater than mine;
but then you pique yourself on your self-control! However, this Fane did hate me, and told
the chaplain of his suspicions; the good parson was my friend, however, and all might have
gone well, but for this oaf--this idiot Jack--coming down to Carew's in person. He could never
get any coin out of 'Fred,' it appears, by letter; or, perhaps, he couldn't 'write!' But there
he was in the big drawing-room when I went in last night, and Carew saw his jaw drop at the
sight of me. He had not the sense to shut it even afterward, though I told him he had made
a mistake, and gave him every chance. I could have persuaded him, indeed, out of his own identity--and
much more mine--only that he appealed to Fane; and then the game was up. It would have made
me laugh had I not been so savage. Carew turned us both out of the house together. His love
of truth would not permit him, it seems, to harbor us. So Jack and I went to the inn, played
écarte all night, and parted the best of friends this morning. But I'll be even with that fellow
Fane--yes; by Heaven, I will, if it's a score of years hence!"

Perhaps the light satiric tone which the young man had used throughout his narrative was little
in accordance with the feelings which really agitated him; but, at all events, his last few
words were full of malignant passion.

"Be even, Dick, by all means, with every body," observed Mrs. Yorke, coolly, "but do not indulge
yourself in revenge. Revenge is like a game at battle-door, wherein one can never tell who
will have the last hit."

"At the same time, it is one of those few luxuries which those who have least to lose can best
afford," said Richard, with the air of a moralist.

"It is not cheap, however, even to them," returned Mrs. Yorke, still busy with her antimacassar.
"It may cost one one's life, for instance."

"And what then?" inquired Richard, carelessly.

"Nobody knows 'what then,' Dick. Our fanatic yonder had one opinion; our philosopher there"--she
pointed to the skull--"another. Both of them know by this time, and yet can not tell us. It
is the one case where the experience of others can not benefit ourselves."

This subject had no charms for Richard. When we are what is vulgarly called "in the sulks,"
and displeased (if we were to own it) with the system of universal government in this world,
the next seems of but little importance. There may be a miscarriage of justice (that is, a
thwarting of our particular wishes) even there. Perhaps Mrs. Yorke was aware that her son's
clouded face did not portend religious or metaphysical speculation, for she abruptly changed
the subject.

"And what are you going to do, Dick, now that this Crompton plan has failed?"

He did not answer, but stood with his back to the fire, moodily stroking his silken mustache.

"Richard"--she rose, and placed her plump white hand upon his shoulder;--"it is very, very
seldom that I ask a favor of you, but I am about to do so now. Promise me that you will never
again undertake for another what you undertook for this man Chandos."

He laughed, as he had laughed before, in bitter fashion. "Why not? It was fifty pounds down;
and apparently no risk: that is, no risk from the law, which has omitted to provide for the
contingency. Next to being above the law is surely to be ahead of it. Besides, I am really
a public benefactor. Without my help, the state would already have been deprived of the services
of four young gentlemen, all of excellent families. Of course, such a calling has its disadvantages.
It is very difficult to obtain clients. The offer of one's valuable assistance is liable to
be declined uncivilly--it requires the talents of a diplomatist to convey it without offense--still,
I possess those talents. Again, undoubtedly the profession is in itself temporary, can never
be permanent; but then, has not nature especially favored me for it, after my mother's model?
Shall I not be a boy at forty, and blooming at fifty-three? The idea of you being fifty-three,
mother!"

As they stood together side by side it seemed, indeed, impossible that this young man could
be her son, far less the offspring of her middle age. She smiled upon him sadly, patting his
handsome cheek. "And is my Richard so full-grown a man," said she, "as, to flatter, and not
to grant?" It was impossible to imagine a more winsome voice, or a more tender tone.

"Nay, mother; I will promise, if you please," said the young fellow, kissing her. "And now,
let us divide this Crompton spoil together." He pulled out his purse, and counted the contents.
"There is Carew's three hundred, a few pounds I won at pool, and dull Jack's IOU for twenty--worth,
perhaps, five. Come, we two are partners in the game of life, you know, and must share alike."

"No, Dick, no," returned his mother, tenderly; "it is enough for me to see you win." She shut
the purse, and forced it back into his unwilling hand. "Some day, I trust, you will sweep away
a great stake--though not as you gained this."

"Ah, you mean an heiress! You think that every woman must needs fall in love with me, because
you have done so, mother."

His rage and bitterness had vanished, as though by magic; her tone and touch had spirited them
away.

"Perhaps I do, dear. Go to bed, and dream of one. You must be very tired. I ought not to say
that I am glad to see you back, Dick; yet how can I help it?"

CHAPTER X.

OVER THE EMBERS.

It was one of the peculiarities of Jane Yorke that she took but little sleep. The household
had long retired, and she put the remains of her son's meal away with her own hands, then sat
down by the fire, thinking. She had more subject for thought than most women; her life had
been eventful, her experience strange. We know what her second husband--the man who repudiated
her and her child--had been and was. Her first husband had been scarcely less remarkable. Leonard
Yorke was a young man of respectable family, and of tolerable means. His parents were dead,
and his relatives and himself had parted company early. They were sober, steady people, connected
with the iron trade: a share in their house of business at Birmingham, carried on in the name
of his two uncles, was the only tie between him and them, save that of kinship. They were strong
Unitarians, strong political economists, strong in their rugged material fashion every way.
They did not know what to do with a nephew who was a religious zealot, and thought all the
world was out of joint; and they had characteristically sought for assistance in the advertising
columns of the Times. Mr. Hardcastle therein proclaimed himself as having a specialty for the
reduction and reform of intractable young gentlemen, and they had consigned Leonard to his
establishment. It was the best thing that they could think of--for they were genuinely conscientious
men--and they did not grudge the money, though the tutor's terms were high. Jane was then a
very young girl--so young, indeed, that parents and guardians would scarcely have taken alarm
had they been aware of her being beneath the same roof with their impressionable charges; and
she was childish-looking even for her tender years. Leonard Yorke, gentle and good-humored,
was moved with compassion toward the orphan girl, as guileless-eyed as a saint in a picture;
he pitied her poverty, and, still more, the worldly character of her uncle and her surroundings.
She was wholly ignorant of the spiritual matters which engrossed his being, and yet so willing
to be taught. She sat at his feet, and listened by the hour to the outpourings of his fervid
zeal. If she did not understand them, she was in no worse position than himself. His tongue
was fluent. His words were like a lambent flame, playing with some indestructible material.
His mind was weak, and devoted to metaphysical speculations--mysticisms: the arcana coelestia
of Swedenborg was Holy Writ to him. He believed in three heavens, and their opposites. Jane's
endeavors were directed to make him believe in a fourth heaven. Childlike and immature in appearance,
she was in character exceedingly precocious. Her intelligence was keen and practical. In very
early years it had been instilled into her that her future welfare would depend upon her own
exertions, and she never forgot the lesson. Her uncle was very generous to her; but he was
not the man to have saved money for his own offspring, if he had had any, and far less for
his niece; he spent every shilling of his income. Little Jane would secretly have preferred
to receive in hard cash the sums which he lavished upon her in indulgences; she would have
dispensed with her pony, and kept a steed in the stable for herself of another sort. The rainy
day was certain to come some time or other to her, and she would have liked to have made provision
for it--a difficult matter for most of us, and for her impossible. She was wise enough, even
then, to know how Uncle Hardcastle would have received any suggestion of a prudential nature,
and she held her tongue.

In Leonard Yorke, if she did not comprehend his doctrine of "perpetual subsistence," she perceived
a provision for her future. At one-and-twenty, indeed, he made his pupil his wife, to the astonishment
rather than the scandal of the neighborhood. They opined that it was only in the East, or in
royal families who wedded by proxy, that brides ran so young. Jane Hardcastle, however, was
in reality eighteen years of age.

Yorke Brothers, of Birmingham, had nothing to say against the match, but they objected to a
Swedenborgian partner in the iron trade, and bought their nephew at a fair price out of the
business. They did not offer to take him back again, when, five years later, he became a true
believer in the faith of Mary Joanna Southcott and the coming of the young Shiloh. This lady,
whose portrait, with that of her spiritual amanuensis, hung in Mrs. Yorke's sitting-room, had
been her only rival in the affections of her husband. She had not been jealous of her upon
that account, feeling pretty certain, perhaps, that the "affinity" between them was Platonic;
but she had rather grudged the money with which he had so lavishly relieved the "perplexities"
of "the handmaid." The amanuensis used to issue I O U's at Joanna's dictation, to be paid with
enormous interest Hereafter, and Leonard Yorke was always ready to discount her paper. There
was no one that subscribed more munificently than he did toward the famous "cradle," or looked
more devoutly for its expected tenant. Even when that long-looked-for 19th of October had come
and gone without sign, and two months later his poor deluded idol passed away into that future
with which she had been so rashly familiar, he was faithful to her yet, and kept the "seal"
which she had given him--his passport to the realms of bliss--as his dearest treasure. He had
scarcely any other "effects" by that time, for, actuated by his too fervent faith, he had been
living upon the principle of his fortune; and at five-and-thirty years of age Mrs. Yorke found
herself a widow, with a stock of very varied experience indeed, but not much more of worldly
wealth than she had had to start with. It was hard, after half a lifetime, to resume the same
semi-relative, semi-dependent position under her uncle's roof which she had occupied before;
but no better offered itself, and she was glad to accept it. Her natural attractions were still
wondrously preserved to her; and, perhaps, on the occasion of her second nuptials (and the
fact of her first was carefully concealed), her age excited less astonishment than her youth
had done in the former instance.

Yet now at fifty-three, this woman, as remarkable for her talents as for her beauty, and who,
if but for a brief period, had once stood "on fortune's crowning slope," found herself with
little beyond a bare subsistence, which she received without gratitude from the hands of Carew.
What she derived from her lodging-house defrayed the somewhat lavish expenditure of her son
Richard. She was far, however, from complaining of his extravagances. She wished him to live
like a gentleman, and not to soil his hands with ignoble, pursuits. She felt a genuine pleasure--only
known to mothers--in gathering toilsomely together what she knew he would lightly spend. She
was for the present amply repaid by the reflection that her Dick was as handsome and well-appointed
a young fellow as was to be seen in London, with an air and manner that would become a prince.
It was only a question of time, she thought, when the princess should appear, be captivated,
and raise him to the sphere for which she had taken care to fit him. In the mean time, it was
only natural that he should enjoy himself after the manner of other youth of great expectations.
She was not averse to his dissipations, for in them indeed lay his best chance of getting acquainted
with young men of this class; nor, so far, had she been disappointed. It would be surprising
to many a stately pater-familias to learn how easily acquaintanceship, and even friendship,
is contracted with his male offspring, if they be among the pleasure-seekers of the town. A
young man of good address and exterior, with plenty of money in his pocket, does not require
introduction. The club door soon flies open to him, but not that of the home. Richard was on
tolerably intimate terms with Chandos, and other young men of the same class--but he had never
been introduced to their sisters. It was here that Mrs. Yorke made her mistake: she thought
she understood society because she had studied two exceptional phases of it. There is nobody
more short-sighted than the Bohemian, who imagines he is a citizen of the world; his round
of life may have no fence in the shape of convention, yet it is often, very limited, and it
is outside every other.

Mrs. Yorke judged of all men by her knowledge of her late husband and of Carew, and of women
by herself. If it had not been for the artificialities of society, she might have been right;
but they are powerful, and she knew little about them. In some matters she was exceedingly
sagacious. She did not entertain the alarm which would have been felt by some mothers with
respect to her son's morals, probably exposed to some danger by his mode of life; perhaps she
had not their scruples; and yet it is strange to see how light those weigh, even with our severest
matrons, when any question of "position" is in the other scale: they will not only permit their
sons to herd with roués, provided they are persons of distinction, but even accept them for
their sons-in-law. Mrs. Yorke, being daughterless, had no temptation to commit this latter
crime, but she was not displeased to imagine her Richard a man of gallantry; he would in that
case be less likely to fall a victim to undowered charms. "It is not your man-about-town who
sacrifices his future in a love-match," was her reflection. On the other hand, no one knew
better than herself what an easy prey to woman's wiles is a young gentleman without experience.
It was for this reason, as well as because she loved to have her boy about her, that she had
opposed Richard's going to Midlandshire. She knew Carew too well to hope that he would ever
take into favor a son of hers, and she distrusted the country, with its opportunities for ensnaring
youth into matrimonial engagements. Thirty years ago, in a fortnight of village life together,
she would have backed herself to have got a promise of marriage out of the Pope; and she did
not believe this to be one of the lost arts among young persons of her sex.

Thus Mrs. Yorke had strained every nerve to get the necessary funds to make town-life pleasant
to her son, and yet she had not succeeded. As a writer, however, it is fully as deep as, Statesman. He has the
most varied tasks in trying to infinite in hexameters Marius' large and small acts of his own
celebrated with his speeches, Demosthenes, with his philosophical discussions Plato driven
from the field and has only the time he lacked to overcome the Thucydides. He was in fact
so well bunglers, that it did not matter quite what field he was plowing. A journalist in
the worst natural Sense of the word, of words, as he himself says of rich, our thoughts on all
terms poor, there was not a specialist, in which he is not using fewer books a quick-read
paper would have made translating or compiling. Most faithfully are his correspondence be Image.
They are usually interesting and witty to name: it is as long as it reflects the main urban
and residential life of the fashionable world, but where the writer rely on themselves, as
in exile, in Cilicia, and after Pharsalian battle it is dull and empty as ever the soul of a cunning
from his community columnists. That such a statesman and man of letters, such as a human being
could not be otherwise as of low überfirnißter superficiality and heartlessness is hardly necessary
to say. Are we to describe the speaker yet? The great writer, but also a great man; and above
all the great orators flows the conviction and passion clearly and roaring from the depths of the
chest out as many of the poor, the only count and are not. Cicero had no convictions and no passion,
and he was nothing but a bad lawyer and advocate. He knew how his property, anecdotal narrative spicy
carried forward if not feel but to arouse the sentiment of his audience and jokes and jokes mostly
personal Type the dry store to cheer the administration of justice, and his better speeches, although
with the free grace and safe meeting place for the most exquisite compositions of this type,
for not reach as the memoirs of Beaumarchais, by far, are but a slight and pleasant reading. But are
even the same judge designated merits the serious appear as virtues very doubtful value, so must
the absolute lack of political sense in the constitutional, legal deduction in the forensic
speeches, the delinquent, the thing is always on the losing lawyer in the eyes egoism, the
horrible Gedankenöde every reader of Cicero's speeches by heart and mind rebel. If something
wonderful , so it's certainly not the speeches, but the admiration, the same place. With Cicero
will be any unbiased soon in the pure, the Ciceronianismus is a problem that may in fact not
really resolved, but only lifted in the larger mystery human nature: the language and the effect
of language on the mind. By the noble Latin Language, just before it went down as Volksidiom,
nor even that talented stylist as it was summarized and recorded in his extensive writings,
went to the unworthy vessel about the power exercised by the language, and by the piety, the
it arouses. We had a great Latin prose writer, for Caesar was, like Napoleon, only incidentally a writer.
Was it any wonder that in the absence of such a least the genius of the language in honoring the great
stylists? and that, as Cicero himself, including Cicero Readers accustomed to ask not what,
but how he wrote? Habit and pedantry accomplished then, what had started the power of language.
Cicero's contemporaries were incidentally Understandably, in this strange idolatry far less
biased than many of the later. The style dominated American Cicero probably a generation through
the Roman lawyer world as good as the far worse of Hortensius done: but the most important men, For
example, Caesar, but always kept them aloof, and among the younger generation suggested for all fresh
and lively talents, the most determined opposition to those hermaphroditic and feeble rhetoric. Man
missing language in Cicero scarcity and severity, the jokes in life, in the arrangement of clarity
and structure, but above all in the eloquence, the fire that makes the speaker. started instead
of the Rhodian eclectic you to go back to the true Attic, especially on Lysias and Demosthenes,
and sought a more vigorous and manly eloquence in Rome to naturalize. This direction were at the
ceremony, but stiff Marcus Junius Brutus (85-42 669-712), the two political Partisan Marcus Caelius
Rufus (672-706 82-48) and Gaius Curio Scribonius († 705 49), both as a speaker full of spirit
and life, also known as a poet Calvus (672-706 82-48), the literary luminary of the younger speakers
circuit, and the serious and conscientious Gaius Asinius Pollio (76-4 678-757 AD). Undeniably,
this was more recent speech literature Flavor and more spirit than in the rock of Saxon and Cicero,
taken together, however, we are not able to measure how far below the storms of the revolution
that this whole richly talented group with the sole exception of Pollio carried off quickly,
the bacteria still better development reached. The time was measured them too short. The new
monarchy began trying to make the speech of the war and suppressed political speech very soon.
Since then the child was probably still kind of pure lawyer pleas in literature detained,
but the higher oratory and speech literature that rests entirely on the political Drive went,
even with the necessary and forever to the grave. Finally developed in the aesthetic literature
of the time the artistic treatment of a professional scientific Materials in the form of stylized
dialogue, as the Greeks very common and occasionally had already occurred earlier in the Romans.
In particular, Cicero tried many times in the representation of rhetorical and philosophical materials
in this form and in the fusion of the textbook with the reading book. His main works are the
'From the speakers' (written 699 55), including the history of Roman eloquence (the dialogue
'Brutus', written 708 46) and to connect other small rhetorical essays complement, and the writing
'by the state' (Written in 700 54), making the font 'from the laws' (written 702? 52) according
to Platonic Pattern is set here. There are no great works of art, but undoubtedly those Works
in which the merits of the author and his most prominent defects in the least. The rhetorical
writings reach far from the doctrinal and conceptual rigor Sharpness of the Herennius dedicated to rhetoric,
but it contained a wealth of practical Trustee and administrator experience anecdotes of all
kinds in light and tasteful representation and solve the problem, in fact, an amusing treatise. The
writing by the State into a quaint, historical and philosophical hybrid structure with the basic
idea that the existing constitution of Rome much the ideal sought by the philosophers state order
was, of course, just as a unphilosophical as unhistorical, by the way not even the Author strange
idea, but was understandably popular and was. The scientific Base of these rhetorical and political
writings of Cicero, of course, is quite the Greeks and other individual, for example, the large
effect in the final document from the State, The Dream of Scipio is actually borrowed from them, but
the same is so far a relative Originality, as well as the processing Roman local color, and
the state Self-esteem, which the Romans to the Greeks over, however, was entitled to the editor
to face even with a certain independence his Greek masters had. The type of conversation is neither
the real Cicero Fragedialektik of the best Greek Art of real dialogue or conversational Diderot
and Lessing, but the major groups Crassus and Antony to the lawyers and the uniting of the older
and younger statesmen Circle of Scipio give it a lively and important part, right back rules of
historical relations and clever anecdotes and points of rest for the scientific Discussion. The
style is well worked through and refined as in the speeches bestgeschriebenen and so far more enjoyable
than this, as the author not often a futile start takes the pathos. If this philosophical colored
rhetorical and political writings Cicero's are not without merit, however, fell by the compiler completely,
when he in the involuntary idleness of his final years (709, 710, 45, 44) on the actual Philosophy
was and with as much peevishness as haste in a few months a philosophical library together
wrote. The recipe was very simple. In crude imitation popular Aristotelian writings, in which
the dialogue form mainly for Developing and critiquing the various older systems was used sewing
Cicero the same problem treated Epicurean, Stoic and syncretic writings, as they came into his
hand or, were, together with a so-called dialogue, without of more to do than to any part, from
the rich collection of prefaces for future Works, which he had located, the new book advanced introduction,
partly a certain popularization, by einflocht Roman examples and relationships, perhaps also to indecent,
but the writer as the reader more familiar objects, in ethics, for example, the rhetorical decorum;
strayed, and partly that of debasement, without which neither the philosophical thinking nor only
to philosophical knowledge unexploded, quickly and boldly working writer dialectical Lines of thought
not be reproduced. In this way, because of course, could very quickly Amount of thick books
are - "there are copies," the author wrote about a self its fertility astonished friends, "they
give me little trouble, for I was only the Words about it and I have in abundance ", however, was
nothing more to say than;. But who In such writings studied classical productions, which would
be highly recommended in literary take pains to things of a beautiful silence. There was the lively
Sciences Only live in one: it was the Latin philology. The scale of Stilo Building linguistic
and factual research within the Latin folk area was expanded, especially by his students Varro
in the grandest manner. It appeared comprehensive Through revisions to the entire vocabulary,
especially Figulus' weitschichtige grammatical Commentaries and Varro's great work 'of the
Latin language', grammatical and linguistic history Monographs, such as Varro's writings from the
Latin language, on the synonyms of the age of the characters, about the origin of the Latin language; scholia
to the older Literature, particularly to Plautus, literary history works, poet biographies, studies
on the earlier stage, the scenic division of Plautus comedies and the authenticity of the same.
The Real Latin philology, which the entire ancient history and pulled the precipitated from the
practical jurisprudence religious right in their circle, was summarized in Varro's fundamental and
for all times remained fundamentally 'antiquities the human and the divine things' (published
687-709 67 and 45). The first half 'of human affairs' described the prehistory of Rome, the city
and land allocation, the science of the years, months and days, and finally the public acts
at home and in war, in the second half 'of the divine things', the civil theology, the nature
and importance of expert colleges of the holy places, religious Festivals, the sacrificial and votive
offerings, finally, the gods themselves clearly developed. This came out of a number of monographs
- for example on the origin of the Roman people, about coming from Troy Roman families, the
districts - as a major and more independent supplement the magazine 'The Life of the Roman
people', a remarkable Attempt at a Roman customs history, a picture of the domestic financial and
cultural status designed in the king, the first Republican, the Punic and in recent times. This
work Varro rest on such a versatile and in its way such a great empirical Knowledge of the Roman world and
its Hellenic border area, as never before-not even after another has owned the Romans and to
the vivid perception of things and the have studied the literature contributed equally, the praise
of his contemporaries was well deserved, Varro that his foreign-oriented in their own world compatriots
in the homeland and the Romans taught to know who and where they were. Criticism, however,
and one system will search in vain. The Greek customer seems pretty dim flowed from sources
and there are traces, that even in the Roman writer of the influence of the historical novel
of its time was not free. The material is well classified in a comfortable and balanced framework,
but methodically neither developed nor treated and all effort, tradition and custom Observation
process are balanced, but neither of Varro's scientific work some blind faith to the tradition still acquit
impractical scholasticism ^ 19 The imitation of the Greek philology is in imitation of more defects
than the Benefits the same as it is above all the Etymologisieren on mere appeal towards both
Varro himself as in the other language scholars, this time in the pure charade and often downright
silliness runs in the 20th ^ In their empirical security and abundance, as in its empirical inadequacy
and unmethodical Varronian reminds strongly of the English National Philology and finds its center
in this ebenwie the study of older Stage. That the monarchical literature in opposition to
this language, the empirical Rule of language development, was already noticed. It is highly
significant that on the Forefront of modern grammarians is no less a man than Caesar himself, who in his
Minutes of the analogy (published 696-704 68 and 50) it first took to force the free speech under
the power of the law. -------------------------------------------------- ------ ^ 19 A remarkable
example is in the writing of agriculture, the general debate (1 2) over the cattle, with nine
times nine divisions of the animal husbandry teaching, with the "incredible" But "true" fact
that the mares Olisipo (Lisbon) fertilized by the wind, even with its strange mixture of philosophical,
historical and agricultural Notes. ^ 20 heralded Varro facere ago by facies, because who does something
to the cause a considerable There, Volpe, the fox, after Stilo of volar Pedibus than Fliegefuß;
Gaius Trebatius, a philosophical lawyer this time, from Sacra sacellum cella; Figulus frater aged
fere and so on. These drivers, not the few, but as a main element of the philological Literature
of the time appears, the greatest similarity to the way one until recently Philology operation
before the insight into the body language here, the empiricists, the Craft hung up. --------------------------------------------------
------ In addition to this uncommon Alertness in the field of philology is the low activity
in the other sciences on.


"Nay, they are not all bad, Sir," continued the young girl, gravely; "the Spriggans, who guard
the buried treasures of the giants, have often helped a poor man out of their store; or, at
least, 'tis said so."

"And the giants--are they all dead?"

"Yes, indeed, Sir, long ago," answered the damsel; "though that they lived here once is true
enough. There's Bonza's Chair, you must have passed before the fog came on, and could not but
have noticed; and the hurling-stones he used to throw for pastime with his brother, they are
to be seen still; but all that about his having such long arms that he could snatch the sailors
from the decks of ships as they went by, is, in my judgment, but an old wife's tale, and I
don't credit it. There, see, Sir; the fog is thinning; that is the castle yonder. When you
see it thus in air it is a sign of storm."

The mist, instead of lifting, was growing less dense above, as it melted before the rays of
the sun, and the ruin which Richard had seen from the hill-range was now once more visible,
without the pedestal of rock on which it was placed. It was a glorious sight, though weird
and spectral, and the young painter halted in mute admiration. The scene seemed scarcely of
the earth at all.

"Most folks are pleased with that when they first see it," remarked his companion, with the
flattered air of one who exhibits some wonder of his own to a well-pleased stranger. "You are
very lucky, Sir; it is not often one gets so good a view."

"I am lucky, too, in having so fair a guide to show it me," said Richard, gallantly. "There
is a church in air too: what is that?"

"That is Gethin church, Sir. It stands all by itself, a mile from the village; but folks say
that the tower was first built for a landmark for the ships, and that the church and church-yard
were added afterward."

"Then people die here, do they, even in this land of dreams?" said Richard, half to himself.

"Die, Sir? Oh yes," answered the young girl, sadly; "my own mother died two years ago, and
lies buried there in yonder lonesome place. But it is not usual for Gethin folks to die so
young, except by shipwreck."

"Are there many wrecks here, then?"

"Yes, Sir, and will be to all time; our church-yard is half full of drowned men. On the nights
before storm, up yonder, you may hear them calling out each other's names."

"Have you ever heard them?"

"Not I, Sir, thanks be to Heaven. I would not venture there at night for the best cargo that
ever came to Turlock."

"Where is Turlock?"

"The port there behind us, Sir; you can see the houses now, but not the harbor. It winds beneath
the cliff, so that a ship can scarcely make it, save in smooth weather, though, when it once
does so, it is safe enough. To see the great green waves rush in and turn, and turn, and waste
themselves in their wild fury, as though they searched for it in anger--ah! it's an awful sight."

"That is in winter-time only, I suppose?"

"Nay, Sir; we have storms at other seasons. Whenever I see such a sign as the castle without
the crag--it's all clear now, you see, because the wind is rising--then am I thankful that
my father is no sailor. Most folk are such at Gethin that are not miners."

"Then your father is a miner, is he?"

"No, Sir, not now, though he once was. Every body knows John Trevethick about here, and why
he don't work underground."

"How was that, then?" inquired Richard, with interest. "You must remember I am a stranger,
and know nothing."

"Well, Sir, it was years ago, and before I was born. Father was just married, though he was
not a young man for a bridegroom, and was down Turlock pit-hole with Harry Coe (Solomon's father),
putting in shot for blasting. They had worked underground together for five-and-twenty years,
and were fast friends, though Coe was an older man, and a widower, with Solomon almost of age.
They were deep down in the shaft, and one at a time was all that the man at the windlass above
could haul up; and they had put in their shot, and given them the signal. One was to go up
first, of course, and then the second to light the match, and follow him with all speed. Now,
while they were still both at the bottom, it struck Coe that the match was too long, and he
took a couple of stones, a flat and a sharp one, to cut it shorter. He did cut it shorter,
but at the same time kindled the match. Both shouted their loudest, and sprang at the basket,
but the man at the windlass could not lift the double weight. You see, Sir, it was certain
death to both of them, unless one should give way. Then Coe jumped out, crying to father 'Go
aloft, John. In one minute I shall be in heaven.' It was he who had caused the disaster, and
therefore, as he doubtless thought, should be the one to suffer for it; besides, he reflected,
perhaps, that he was an old man, and had no bride at home to mourn for him; still, it was a
noble deed, and I never denied it."

"Denied it!" exclaimed Richard; "I should think not. Why should you?" and he looked up with
wonder into his companion's face. It was one blush from brow to chin.

"Well, Sir," continued she, disregarding his interruption, "my father was hurried up; and as
he looked over the basket the charge exploded, and the great stones flew up and blackened his
face. In a minute more he was safe above-ground."

"But the poor man below?"

"He was dead, Sir. It could not have been otherwise. Father took it so to heart that he never
did a day's work underground again. And when I was born, a few months afterward, I was christened
Harry--though that's a lad's name--in memory of the friend that saved his life by the sacrifice
of his own."

"He might well have done that, and even more," said Richard, "if more could have been done."

"That's just what father says, Sir," answered the young girl, quietly. "But when things have
happened so long ago--before one was born--they don't come home to one quite so strong, you
see. Father keeps not only his old gratitude, but his old tastes. He cares more for mines and
machinery and such like than for any thing else; he is a better mechanic than any in Turlock,
where I have just been to the watch-maker's to get him some steel springs. You should see the
locks he makes, and the rings he turns. He will be so pleased if you ask him to show them to you."

"I shall certainly ask him to do so, if I get the chance," said Richard, eagerly. "Is that
your house with the pretty garden?"

"No, Sir; that's the parson's. Nobody can get flowers to grow as he does. The next house at
the top of the hill is ours."

"Why, I thought that would be the inn!" exclaimed Richard, looking at the little white-washed
house, with its sign-board, or what seemed to be such, swinging in the rising breeze.

"It is the inn," said his companion, quietly, but not without a roguish smile. "Father keeps
the Gethin Castle, although he has many other trades."

"And is that he, at the door yonder?" inquired Richard, pointing to a tall, thick-set man of
middle age, who was standing beneath the little portico, with a pipe in his mouth.

"No, Sir, that is not father," replied the girl, with sudden gravity; "that is Solomon Coe."

CHAPTER XII.

A PERILOUS CLIMB.

"Is father in?" inquired the young girl of Solomon, as he stood in the doorway, without moving
aside to let Richard pass into the house.

"No, he is not," returned the person addressed, his keen blue eye fixed suspiciously on the
stranger. "As you were so long on your errand, he gave up his lock-work, and has gone off to
the pit. He said he had never known you loiter so."

"I did not loiter at all," returned the maiden, indignantly; "if it had not been for the fog,
I should have been home an hour ago; but one can't walk through wool as if it were air. You
had the fog here yourselves, hadn't ye?"

It was strange to note the change in the girl's speech; not only were her air and tone quite
different from what they had been--her modesty or shyness exchanged for a confidence and even
a touch of defiance--but her phraseology had become blunt and provincial.

"Well, any way he was angered, Harry," returned Solomon, "until I told him of the new copper
lode, as I whispered to you of this morning (you were the first to learn it, Harry), when off
he set, in good-humor enough with all the world.--You'll come across John Trevethick, if you
want him, young man, over at Dunloppel, though I doubt whether you will find him much of a
customer--unless you are in the iron and steel line."

"I am in the knife-and-fork line just at present," answered Richard, good-humoredly; "and,
if you will be good enough to move aside, I should like to order my dinner."

"I ax pardon," said Solomon, sulkily, withdrawing himself from the doorway. "I did not know
I was hindering custom.--Who is this young spark, Harry?" added he, in a low tone, as the other
entered the house.

"Well, he's a young gentleman, Solomon, as you could see very well if you chose," answered
the girl, angrily. "He don't look much like a bagman, I think, any ways. I am sure father would
not like you to treat his customers in that fashion."

"I am sure he wouldn't like your escorting such customers over Turlock Down alone."

"That's father's business, and not yours, at present, Solomon," retorted the girl, tartly;
"and perhaps it never may be yours. You take as much upon yourself because of your new copper
vein as if it was gold."

"Nay, don't say that, Harry," replied the other, with an admiring look, from which every trace
of ill feeling seemed to have departed. "If it were gold, I should be more pleased upon your
account than my own, you may depend upon it. You think I am jealous, now, of yonder bit of
a lad, but----"

"I think nothing of the kind," answered Harry, impetuously.

"Well, well," returned Solomon, soothingly; "then we'll say no more about it. Trevethick wanted
me to be away with him to pit, but I said: 'No; I'll wait for Harry, and bring her with me
to Dunloppel.' It's a great find, my girl, and may be the making of us all."

"Nay, a walk to Turlock and back is enough for one day's work, Solomon; and, besides, I'm wet
through with the fog, and must change my things.--Hannah! Hannah!" and, raising her voice to
landlady pitch, she addressed some one within doors, "didn't you hear the parlor bell ringing?--So
never mind me, Solomon; I dare say I shall hear enough about the lode when you and father come
back;" and with that, and a careless nod of her shapely head, the young girl pushed past her
disappointed swain, and ran up stairs.

The Gethin Castle Inn was a much better house of entertainment than might have been looked
for in a spot so secluded from the world, and far from the great arteries of travel. A coast-road
passed through the little village leading from Turlock to the now almost disused harbor at
Polwheel, and that was the sole means of getting to Gethin save on foot or horseback. There
was no traffic--to be called such--in the district. Dunloppel, always a productive mine, was,
like its more famous brother, Botallack, situated on the sea-coast, so that neither road nor
tramway had been created for its needs; the land about was barren, except in minerals; and
not a tree was to be seen for miles. Indeed, with the exception of the parson's garden, there
was scarcely a cultivated spot in the whole parish. The graceful sprays of the sea-tamarisk,
however, flourished every where, in lieu of foliage, and in places where certainly foliage
is seldom seen. Not only did it grow luxuriantly on banks and similar exposed positions, as
though the roaring sea-winds, which cut off all other vegetation, favored and nourished it,
but waved its triumphant pennant upon walls and house-tops. Stony places have a special attraction
for this weed; and it takes root so readily that the story of its importation into Gethin might
have had more foundation in fact than some other local legends equally credited. Only a few
years back the plant had been unknown there, but a wagoner of the place, on his return journey,
had plucked a sprig of it in some locality where it grew, to serve the purpose of a whip; and,
when he reached home, had thrown it carelessly on the top of an earthen wall, where it had
struck root, and multiplied.

The cliffs, and the sea, and, above all, the ruined castle upon the rock, were the sole attractions
then which Gethin possessed--and that they did attract was an unceasing subject of wonder to
its inhabitants. Whatever could the fine folk see in a heap of stones or a waste of water,
to bring them there for hundreds of miles, was a mystery unexplained; but the villagers were
no more unwilling than professional spiritualists to take a practical advantage of the Inexplicable.
In the winter they reaped the harvest of the sea, or explored the bowels of the earth; in the
summer they transformed themselves into "guides," and set up curiosity-shops of shells and
minerals; while, to supply accommodation to the increasing throng of Visitors, John Trevethick,
who had always a keen eye for profit, had leased the village beer-house, and enlarged it to
the dimensions of a respectable inn. Even now, however, the house exhibited a curious ignorance
or disregard of the tastes of those for whose use it was built--the windows of all its sitting-rooms
opened upon the straggling street, while the glorious prospect of cliff and ocean which it
commanded behind was totally ignored. Thus Richard Yorke found himself located in an apartment
which, though otherwise tolerably comfortable, might as well have been in Bloomsbury for the
view which it afforded. The walls were ornamented by colored pictures of the Royal Exchange
and of the Thames Tunnel, London; and upon the mantel-piece was an equestrian figure (in china)
of Field-marshal the Duke of Wellington as he appears upon the arch of Constitution Hill. The
only attempt at "local coloring" was found in the book-case--composed of two boards and a cat's
cradle--in which three odd volumes of the "Tales of the Castle" had been placed, no doubt with
reference to the grand old ruin whose tottering walls beckoned "the quality" to Gethin.

His simple meal of bacon and eggs having been dispatched, and gratitude failing to invest with
interest the lean pigs that searched in vain for cabbage-stalks, or the dyspeptic fowls that
were moulting digestive pebbles in the street without, Richard lit a cigar, and prepared to
saunter forth. The fog had vanished; all the sky was blue and bright. The keen and gusty air
increased in him that elasticity of spirit with which luncheon at all stages of their life-journey
inspires mankind.

"I suppose," said he, looking in at the window of the room he had just left, and where Hannah,
who was waiting-maid as well as cook, except "in the season," was clearing away the remnants
of the repast, "one can get to the castle without a guide?"

"Nay, Sir; you must get the key first, for the man don't bide at the cottage, except in summer-time,
and the gate has got spikes at the top. Miss Harry has got it somewheres, if you'll wait a minute."

Miss Harry herself brought it out to him. She had changed her attire for what was an even more
becoming one than that she had worn before, and her bright brown hair was arranged with greater
care, and perhaps with more view to effect.

"The guide has not begun his duties yet, Sir," she explained, with a smile; "and so we keep
the key here. You can't fail to find the road; but the precipice-path is a bit awkward in a
wind like this, and you must be careful to take the right one; the old ledge was broken in
by the storm last month, and has an ugly gap."

"But why not show me the way yourself, Miss Harry?" pleaded the young fellow. "You know how
easily I lose myself; and if I should come to harm, by taking the wrong turning, you would
be sorry, I'm sure."

"Indeed I should, Sir," returned the young girl, simply; "and I doubt whether you will find
any body else in the village. This news from the mine has taken them all off, it seems; and
you wouldn't know rock from castle, unless you had one to tell you, they are so alike."

The fact was that Harry's conscience smote her for her wish to be of service to this handsome
young fellow, since she had just refused to accompany Solomon to Dunloppel, on the score of
fatigue. It was level walking, or nearly so, to the pit-mouth, and it was a climb of many hundreds
of feet to the ruin. Still, she felt no longer tired, if she had done so a while ago, and the
stranger might come to harm without a guide.

"But you're not coming without a bonnet?" exclaimed Richard.

"Nay, Sir; I should come home without one if I went up yonder in such a wind as this," answered
she, laughing; "and I recommend you to fasten on your hat, if you wish to see it again."

"But you'll catch cold," urged Richard.

"We don't mind air at Gethin, Sir; and this shawl will cover my head, if that's all."

It really was Harry Trevethick's custom to go bareheaded in fine weather about her own home,
though, perhaps, the consciousness that she never looked so well in even her Sunday head-gear,
as with her own ample tresses for a covering, may have influenced her resolve. Chignons were
unknown at that time, and never had the young man beheld such wealth of gold-tinged locks as
that which blew about his fair companion's brow, and presently streamed out behind her, as
they neared the cliffs, and met the full force of that Atlantic breeze. It blew freshly and
shrilly enough up the winding gorge through which they had to descend to the foot of the castled
rock; but by the time they reached the beach the wind had risen to a gale. They stopped a minute
within shelter of a hollowed cliff to view the place. It was a noble spectacle. The great waves
came roaring in, and dashed themselves against the walls of slate in sheets of foam, to fall
back baffled and groaning. They had eaten the cliff away in two dark frowning spots, which
his guide said were caverns, approachable at low-water; but the rock itself on which the castle
stood defied them; they had only succeeded in insulating it, except for a narrow tongue of
land, which now formed the sole access to it from the shore. Even without any historical or
poetic association, the object before them--rising bare and sheer into the air to such a height--on
which a swarm of gulls, shrunk to the size of bees, were clanging faintly, was grand and striking;
but the place had been the hold of knights and kings a thousand years ago and more. The young
girl pointed out to Richard where the main-land cliff had once projected so as to meet the
rock, and showed him on the former's brow some fragments of rude masonry. "That was the ancient
barbacan," she said, "once joined to the castle by a draw-bridge, as was supposed, which, when
drawn up, left Gethin so that neither man nor beast could approach it without permission of
its defenders. Even now, with none to hinder one, it is a steep and perilous way, especially
in a wind like this. Perhaps it would be better not to venture."

"But you shall take my arm, Harry," said Richard; "only let me pin your shawl about your head
first, lest those long locks of yours blind us both."

"I can do that myself, Sir, thank you," said Harry, austerely; then added, with a smile, to
reassure him--for why should she be angry?--"you would only have pricked your fingers, as Solomon
does. No man is clever with his hands, excepting father."

"And you say that to a painter, do you, Miss Harry--a man who lives by his handiwork?"

"I forgot that," said Harry, penitently; "besides, I was only saying what Solomon says."

"That was the gentleman who took me for a peddler, eh?" said Richard. "He is not quite so wise
as his namesake--is he?"

"Oh yes, Sir; Solomon Coe has a long head: the longest, father says, of any in these parts.
He has made his own way famously in the world--or, rather, under it, for he is a miner. He
used to work in the coal-pits up Durham way, but--"

"Is that why he looks so black?" interposed Richard, laughing.

"Nay, Sir, I didn't notice that," said Harry, simply. "Very likely he was down Dunloppel this
morning. It half belongs to him, father says; and if this lode turns out well, he will be very
rich."

"And your father would be glad of that, would he not?"

"Yes, indeed, Sir; for Solomon is the son of his old friend and preserver, as I told you."

"But it would not please you quite so much--eh, Miss Harry?"

"Not so much as father--certainly not," answered the girl, gravely. "It seems to me folks are
rich enough when they don't spend half they get; just as other folk--like Mr. Carew, who owns
all about here--are poor enough, with all their wealth, who pay out of their purse twice what
comes into it."

"Mr. Carew is known here for a spendthrift, is he, then?"

"Well, Sir, it's only gossip, for he has never set foot here in his life, I reckon; but, from
what we hear, he must fling away his money finely. However, as father says, there's one excuse
for him--he has neither chick nor child of his own. Eh, but you're looking white, Sir; Gethin
air is apt to nip pretty sharp those who are not accustomed to it. You had best not try the
castle to-day."

"Yes, yes; we will go at once," cried Richard, impatiently; and, drawing the girl's hesitating
arm through his own, he moved rapidly along the wind-swept way. Under the circumstances, there
really was some danger; but, had there been twice the peril, he would not have shrunk from
it at that moment--the chance observation of the young girl about Carew's having no offspring
had turned his blood to a white heat of wrath. Although his mother had studiously instilled
in him how foolish it was to indulge in any expectations with respect to the Squire, he had
always entertained some secret hopes in that quarter until he had proved their fallacy by experiment;
and the failure of his expedition to Crompton rankled in his mind. He regarded his father with
the bitterest resentment; he did not altogether forgive his mother for the share which she
had had (through her misrepresentation of her own position in the register) in depriving him
of his birth-right, and he felt himself at odds with all the world. He had come to Gethin partly
on account of what Parson Whymper had told him of its picturesqueness, but chiefly because
it was an out-of-the-way spot, unfrequented by that society with whom he had such good grounds
for quarrel, and where he was not likely to have his pride wounded afresh by any reference
to his position; and yet he had not been two hours in the place before the only person in it
in whom he was likely to be interested had galled him keenly. He could not long be angry with
her, however, for her involuntary offense, nor angry at all in such fair company. She clung
to him, perforce, upon the narrow causeway, and shrank with him into whatever shelter was afforded,
here and there, upon their toilsome path, when they took breath, and gathered strength together
for once again confronting that pitiless blast. If either of them had known how fierce a gale
was imminent, they would not certainly have ventured upon such an expedition; but, having done
so, they were resolved to go through with it. Harry had plenty of courage, and fought her way
with practiced eye and hand along the winding ledge; and Richard was not one to own himself
vanquished by difficulties before which a woman did not quail. Twice and thrice, however, they
were both driven back again round some comparatively sheltered corner by the mere fury of the
wind, which battled with them as stubbornly as though it were the disembodied spirits, of the
ancient defenders of the place; and when, mechanically, and almost of necessity, Richard's
arm sought the young girl's waist, whose garments made it more difficult for her to advance
than for him, she did not reject its welcome aid. Then, just as his disengaged hand was clinging
to a pinnacle of rock, his hat blew off, exactly as she had predicted, and his dark curls mixed
with hers in wild confusion. Thus, foot by foot, they won their way, and reached at last the
iron-spiked door, the only work of modern hands on that gray rock. This screened them from
the gale; and, as they stood a while to rest beneath its shelter, she showed him what a handsome
key her father had made for it, with cunning wards, more suitable for a banker's safe than
for such ancient relics as they guarded, and told him how the gate was put there to exclude
the summer visitors, who would otherwise enter without fee.

"Nay, but I will pay my fee," said Richard, gallantly; and, since their cheeks were almost
touching as it was, the debt was easily discharged on her ripe lips.

"For shame, Sir!" cried the girl, indignantly; and there was something in her face and voice
which showed him that her anger was not feigned. "I am sorry I brought you here, mistaking
you for a gentleman. Here is the key, Sir; but I go back alone." And she freed herself roughly
from his arm, and turned to go.

"For Heaven's sake, don't!" cried Richard, earnestly. "You may call me any thing you please,
but do not let my rudeness prove your peril. I was rude, but, on my honor, I did not intend
to be so. I meant no harm, although I see I have vexed you. Forgive me, pray; I did not mean
to be either ungenerous or ungrateful. Is it thought so very wrong at Gethin--even with such
great temptation--"

"Yes, Sir, it is," she broke in, vehemently; "and I was wrong to come with you."

"Nay, don't say that," pleaded the young fellow. "How could you be wrong to do so great a kindness
to a stranger as you have done to me? It was my sense of it--my heartfelt sense, believe me,
of the trouble and toil you have undergone for my sake; and I don't deny, Harry, your beauty
too, of which I have never seen the like. But there, I am offending you again. Pray, come into
the shelter; it makes me sick to see you in such danger;" and to make room for her, and at
the same time to stand as much apart from her as possible, he stepped back, forgetting the
scanty space on which he stood, and--fell!

A yard--a mile--he scarcely could say which, so overwhelming for the instant was his sense
of peril! He only knew that he was flying through space. Then, suddenly, his feet found foothold,
and his hands clung to the gray rock, and the driving wind beat on his body ceaselessly, and
seemed to nail him where he clung.

Was it the scream of gull, or piercing cry of some spirit of the air, that rang through his
brain? or was it, indeed, the agonizing shriek of a woman? He heard it plainly; but Harry never
knew whether she had shrieked or not. She was aware of nothing except that this unhappy man
was perishing--had, perhaps, already perished--for her sake; through fear for her safety, and
his wish not to give her offense. She was on her knees upon the ledge, and craning over it
with horror-stricken face the next instant, and could see him plainly. His feet had fallen
upon that very part of the old path which the storms of last winter had torn and jagged away.
A few jolting fragments of rock were all that was left of it--insufficient even for a practiced
cragsman to make his way along on either side. His head--she could not see his face--was but
a yard beneath her; but how could she get at him?

"I am here," she cried. "Be of good courage, Sir."

She had nothing to offer in the way of help at the moment; but she was well aware of what vital
importance it was that he should not lose heart. She lay down with her face on the bare rock,
and strove to reach him; but, even had her arm been long enough, he had no hand to spare to
clasp her own. The whole force of the gale was full upon her, and carried her hair to windward
like a whip.

"Do not come too near the edge, brave girl," cried Richard, beginning to be conscious of her
efforts. "Is there no rope nor ladder?"

"Yes," answered the girl. "Keep heart. Do not look down. I must be five minutes gone--not more."

She was up, and with the gate-key in her hand, ere she had done speaking. Great Heaven! would
that door never open? How her trembling hands missed the keyhole; and when the key was in,
how the rusty wards opposed its turning. Then when the door was opened, it seemed as though
the winds had husbanded their strength behind it for one wild sortie, with such fury did they
rush out to beat her back. But she struggled in somehow, and on across the howling waste of
clifftop to a little hut of stone, which formed the covering of a well. There, as she expected,
she found a rope coiled up, which was used to draw up water in an iron cup, to gratify the
curiosity of visitors as much as to quench their thirst; for it was strange, indeed, to meet
with fresh water there, the presence of which, no doubt, had caused the place to be chosen
for a fastness in old time. With this she hurried back; and fixing one end firmly round the
door-post, she looped the other in a slip-knot, and lowered it carefully to Richard. "Put this
beneath your arms," she said; "the rope is strong and firmly fastened. You must climb up by
it, hand over hand."

It was not so easy a task for the young artist as for a Gethin man; but he was strong and active;
and where his chief difficulty lay, which was at the clifftop, the girl's willing arms assisted
him.

"You have saved my life, Harry," were his first words, when he stood in safety. "How shall
I ever repay you?"

Then this brave girl, who had never faltered where action was necessary, began to sob and cry.

He took her hand and covered it with kisses. "I may kiss this," said he, plaintively, "may I not?"

She did not withdraw her fingers, but neither did she cease from weeping. Her grief seemed
to be something more than that resulting from the tension of strong feelings suddenly relaxed.

"Let me go home, let me go home!" was her sole reply to all his entreaties that she should
rest a while, and strive to calm herself. It was with difficulty that he could support her
down the steep, so violently did she tremble. When they reached the foot of it she turned to
Richard and murmured: "I have one favor to ask of you, Sir. Will you grant it to me?"

"Most certainly, dear girl. It would be gross ingratitude indeed if I did not."

"Then never speak," returned she, earnestly, "of what has occurred to-day. Never show by your
manner that you feel--as you say--grateful for what service I have been able to be to you.
Let not father nor Solomon ever know."

"It will be very hard, Harry, to keep silence--to owe you so great a debt, without acknowledging
it," said Richard, tenderly; "but, since such is your wish, I will obey it."

"Thank you, Sir. And now I will go home alone. I was deterred by the wind, the steepness--any
thing you please--from accompanying you up yonder; remember that. You will not mind waiting
a while behind me?"

"Surely not," said Richard, wonderingly.

And the next moment she had hurried round an angle of the main-land cliff, and was gone.

CHAPTER XIII.

FISHING FOR AN INVITATION.

"What a strange girl!" muttered Richard, as he stood in the same hollowed rock, alone, where
Harry and he had first taken shelter. "What a compound of strength and weakness--as my mother
says all girls are, though I have never known them strong before! How eager she seemed to part
company with me, and how anxious to get home without me--and I am never to speak of what has
happened, to her father nor to Solomon! This Solomon is her unwelcome wooer, that is clear.
He is neither young nor handsome--nor attractive in any way in her eyes, I reckon. And what
a beauty she is, to be thrown away on such a boor!"

The recollection that the door at the top of the rock had been left open, and the key inside
it, here flashed upon him. "She will be sorry about that key," he thought; "and glad and grateful
to me if I go back and fetch it. The old man will be wroth with her for having trusted a stranger
with such a treasure. This Trevethick must be an ingenious fellow, and a long-sighted one,
no doubt. It was he who applied to Parson Whymper for a lease of the old mine, if I remember
right. Perhaps the chaplain may help me to get it him, for I owe him something for his daughter's
sake. The idea of his having such a daughter! What rubbish is this we artists talk of birth
and beauty! Neither in life nor on canvas have I ever seen one so fair as this girl." He meditated
for a moment, then cried out, angrily: "Heaven curse me, if I harm her! What an ungrateful
villain should I be! If there be a Gehenna, and but one man in it, I should deserve to be that
man!"

Then he began to climb the rock. He did not tarry this time for breath nor shelter, though
the wind had no whit abated, but trod right on till he reached the spot where the catastrophe
which had been so near fatal to him had occurred. "It was a narrow escape," mused he, looking
down upon the place, not without a slight shudder. "What odd things come into the head when
Death is whispering in the ear! If it had not been for my fair guide, where should I have been
by this time? Beneath the sea, for certain. But what else? How strange it seems that if there
is any 'else,' no one, from the beginning of time till now, of all the millions who have experienced
it, should have come back to tell us! And yet there was a man who came back from the grave
once. Who was he? I recollect his picture by Haydon; his talk must have been better worth listening
to than that of most. Is nothing true that one hears or reads, I wonder? Here is where I kissed
her! I wouldn't kiss her again, if I had the chance; I swear I would not. I am a good boy now--all
morality, if not religion--for they do say that hell is paved with good intentions--which seems
hard. If one is to be punished for one's wicked thoughts--even if they do not bear fruit--it
is surely but reasonable that one's good ones--even if never carried into practice--should
be set down on the credit side of the ledger."

With an exclamation of contempt or impatience, he turned from the dizzy sight of cliff and
sea, and shouldered his way through the wind-kept doorway on to the open summit of the rock.
It was a wild waste place indeed, yet not without ample indications of having been inhabited
in days of old. Low but massive walls sketched out the ground-plan of many a chamber, the respective
uses of which could only now be guessed at. But beneath one broken arch there was a heap of
rude steps with a stone something on it, which Richard rightly imagined had once formed an
altar. Man had worshiped there thirteen hundred years ago. Nay, not far off, and in the very
centre of this desolate hold, there was a burial-ground, with a low wall of earth about it,
which neither time, nor the curious barbarism which marks our epoch, had much defaced. The
archaeologists had been there, of course, and discovered evidence which had satisfied them
of the presence of the remains of their fellow-creatures; but with that they had been content.
The dead had, for the most part, been left undisturbed in their rocky graves, to await the
summons in the faith of which--and perhaps even for it--they had died. For these were King
Arthur's men (as Richard had read)--the warriors who had helped the blameless king "to drive
the heathen and to slay the beast, to fell the forest and let in the sun."

The lonely desolation of the place, and its natural sublimity, combined with the recollection
of his late deadly peril, tinged the young man's thoughts with an unusual seriousness; and
yet he could not restrain the cynicism that was habitual to him whenever his attention was
compelled to solemn subjects.

"Now, are these poor folks--whose creed must have been any thing but orthodox, by all accounts--all
in eternal torments, I wonder, or only waiting to be so, for a few hundreds of years longer?
Such was my mother's friend, Joanna's, comfortable creed, and it is shared, as I understand,
by all the most excellent people. How much better (if so) would it have been for them to have
been born and cradled on this rock as sea-gulls! Gad, to dwell here and fight for a king about
whose very existence posterity is to be in doubt in this world, and then to go to the devil!
What a nightmare view of life it seems! If, an hour ago or so, things had turned out otherwise
with me, I should have solved the problem for myself. I almost wish I had. And yet it was not
so when I was clinging tooth and nail to the cliff yonder; and these folks would not have died
if they could have helped it, neither. There's something ugly in black Death that disinclines
man to woo her. This wind bites to the marrow, and I'll go. I've seen Gethin now, and there's
an end." He turned, and walked as slowly as the blast would let him toward the gate. "And yet,
if it was warmer, and summer-time," continued he, "I should like to sketch these things, or
some of them, especially if Harry were with me." He came out, and locked the door, and once
more stood in the shelter of it, with the key in his hand. "She'll be glad I went back for
this, and know that it was done for her sake. If she had but money, now--this girl--and was
a lady, and all that! Or if I could choose whom I would!" He began to descend slowly, step
by step; the furious gale forgotten; his late escape from death unremembered; one thought alone
monopolizing his mind--the thought that monopolizes all men's minds (or nearly all) at his
age. It was here that his hat had blown off, and her soft curls had played about his face;
it was there that he had first clasped her waist, and had not been rebuked. Then he fell to
thinking of all that had happened between them during the few hours that were already an epoch
in his life. Why had she looked so frightened at first seeing him? Had he seemed to come upon
her as her "fate," as some girls say? He would ask her that some day--perhaps up yonder amidst
the ruins. He had not missed the look of annoyance which she wore when Solomon had spoken to
him so roughly, nor failed to couple it with the expressions she had before made use of with
reference to Coe the elder, and the gratitude with which her father regarded his memory. This
Solomon might be a suitor who was backed by the old man, but certainly not encouraged by Harry.
Was she already engaged to him, tacitly or otherwise? It was impossible, being what she was,
that she should not have been wooed by somebody.

Richard Yorke was not one of those exacting characters who demand that the object of their
affections should never have attracted those of another; he was even reasonable enough to have
forgiven her (if necessary) for having returned them, in ignorance of the existence of a more
worthy admirer in himself. There are many more varieties of Love than even the poets have classified;
and perhaps it is in despair of dealing with this Proteus that we elders so often ignore him
in our calculations.

The day was darkening by the time Richard reached the village. Around the inn door were a group
of miners, who stared at his bare head hard enough, but gave way to him civilly. They were
talking and laughing loudly, and wiping their mouths with the backs of their hands. It was
evident that somebody had been "standing treat" in the narrow passage; and leaning their elbows
on the sill of the little bar window were more miners, each with his pint pot of ale.

"Here's luck to Trevethick and Coe," said one, "for a parting toast."

"Ha, ha, that's good!" cried another, in appreciation of this commercial epigram; "Trevethick
and Coe; to be sure."

"Trevethick and Coe, and may the copper last!"

But one, emboldened by the liquor, or naturally more audacious than the rest, put his head
and shoulders through the open window, and, making a trumpet of his two hands, whispered in
a hoarse voice, audible to every one: "And is it to be Coe and Trevethick also, Miss Harry--eh?"

Then the window was slammed down with no gentle hand, and the men went out laughing heartily,
and for the first time leaving room for Richard to pass in. He did not look toward the bar
window, but, as though he had heard nothing, walked quickly past it into the sitting-room,
which had been allotted to him. It was strange, since what he had just heard only confirmed
the suspicions which he had already entertained, that the words should give him annoyance;
but they certainly did so. What was more natural than that this inn-keeper's daughter should
be engaged to marry her father's friend--a man apparently well-to-do, and with a prospect of
doing better? What could be more unreasonable than for Mr. Richard Yorke, a young gentleman
whose only hope in life was to marry a girl--or an old woman, for that matter--with a good
fortune, to be irritated at such intelligence, especially after an acquaintance with this "Miss
Harry" of about three hours at most? After a minute or two of reflection the idea seemed to
strike even himself in the same light; for he gave a short sharp laugh, and said what a fool
he was, and then lit his pipe. Even tobacco, however, that balm of hurt minds, did not altogether
soothe him. He could think of nothing but this young girl, whose beauty had bewitched him,
and to whose courage and presence of mind he owed his life. He had sworn to himself--and there
was no necessity to repeat it--that he meant her no harm. Indeed, it would not be less than
she deserved to ask her to be his wife. Perhaps, if this mine, in which her father had a share,
should turn out well, she would not be so bad a match, even in point of money; but to this
he did not attach much importance. He was indulging in a dream, which he fondly imagined was
unselfish and honorable to himself in a high degree. Quite a virtuous glow seemed to mingle
with his ardent passion; though the fact simply was (as it often is in such cases) that, for
a personal gratification, he was prepared to barter his future prospects. He did not doubt
but that what he contemplated would be for the benefit of this young girl; he must seem like
an angel to her (for love does not always touch us with the sense of unworthiness); as, indeed,
by comparison with this man Coe, he was. His mother would be a good deal "put out," it was
true, but then she was too fond of him to be angry with him for long, far less to break with
him. He was his own master, for some time to come, at all events, for he had two hundred pounds
in his pocket.

What nonsense do the greatest philosophers sometimes discourse, when their topic is Self-interest!
It is likely enough that self-interest actuates them, and in a supreme degree. When folks are
by nature wise and prudent--or if their tastes are studious, and their vices few--or when,
above all, the brain is seasoned, and the blood moves sluggishly in the veins, then men do
act for their own advantage, and keep their eyes fixed on the main chance. But with most of
us, especially when young, self-interest, properly so called, is often but a feather's weight
in the balance of Motive. Revenge makes it kick the beam; and Passion; and even momentary Whim.
It was one of the arguments advanced by Christian men in favor of slavery, that no man would
ill-use his slave, because it was his own property; as though the lust of cruelty in a brutal
nature were, while it lasted, not ten times as strong as the lust of gain. There are moments
when a man is ready to part with not only his earthly prospects, but his hopes of heaven, rather
than be balked of an immediate satisfaction: that of striking his brother to the heart, or
growing rich by one stroke of fraud, or ruining forever the woman that loves him best; and
there are many men, in no such desperate case, whose only guide is Impulse, and whose care
for the morrow is dwarfed to nothing matched with the gratification of to-day. These are said
to have no enemies but themselves, but they have victims; and, though not apt for plots, are
often more dangerous than the most designing knaves.

Pipe after pipe smoked Richard Yorke as he sat over the fire in the deepening twilight, so
deep in thought that it quite startled him, when, suddenly looking up, he found that all was
dark. Then he rang the bell, and Hannah entered with the wished-for candles.

"Is your master in?"

"I'll see, Sir. Do you wish to see him?"

"Yes. First bring me a bottle of sherry and two glasses, then ask him to step in."

The serving-maid obeyed; and presently there was a heavy step in the passage, and in strode
John Trevethick, a man of sixty years or so, but straight as a pine, and strong as an oak.

"Your servant, Sir," said he, in a gruff voice, and with no such inclination of the head as
landlords use.

"Good-evening, Mr. Trevethick. I am afraid I'm putting you to some inconvenience by coming
to Gethin so many weeks before the usual time."

"Nay, Sir; my house is open summer and winter."

"Now I wonder is this the natural manner of this boor," thought Richard, "or has he been already
prejudiced against me by the other?--And an excellent house it is, Mr. Trevethick; I little
expected to find so good a one down here, I promise you."

"Well, I built it myself, Sir," said the landlord; "so it don't become me to say much of that.
It cost me a good bit of money, however; and it's hard to get it back, when one's season only
lasts for a month or two."

"Ah! I'm the first swallow that you've seen this year, I dare say. Well, I hope I herald a
lucky summer. Take a glass of your own sherry, will you?"

The landlord looked suspiciously at his guest: perhaps the phrase "your own sherry" smote his
conscience, knowing the price he paid for it, and what it was, and what he meant to charge;
but grunting: "Here's to you, Sir," he filled his glass, and smacked his lips over it slowly.

"Solomon has not set him against me," was Richard's conclusion. "The graceful manner of this
Cornish giant is natural to him.--You have a fine castle here, Mr. Trevethick, and nobly placed.
Indeed, I never saw the like before."

"So most folks say," answered the landlord.

"There is not much left of it, however," said Richard, smiling.

"Well, it'll last my time, at all events, and I dare say yours," was the morose reply.

"Indeed it will, and that of many a generation to come. It is seldom one sees such massive
walls. A good deal of trouble, however, seems to have been taken to prevent people from running
away with them, to judge by this;" and he held up the key.

"Well, the castle is mine, Sir--or, at least, I pay my rent for it; and, I suppose, I can do
what I like with my own. If there was no gate there, do you think any body would pay me for
viewing the place? Not they. Why, there's some parties ain't even content with the key, but
must have a guide too, or else they buttons up their pockets."

It was so impossible to misunderstand the bearing of this remark that Richard burst out into
a good-humored laugh; he was really pleased because the landlord's hint assured him that he
was in ignorance that he had had a guide. "I shall certainly pay my footing, Mr. Trevethick,
the same as if I had had an attendant--of which, however, I should have been glad at one or
two places; the wind did take my hat, and very nearly the rest of me. But what I meant by the
trouble that was taken to secure your ruins from intruders was with reference not to the door,
but to the key of it. Why, if it were a real castle, full of furniture, it could not be more
effectually guarded. You must have good lock-smiths hereabout, if that's a specimen of their work."

The icy landlord thawed again.

"Well, Sir, the fact is, I made that key with my own hands."

"You?" cried Richard, in affected astonishment. "Why, you must be a mechanical genius. Look
at the work! look at the wards!" and he scrutinized them admiringly close to the candle. "Do
take another glass, Mr. Trevethick."

"Nay, Sir; I've a friend in the parlor waiting for me," rejoined the landlord, dryly. He appeared
already to regret having given way to that momentary feeling of self-esteem.

"I wish I had," observed Richard, smiling. "It's lonely work coming down here by one's self,
and finding nobody to speak to."

There was a short pause, during which Richard was rapt in admiration of the key.

"Now, if his thick skin prove impervious to flattery," thought he, "then will I fly my last
shaft into his very gizzard."

Mr. Trevethick's skin was quite compliment-proof, if an invitation into the bar parlor was
to be the evidence of its having been pierced.

"You should come down in the summer-time, Sir," said he, coolly; "then you will find lots of
folks to talk with. At present I am afraid you must put up with your own company." And the
huge frame of the landlord was already moving toward the door.

"I am afraid so, indeed," said Richard, carelessly. "Parson Whymper ought to have known better
than to send me down here at such a time as this."

John Trevethick stopped at once, and Richard saw reflected in the glass above the fire-place
a look of intense interest. He could not have supposed so phlegmatic a face was capable of
so much expression.

"Parson who, did you say, Sir? Whymper?"

"Yes; an excellent friend of me and mine; the chaplain of Mr. Carew, of Crompton. It was he
who told me how I might fill my sketch-book with the beauties of Gethin; and added, that I
should have a hearty welcome from one John Trevethick, if I gave his name."

"And that you shall, Sir," cried the landlord, returning to the table, and striking his broad
palm upon it, to give emphasis to his words. "A friend of Mr. Whymper's should be always welcome
here. How is he, Sir? And how is Mr. Carew?"

"I have seen neither of them since I was staying at Crompton three months ago or so," said
Richard, coolly. "They were well enough then, though the Squire was doing his best, as usual,
to exhaust his constitution and his purse; and the chaplain, as usual, also, was making things
as straight as he could, and putting the skid on where he dared. But you know all about that,
Mr. Trevethick, I dare say, almost as well as I do. I am sorry you won't take another glass
of wine."

"I think I will, if you permit me to change my mind, Sir," said the other, suiting the action
to the word. "Now, the idea of your being so intimate with Parson Whymper, and having staid
at Squire Carew's! Why, the Squire's my landlord, and owns all about here--leastway, short
of Dunloppel. It's unlucky that this copper should have cropped out just beyond him, as it were."

"There is no mine here belonging to him then, eh?"

"Well, no, Sir; not, properly speaking, a mine, there ain't;" and the well-practiced hand of
the landlord shook as he put down the glass, so that it clanked against the bottle.

Richard Yorke laughed a short dry laugh, apparently at some reflection of his own.

"Well, I'm sorry you've got your friend, landlord, and therefore can not have a chat with me;
for it is evident we should find something to talk about together."

"And I'm sorry too, Sir. Though, if you wouldn't be too proud to come into our bar parlor--but
then I can scarcely ask a gentleman as has been used to Crompton to do that."

"Indeed, I shall be very pleased to come," said Richard, frankly. "I have nothing to be proud
of, I assure you; and if I had, why should I not accept the company of an honest man?"

"Very good, Sir. There's only me, and my daughter Harry, and this friend of mine, Solomon Coe.
If you'll please to walk this way."

"Let's take the bottle with us, and then, perhaps, Mr. Coe will help us to finish it."

And bearing that token of amity in his hand, John Trevethick led the way into the bar parlor.

CHAPTER XIV.

THE BAR PARLOR.

The bar parlor of the Gethin Castle was a small snug apartment in the rear of the house, and
therefore exposed to the full fury of the Atlantic winds, which were now roaring without, and
enhanced, by their idle menace, the comfort of its closely drawn red curtains, and its ample
fire, the gleam of which was cast back from a goodly array of glasses and vessels of burnished
pewter. Upon a well-polished oak chest--the pride of the house, for oak was almost as rare
at Gethin as among the Esquimaux--stood a mighty punch-bowl; and on the mantel-piece was a
grotesque piece of earthen-ware, used for holding tobacco, about which some long clay pipes
and peacocks' feathers were artistically arranged. A smell of nutmeg and lemons pervaded this
apartment, and pleasantly accorded with its almost tropical temperature; and the contrast it
altogether afforded to his own more stately but desolate "private sitting-room," with its disused
air and comfortless surroundings, struck Richard very agreeably. On a chintz-covered sofa,
in the most retired corner of this parlor, sat Solomon Coe and Harry Trevethick, and it was
difficult to say in which of their countenances the most astonishment appeared when the young
painter presented himself at the door. Harry's cheeks, which were not pale before, became crimson,
though she neither moved nor spoke. But Solomon rose, and, with a frown, seemed to be asking
of Trevethick the reason of this unexpected intrusion.

"This is a friend of Mr. Whymper's," said the landlord, setting down the sherry on the table;
"and therefore, I am sure, the friend of all of us. That's my daughter Harry, Sir; and that"
(and here he grinned) "is Solomon Coe, a very intimate friend of hers--as you may see. We are
a family party, in fact, or shall be some day; so, pray, make yourself at home."

"I have seen Mr. Coe before," said Richard, frankly, and shaking that gentleman's unwilling
hand; "and, though he took me for a bagman, I bear him no malice on that account."

"A bagman! Lor, Sol, what could you ha' been thinking about?" laughed Trevethick, grimly. "Why,
this here gentleman has been stopping at Crompton with the Squire! But you mustn't mind Sol,
Sir; his mind ain't free just Well, Harry, lass, why don't you get up and shake hands with
the gentleman?"

"I have seen this young lady before, also," explained Richard. "It was she who was good enough
to get me the key of the castle, which I have just returned, by-the-by, to your father," he added.

Harry gave him a look which showed him that his second pilgrimage up the rock was not unappreciated.

"Did you see the chapel, Sir, and the tombs?" inquired she.

"I hardly know, indeed," said Richard. "It was the climb itself that I enjoyed the most, and
shall never forget as long as I live."

"Oh, but you must go properly over our ruins, young gentleman," said Trevethick, with the air
of a proprietor. "My girl here, or Solomon, must show you them to-morrow, for they need a bit
of explanation. Sol knows all about them. Don't you, Sol?"

"Oh yes; I know," answered Solomon, doggedly; "but nobody won't go up to the castle to-morrow,
I reckon, with this sou'wester a-blowing."

"It is a wild night, indeed," said Richard, putting aside the curtain, and looking out through
the shutterless window. "The clouds are driving by at a frightful speed."

"Ay, and it ain't only the clouds," said Trevethick, filling his pipe, and speaking with great
gravity; "the Flying Dutchman was seen off the point not two hours ago."

"By old Madge, I suppose?" observed Solomon, derisively.

"Yes, by old Madge," retorted the landlord, sturdily. "She as knew our life-boat was lost last
year with all hands long before she drove into Turlock Bay, bottom upward."

"But how was that?" inquired Richard, with interest.

"Well, Sir, it was this way," said Trevethick. "It was a stormy night, though not so bad a
one as this is like to be, and the life-boat had gone out to a disabled Indiaman. She had been
away three hours or more, when, as I was sitting in this very parlor, in came Madge, looking
scared enough. She had been to Turlock on an errand for me. So, 'Sit down,' says I, 'and take
a glass, for you look as though the wind had blown your wits away, old woman.' 'Tain't that,
John Trevethick,' says she; 'but I'm near frightened to death. I've seen a sight as I shall
never forget to my dying day. I have just seen our life-boat men--all nine of 'em. The Lord
have mercy on their souls!' 'Well, why not?' says I. 'Why shouldn't you ha' seen 'em? They've
got back sooner than we hoped for--that's all.' 'Nay,' said she; 'but I met 'em coming out
of Gethin--away from home--the home they will never see again--all wet and white like corpses.
They're drowned men, as sure as you stand there, John Trevethick.' And so it turned out, poor
fellows!"

"And did you tell any body of this before you knew that they were drowned?" inquired Richard.

"Ay, that's the point," muttered Solomon, approvingly.

"No," said Trevethick. "I didn't believe the old woman, and I thought her story would be very
ill taken; so I kept it to myself. But it turned out true for all that; the thing happened
just as I say. John Trevethick ain't no liar."

"Of course you are stating what you believe to be the fact," said Richard, in a conciliating
tone; "I don't doubt that."

"Just so; he's told it so often that he really does behave it," said Solomon, laughing. "But
what seems curious is, that it is always Madge--purblind old woman, as wants to be thought
a witch--as sees these things--drowned sailors, and Flying Dutchmen, and so forth. I should
like to know who else has ever had the chance?"

"Lots of folks," said the landlord, doggedly.

"Well, you been here these forty years," said Solomon, "have you seen 'em? And Harry here has
been at Gethin all her life, has she seen 'em?"

There was an awkward silence. Harry had turned very pale--in terror, as Richard thought, of
the dispute between her father and Solomon becoming serious.

"That's naught to do with it," said Trevethick, sharply. "You're no Gethin man, Solomon, or
you wouldn't talk so. Why, didn't Madge describe the very ship as was lost off Castle Rock,
the night before we ever set eyes on her? and wasn't it printed in the paper?"

"In the next Saturday's paper: yes," replied Solomon, curtly.

"Nay, I heard the old woman with my own ears," said Harry, gravely. "There had been no wreck
when she told me she had seen the schooner. 'The Firefly,' said she, 'will never come nearer
home than Gethin Bay: you mark my words.' That was twelve hours, ay, and more, before she struck."

"Forgive me for interrupting," said Richard; "but I don't understand this matter. Is it supposed
that a vessel announces her own destruction beforehand?"

"Sometimes," said Trevethick, gravely. "A ship is as well known here--if she belongs to this
part of the coast--as a house is known in the Midlands. Well, if she's doomed, Madge--and it
ain't only Madge neither--will see her days before she comes to her end. This Firefly, for
example, belonged to Polwheel, and had been away for weeks."

"But still she was expected home?" interrogated Richard.

"Ay, that's it," said Solomon, once more nodding approval. "The old woman had that in her mind."

"Why so?" argued Trevethick. "What was the Firefly to her that she should think she saw her
drive into the bay, and break to pieces against the rock out yonder? And why should she tell
her vision to Harry?"

"That certainly seems strange, indeed," said Richard, "as showing she attached importance to
the affair herself. It was a most curious coincidence, to say the least of it. But what is
this Flying Dutchman, of which you also spoke? I did not know he ever came so far out of his
proper latitude as this."

"He's seen before great storms, however," said Trevethick; "you ask the coast-guard men, and
hear what they say. There's many a craft has put out to her from Gethin, and come quite close,
so that a man might almost reach her with a boat-hook, and then, all of a sudden, there is
nothing to be seen but the big waves."

John Trevethick had more to say to the same effect, to which Richard listened with attentive
courtesy; while at the same time he held to the same skeptical view entertained by Solomon.
Thus he won the good opinion of both men; and of that of the girl he felt already assured.
He scarcely ever addressed himself to Harry, and as much as possible avoided gazing at her.
If the idea of his paying any serious attention to her had ever been put into her father's
mind, the intelligence that he had been the friend and guest of Carew's had been probably sufficient
to dissipate it: the social position which that fact implied seemed to make it out of the question
that he should be Harry's suitor. It only remained for him to disabuse Solomon of the same
notion. This was at first no easy task; but the stubbornness with which his rival resisted
his attempts at conciliation gave way by degrees, and at last vanished. To have been able to
make common cause with him upon this question of local superstition was a great point gained.
Solomon had a hard head, and prided himself upon his freedom from such weaknesses; and he hailed
an ally in a battle-field on which he had contended at odds, five nights out of every seven,
for years. Harry, as we have seen, shared her father's sentiments in the matter; and it was
a great stroke of policy in Richard to have espoused the other side. He would, of course, have
much preferred to agree with her--to have embraced any view which had the attraction of her
advocacy; but it now gave him genuine pleasure to find his opposition exciting her to petulance.
She was not petulant with Solomon, but left her father to tilt with him after his own fashion.

From the superstitions of the coast they fought their way to those of the mines. Old Trevethick
believed in "Knockers" and "Buccas," spirits who indicate the position of good lodes by blows
with invisible picks; and, as these had more immediate connection with his own affairs than
the nautical phenomena, he clung to his creed with even greater tenacity than before. So fierce
was their contention that it was with difficulty that Richard could put in an inquiry as to
whence these spirits came who thus interested themselves in the success of human ventures.

"I know nothing of that," said Trevethick, frankly, "any more than I know where that wind comes
from that is shaking yonder pane; I only know that it is there."

"Nay, father, but I know," said Harry, with a little blush at her own erudition: "the Buccas
are the ghosts of the old Jews who crucified our Lord, and were sent as slaves by the Roman
emperor to work the Cornish mines."

"Very like," said Trevethick, approvingly, although probably without any clear conception of
the historical picture thus presented to him. "It's the least they could do in the spirit,
after having done so much mischief in the flesh."

The contradiction involved in this exemplary remark, combined with the absurdity of repentance
taking the form of interest in mining speculations, was almost too much for Richard's sense
of humor; but he only nodded with gravity, as became a man who was imbibing information, and
inquired further, whether, in addition to these favorers of industry, there were any spirits
who worked ill to miners.

"Well, I can't say as there are," said the landlord, with the air of a man who can afford to
give a point in an argument; "but there's a many things not of this world that happen underground,
leastway in our mines, for Sol there is from the north, and it mayn't be the same in those parts."

"It certainly is not," interrupted Solomon, taking his pipe out of his mouth to intensify the
positiveness of his position.

"I say," continued Trevethick, reddening, "that down in Cornwall here there is scarce a mine
without its spirit o' some sort. At Wheal Vor, for example, a man and his son were once blown
to pieces while blasting; and, nothing being left of them but fragments of flesh, the engine-man
put 'em into the furnace with his shovel; and now the pit is full of little black dogs. I've
seen one of 'em myself."

Solomon laughed aloud.

Richard was expecting an explosion of wrath. The old man turned toward him quietly, and observed
with tender gravity: "And in a certain mine, which Sol and I are both acquainted with, a white
rabbit always shows itself before any accident which proves fatal to man. It was seen on the
day that Sol's father sacrificed his life for mine." Then he told the story which Richard had
already heard from Harry's lips, while Solomon smoked in silence, and Harry looked hard at
the fire, as though--as Richard thought--to avoid meeting the glance of her father's hereditary
benefactor.

"You are right to remember such a noble deed as long as you live," said Richard, when the old
man had done. "My own life," added he, in a lower tone, "was once preserved by one whom I shall
love and honor as long as I have breath." But
when the new governor of Illyria, that of Caesar from exile appointed Aulus Gabinius, with fifteen
cohorts and 3,000 riders in winter 706/07 (48/47) on the land in Illyria arrived, changed the
system of warfare. Instead, like his predecessors, to to restrict the small war, the brave
man took active at once, despite the rob Season, with his whole army, an expedition into the
mountains. But the unfavorable Weather, the difficulty of the Board and the valiant resistance
of the rubbed Delmati the army on; Gabinius had to retreat, was attacked on that of the Delmati
and shamefully beaten, and reached the weak remnants of its grand army difficulty Salome, where
he died soon after. Most of the Illyrian coast cities were found then the fleet of Octavius, who
clung to Caesar, like Salome and Epidauros (Ragusa Vecchia) were from the fleet at sea, on land of
the barbarians pressed so hard that the transfer and the surrender of the army trapped in Salome
debris not far appeared. Since brundisischen was the commander of the depot, the energetic Publius
Vatinius, in the absence of warships ordinary boats equipped with beaks and the hospitals in
the dismissed soldiers manned and supplied with this improvised fleet of wide Octavia superior
niche in the island of Tauris (Torcola between Lelina and Curzola) a meeting in which the bravery
of the leader and the ship's soldiers, as so often, replaced what the ships lacked, and had
won a brilliant victory the Caesareans. Marcus Octavius ​​left this Waters and set out to Africa (707
Spring 47), although the Delmati sat for years long with great tenacity to fight back, but it was
this merely a local mountain warfare. When Caesar returned from Egypt, had his aide determined
the threat in Illyria Danger has been eliminated. The more serious it was in Africa, where
from the beginning of the Constitution Party had prevailed in the civil war fully and increase their power
at all times. Up Pharsalian here actually had to battle King Juba led the regiment, he had Curio
overcome, and the power of the army were his volatile rider and his countless Protect, and the
Pompeian governor Varus played alongside him such a subordinate role that He even those Curios
soldiers who had surrendered to him, deliver the king had and their execution or discharge
into the inner Numidia was forced to watch. This changed is Pharsalian after the battle. On
a flight to the Parthians thought, with the exception of the Pompey himself, not a well-known
man of the defeated party. Similarly, attempts were made to the Lake join forces to say, Marcus
Octavius' Illyrian warfare in the waters was isolated and had no lasting success. The vast majority
of the Republicans and the Pompey turned to Africa, where alone is an honorable and constitutional
struggle against the usurper seemed possible. There were scattered in the rubble of the Pharsalia
Army, the occupying troops from Dyrrhachium, Kerkyra and the Peloponnese, the remains of the Illyrian
Fleet gradually together, and it arrived in the city, the second top commander Metellus Scipio,
the two sons of Pompey, Gnaeus and Sextus, the political leader of the Republicans Marcus Cato,
the able officers Labienus Afranius, Petreius, Octavius, and others. When the forces emigration
were reduced, however, their fanaticism had probably increased. They went not only to kill the prisoners
and even the Caesar's emissaries, but King Juba, where the bitterness of party man with the
fury of the semi-barbarous African flowed together, placed it on the maxim that in every suspected
of sympathies with the enemy Community exterminated the citizens and the city would be burned down,
and led against some localities, such as the unfortunate Vaga Hadrumetum in this theory In fact,
virtually by. Yes that is not the capital of the province itself, the blooming, ebenwie Carthage
once by the Numidian kings long viewed with suspicion eye Utica, King Juba the same treatment and
was told that one against, but not without reason, the inclination Caesar citizenship accused
was satisfied with the precautions, she had only Cato energetic appearance to thank. Since
neither Caesar himself nor any of its governor, the lowest took to Africa, had the perfect coalition
time to get there, politically and militarily to reorganize. Above all, it was necessary to the completed
by Pompey's death, top commander spot to fill again. King Juba had a good mind, the position he
held until the Pharsalian had a battle in Africa, even to allege, because he did not more than client
the Romans, but as an equal ally occurred or even as a patron and Example, it took out to beat
Roman silver coins with his name and coat of arms even laid claim to lead alone in bearing the purple
and the Roman generals ansann to take off the purple general's cloak. Metellus Scipio, also called
the command for themselves, because Pompey him, more out of schwiegersöhnlichen as military considerations,
in Thessalian campaign had accepted as equal to. The same demand rose Varus as - admittedly self-appointed
- the governor of Africa, as the war in his province should be conducted. Finally, the army sought
to guide the propraetor Marcus Cato. Apparently had it right. Cato was the only man for the difficult
job that required dedication, Power and authority possessed, if he was no military, yet it
was infinitely better to have a Not military, which was regarded to be modest and to have its act
under the general, as an officer of unproven ability, such as varus, or even an inability of proven,
Metellus Scipio like to order for in-chief. However, the decision was finally on these same
Scipio, and Cato himself was the one they essentially certain. It happened This is not because
he is not up to that task felt, or because his vanity at to shake out their bill was more than
the answer, still less because he Scipio loved and respected, with whom he was personally rather
hostile and everywhere in its notorious inefficiency only by his paternity law to a certain significance
was reached, but only because his dogged legal formalism rather the Republic of right, left to
perish, as they saved in an irregular manner. When he Pharsalian met after the battle of Corfu
with Marcus Cicero, he had offered to this, still tainted by his Cilician governorship with her
generalship was higher than the standing officer, as was rightful to transfer the command in
Kerkyra and the hapless lawyer who his laurels from Amano cursed a thousand times now, through
this willingness almost to despair, but also all reasonably insightful men brought to wonder.
The same principles have been riding here, where something more out arrived, Cato was considering
the question of to whom the fees top commander there when it was a Arable field at Tusculum,
and she said to the Scipio. This statement was his own and eliminates the candidacy of Varus.
He was also, and he alone, with the energy the claims of King Juba opposed it and let him
feel that the Roman nobility he did not feel like asking for the Grand Prince of Parthia, in
order to protect Mr assistance to seek, but demanding and commanding the subject of assistance. In
the present State of the Roman forces in Africa Juba could not help but somewhat milder strings
raise, although he admittedly in the weak Scipio nevertheless insisted that the Pay his troops of
the Roman Checkout imposed and in case of victory, his Cession of the province of Africa was
assured. The new supreme commander stepped aside again the Senate of the "Three Hundred", which
opened in Utica headquarters and thinned ranks supplemented by including the most prestigious
and richest men of the knighthood. The Armoury have been promoted mainly by Cato's zeal, with
the greatest energy and every able-bodied Man, even freedmen and Libyans, set in the legions, which
the agriculture of the Hands have been deprived of much that a large part of the fields remained
untilled, but even so also an impressive result was achieved. The heavy infantry was one of
fourteen legions, of which two already established by Varus, in part, the eight other fugitives,
and partly from the in Conscript formed the province and four armed Roman legions of the king
Juba were. The heavy cavalry, consisting of the Celts and Germans arrived with Labienus and
including all sorts of people had queued without Juba Roman armed horsemen 1,600 men strong.
The light troops were composed of countless masses of horse without a bridle and reins and armed
only with spears Numidia, of a number of mounted archers and large Swarms of riflemen on foot.
This finally came Juba 120 elephants and that of Publius Varus and Marcus Octavius ​​commanded
55 strong sailing fleet. The oppressive lack of money has been fairly by a self-taxation of the Senate
done, the was the more productive, than the richest African capitalists to enter into the same had
been initiated. Cereals and other Inventories had piled up in the defensible fortresses in immense
masses, while from the open places as possible from the stocks. The absence of Caesar, the difficult
Mood of his legions, the ferment in Spain and Italy gradually raised the mood and the memory of
the battle Pharsalian began to give way to new hopes of victory. The lost time of Caesar in
Egypt retaliated nowhere is harder than here. If he had immediately after Pompey's death is turning
to Africa, he would be there for a weak, disorganized and dismayed, and complete anarchy army
have found among the leaders, while now, including through energy Cato, one of the defeated at
Pharsalia equal in number Army well-known leaders and under a controlled top management in Africa
was. It seemed to exercise at all about this African expedition Caesars its own evil star. Still
before his embarkation Egypt had Caesar in Spain and Italy, several measures the initiation and
preparation of the African war arranged; from all but there was nothing arisen as a disaster. should
be from Spain, Caesar's arrangement, according to the governor the southern province, Quintus Cassius
Longinus, translate with four legions to Africa then pull the king of Bogud Westmauretanien ^ 9
itself and with him against Numidia and Africa . Proceed But some of that to Africa army closed a
lot of born Spaniards and two All former Pompeian legions in itself; Pompeian sympathies prevailed
in the army as in the province, and the inept and tyrannical appearance of Caesar's governor
was not likely to appease them. It formally came to insurrection, troops and cities taking
sides for or against the governor, it was already on it or the fact that those who brought against the
governor himself Caesar had been attached open the flag of Pompey; already had Pompey's eldest son
Gnaeus, to use this favorable turn, from Africa to Spain embarked, as the disavowal of the governor
by the most respected Caesareans and even the intervention of the commander of the northern
province of the uprising just in time oppressed. Pompey, the futile way with a Attempt to establish
themselves in Mauritania, time lost, was late, Gaius Trebonius Caesar after his return from
the East for the relief of Cassius sent to Spain (Autumn 707 47), found everywhere inevitable obedience.
But of course this was on errors done from Spain did nothing to disturb the organization of the
Republicans in Africa; yes it was even, as a result of complications with Longinus, King of
Bogud Westmauretanien, the on Caesar's side and was at least king Juba had some obstacles
in its path may have been called up his troops to Spain. --------------------------------------------------
-------------------- ^ 9 The states design in northwestern Africa during this period is very
obscure. After the war Jugurthine Bocchus king reigned probably from Mauritania western sea to
the port of Salda, in today's Morocco and Algiers, by the Mauritanian upper house of kings, probably
from several princes of Tingis (Tangier), the previously found (Plut. Sert. 9) and which probably
Sallust (Hist. 3, 31 Kritz) Leptasta and Cicero (Vat 5, 12) Mastanesosus may include, in their own
limited boundaries been, or even with him gone to his fief, Syphax, as has occurred over many
tribal princes store (App. Pun. 10) and at this time in the neighboring Cirta Numidia, but
probably Juba under suzerainty of the prince was obsessed Massinissa (App. civ. 4, 54). To 672 (82)
we find in Bocchus' place a king or Bocud Bogud (hist Oros. 5, 21, 14) the Bocchus son. 705 (49)
to the kingdom appears divided between the King Bogud, the the Western, and the king Bocchus
who owns the eastern half and in which the later Divorce in Mauritania Bogud kingdom or the state
of Tingis and Bocchus' Empire or State of Jol (Caesarea) back (Pliny Nat. 5, 2, 19, see Bell.
Afr. 23). -------------------------------------------------- --------------- Write the events
were still among the troops that Caesar in southern Italy had can pull together to take with
them to Africa überzuschiffen. It was mostly the old Legions in Gaul, Spain, Thessaly was founded
Caesars throne. The spirit of this Troops had not improved the victories shattered the long
break in southern Italy completely. The almost superhuman demands, which made the commander of her and their consequences in the
terribly thinned ranks emerged only to let bright, even in these iron men Returns a ferment
of resentment and required only the time and peace to the minds in a ferment to bring. The
only man who impressed them was away for a year and almost lost, their superior officers but
were afraid of the soldiers is far more than this from them and Weltbesiegern saw any brutality
against their accommodation provider and any indiscipline after. And when the orders to embark
for Sicily was, and the soldier, the rich well of life Campania again with a third, to the Spanish
and tribulations of Thessaly should not mix up the following campaign, tore loose and too long allzuplötzlich
again tightened reins. The legions refused to obey, before the promised Gifts were paid to them,
and showed the officers sent by Caesar with scorn speeches so by throwing stones back. An attempt
to the beginning of the insurgency by raising the promised sums had to absorb, not only unsuccessful,
but the soldiers broke en masse in order to extract the fulfillment of the promises in the
capital of the general. Individual officers who tried to restrain the mutinous Rotten road were
slain. It was a terrible danger. Caesar had the few located in the city Soldiers occupying the
town, to the feared looting by law, at least for the first Start to ward off, and suddenly appeared under the raging pile with the question of what
they coveted. You cried to leave. Instantly he was asked how, given. Because of the Gifts, added
Caesar, which he had promised for the triumph of his soldiers, and because of the fields, which
he had not promised them, but definitely want them on the day where he will triumph with the other
soldiers to report to him, to the triumph itself of course they could not participate as previously
released, of course.
 We kept tapping
with the heels of our boots at equal intervals against this wall."

"The miner's signal," explained the landlord, with a wave of his pipe.

"We felt that if we were once heard, and if hard work could do it, that our mates would save
us yet; and we encouraged one another as well as we could. But presently the oil in our lamps
gave out, and we were left in darkness; and then our hope grew faint indeed. We had knocked
for four-and-twenty hours unintermittingly without any reply. We did not cease, however, to
discuss the possibilities of escape. We knew that all was being done for us above-ground that
could be done; that the surveys of the mine were well executed; and that it was known exactly
where we were, if we were alive at all. There were more than a hundred men employed in the
lower workings, and it was a certainty that not one of them could have escaped death; the attention,
therefore, of the engineers would be concentrated upon those parts of the mine that might possibly
be left above water."

"On the second night of our imprisonment we heard a distinct reply to our signal; the old man
who was of our company began to weep for joy, though he was doomed, as it turned out, poor
soul! never to see the light. 'We shall be saved,' he said; 'do not fear.' We knocked again,
and again the reply was heard--they had found us out, and would never relax their efforts to
save us. 'God bless them!' said we all. We laid our ears close to the rock, and presently heard
the strokes of the pick, but not very distinctly. When the other said he was afraid the rock
was thick, the old man cried out: 'No, it was not that; it was because we were dull of hearing.'
The fact was, that the seam was not only thick, but very hard. It was strange, indeed, though
sounds are easily transmitted through rocks of considerable thickness, how our feeble taps
had been heard at all. Day after day, and each day a black night, went on; every hour was to
be the last of our captivity, according to the old man; as for me, I was almost worn out, and
heavy with sleep, but he was in constant motion, knocking and listening. Then suddenly we heard
a splash in the water beneath us--he had lost his balance, slid down the inclined plane, and
been drowned. He never stirred a limb nor uttered a cry. His fate discouraged and alarmed us
two survivors exceedingly. If help was coming, we now felt it would never come in time. We
dug into the shale with the handles of our lamps and with our fingers, to make our position
more secure. We did not venture to speak of our late companion's fate to one another. Horror
overwhelmed us, so enfeebled had we become through famine and fatigue. We had devoured our
leather belts, and even crumbled the rotten wood of the timber-props in water, and eaten that;
but we were now consumed by thirst, which we dared no longer quench. We were afraid to venture
down as before for the water in which the old man had sunk to death; and it was that which
had kept us alive."

"Don't forget about how you made a bucket of your boots, Sol," suggested Trevethick, gravely.

"Yes, at last we tied a string to a boot, and got the water up that way," continued Solomon;
"but our stomachs turned against it."

"It was not so good as my punch," observed the landlord, parenthetically, and emptying his
steaming glass.

"More dark days came and went, though, of course, we could not tell how many; then, all of
a sudden, we heard a human voice, inquiring: 'How many are you?' 'We are three,' was our reply.
We had not the courage even then to own that one of us had already been taken; death seemed
still so near to us. The aperture which had thus let in the world upon us was also very small."

"And what was it you asked for first?" interrupted the landlord, with a nod at Richard, as
much as to say: "Listen now; this is curious." One of the most able of his officers, the tribune Marcus Antonius, commanded propraetors
here with violence. The south-eastern ports Sipus, Brundisium, Taranto, where the first a landing
attempt was expected to have to get a crew of three legions. The coal
was carried out in baskets as fast as it was hewn out: the atmosphere in which they thus toiled
like giants, naked to the waist, was almost suffocating; yet, under these conditions, they
had literally effected in four days, to save our lives, what it would have taken them four
weeks to do, had they been working by the piece for wages. They had even been compelled to
put up ventilators, and their lamps would only burn when close to these. They gave us broth
through a tin pipe; but almost another day elapsed before the hole was large enough for them
to carry us through it in their arms."

"And there was nobody else saved, was there?" inquired the landlord, with a triumphant look.

"There was not," said Solomon, expressing his tobacco smoke very slowly. "Out of a hundred
and thirteen men who had been caught by the flood in Dunston, we two were the sole survivors."

Many other stories of the like sort had Solomon to tell, and for not one of them, was he indebted
to his imagination. His experience of life had been remarkable, and it had impressed itself
upon his character. His will was as strong as that of Trevethick, but he had less of caution;
and he was at the same time both plodding and audacious.

It would not be well, thought Richard occasionally, to have either of these men for an enemy;
and he was right. Unhappily, it was impossible to win Harry without a quarrel with, at least,
one of them, and rather than lose her he was prepared to defy them both. If he could but have
lifted a corner of the curtain that veils the future--well, even then, so mad was he by this
time with the love of her, that he would almost have defied them still.

CHAPTER XVI.

SPRING-TIDE.

There is a beauty in woman that takes the stranger, and another the changeful charm of which
wins its way deeper and deeper daily into the heart of man; but in the person of Harry Trevethick
these two beauties were combined. Richard thought he had never seen any face half so fair as
that which shone upon him through the mist on the first day when he came to Gethin; and when
he had dwelt there for weeks he was of the same opinion still. Harry was innocent, tender-hearted,
and gay, and so far the expression of her features told you truth; but it also told you more
than that, which you must needs believe, though it was not the fact. However, if the peoples between the Phasis and Maeotis, Colchis, Soane, Heniocher, Zyger, Achaeans,
even the distant Bastarnae the long list of conquered by Pompey Nations are classified, so we took
it evidently with the concept of submission very little detail. The Caucasus proved again
world-historical in its significance; such as the Persian and the Hellenistic and the Roman conquest
found in him their border. So there was not King Mithridates left to themselves and the doom.
Like his ancestor, the founder of the Pontic state, its future empire had first entered, before fleeing
the captors of Antigonus, and supported by only six riders, so now was the grandson of the Borders
of his kingdom and his cross back and his fathers conquests with the Have to look back. But
the dice of fate had no more often and capricious the highest winnings and losses thrown the
most powerful than the old Sultan of Sinope, and rapid and unpredictable change the fortunes
in the East. Well-liked now Mithradates the evening of his life to accept any new exchange event
with the thought that he only again preparing a new revolution and the only continuity of
the eternal change of fortunes was. Was it the Roman rule of the Orientals in the deepest
sense of their being unbearable and Mithridates himself, for better or for worse, the right Duke
of the East, the slackness of the regiment, as practiced by the Roman senate to the provinces, and
in the fermenting and to civil war maturing strife of political parties in Rome could Mithradates,
if it He succeeded to bide his time, even well-even for the third time to restore his rule.
So just because he hoped and planned, as long as life was in him, he was dangerous to the Romans,
as long as he lived, not as a country less volatile old man as he and his hundreds of thousands was
extended to wrest Hellas and Macedonia to the Romans. The restless old man came in 689 (85) of Dioskurias
under unspeakable appeal in part on land, partly by sea in the realm of Panticapaeum, rushed
here by its reputation and its strong entourage Wayward Son Machares from the throne and forced him
to give himself to death. From here He tried once more to negotiate with the Romans, and he
asked him his father's kingdom returned and agreed to recognize the supremacy of Rome and as
Lehnfürst Interest payable.
 That must have been difficult; though, if I saw
you sitting under water yonder, I should certainly dive, and try."

"You would have no breath to make me pretty speeches then," said Harry, demurely. "This mermaid
was, however, a changed child. A Polwheel woman was bathing her infant in the pool yonder beneath
that arched rock, when it suddenly gave a cry of joy, and leaped from her arms into the sea.
She thought it was drowned, but it came up the next instant more beautiful and bright than
ever. She did not herself know but that it was her own child, but there were old folks in the
town who knew that it was in reality a mermaid's changeling. She grew up to be a lovely woman,
and the Squire of Polwheel at that time--for his race has died out since--fell in love with
her; he treated her very ill, and she died broken-hearted, at Gethin, and was buried in our
church-yard, where I can show you the tomb."

"And did no punishment overtake the scoundrel Squire?"

"Yes. After a great revel one night, he was returning home by the sands, and in the moonlight
beheld a beautiful lady sitting by this same pool. She was so like his dead love to look at
that he was frightened at first, but she smiled and beckoned to him, and then, clasping him
in her arms, leaped into the sea, and drowned him; and in the storm that arose that night the
merry maids filled up the harbor."

"That was hard upon Polwheel," observed Richard, "though the Squire only got what he deserved.
He must have been a bad lot."

"But the mermaid was very foolish to believe him," added Harry--"very."

They visited the Fairy Bower, did these young people--the only spot about Gethin where trees
grew; a beautiful ravine, with a fall of water, and a caverned cell beside it, where a solitary
hermit was said to have dwelt. Notwithstanding which celibate association, it had a wishing-well
besides, into which a maiden had but to drop a pin, and wish her wish, and straightway the
face of her future husband was mirrored in the water. Through its clear depths you might see
the bottom of the pool quite paved with pins.

"And does the charm always work?" asked Richard, laughing. "Try it to-day."

"No, no," answered Harry, gravely; "one must be quite alone for that, and beneath the moonlight."

On Morven Point, a grand old promontory, which pushed out many a yard to meet the encroaching
waves, and battled with long before they reached the main land, they sat and watched the sunsets;
looked down upon the busy hive of men that worked upon the slate quarry beneath, or gazed upon
the ships that tacked and wore to make Turlock Haven. There was a tower on this place, half
ruined and with broken steps, up which they climbed together on one occasion, and stood supporting
one another upon its dizzy top. There lay around them a splendid prospect of sea and land,
but they were looking into one another's eyes, and yet they did not speak of that which was
nearest to their hearts. It was a topic to be avoided as long as possible. They only enjoyed
these blissful opportunities--they had only been permitted to thus stroll out together alone
and unsuspected--upon the tacit understanding that no such thing as love could exist between
them. If Harry had not plighted faith to Solomon, her engagement to him tacitly existed nevertheless,
and it was under its aegis alone that they had been protected and indulged. It was a part of
the character of the young girl to persuade herself that she was doing no harm so long as it
was possible to entertain that delusion; and it was all one to Richard what their love was
called so long as it was love. Else, as they stood alone together in the noonday stillness,
his arm around her waist, as it had not been since that first afternoon upon the castled rock,
he must needs have told her why the heart that pressed so close against her side was beating
high. Just then, however, he dared not. Suppose that, by any possibility, he had mistaken her
sentiments; suppose, that is, an extorted promise, or fear of her father's anger, or what not,
should compel her to deny his suit, and cleave to Solomon; suppose even that her simplicity
was such--and it was in some things marvelously great--that she had accepted his affection
as that of a brother--a friend of her father's and of "Sol's"--but no; he felt certain that
she loved him; suppose, at all events, for whatever reason, she was once again to reprove him
for yielding to the temptation of her lips, he felt that such a rebuke must of necessity finish
all. She could not forgive him twice, unless she gave him license to offend forever. He dared
not, therefore, speak directly of that which both were thinking of; and yet he could not altogether
ignore so sweet a subject.

"That is the moor yonder, Harry, over which I first came to Gethin--how long ago!"

"Has the time, then, hung so very heavy on your hands?" asked she, seriously.

"No, Harry, no; on the contrary, I have never been so happy; but when one has a new experience,
however charming it may be, it seems to dwindle down one's past to nothing. I have had two
lifetimes, as it seems to me--one elsewhere, and one here; and yet it is but six weeks since
I met you first, Harry, out yonder, gleaming like a sunbeam through the fog."

"I remember it well," said Harry, with a slight shiver.

"But not to sigh about it, dear, I trust? You are not afraid of me now, as you were then? Do
you recollect how scared you were when I called you back that day?"

"Yes, well," answered the young girl, earnestly. "I had a reason for being scared, though you
would laugh at me if I told you what it was."

"Do I ever laugh at you, Harry, when you would have me serious?" asked Richard, reproachfully.
"Come, tell me why you shrank from me--as you can not to-day, dear, for, see, I have got you
close--and why your large eyes looked so wild and strange that I half thought you mad? Did
you take me for a ghost?"

"No; but I had just seen what is far worse than any ghost. Did you not mark how pale I got
that same night? I thought I should have fainted when I was asked" (it was Solomon who had
put the question, but Solomon's name was never mentioned between these two young people) "if
I had ever seen a spectre ship. I had seen one that very day--only a few minutes before I met
you--and on this very cliff."

"Well, and what then?" said Richard, smiling. "Neither your father, nor any one in whom you
have an interest, goes to sea. The Flying Dutchman did not concern you, I reckon, even if he
did pay you a call."

"You do not understand," said Harry, seriously; "it was not that at all. But when the mists
rise over Turlock sands, as they did that day, a black, square-rigged vessel glides across
them, which bodes ill to those who see her; and I saw her as plain as I see you."

"But not so near," said Richard, fondly.

"She was coming from Turlock to the quarry yonder--"

"To fetch slates," interrupted the other--"nothing more likely."

"Nay, not she; no craft would have attempted that in such weather; and, besides, there was
not a soul on board of her. She was sailing against what little wind there was, and against
the tide."

"But even if this was so, Harry, what of it? What harm has come of it?"

"Nothing as yet; nor was I greatly frightened at the time. That omen bodes unhappiness to him
or her who sees it, and I was already unhappy."

"Because I was not here to comfort you, Harry. Well, that is remedied."

She shook her head, and did not return the reassuring pressure of his hand. "Listen!" she said.
"This misery comes through the person whom he who has seen the vision shall next meet; and
I thought I knew who I should meet on my way home--one from whom"--she sank her voice to a
whisper--"I already expected misery."

"You mean--" began Richard, eagerly.

"No matter whom I mean. It was not he who met me; that was you."

The hand which he held in his was cold as ice; her face was pale; and her limbs trembled under her.

"This is folly, Harry dear. Am I likely to do you harm, to make you miserable?"

"I do not know," said she. "I sometimes think you are."

He put the long hair back from her forehead, and gazed into her eyes, which were now fast filling
with tears. "I love you, Harry, with all my heart," sighed he--"you know I do. And, though
you are sometimes cold, and at others seem as though you purposely avoided me, I think you
love me--just a little--too. Better, at all events, than the man with whom you yourself have
just confessed you expect nothing but misery."

"Hush, hush!" moaned she. "If I said that, it was very wrong."

"It was the truth, Harry. How could it be otherwise? He is not a lover meet for such as you;
he is twice your age, and rough and rude of speech even as a suitor. Do you think he will be
more tender when he is a husband? He is no mate for you, Harry, nor you for him."

Again she shook her head, with a slow mournful movement, as though less in dissent from his
statement than in despair of remedy.

"What!" cried he, "because his father was your father's friend, does that give him the right
to be your husband?"

The young girl answered only with her sobs.

"Now tell me, darling--did you ever promise to be this man's wife in words?"

"Yes--no--I am not sure. Oh yes, I must be his; my father has set his mind upon it. Nay, do
not smile at that; you don't know what my father is. He is not one to cross;" and, as if at
the very thought of her stern parent's wrath, she lifted up her head from Richard's breast,
and looked around in fear.

"But suppose I win him to my side, sweet Harry?"

"That you could never do," sighed she. "I tell you you don't know him."

"Nay; but I think I do, dear; and, if I could show him that it was to his own advantage to
have me for his son-in-law, in place of--"

"You would not persuade him," interrupted the young girl, firmly--"not even if you were Carew
of Crompton's heir."

The words she had used were meant to express exhaustless wealth--for with such was the owner
of Gethin still credited in that far-away corner of his possession--but they startled and offended
Richard. "I may not be Carew's heir," said he, haughtily; "but I have some power at Crompton,
and I can exert it in your father's favor."

Harry shook her head. "He wants for nothing," she said, "that you can give him. He is wealthier
than you imagine. He has two thousand pounds in notes, for which he has no use; they lie in
the strong-box in my room. But there, I promised not to speak of that."

"I am not a burglar in disguise," said Richard, smiling, "and would make your father richer
rather than rob him. But why should he keep so large a sum by him?"

"I do not know; but there it is, locked with a letter padlock which he made himself. No human
being can open it, he says, who does not know the secret."

Richard was silent. Something else than love was occupying his thoughts, though his fingers
were making marriage rings for themselves of Harry's golden hair. It is like entertaining angels
unawares to find after one has fallen in love that it is with an heiress.

"Dear Harry," said he at last, "I think I shall take you from your father's willing hands;
I have good hope of it, and better since I have heard you so despairing; but, at all events,
you will be mine. Let me hear those sweet lips say so. Promise me, promise me, my darling,
that you will be my wife."

He caught and clasped her close, and she did not repulse him.

"I dare not, Richard--I dare not promise you," she murmured.

"But if your father gives me leave?" whispered he, his lips to her warm cheek.

She uttered a soft cry of passionate joy that told him more than a hundred phrases of assent
how dear he was to her, and hid her face upon his breast.

Oh happy hour, so bright, and yet so brief! Oh golden noon, already on the verge of eve and
blackest night!

How often in the after-time did that fair and sunny scene recur to them, a bitter memory; how
often was that first kiss of love renewed by cruel fancy and in mocking dreams, its sweetness
changed to gall!

Better for one--better, perhaps, for both--if, clasped in one another's arms, they had fallen
from that tall tower's top, and then and there had ended life and love together!

CHAPTER XVII.

WORKING ON A PIVOT.

Never had Richard been in such high spirits as on the evening of that day on which Harry had
made confession to him of her love, and had promised to be his wife should her father's consent
be gained. It was true that she had been far from sanguine upon the latter point; but Richard
had his reasons for being of a different opinion. It would be better, every way, if he could
obtain Trevethick's good-will; not that he at all shared in the girl's dread of his anger,
but because it really seemed that if he married her from her father's roof he should be fulfilling
his mother's injunctions in making alliance with an heiress. What with his two thousand pounds
in gold, and his inn, and his lucky mine, it was plain that the old man would have no despicable
sum to leave behind him; and yet, to do Richard justice, this only formed an additional incentive
to a project upon which, at all events, he had long set his heart. He had resolved at all hazards
to make the girl his wife. His love for her was as deep as it was passionate; and now that
he was assured from her own lips of its being returned, his heart was filled with joy, and
spoke out of its abundance. It had been hitherto his habit in that family circle round the
bar-parlor fire to play the part of listener rather than of talker. He had mainly confined
himself to the exhibition of an attentive interest in Solomon's stories, or in his host's sagacious
observations with respect to the investment of capital, such as: "One couldn't be too cautious
where one put one's money;" and, "Where the interest was high the risk was great, and where
it was low it was not worth while to let it leave one's hand." Next to the subject of local
superstition, "investment" was the favorite subject of debate between Trevethick and "Sol;"
and Richard, whose ignorance insured his impartiality, had been the judicious scale-holder
between them. But upon the present occasion it was the young artist who led the talk and chose
the matter. He told them of the splendors of Crompton and of the marvelous prodigality of its
owner, and they listened with greedy ears. To vulgar natures, the topic of mere wealth is ever
an attractive one, and in the present instance there was an additional whet to appetite in
the connection of Carew with Gethin. He was naturally an object of curiosity to his tenant
Trevethick, and never before had the old man had the opportunity of hearing at first hand of
the eccentricities of the Squire. In relating them Richard took good care to show by implication
on what intimate terms he stood with him, and hinted at the obligation under which he had put
him by throwing his park gate open so opportunely. The impression which he left upon his audience,
and desired to leave, was, that Carew was indebted to him for having saved his life.

"Then it is likely the Squire would do any thing for you that you chose to ask him?" observed
Trevethick, with the thought of his own debt to Solomon's father doubtless in his mind.

"Well, he certainly ought to do so," answered Richard, carelessly; "but, on the other hand,
it is not very probable that I shall put him to the test."

"Just so," returned Trevethick, sucking at his pipe; "you're independent of the likes of him."

"Altogether," was Richard's reply.

The old man spoke no more, but sat in a cloud of smoke and thought for the rest of the evening.
Even when "Sol" rose up to go--Harry having retired long since, for they kept very early hours
at the Gethin Castle--the landlord did not, as usual, accompany him, but mixed himself another
glass of his favorite liquor. As for Richard, it was not his custom to seek his bed until after
midnight; so Trevethick and he were left to one another's company. It was an opportunity to
which the latter had been looking forward for many a day, but which he had never desired so
keenly as at that moment.

"Are you likely to be at Crompton soon again?" inquired the landlord, pursuing the subject
of the evening's talk.

"I have no intention of going there at present," returned Richard. "The fact is, Mr. Trevethick,
between ourselves, I am but a poor man in comparison with many of those I meet there, and their
ways and habits are too expensive for me."

"Ay! gambling and such like, I suppose?" observed the landlord, cunningly. "It is 'Light come
light go' with the money of that sort of folk, I reckon."

"Just so; and though my money comes light enough--that is, I have not to earn it, since my
mother makes me an allowance--I don't choose to risk it at the card-table."

"Quite right, quite right, young gentleman," answered the other, approvingly. "But there are
some prudent gentry even at Crompton, I suppose. Parson Whymper, for instance, he don't gamble,
do he?"

"Certainly not; he is much too sagacious a man, even if he were rich enough, to play; but for
him, indeed, some say the Squire would have come to the end of his tether before this. He manages
every thing at Crompton, as you know."

"And yet Carew don't want money?" said the landlord, musing.

"Well, I have been his guest," returned Richard, smiling; "and it is scarcely fair of me to
speak of his embarrassments. He does not certainly want it so much but that he can still afford
to indulge his whims, Mr. Trevethick, if that's what you mean."

"That's just what I did mean," said the old man, frankly. "Six months ago or so I made a certain
proposition to the Squire, which would have been exceedingly to his advantage to accept--"

"And not to yours?" interrupted Richard, slyly.

"Nay, I don't say that, Sir," answered the other. "But it was one that he ought to have been
glad to accept in any case, and which it was downright madness in him to refuse, if he wanted
cash. It was a chance, too, I will venture to say, that will never offer itself from any other
quarter. Mr. Whymper acknowledged that himself."

"I know all about the matter, Mr. Trevethick: the Squire behaved like the dog in the manger
to you. He won't work the mine himself, nor yet let you work it."

"For mercy's sake, be quiet!" cried the landlord, earnestly, and looking cautiously about him.
"If you know all about it, you need not let others know. What mine are you talking about? Give
it a name--but speak it under your breath, man." The old man leaned forward with a white moist
face, and peered into Richard's eyes as though he would read his soul.

"Wheal Danes was the name of the place, if I remember right," said Richard. "Carew has a notion
that the Romans did not use it up, and that it only wants capital to make it a paying concern.
It is one of his mad ideas, doubtless."

Mr. John Trevethick was not by nature a quick appreciator of sarcasm, but he could not misunderstand
the irony expressed in Richard's words.

"And is that what you came down to Gethin about?" inquired he, with a sort of grim despair,
which had nevertheless a comical effect.

Richard could only trust himself to nod his head assentingly.

"Well," cried the other, striking the table with his fist, "if I didn't think you was as deep
as the devil the very first day that I set eyes on you! So you are Parson Whymper's man, are
you?" And here, in default of language to express his sense of the deception that, as he supposed,
had been practiced on him, Mr. Trevethick uttered an execration terrible enough for a Cornish
giant.

"I am not Mr. Whymper's man at all," observed Richard, coolly. "Mr. Whymper is my man--or at
least he will be one day or another."

"How so?" inquired the landlord, his eyes at their full stretch, his mouth agape, and his neglected
pipe in his right hand. "Who, in the Fiend's name, are you?"

"I am the only son and heir of Carew of Crompton," answered the young man, deliberately.

"You? Why, Carew never had a son," exclaimed Trevethick, incredulously; "leastways, not a lawful
one. He was married once to a wench of the name of Hardcastle, 'tis true; but that was put aside."

"I tell you I am Carew's lawful son, nevertheless," persisted Richard. "My mother was privately
married to him. Ask Parson Whymper, and he will tell you the same. It is true that my father
has not acknowledged me, but I shall have my rights some day--and Wheal Danes along with the rest."

The news of the young man's paternity must have been sufficiently startling to him who thus
received it for the first time, and would, under any other circumstances, have doubtless excited
his phlegmatic nature to the utmost; but what concerns ourselves in even a slight degree is,
with some of us, more absorbing than the most vital interests of another; and thus it was with
Trevethick. The ambitious pretensions of his lodger sank into insignificance--notwithstanding
that, for the moment, he believed in them; for how, unless he was what he professed to be,
could he know so much?--before the disappointment which had befallen himself in the overthrow
of a long-cherished scheme.

"Why, Mr. Whymper wrote me with his own hand," growled he, "that in his judgment the mine was
worthless, and that he had done all he could to persuade the Squire to sell. And yet you come
down here to gauge and spy."

"All stratagems are fair in war and business," answered the young man, smiling. "Come, Mr.
Trevethick; whatever reasons may have brought me here, I assure you, upon my honor, that they
do not weigh with me now, in comparison with the great regard I feel for you and yours. If
you will be frank with me, I will also be so with you; and let me say this at the outset, that
nothing which may drop from your lips shall be made use of to prejudice your interests. I have
gathered this much for myself, that Wheal--"

"Hush, Sir! for any sake, hush!" implored the landlord, earnestly, and holding up his huge
hand for silence. "Do not give it a name again; there is some one moving above stairs."

"It is only Solomon," observed Richard, quietly.

"I don't want Sol nor any other man alive to hear what we are talking about, Mr. Yorke," answered
Trevethick, hoarsely. "You have gathered for yourself, you were about to say, that the mine
is rich, and well worth what I have offered for it."

"And a good deal more," interrupted Richard. "Perhaps a hundred times, perhaps a thousand times
as much. We don't make so close a secret of a matter without our reasons. We don't see Dead
Hands, with flames of fire at the finger-tips, going up and down ladders that don't exist,
without the most excellent reasons, Mr. Trevethick. What we wish no eye to see, nay, no ear
to hear spoken of, is probably a subject of considerable private importance to ourselves. Come,
we are friends here together; I say again, let us be frank."

Trevethick was silent for a little; he felt a lump rise in his throat, as though nature itself
forbade him to disclose the secret he had kept so long and so jealously guarded. "I have known
it for these fifty years," he began, in a half-choking voice. "I found it out as a mere lad,
when I went down into the old mine one day for sport, with some schoolmates. The vein lies
in the lowest part of the old workings, at a depth that we think nothing of nowadays, though
it was too deep for the old masters of the pit. I remember, as though it was yesterday, how
my heart leaped within me when my torch shone upon it, and how I fled away, lest my school-fellows
should see it also. I came back the next day alone, to certify my great discovery. It is a
good vein, if ever there was one. The copper there may be worth tens of thousands, hundreds
of thousands, millions!" Never had the numeration table been invested with such significance.
Trevethick's giant frame shook with emotion; his eyes literally glared with greed.

"You have been there since?" observed Richard, interrogatively.

"Often, often," answered the other, hoarsely; "I could not keep away. But nobody else has been
there. The place is dark and perilous; there are rats, and bats, and eerie creatures all about
it. And folks are afraid, because of the Dead Hand and the Flame."

"Your hand and torch?"

"Yes. I did my best to keep the place my own; my thoughts were never absent from it for a day.
And when I had earned a little money I put it by, and more to that, and more to that again,
till I had got enough to make a bid for the lease of the old mine. But Carew was under age;
so that fell through. I bided my time, and bid again; not much--not enough, as I fondly thought,
to excite suspicion--but still what would seem a good price for a disused pit. Then I bid more
and more; but Carew will neither sell nor let; and my money grows and grows in vain. I tell
you I have laid by a fortune only to pour into his hand. It is ready for him to-night; there
would be no haggling, no asking for time--it would be paid him in hard cash. How long, thought
I, will this madman balk me with his whim? He will die some day in his cups, or break his neck
in hunting, and I shall surely come in with my offer to his heir, and have my way at last,
and win my prize. But now, after all my patience and my pains, I am overmatched by a Parson
and a Boy." He spoke with uncommon heat and passion--not complainingly. His face was dark,
and his tone violent, and even menacing. There was no mistake about his having accepted his
companion's invitation to be frank.

"Mr. Trevethick," said Richard, gravely, "your disappointment would be natural enough, if your
long-cherished plan had really failed; but you have misunderstood me altogether. I am grateful
to you for confiding to me the whole of what I had already guessed in part; and you shall have
no reason to repent your confidence. Your secret is safer now than it has ever been; for from
my lips Mr. Whymper shall never have his suspicions with respect to Wheal Danes confirmed.
I have been too long your guest, I feel myself too much the friend of you and yours, to act
in any way to your disadvantage."

Trevethick looked at him inquiringly, suspicion and disfavor glowing in his dusky face. "But
if your story is true, young gentleman, this mine will be your own some day?"

"It may, or it may not be, Mr. Trevethick. My father's intentions are not to be counted upon,
as you must be well aware, for twenty-four hours. But if ever Wheal Danes is mine--" Richard
hesitated a moment, while the landlord devoured him with his eyes.

"Well," cried he, impatiently, "what then?"

"I am willing to make over to you, as soon as I come of age, by deed, all interest that I may
have in it--on one condition."

"Make over Wheal Danes to me by deed! What! at my own price?"

"For nothing; you shall have it for a free gift."

"But the condition? What is it that you want of me that is not money?"

"I want permission from you, Mr. Trevethick, to wed, that is--for I would not speak of love
without your leave--to woo your daughter."

"To wed my daughter!" cried Trevethick, starting from his seat; "my Harry!"

"I say provided that my suit is not displeasing to her," answered Richard, not without a tremor
in his voice, for the old man's face was terrible to look upon. Hatred and Wrath were struggling
there with Avarice, and had the upper hand.

He rocked himself to and fro, then answered, in a stifled voice, "My daughter's hand is already
promised, young man."

"It may be so, Mr. Trevethick, but not by her, I think; and that her heart has not been given
to the man you have designed for her is certain. You may see that for yourself."

"I tell you I have passed my word to Solomon Coe that she shall be his wife," returned the
other, gloomily, "and I am not one to go back from a bargain."

"One can only promise what is in one's power," urged Richard; "your daughter's heart is not
yours to give. In backing this man's suit you have already redeemed your word to him. If he
has failed to win her affections--and I think he has--let me try my chance. I am a fitter match
for her in years; I am a gentleman, and therefore fitter for her, for she is a true lady. I
love her a thousand times as much as he. As for Wheal Danes, I would give you twenty such,
if I had them, for the leave I ask for, and the end I hope for."

It was curious to mark how the mere mention of the mine by name affected the old man; his wrath,
which seemed on the very point of explosion, was checked and smoothed at once, like raging
waves by oil; his brow, indeed, was still dark and frowning, but he resumed his seat, and listened,
or seemed to listen, to Richard's impassioned pleading. His genuine feeling made the young
fellow eloquent, and gave a tender charm to his always handsome face and winning tones.

Perhaps even the unsympathetic Trevethick was really somewhat touched; at all events, he did
not interrupt him, but when he had quite finished took out his watch, and said, in a softened
tone: "The hour is late, Mr. Yorke, and you have given me much to think about, to which I can
not reply just now. Your communication has taken me altogether by surprise. I will answer neither
'Yes' nor 'No' at present. Good-night, Sir." He nodded, which was his usual salute at parting;
but upon the young man's eagerly stretching out his hand, he took it readily enough, and gave
it such a squeeze with his giant fingers as made Richard wince. Then, smiling grimly, he retired.

As his heavy step toiled up stairs Richard perceived a slip of paper on the floor, which had
apparently fluttered out of the old man's watch-case. Upon it were written the three letters,
B, N, Z. As he held it in his hand he heard the landlord's tread returning with unusual haste,
and had only just time to replace the paper, face downward, on the sanded floor, before the
other reappeared.

"I have dropped a memorandum, somewhere," said he. "It is of no great consequence, but--Oh,
here it is!" He picked it up, and replaced it in the hollow of his great silver watch.

Richard, who was sitting where he had left him, looked up with a glance of careless inquiry.
"Good-night again, Mr. Trevethick."

"Good-night, Sir." And again the landlord smiled in his grim fashion.

CHAPTER XVIII.

BY MOONLIGHT.

Richard sat over the fire, revolving his late conversation with Trevethick in his mind, and
picturing to himself what would probably come of it. Although the declaration of his love for
Harry had been thus suddenly made, it had not been made unadvisedly. Though he had not expected
the opportunity for stating it would have offered itself so soon, he had planned his whole
argument out beforehand, with Wheal Danes for its pivot. And, upon the whole, he felt satisfied
with its effect upon his host. The latter had not surprised him (except by his frankness) in
his disclosure respecting the rich promise of the mine. Richard's own observation, aided by
the clew which Parson Whymper's few chance sentences had given him, had convinced him that
Wheal Danes was a most coveted object in the landlord's eyes; and had it happened to have fallen
into his own hands, he did really suspect enough to have had it searched for ore from top to
bottom. Trevethick had therefore lost nothing by his revelation (as his sagacity had doubtless
foreseen), while he had made a very favorable impression upon Richard by his candor. Cornish
giants, thought the latter, might be rude and brutal, but duplicity was foreign to their character;
it was not Blunderbore, but Jack the Giant-killer, who dug pitfalls, and pretended to swallow
what he only put in a bag.

Trevethick had certainly shown strong disfavor to the young man's suit, backed though it was
by such great pretensions; and it was evident that but for his hold upon him with respect to
the mine, Richard would not have been listened to so patiently. However, his mouth had not
been peremptorily closed at once (as he had expected it would have been), which was a great
point gained, and the longer the old man took to think about the matter the more likely was
self-interest to gain the day with him. Supposing Richard's representations to have been correct,
he was certainly "a better match" for Harry than Solomon was; and he had no apprehension of
their being refuted. Trevethick would in all probability write to Mr. Whymper to inquire into
the truth of them--but what then? He would certainly make no reference to the mine; and as
to Richard being Carew's lawful son, had not the chaplain himself (whom he could count on as
a friend to say all that was to his advantage besides) admitted that, in his eyes, he was born
in honest wedlock? At all events, there would be ample excuse for his having taken such a view
of the case; while, as to his prospects, he had frankly confessed that he was, for the present,
unacknowledged by the Squire. So long, in fact, as he could keep up the pretense of influence,
either present or contingent, at Crompton, he felt his position with Trevethick tolerably secure.
In all this scheme of dark deceit his love for Harry was interwoven like a golden thread, and
amidst all his plots and plans her glorious face would suddenly rise unbidden, and charm him
from them. He had long since resolved to win her, but the late avowal of her love for him,
and now his partial success to gain her father's favor, seemed to have made her his own already.
How beautiful she had looked that day upon the tower, with the sunlight on her hair! How fresh
and guileless were her ways! Her very weaknesses were lovable, and the cause of love. How touching
was her simple faith in omens, and how pleasant to combat it, his arm about her dainty waist,
as though to protect her from the shadow of harm! How pitiful her fear of her gruff father,
and of this Cornish Solomon; and how sweet to calm it, kissing her tears away! Once more his
loving arms embraced her--once more his lips touched her warm cheeks--when a sudden noise awakened
him from his dream of bliss.

The parlor fire had long gone out. It was warm for the time of year; but had it been otherwise
he would not have replenished it. The candles, too, had burned out, and the moon-beams were
streaming through the window; but had it been dark he would scarce have been aware of it. The
house had long ago been hushed in repose, and yet Richard felt certain that he had heard a
movement in the passage.

A stealthy step, yet not that of thief or burglar; a fairy footfall, rather, which was music
to his ear. His heart leaped up to tell him that on the other side of the door was Harry Trevethick.
He held his breath, and trembled--not for fear. Was it possible that, knowing he was sitting
there alone, she had come down of her own choice to bear him company? Had her father told her
something--some glad tidings which she could not keep from her lover even for a night? Or,
filled with sweet dreams of him, as he of her, had she risen in her sleep, and been drawn involuntarily
toward him by the loadstone of love? But--hark! The bolt that fastened the house-door was softly
drawn, and the latch gently lifted. What could that mean? Why was she thus going forth alone,
and clandestinely, at midnight? His heart beat faster than ever. For an instant all that he
had read or heard from his wild companions, and what he had himself believed until he came
to Gethin, of the wiles and inconstancy of woman, flashed upon his mind. Had he, bred in the
town, and familiar with all the ways of vice, been flattered and hoodwinked by a country wanton?
Impossible. For, though there were no virtue in the world, he felt assured that Harry loved
him, and him alone. She must be walking in her sleep. Softly, but very swiftly, he left the
parlor, and hurried to the front-door. It was closed, but unfastened. He opened it, and looked
out. All was as light as day, and yet so different. Every object in the street, every stone
in the cottage opposite, stood out distinct and clear, but bathed in a pale and ghostly atmosphere.
The distant murmur of the sea came to him like the sigh of one just freed from pain. Nothing
else was to be heard; no human tread disturbed the midnight stillness; but along the winding
road that led to Turlock he caught the far-off flutter of a woman's dress. She was going at
rapid speed, and the next moment had turned the corner, but not before he had recognized his
Harry; and, closing the inn door softly behind him, he started after her like an arrow from
the bow.

The scene of this pursuit was strange and weird enough, had Richard possessed eyes for any
thing but the object of it. The sky was without a cloud, and the sea--which showed on its cold
blue surface a broad and shining path where the moon-beams lay--without a ripple. On shore
there was even less of motion. The bramble that threw its slender shadow on the road moved
not a twig. Nature, green and pale, seemed to be cast in an enchanted sleep, and even to suspend
her breathing. From the point Richard had reached he could see the road stretching for a full
mile, like a white ribbon, save in the middle, where it dipped between high banks. It led to
Turlock only, but at this place a foot-path struck across the fields to the Fairies' Bower.
To his astonishment, though indeed he had scarcely capacity enough for further wonder, Harry
took this path; he saw her climb the stile, and then for the first time look round; he sank
under the hedge, to hide himself; and when he cautiously looked forth again the girl had vanished.
But he knew whither she was going now. He had assisted her across that very stile but a few
days ago; he had walked with her through the hazel copse, and skirted the clear trout-stream
by her side; and he could follow her now at utmost speed, and with less caution, for the path
was green and noiseless. He could hear his heart beat--not from want of breath--as though in
accord with the silver treble of the stream, as he sped along. Through the scanty foliage of
the dell he saw her light dress gleam across the wooden bridge, but he himself stopped beside
it, peering through the lattice of the branches upon her as she stood on the green bank of
the Wishing-Well.

Never had moon-beams shone upon a sight more fair. Harry was attired as she had been on the
previous evening, except that she wore a shawl, which also served her as head-gear, like a
hood. This she now unfastened, and taking out the pin that had joined it together, held it
above the well, which showed, as in a mirror, her leaning face and curving form, her wealth
of hair, her frightened yet hopeful eyes, and the rise and fall of her bosom, filled with anxiety
and superstitious awe. She had come to test her future--to foresee her fate--at Gethin Wishing-Well.
For an instant she poised the pin, her lips at the same time murmuring some simple charm--then
dropped it into the well's clear depths, and watched it fall. As she did so, another figure
seemed to glide upon the liquid mirror, at the sight of which she clasped her hands and trembled.
Superstitious as she was, Harry had only half expected that her foolish curiosity would be
actually gratified. Moved by the avowal of Richard's love that morning, the obstacles to which
seemed to her so formidable, she had wished to see her future husband, to know how fate would
decide between him she loved and him whom her father had chosen for her, and yet she was terrified
now that that which she had desired was vouchsafed her. She scarcely dared to look upon yonder
shadowy form, although its presence seemed to assure her of the fulfillment of her dearest
wish. It was the counterfeit presentment of Richard Yorke himself; bareheaded, just as she
had seen him last in the bar parlor, but with heightened color, an eager smile, and a loving
gratitude in his eyes, which seemed to thank her for having thus summoned him before her. The
figure was at right angles from her own, but the face was turned toward her. She gazed upon
it intently, looking for it to faint and fade, since its mission had been accomplished. She
even drew back a little, as though to express content, yet there was the vision still, a glorious
picture in its fair round frame of moss and greenery. Supposing it should remain there (her
pale face flushed at the thought) indelibly and forever, to tell the secret of her heart to
all the world! Then a whisper, that seemed to tremble beneath its freight of love, whispered,
"Harry! Harry!" and she looked up, and saw the substance of the shadow, her lover, standing
upon the little wooden bridge!

Though Folly be near kin to Vice, she does not acknowledge the relationship, and, to do Harry
Trevethick justice, she would never have made a midnight assignation with Richard in the Fairies'
Bower. She was more alarmed and shocked at the too literal fulfillment of her wish than pleased
to see him there. She shed tears for very shame. Whatever reserve she had hitherto maintained,
with respect to her affection for him, had now, she perceived, been swept away by her own act.
The scene to which he had just been an unsuspected witness was more than equivalent to a mere
declaration of love: it was a leap-year offer of her hand and heart. She had no strong-hold
of Duty left to which to betake herself, nor even a halting-place, such as coy maidens love
to linger at a little before they murmur, "I am yours."

There was nothing left her but revilings. She poured upon him a torrent of contumely, reproaching
him for his baseness, his cowardice, his treachery in tracking her hither, like a spy, to overhear
a confession that should have been sacred with him of all men. Whatever that confession might
have been--and, to say truth, so utterly possessed had she been by her passionate hopes, her
loving yearnings, that she knew not what she had merely felt, what uttered aloud--she now retracted
it; she had no tenderness for eaves-droppers, for deceivers, for--she did not know what she
was saying--for wicked young men. Above all things it seemed necessary to be in a passion;
to be as irritated and bitter against him as possible. The copiousness of her vocabulary of
abuse surprised herself, and she did not shrink from tautology. She only stopped at last for
want of breath, and even then, as though she knew how dangerous was silence, she bemoaned herself
with sobs and sighs.

Then Richard, all tenderness and submission, explained his presence there; showed how little
he was to blame in the matter, and, indeed, how there was neither blame nor shame to be attached
to either of them; spoke of his late interview with her father, gilding it with brightest hopes,
and cited the marvelous attributes of the Wishing-Well itself in support of his position. He
felt himself already her affianced husband; the question of their union had become only one
of time. She was listening to him now, and had suffered him to kiss her tears away, when suddenly
she started from his embrace with a muffled cry of terror. Some movement of beast or bird in
the copse had made a rustling in the underwood, but her fears gave it a human shape. What if
Sol should have followed them thither, as Richard had followed her! What if her father should
have heard her leave his roof, as Richard had, or should miss her from it--and--oh shame!--miss
him! "Home! home!" she cried. "Let me go home." And she looked so wild with fright that he
durst not hinder her. Hardly could he keep pace with her along the winding path, with such
frantic speed she ran. At the stile she forbade him to accompany her farther.

"What! leave you to walk alone, and at such an hour, my darling?" It was nearly two o'clock.

"Why not?" she cried, turning upon him fiercely. "I am afraid of none but you, and of those
whom I should love, but of whom you make me afraid." Then up the white road she glided like
a ghost.

Richard watched her with anxious eyes as long as he could, then sat upon the stile, a prey
to apprehensions. To what dangers might he not have already exposed her by his inconsiderate
pursuit! Suppose some eye had seen them on their way, or should meet her now on her return!
Suppose her own fears should prove true, and her father had already discovered their absence!
His thoughts were loyally occupied with Harry alone; but the peril to himself was considerable.
It was impossible that he could satisfactorily explain his companionship with the inn-keeper's
daughter at such a place and hour. The truth would never be believed, even if it could be related.
She had got home by this time; but had she done so unobserved? Otherwise, it was more than
probable that he should find two Cornish giants waiting, if not "to grind his bones to make
their bread," at least to break them with their cudgels. In their eyes he would seem to have
been guilty of a deliberate seduction, the one of his daughter, the other of his destined bride.
Yet, not to return to Gethin in such a case would be worse than cowardice, since his absence
would be sure to be associated with Harry's midnight expedition. He had hitherto only despised
this Trevethick and his friend, but now, since he feared them, he began to hate them. Bodily
discomfort combined with his mental disquietude. For the first time he felt the keenness of
the moonlit air, and shivered in it, notwithstanding the hasty strides which he now was taking
homeward. Upon the hill-top he paused, and glanced about him. All was as it had been when he
set out; there was no sign of change nor movement. The inn, with its drawn-down blinds, seemed
itself asleep. The front-door had been left ajar, doubtless by Harry; he pushed his way in,
and silently shut it to, and shot the bolt; then he took off his boots, and walked softly up
stairs in his stockinged feet. He knew that there was at least one person in that house who
was listening with beating heart for every noise.

The ways of clandestine love have been justly described as "full of cares and troubles, of
fears and jealousies, of impatient waiting, tediousness of delay, and sufferance of affronts,
and amazements of discovery;" and though Richard Yorke had never read those words of our great
English divine, he had already begun to exemplify them, and was doomed to prove them to the
uttermost.

CHAPTER XIX.

RICHARD BURNS HIS BOATS.

It was strange enough that day after day and week after week went by without John Trevethick
making any reference to the application his guest had made for his daughter's hand. His silence
certainly seemed to favor it; and the more so since, notwithstanding what he knew, he put no
obstacles in the way of the young people's meeting and enjoying each other's society as heretofore.
Perhaps he had too strong a confidence in Harry's sense of duty, or in the somewhat more than
filial fear in which she stood of him. Perhaps Richard's prudent and undemonstrative behavior
toward the girl in the presence of others deceived him. But, at all events, the summer came
and still found Richard under the same roof with Harry, and more like one of the family than
ever. Tourists of the young man's own position in life, and even of the same profession, began
to visit Gethin, and of course "put up" at the Castle, but he found nothing so attractive in
their company as to withdraw him from that homely coterie in the bar parlor for a single evening.
He was always made welcome there by both his host and Solomon; and without doubt, so far as
the former was concerned, a less sanguine man than the young landscape-painter might have considered
that his suit was tacitly acceded to.

Even Harry herself--to whom her father's conduct was surprising enough--had come at last to
this conclusion. Only one thing militated against this pleasant view of affairs--it was certain
that the old man had not yet opened his lips to "Sol" upon the matter. It was clear that the
miner still considered himself in the light of Harry's accepted suitor. As a lover, he was
fortunately phlegmatic, and did not demand those little tributes of affection in the shape
of smiles and whispers, secret glances, silent pressures, which his position might have exacted;
but he would now and then pay her a blundering compliment in a manner that could not be misinterpreted,
or even make some direct allusion to their future settlement in life, which embarrassed her
still more. Despite the fear of the many soldiers in the capital has flowed Pompey was
the sentiment of the majority no doubt, we could not risk it to be expressed. About the renewed
proposal by Caesar, that the two governors also the resignation of its commands may be given
up, all through his writing close down and on the settlement proposals of Marcus Caelius Rufus and
Marcus Calidius to cause any request, Pompey for immediate departure to Spain, refused the
consuls, as they could as President is to offer the vote. Even the application one of the most
determined adherents, not only against the military situation of the Things was as blind as his
party, Marcus Marcellus: suspend the decision, to the Italian militia under arms to virtue
and to protect the Senate, could not be brought to a vote. Pompey had his usual organ Quintus
Scipio To explain that he was now or never take up the matter of the Senate and they are determined
leave, if you hesitate for even longer. The consul Lentulus it expressed openly that it does
to the decision of the Senate no longer decisive, but if the same in his servility should remain,
he act on its own and to have with its powerful friends the other am. So terrorized, the majority
decided, what was told her that Caesar, to a specific, not the distant days of Lucius Domitius
Gaul Ahenobarbus, the shy side to Marcus Servilius Nonianus leave and dismiss the army had, as otherwise
he Is deemed a traitor. When the Tribune by Caesar's party against this decision of its Interzessionsrechts
served, they were not merely, as they claimed at least in the Curia itself threatened by Pompeian soldiers
with swords and for their lives save to escape slavery in clothes from the capital constraint,
but it also treats also now sufficiently intimidated her Senate formally quite constitutional
intervention as an attempt at revolution, the country declared in danger, and called in the
usual forms the entire citizenry to arms and to the top of all the armed men constitutional
officers loyal (7 January 705 49). ----------------------------------------------- To distinguish
^ 3 of the same consul of 704 (SO), this was a cousin, the consul of 705 (49) a brother of Marcus Marcellus,
Consul 703 (51). ---------------------------------------------- Now it was enough. As Caesar through
the protection beseeching him to the camp fleeing Tribune had found the set inclusion in knowledge
was that his proposals in the capital, he called the soldiers of the thirteenth legion, which
stands in from their cantonments Tergeste (Trieste) had arrived in Ravenna, developed together
and before them the state of things. It was not just the brilliant cancellations heart and soul heritage ruler whose brilliant
speech In this shocking turning point of his fate and the world aloft glowed and flamed; not
only the generous master, and the victorious army general who spoke to the soldiers, which he himself
called to arms and for eight years with ever increasing enthusiasm his standard was followed, it
said, especially the energetic and consistent statesman, which now represent twenty-nine years
since the cause of freedom in good and bad times, for them the daggers of the killers and the
executioners of the aristocracy, the swords of the Germans and commanded the waters of the unknown
ocean Despite did not yield ever and shake, Sullan of the Constitution shredded, the regiment of
the Senate fell, the military and unarmed had democracy in the struggle signposted beyond the Alps
and reinforced, and he did not speak clodianischen to the audience, the Republican enthusiasm
for long ash and slag was burned, but the young men from the cities and villages of northern
Italy, the powerful idea of ​​civil liberty, still felt fresh and clean, the still were able
to fight and die for ideals, which for their own landscape of the Government denied them citizenship
in a revolutionary way received from Caesar, had the Caesar the rods and axes fall again surrendered
and the actual evidence, the it had, how to make relentless use of it against the oligarchy Transpadanes
thought. Before such listeners put such speakers are the facts: the gratitude for the Conquest of
Gaul, the aristocracy of the generals and the army was preparing the dismissive Elimination of the
electors, the terrorizing of the Senate, a sacred duty to the front of a half a millennium of
the fathers with the weapons in the hands of the nobles wrung tribune by force of arms to shield
to keep the old oath, which that in itself as for the Grandchildren of their grandchildren made,
for the Tribune of the community to stand up man for man in death. Then, when he called the leader
and commander of the Popular Party, the soldiers of the people, now, after the quality test exhausted,
reached the yielding of the extreme outer limits was to follow him now in the past, the inevitable,
the decisive battle against the equally hated as despised, just as perfidious as incompetent
and to ridicule inveterate aristocracy - there was no officer and no soldier who would have
held back. The departure was ordered, at the tip of his vanguard Caesar crossed the narrow stream;
of his province of Italy retired and beyond which the Constitution the proconsul of Gaul banished.
By nine-year absence, the soil of his country re-entered, entered he is also the path of the
revolution. "The die was cast." 10. Chapter Brundisium Ilerda, Pharsalos and Thapsus should be established
between the two former rulers of Rome, so the total the weapons to decide who was appointed by
them to be Rome's first sole ruler. See We, as for the upcoming war between Caesar and Pompey,
the power relationship had made. Caesar's power rested on the first completely unlimited power,
that he enjoyed within his party. If the ideas of democracy and the monarchy ran together in
her so this was not the result of an accident and received accident releasable coalition, but
It was founded in the deepest essence of democracy without representative government, that democracy
monarchy as both found their highest and final expression in Caesar. Politically and Caesar decided
to military means in the first and last instance. In such high esteem he each tool was also useful,
it always remained tool: Caesar was within without his party comrades, surrounded only by
military and political aides in the Usually emerged from the army and trained as soldiers, were
nowhere to land and to question the purpose, but to obey absolutely. That is why, especially in the
crucial Moment when the civil war began, of all officers and soldiers of Caesar, only one refuse
to obey, and it only confirms this view of the relationship Caesars to his followers that this was just
the first of all. Titus had with Labienus Caesar all the hardships of the gloomy Catilinarian time
as all the splendor of the Gallic victories career divided, had commanded a regular independent
and often led half the army, he was without question as the oldest, ablest and most loyal
aides at Caesars, so even the most asked and most highly honored. Even in the year 704 (50)
Caesar had him in command in this world Gaul transferred to partly to give them confidence heading
to safe hands, sometimes also Labienus in his candidature for the consulate to promote it.
Just came here alone Labienus with the other party the name, went at the start of hostilities
in 705 (49), held in Caesar in Pompey's headquarters and fought throughout the Civil War with
unprecedented bitterness against his old friend and warlord. We are neither Labienus character yet
informed enough about the individual circumstances of his party change; but essentially nothing
is safe from here as further evidence that the war lord may be far safer to count on his captains
as to his marshals. It appears that Labienus was one of those personalities, full of military usefulness
statesmanship and the inability to unite if they do, unfortunately, politics want or need,
those fab dizziness are exposed, of which the history of Napoleonic marshals so many tragicomic example shows.
He might well be entitled To keep than to apply the second head of the Democracy next Caesar, and
that, having this right was rejected, it will have led in the camp of the enemy. It was here
first Times, the whole weight of evil, that Caesar's treatment of its officers as a dependent
Aides not to take over a separate command suitable men in his camp summoned up, while still
easily be foreseen in the fragmentation of the forthcoming Warfare by all the provinces of the
vast empire just such men needed urgently. But this disadvantage was still far outweighed by
the first and only at that price to be preserved condition of any success, the unit of top management.
The uniform Line was given its full force by the usefulness of the tools. This came in first Line into
account the army. They had nine infantry legions or 50000 Man, but all of which faced the enemy,
and two-thirds of all campaigns had taken part against the Celts. The cavalry was composed
of German mercenaries and Norian, their usefulness and reliability in the war against Vercingetorix
had been tested. The full eight-year war against the manifold vicissitudes brave, though military
decided following the Italian Caesar Celtic nation had given the opportunity to organize his army, as
only he knew how to organize. All the fitness of the soldiers requires physical abilities: was at
Caesars levies on strength and dexterity more than the recruits on wealth and morality seen. But
the performance of the Army is based, as that of each machine, especially on the ease and speed the movement
in readiness for immediate departure at any time and in the rapidity Caesar's soldiers of marching
obtained a rarely achieved and probably never surpassed Perfection. Courage was of course over all:
the art of the war and the rivalry Esprit de corps to fan such that the preference of individual
soldiers and the departments themselves Standing back as the necessary hierarchy of bravery,
appeared Caesar practiced with unmatched Championship. He got used to fear from the people by where
it occurred without serious risk could, the soldiers often coming from a fight was not informed
but they unexpectedly encounter the enemy left. But the courage was equal to the obedience.
The soldier was encouraged to do the wards without asking the reason and purpose; some pointless
ordeal was only as an exercise in the difficult art of blind obedience imposed upon it. The discipline
was strict, but not embarrassing: it was ruthlessly handled if the soldier was standing before
the enemies, at other times, especially after the victory, the Reins slackened, and when the
otherwise useful soldiers then popular, to perfume themselves or clean with elegant arms and other
things are, even if he brutalities skills or even wrong kind of concern could be guilty and not only
First, the military relations were affected by the fact there has been some Narrenteidung as
the crime to him through the deaths and complaints of the provincials were at the commander a deaf
ear. Mutiny on the other hand was not only the instigators, but even the corps, Never forgiven.
But the true soldier should not just at all competent, brave and obedient, but all this he is willing
to be so voluntarily, and only where it is ingenious natures, by example and hope and, above
all by the knowledge used appropriate to be that animated machine which govern them to determine
the lucky service. If the officer to require his people courage, even with them the danger
in the Eye must have seen so Caesar had also had as a general opportunity to the sword and then pull
equal to the best of him used; to work and hardships but it seems always themselves far more than his
soldiers. Caesar made sure of victory, the first course, the commander brings profit, but
also for the soldiers personal Hopes were placed. That he knew how to inspire the soldiers to the
cause of democracy, the extent that the prosaic has become still allowed enthusiasm, and that
the political equality Transpadanes the landscape, the home of most of his soldiers, with the
real Italy was presented as one of the objectives fight has already been mentioned. It is understood
that in addition and material rewards were not lacking, both specific for outstanding feats of
arms, as general for any good soldier, that the officers doped, the soldiers gifted and have been
for the triumph of the most lavish gifts in view. But above all Caesar knew things as a true
master army, in every large or small driving wheel the powerful tool to awaken the feeling
suitably used. The ordinary man is intended to serve and he is reluctant not to be a tool if
he feels that a Master wants it to. Everywhere and always rested the eagle eye of the commander
on the whole army, with impartial justice, rewarding and punishing, and the activity of each
of the routes serving the best of all looking, so that even with the slightest sweat and Blood experimented
or not played, but also about where it was necessary to unconditional surrender was called up to
his death. Without the individual in the entire engine to look for Allow him Caesar had yet
enough of the political and military context of the Things imagined to be recognized as a statesman
and commander of the soldier, or perhaps idealized be. Certainly, he treated the soldiers not
as an equal, but as men who Truth be entitled to demand and bear were capable of, and the
promises and Insurance of the commander had to be believed, without cheating or suspect listen
to rumors, as a longtime comrades in war and victory, in which hardly anyone was, he knew not
by name and in which not all of the campaigns a more or less formed a personal relationship
with the commander would have, as good comrades with whom he tame and with his usual cheerful chatter
and reversed elasticity, as wards, to repay their services to avenge their wrongs, and his death was a
sacred duty. Maybe There has never been an army that was so perfect, what should be the Army: one
for their Purposes, capable and willing machine for their purposes in the hands of a master,
who on her its own elasticity transfers.
 At present, I tell you fairly, that
if I saw a check of yours, I should look upon it as so much waste paper until I also saw it
honored."

"Three thousand pounds is a large sum, Mr. Trevethick," said Richard, thoughtfully.

"Let us say two, then," returned the landlord, mockingly. "Sell out two thousand pounds of
this independent fortune of yours, that has been invested in the Deep Sea Cockle Mine, or in
debentures of the Railway in the Air. Let me see but two thousand pounds, Mr. Richard Yorke,
and then--and not before--may you open your lips to me again respecting my daughter Harry."
He turned upon his heel with a bitter laugh; while Richard, as white as the sketch-book he
still held in his hand, remained speechless. A perilous thought had taken possession of his
mind--a thought that it would have been better for him to have dropped down there dead than
to have entertained, but it grew and grew apace within him like a foul weed. Had his life of
selfish pleasure angered the long-suffering gods, and, having resolved upon his ruin, were
they already making him mad? He ran after the old man, who did not so much as turn to look
behind him, though he could not but have heard his rapid steps. "Mr. Trevethick, I will do
it," he gasped out.

"Do what?" said the other, contemptuously, striding on. "Go hang yourself, or jump off Gethin
rock into the sea?"

"I will get you the money that you speak of--the two thousand pounds. You shall have it in
your hand, and keep it for that matter, if you please."

"What?" Unutterable astonishment stared out from the landlord's face. For the first time since
the receipt of Carew's letter he began to discredit its contents. If this young fellow had
really the immediate command of so large a sum, there was probably much more "behind him."
He must either have a fortune in his own right, or if Carew had settled such a sum of money
on him, he must have had a reason for it--the very reason Richard had assigned. And if so,
Wheal Danes might be his to dispose of even yet. But Trevethick was not the man to hint a doubt
of his foregone conclusions. "You have not got this money in your pocket, have you?" said he,
with a short dry laugh.

"No, Sir; but I can get a check for it from my mother, in course of post."

"A check!" cried the other, contemptuously, all his suspicions returning with tenfold force.
"I would not give one penny for such a check."

"I will get it changed myself, Mr. Trevethick, at Plymouth. The post has gone, but I will write
to-morrow, and within the week--"

"You shall not stay here a week, nor another twenty-four hours," roared Trevethick. "I have
been made a fool of long enough. I will not listen to another word."

But he did listen, nevertheless. No longer hampered by vague fears and difficulties, with which
he knew not how to grapple, but with a distinct plan of operations before him, Richard's eloquence
was irresistible. Deceit, if not habitual with him, had been practiced too often to lack the
gloss of truth from his ready tongue. He actually had a scheme for procuring the sum in question,
and when he possessed confidence himself, it was rarely, indeed, that he failed to inspire
it in others. For the second time, the landlord of the Gethin Castle found himself in doubt;
he was staggered by the positiveness of the young man's assertions, and by the force and flow
of his glowing words. In spite of himself, he began once more to think that he might have been
mistaken in condemning him as an impostor, after all; as Richard had said, Carew was scarcely
sane, and when excited by wrath, a downright madman. His resolves, too, were as untrustworthy
and fickle as the winds. Trevethick felt tolerably convinced that the money would, at all events,
be forthcoming; and the sum--large in itself--seemed the earnest of much more. Last, but not
least, there were the possibilities in connection with the mine. If he broke altogether with
Richard, and turned him out of his house outright, might not his first act be to reveal to
Parson Whymper, in revenge, all that he knew about Wheal Danes!

"Well, well, you shall stay at Gethin, then, till your check comes, young gentleman," said
he, in a tone that was meant to be conciliatory. "I don't wish to be uncivil to any man, and
certainly not to one who has been my guest so long. But you will keep yourself to yourself,
if you please, in the mean time. The bar parlor will no longer be open to you, until you have
proved your right to be there. And I don't mean to promise any thing certain by that, neither;
but what with your fast talking and fine speaking I'm all in a buzz."

Honest John Trevethick did not, indeed, know What to think, what to believe, or what to propose
to himself for the future. His brain, unaccustomed to much reflection, and dulled by pretty
frequent potations, was fairly muddled. Most heartily did he wish that this young landscape-painter
had never set foot in Gethin; but yet he could not make up his mind to summarily eject him.
Upon the whole, he was almost as glad to temporize in the matter as Richard was himself.

In point of fact, Richard Yorke had won the battle, and was for the present master of the field;
but what a struggle it had been, and at what a loss he had obtained the victory, you might
have read in his white face and haggard eyes. As to whether it would be possible to hold the
advantage he had gained was a problem he had yet to solve. He had committed himself to a policy
which might--nay, very probably would--succeed; but if it should fail, there would be no escape
from utter ruin. He had burned his boats, and broken down the bridge behind him.

CHAPTER XX.

ON THE BRINK.

For four more days, Richard Yorke continued at the Gethin Castle--to outward appearance, in
the same relation with the landlord and his family as before, but in reality on a totally different
footing. Trevethick had not found it practicable to exclude his late guest from the bar parlor;
he could not do so without entering into an explanation with its other tenants, which he was
not prepared for, or without devising some excuse far beyond his powers. Notwithstanding his
bluff ways, he could tell a lie without moving a muscle; but he was incapable of any such ambitious
flight of deceit as the present state of affairs demanded. He had, indeed, no aptitude for
social diplomacy of any kind, and suffered his change of feeling toward the young landscape-painter
to appear so plainly that even the phlegmatic Solomon observed it. He was rather pleased than
otherwise to do so. He had acquiesced in the hospitality with which Richard had been treated,
but without the slightest sympathy with it; and, in fact, he had no sympathies save those which
were connected with his personal interests. It was evident enough that his father-in-law elect
had had some reasons of his own--probably in relation to the property he held under Carew--for
conciliating this young gentleman; and "Sol" had taken it for granted they were good, that
is, substantial, ones. If these reasons no longer existed, the sooner this young gentleman
was got rid of the better. It was true he had behaved himself very civilly; but his presence
among them had been, on the whole, oppressive. "Sol" rather chafed at Richard's social superiority,
though it was certainly never intruded, and, at all events, he preferred the society of his
own class, among whom he felt himself qualified to take the lead. But the idea of jealousy
had never entered into his mind. In his eyes Richard was a mere boy, whose years, as well as
his position in life, precluded him from any serious intentions with respect to Harry, whom,
moreover, Solomon regarded as his betrothed. If he had been married to her, he would certainly
have forbidden her "gadding about" so much with this young fellow; but at present she was under
her father's rule, and the old man knew very well what he was about. He was glad that there
now seemed a prospect, to judge from the latter's manner, that the lad's intimacy with Harry,
and the family generally, was about to end; but it might have lasted six months longer without
"Sol's" opening his mouth about it, so prudently had Richard played his cards--so irreproachably
behaved "before folk."

Solomon went, as usual, daily to look after affairs at Dunloppel, but Trevethick remained within
doors, under pretense that the influx of guests, which was in fact considerable, demanded his
presence. He took care that Richard and Harry should have no opportunity of meeting alone throughout
the day; while in the evening he sat in almost total silence, sucking his pipe, and frowning
gloomily--a wet blanket upon the little company, and the source of well-grounded terror to
his daughter Harry.

Richard had told her how the matter stood; protested that he could get the money; and argued
that when that was done, her father could have no excuse for forbidding his suit. But she knew
the old man better than he, and trembled.

On the fifth day Richard received a letter, inclosing a check for two thousand pounds upon
a London bank, from his mother, and, with an air of quiet triumph, showed it to his host.

"That is worth nothing here," observed Trevethick, coldly; "for all I know, the bank may not
exist, or she may have no account there." But it was plain he was surprised, and disappointed.

"Notice has been sent to Plymouth, as I am here informed," said Richard; "so that I can get
the check changed there, if you are still dissatisfied; which, you must pardon me for saying,
I do not think you really are. Come, take my hand, and allow that you have behaved ungenerously.
You're a man of your word, I know. This proves to you I am at least no pauper. I claim the
right which you agreed to grant on that condition, to ask your daughter's hand, and demand
of you to leave her, at all events, to grant it if she pleases. I affirm, once more, the truth
of all that I have told you as regards myself. I am Carew's only son, begotten in lawful wedlock.
He will acknowledge as much himself some day, even though he should delay it to his dying hour.
If ever I come to possess it (and I think I shall), Wheal Danes shall be yours, without the
payment of a shilling. Even now, I do not offer myself empty-handed. This is the sum that you
yourself agreed I should show myself possessed of; but there is more where this comes from.
I ask again, then, give me my fair chance with Harry: let her choose between me and this man Coe."

This was a wily speech; for Richard was recapitulating the very arguments which were presenting
themselves to the old man's mind. True, he had promised his daughter to Solomon, and would
much rather have had him for a son-in-law; but there were unquestionably great advantages in
the position of this other claimant. Trevethick was not quite the slave to gratitude which
he had professed himself to be, with respect to Coe's father. He did feel sincerely grateful;
but he had himself exaggerated the feeling, with the very intention of making Harry understand
that her fate was fixed. He had not been blind to the fact, that from the first she had never
regarded "Sol" with favor as a suitor, and it was still possible to break off the match without
disgrace, upon the ground of her disinclination to it. Above all, perhaps, he was actuated
by the apprehension that Richard, if refused a hearing, would disclose the secret of Wheal
Danes, and wreck the scheme upon which his heart had been set for near half a century. One
word from him would divert the unsuspected wealth, over which he had so long gloated in anticipation,
into another's hand. But he did not like the young man better for the precious knowledge which
he alone shared with him; far otherwise; he hated him for it, and, without being a murderer
in his heart, would have gladly welcomed the news that his mouth was closed forever by death.

"I wish such or such a one was in heaven," is a common expression, the meaning of which is
of still more general acceptation. The idea, in fact, has doubtless flitted across the minds
of most of us, though few, let us hope, would help to realize it; for, notwithstanding its
agreeable form, it is not a benevolent aspiration. The reception of the individual in question
into the realms of bliss has less interest with us than his removal from the earth's surface,
and, consequently, from our path upon it. We may be very civil toward this person, and we often
are; but we seldom desire him for a son-in-law. John Trevethick did not. But still less did
he desire his open enmity; the longer, at all events, the declaration of war could be deferred
the better.

"Come," urged Richard; "I am only demanding the redemption of your promise--one," added he,
precipitately, "that it lies in your own power to redeem."

"The conditions, Mr. Yorke, have not yet been fulfilled," said Trevethick, pointing to the
check. "I must see that money in bank-notes."

He had not the least doubt of the genuineness of the document; but his objection would at least
give him the respite of another day or two, and a respite seemed almost a reprieve.

"As you will," answered Richard, with a faint smile. "It is a matter of perfect indifference
to me, and only costs me a journey to Plymouth. If you will be so good as to let me have some
vehicle to take me as far as Turlock, I will pack my carpet-bag and start at once."

The landlord nodded, and withdrew without a word.

Left to himself, the smile faded from Richard's face, and was succeeded by a look of the utmost
dejection and disappointment. All had been going so well up to that very last moment, and now
all remained to be done, just as though nothing had been done at all. The dangerous path that
he had marked out for himself had to be trodden from first to last, at the very moment when
he had seemed to have reached his journey's end by a safe short-cut. He knew that it was the
smallest grain of suspicion, if not the mere desire to procrastinate, that had turned the scale
in Trevethick's mind, and imposed this task upon him. The genuineness of the check had been
almost taken for granted--entire success had been missed, as it were, by a hair's-breadth.
And now he was as far from it as ever. Had he been but a little more earnest, or a little more
careless in his own manner, all might have been well. Caesar used even by to lead
Northern Italy from as close as the election campaigns and to monitor. Nevertheless, was achieved,
the purpose is very imperfect. For 699 (55) have been, the Treaty of Luca accordingly, Pompey
and Crassus consuls elected and the only candidate persevering the opposition, Lucius Domitius
removed: but even this was only apparent violence been enforced, and Cato was wounded and others
vorfielen most annoying performances. In the next Konsularwahlen for 700 (54) was done, all efforts
of the authorities to Despite victory, Domitius really elected, and Cato now whether in applying
for the praetor, in him the year before, the annoyance of the entire citizenry of Caesars client
Vatinius the field had struck. In the elections for 701 (53), the opposition, among other
Candidates and the leaders of the incontestable as to transfer the most annoying Wahlumtriebe,
that those that have brought the scandal was no different as they could be dropped. This repeated defeats
of the dynasties and evil in the election battleground may in part be attributed be on the Unregierlichkeit
the rusty machinery that unpredictable contingencies of the election business, the attitude of the middle
class opposition, which many here engaging and the party position often strangely intersecting
private considerations, the main cause but lies elsewhere. The elections were in that time much
in the power of the various Clubs, in which the aristocracy was grouped, the corruption of
the same nature was the most comprehensive Scale and organized with the greatest order. The
same aristocracy that is representing in the Senate was also dominated the elections, but when they grudgingly
gave way in the Senate, and had agreed they meet here in secret and safe from any accountability
to those in power necessarily. That by the strict criminal law against the club's are Wahlumtriebe
that Crassus as consul 699 (55) to confirm the citizenship, had the effect of the nobility
in this field was not broken, of course by itself and see the election of the next few years. Similarly,
Great difficulties were the rulers of the jury. In its momentary Decided in the same composition,
next to the equally influential Senate nobility, mainly the middle class. Setting a high gripped
by a jury census of Pompey 699 (55) applied for law is a remarkable proof that the opposition to the
authorities based in the actual middle class had here and the high financial as always proved to
be more amenable to this. Nevertheless, was the Republican Party here has not withdrawn all the ground
and she was not tired, with political action thriller Alan, not the rulers themselves, but
probably to follow their excellent tools. This Process was led war more vividly than the tradition
according to the indictment of senatorial business Youth approached and understandably in these
young men more than among older peers yet to find republican passion, fresh talent and bold aggressiveness
was. However, the courts were not free, and if the authorities made serious, they did as little
as the Senate to refuse to obey. None of the opponents of the opposition with so grim, proverbial hatred
pursued as Vatinius, by far the boldest and safer closer to the followers of Caesar, but his Lord commanded,
and he was in processes all charges against him acquitted. Meanwhile, accusations of men as Gaius and
Gaius Licinius Calvus Asinius Pollio the sword of the dialectic and the scourge of to swing ridicule
understood missed their target even not, if they failed; and individual achievements were not enough.
In most cases, of course, they were minor Individuals suffered, but also one of the most hated
and made trailer of dynasties, the Consulate Gabinius, was overthrown in this way. However,
combined with the implacable hatred of the aristocracy to him the law on the management of
the pirate war awarded as little as the dismissive treatment of the Senate during his governorship
of Syria, Gabinius against the rage of high finance, the opposite, he ventured as governor of
Syria, there had to represent the interests of the provincials, and even the resentment of Crassus,
the he had made at the handover of the province of prolixity. His only protection against
all This was Pompey's enemy, and he had every reason to his abilities, boldest and most loyal
aides to defend at all costs, but here as everywhere, he did not understand it, his to use power and
to represent his clients such as the Caesar took his own: the end 700 (54), the jury found guilty of
extortion Gabinius and sent him in exile. On the whole, were so popular in the field of elections
and the jury it is the leaders who preferred the shorter. The factors that prevailed in it,
were less tangible and therefore harder to terrorize or to corrupt than the direct organs the
government and administration. The rulers met here, especially in national elections, to the viscous
force in the closed and coteries clustered oligarchy with which one yet by no means finished,
is when one has thrown their regiment, and to break the Government's view is, the concealed it
occurs. They also met here, especially in the juries, the reluctance of the middle classes against
the new monarchical regime, with all the arising from these embarrassments they were able to eliminate
either. They suffered in both areas a series of defeats, of which the election victory of the
opposition while only the value of demonstrations, since the authorities had had the means and
used, cancel at any unpopular officials in fact, the opposition criminal convictions but in
a sensitive way, they robbed useful agents. How could things stood, the rulers of the popular
vote and the jury is still sufficient to eliminate or to dominate, and the opposition, as it was
very concentrated here too, claimed up to a certain extent, but the melee. Even more difficult but
it turned out, the Opposition to meet in a field, they turned increasingly eager as more of
them the immediate political action was forced out. This was the literature. Even The court
was also opposition, yes, above all, a literary, as the speeches regularly have been published
and served as political pamphlets. Faster and sharper still met the arrows of poetry. The vibrant
high aristocratic youth, perhaps even more energetically the educated middle class in the Italian country
towns, led the pamphlets and Epigrammenkrieg with zeal and success. Fought side by side in this field,
the distinguished Senator's son Gaius Calvus Licinius (672-706 82-48), who as an orator and pamphleteer
and as a skillful writer was feared, and the municipal of Cremona and Verona, Marcus Furius
Bibaculus (652-691 102-63) and Quintus Valerius Catullus (87-54 667 to 700), whose elegant
and biting Epigrams fast as an arrow flew through Italy and met their goal. Certainly there is
in the literature of these years, the oppositional tone. It is full of grim mockery of the "Great
Caesar," "the only general," against the loving father and son, which destroy the whole world to their
run-down favorites opportunity to give to parade the spoils of the long-haired Celts through the
streets of Rome, with the Prey to the most remote islands of the West orient royal feasts and
as goldregnende The honest competitors outdo boys at home with their girls. It is in the Catullus ^
6 poems and other debris of the literature of the time something of the genius of personal and
political hatred, of those in frantic joy or despair serious exuberant Republican agony as they
emerge in a mighty way in Aristophanes and Demosthenes. At least the wisest of the three rulers
knew well that it was equally impossible to despise the opposition, such as by force command
to suppress it. As far as he could, Caesar tried instead to win the most famous writer in person.
Cicero had the considerate treatment he underwent preferably from Caesar, to a large extent
to thank his literary reputation, but the governor of Gaul did not disdain even with that of Catullus
in Verona by the help of his father's known him personally to conclude a special peace, the
young poet, who with just the powerful General bitterest and most personal sarcasms had inundated
most flattering from the same ward with the Award treated. Yes Caesar was genius enough to
his literary adversaries on their own territories to follow and as many indirect defense attacks a
detailed to post general report on the Gallic Wars, which the necessity and Constitutionality
of his war with happy assumed naivety to the public developed. Solo poetic and creative is what it is necessarily
and exclusively the Freedom, and she alone, it can, even in the most miserable caricature, still with
her to inspire last breath fresh natures. All elements of literature were capable and remained
anti-monarchist, and when Caesar himself was allowed to venture into this area without to
fail, the reason was but that he himself even now the great dream within the meaning of a free
commonwealth, bore the course neither he nor his opponents on its transfer trailer could. The
practical policy was not necessarily by those in power dominated the literature as the Republican
^ 7 ----------------------------------------- ^ 6 The collection is preserved to us full of relations
on the events of 699 (55) and 700 (54) and was known in the latter no doubt made, the latest
incident, which it does, the process of Vatinius (August 700 54). Jerome's statement that Catullus 697/98
(57/56) died, therefore needs to be moved by only a few years. From the fact that Vatinius
at "his consulate conspires", it has been concluded erroneously that the collection appeared only
after Vatinius' Consulate (707 47), it follows only that Vatinius as she appeared, already
could count on being in any particular year consul, including he already 700 (54) had every reason,
for sure his name was on with the agreed in Luca Candidate list (Cic. Article 4, 8 b, 2). ^ 7
The following poetry of Catullus (29) in 699 (53) or 700 (54), after Caesar's brit anni shear
expedition and before the death of Juliet, written. Who can it appearance, who is able auszustehn,
who is not a goat, a player or gourmet is that now calls his Mamurra what once had long hair,
the Celts and the remote British Country? You wimp Romulus, the see and give to you? The ointment
is therefore in high spirits and hard , As sweet Schnabelierer as Adonis now here over a single
girl in all our rooms? You Wimp Romulus, the see and give to you? Are you a glutton, a player 're a
goat! Drum words translated test, the only general to fernstentlegnen island of you Occident, That
here your disused pastime could waste two or three million? What's wrong with liberal, if
not this? Has not enough been ruined and he squandered? First was his father's dilapidated estate,
then the Pontus prey, then Iberia, Of these, know of the Tagus goldbeschwerte wave. The fear that
you Brit Anner, Celts, who fear the! What do you heget the rags, which can hunt anything from
a rich heritage through the throat? Drum circle of the earth so you ruiniertet, your loving father-son?
Mamurra from Formia, Caesar's favorite, and for a time during the Gallic War officer his army
was, presumably returned shortly before writing this poem, to the capital and probably then
engaged in the construction of its much-discussed, with prodigal Superb fitted marble palace on the
Caelischen mountains. The Iberian prey will belong to Caesar's governorship of the beyond Mamurra
Spain and even then, as sure later in Gaul, found in his headquarters in, is probably the Pontic on
Pompey's war against Mithridates, especially since. following the suggestion of the poet not
only Caesar has enriched the Mamurra. Innocent than these toxic, Caesar felt bitter Invective (Suetonius
Caes. 73) is another about the simultaneous poem of the same poet (11), which are here also like it because
it is pathetic with his introduction to a nothing less pathetic than the general staff of the
Commission new powers from the tavern suddenly advanced to headquarters Gabinius, Anthony and
the rest of them and very much parody-like. Recall that it was written at a time when Caesar
on the Rhine and fought on the Thames and where the expedition of Crassus to Parthia, after
the Gabinius Egypt have been prepared. The poet, as if even one of the leaders of one of the
hoping for vacant posts, are two of his clients the last orders before the departure: Furius
and Aurelius, Catullus your aides, may he draw on India's end, Where the East Sea Echoing widely
surging wave hits the beach, or to Hyrcania and Arabia, in the pfeilfroh'n Parthian territory
and Saker Or where the mirror of the sea colors of the sevenfold Nile; Or does it his way over
the Alps, where the Malstein was the great Caesar, Where the Rhine flows and on the live Erdrand
Wilde Brit Anner - you, ready with all the Catullus, which he Gods Final Council determines it to
share my treasure bringeth even before the short tiresome Message! Let it stand and walk with their
husbands, what they embraced three hundred at the same time holds true to love No one, but every
hour of every will. Not, as otherwise they looked after my love, she deliberately bent, like
the violets, That along at the edge of the field Stripped the walking plow. -------------------------------------------
It was necessary to Although powerless against this, but always troublesome and boldly expectant
opposition to Ernst intervene. The issue was, it seems, the condemnation of Gabinius (end of 700
54). The ruler agreed to some, albeit only to effect temporary dictatorship and using these
new coercive specifically with regard to elections and the jury enforce. As the person who
was responsible, first, the government of Rome and Italy, took over the implementation of this
Decision Pompey, they also contributed for the stamp of his own Sluggishness in the Resolution
and the action and his strange inability to self- as to command where he wanted and was able to
go out with the language. Already output 700 (54) was in hints and not even the claim by Pompey's
dictatorship laid before the Senate. As an ostensible reason, the continuous strip club and
economy was in the capital, by bribery and violence, but at the elections as to the jury the
pernicious pressure to bear and the riot was there in perpetuity, and we must admit, that
they easily made the rulers to justify their Ausnahmemaßregeln. Solo understandably spared
even the servile majority are reluctant to approve what the future dictator even seemed to hesitate
to seek open. Then, when the unprecedented agitation for the Elections to the consulate for 701
(53) the most annoying performances brought about the elections a full Year on the fixed time,
abducted, and only after a seven interregnum in July 701 (53) took place, Pompey found in it the
desired occasion as the only means the node where he can not be hacked yet, the Senate now intended
to refer to the dictatorship; but the decisive word of command was still not spoken. Perhaps
it would be even long remained unspoken, if not with the Konsularwahlen for 702 (52) against the
candidates Quintus Metellus Scipio and the rulers Publius Plautius Hypsaeus, both personally
to Pompey closely related and quite loyal men, the boldest of the Republican party-goers Opposition
Annius Titus Milo, had stepped as opposition candidate in his place. Milo, equipped with physical
courage, with a certain talent for intrigue and into debt, and especially with plenty of congenital
and carefully trained audacity, had among the political Industry knights of those days made a name and
was next in his craft Clodius of the most famous man, certainly including this in the most
deadly hostility competition. Since this road was the Achilles acquiriert by those in power
and with their approval again played the ultra-democrats, of course, was the Hector of the
street aristocrat and the Republican opposition, which have now closed with Catiline himself
Alliance would, if he had been wearing her, saw Milo willingly as their rightful Champions in all riots.
In fact, the few successes in this field of battle, they it was the work of Milos and its well-trained
fencers gang. Supported so as hinwiederum Cato and his family Milos application for the consulate, and
even Cicero could not help his Enemy's enemy, his longtime patron to advise, and as Milo himself neither
money still spared violence to enforce its election, secured seemed the same. For those in power they would
not merely have been a new crushing defeat, but also a real Danger, for it was expected that the
daring partisan is not as easy as Domitius and other men of honest opposition as consul would
be canceled. As it happened that by chance near the capital, on the Appian Way, Achilles and Hector
encountered one another and between gangs resulted in a mutual scuffle in which Clodius himself
a sword blow to the shoulder and was forced was, to an adjoining House to escape. This was done
without authority Milos, since the matter but so far had come and the storm now had to be passed but
once, it seemed the whole crime Milo desirable and even less dangerous than the half: he ordered
his men to the Clodius draw out from his hiding place and close it down (13 January 702 52). The
Street leader of the party's leaders, People's Tribune Titus Munatius Plancus, Quintus Pompeius Rufus
and Gaius Crispus Sallust saw in this incident, a suitable occasion in the interests of their
masters Milos candidacy and to thwart Pompey's dictatorship to enforce. The dregs of the populace,
especially the freedmen and slaves who, with their patron Clodius and lost future liberator: the
need for excitement was so easily effected. After the bloody corpse on the platform of the market
exhibited in the parade and associated Speeches were held, went off the riot. To the stake for
the great liberator ward of residence of the perfidious aristocracy: the rotting body was in
the town hall and set fire to the building. Then the swarm preferred Milos house and had besieged
the same, to the gang drove the attackers with arrows. We went to the house of Pompey and his Konsularkandidaten
of which of those as a dictator, they welcomed as consuls were, and from then before the king
of the intermediate Marcus Lepidus, the head of the consular elections was responsible. Since
this dutifully refused the same as demanding the roaring pile it to organize immediately, so he was kept
under siege for five days in his apartment. But the entrepreneurs of this outrageous appearances on
their role had played. However, was her lord and master decided to use this favorable incident
so as not eliminate only Milo, but also to take the dictatorship, but he did not want by a
bunch Knüttelmänner received, but by the Senate. Pompey drew up troops to the ruling in the capital
and in fact all over the world have become intolerable anarchy knock down, now at the same
time he ordered what he requested before, and the Senate gave way. It was only a trivial trick,
that the proposal of Cato and Pompey, the proconsul Bibulus while leaving his previous positions
held for the dictator to the "consul without colleague" appointed ward (the 25th of the intercalary
month 8702 ^ 52) - a maneuver which has a twofold with internal Opposition afflicted ^ 9 Designation
allowed, to avoid the simple product descriptions, and vividly recalls the wise decision of the Junkers
lost, the plebeians not give the consulate, only consular authority. --------------------------------------------------
- ^ 8 was followed this year with 29 to January and February with 23 days of the intercalary month
of 28 and then in March. ^ 9 Consul is Mr (I, 260) and a consul, who is also pro-consul is, is
both real and vice consul. -------------------------------------------------- - So in the
legal possession of full power, Pompey went to the station and walked from strongly against the
powerful in the clubs and the juries Republican Party. The existing Election rules were enjoined
by a special law and repeated by another against the Wahlumtriebe that since all 684 (70) committed
crimes of this nature retroactive Force, received the previously set to increase penalties. More
importantly, the available that the governorships, which is the far more significant and more
far more profitable Half in office, the consuls and praetor not immediately withdraw from the consulate
in or the praetor, but only after the expiry of an additional five years should be awarded order
which of course could not take effect until four years ago and therefore the next time the
occupation of much of the governorships for the regulation of this Interim Senate resolutions to
be adopted, that is really from the moment the Senate dominant person or group is addictive.
The jury commissions were indeed exist, but the Rekusationsrecht is capped and, perhaps more importantly
was abolished freedom of speech in the courts than by both the number of lawyers to each allotted
speaking time is limited by the maximum rates and torn bad habit: In addition to the fact-also
known as character witnesses or "eulogist" in favor of the accused forbidden to teach, was.
The obedient Senate also decreed on Pompey's hint that advised by the brawl on the Appian
Way, the fatherland is in danger, therefore, was the same for all related crimes by a special law
a Special Commission and appointed its members almost from Pompey. There was also an attempt
made the censorial office to procure another serious role and through it the to clean deeply
dysfunctional citizenry of the worst scum. All these measures made under the pressure of the
sword. As a result of the declaration of the Senate, that the country is at risk Pompey called
in Italy the service-team subject to arms and she took the oath for all cases and duty was temporarily
is sufficient and reliable Troop down to the Capitol, every opposition movement threatened Pompey
with armed Intervention and provided during the process of negotiations for the murder of
Clodius all Contrary to custom, the court of justice even watch.
 He had never been inside a bank before, and he looked
around him curiously. On the left was an opaque glass door, with "Manager's Room" painted on
it; on the right was an elevated desk, from which every part of the apartment could be commanded;
the clerk who sat there looked down at him for an instant as he entered, but at once resumed
his occupation. Every body was busy with pen and ledger; men were thronging in and out like
bees, giving or receiving sheaves of bank-notes, or heaps of gold and silver. Richard waited
until there was a vacant place at the counter, then stepped up with: "I want to exchange some
Bank of England notes, please, for your own notes."

"Next desk, Sir," said the man, not even looking up, but pointing with the feather of his quill
pen, then scratching away again as though he would have overtaken the lost time.

There was a singing in Richard's ear as he repeated his request, and fumbled in his breast-pocket
for the notes; then a silence seemed to fall upon the place, which a moment before had been
so alive and noisy. Every pen seemed to stop; the ring of the gold, the rustle of paper, ceased;
only the tick of the great clock over the centre door was heard. "Thief, thief! thief, thief!"
were the words it said.

"How much is there?" inquired the clerk, taking the bundle of notes from Richard's hand; and
his voice sounded as though it was uttered in an empty room.

"Two thousand pounds," said Richard. "Is there any difficulty about it? If so, I can take them
elsewhere."

But the clerk had got them already, and was beginning to put down the number of each in a great
ledger. Richard had not calculated upon this course of procedure, and had his reasons for objecting
to it.

"80,431, 80,432, 80,433," read out the clerk aloud, and every soul in the room seemed listening
to him.

"That will do," said another voice close to Richard's ear, and a light touch was laid upon
his arm. Scarlet to the very temples, he looked up, and there stood the little red-whiskered
man from whom he had parted not ten minutes before. A very grave expression was now in those
twinkling black eyes. "I have a warrant for your apprehension, young man, upon a charge of
theft," said he.

"Of theft!" said Richard, angrily. "What nonsense is this?"

"Those notes are stolen," said the little man. "Your name is Richard Yorke, is it not?"

"What's that to you?" said Richard. "I decline--"

Here the door of the manager's room was opened, and out strode Solomon Coe, with a look of
cruel triumph on his harsh features. "That's your man, right enough," said he. "He'd wheedle
the devil, if once you let him talk. Be off with him!"

The next moment Richard's wrists were seized, and he was hurried out between two men--his late
acquaintance of the hotel and a policeman--down the bank steps, and into a fly that stood there
in waiting.

"To the County Jail!" cried Solomon, as he entered the vehicle after them. Then he turned to
the red-whiskered man, and inquired fiercely, why he hadn't put the darbies on the scoundrel.

"Never you mind that," was the sharp reply. "I'm responsible for the young gentleman's safe-keeping,
and that's enough."

"Young gentleman! I am sure the young gentleman ought to be much obliged to you," replied Solomon,
contemptuously. "Young felon, you mean."

"Nobody's a felon until after trial and conviction," observed the little man, decisively. "Let's
have no misunderstanding and no obligation, Mr. Coe; that's my motto."

Here the wheels began to rumble, and a shadow fell over the vehicle and those it held: they
were passing under the archway of the jail.

CHAPTER XXII.

LEAVING THE WORLD.

What wondrous and surpassing change may be in store for us when the soul and body have parted
company none can guess; but of all the changes of which man has experience in this world, there
is probably none so great and overwhelming as that which he undergoes when, for the first time,
he passes the material barrier that separates guilt from innocence, and finds himself in the
clutches of the criminal law. To be no longer a free man is a position which only one who has
lost his freedom is able to realize; the shock, of course, is greater or less according to
his antecedents. The habitual breaker of the law is aware that sooner or later to the "stone
jug" he must come; his friends have been there, and laughed and joked about it, as Eton boys
who have been "swished" make merry with the block and rod, and affect to despise them; the
situation is, in idea at least, familiar to him; yet even he, perhaps, feels a sinking of the
heart when the door of the prison-cell clangs upon him for the first time, and shuts him from
the world. The common liberty to go where we will is estimated, while we have it, at nothing;
but, once denied, it becomes the most precious boon in life. How infinitely more poignant,
then, must be the feelings of one thus unhappily circumstanced, to whom the idea of such a
catastrophe has never occurred; who has always looked upon the law from the vantage-ground
of a good social position, and acquiesced in its working with complacence, as in something
which could have no personal relation to himself!

Thus it was with Richard Yorke when, for the first time, he found himself a prisoner in the
hands of Mr. Dodge, the detective, and his blue-coated assistant. For the time he felt utterly
unmanned, and might have even fainted, or burst into tears, but for the consciousness that
Solomon Coe was sitting opposite to him. The presence of that gentleman acted as a cordial
upon him; the idea that he owed his miserable position to that despised boor wounded him to
the quick, but at the same time gave him an outward show of calmness: he could not have broken
down before that man, though he had been standing beneath the gallows-tree. Despondency would
have utterly possessed him but for hate and rage--hate of his rival and all who might be concerned
in this catastrophe, and rage at the arrest itself. For, though he had not the consciousness
of innocence to support him, he had no sense of guilt. He had had no intention of absolutely
stealing Trevethick's money; and yet he foresaw how difficult it would be to clear himself
of that grave charge. He also looked back, and perceived for the first time the magnitude of
the folly which he had committed. He felt no shame for it as a crime--he had not principle
enough for that; but he recognized the extent of the imprudence, and its mad audacity; yet
he was mad and audacious still. He had been brought up as much his own master as any youth
in England, no matter how rich or nobly born; he had never known control, nor even (except
during those few days at Crompton) what it was to control himself; and he could not realize
the fact that he might actually come to share the fate of common thieves; to wear a prison
garb; to be shut up within stone walls for months or even years; no longer a man, but a convict,
known only by his number from other jail-birds. He did not think it could even come to his
standing in the felon's dock, subject to the curious gaze of a hundred eyes, the indifferent
regard of the stern judge, the--In the midst of these bitter thoughts, which were indeed disputations
with his fears, the fly had stopped at the jail gate, and Mr. Dodge, with a cheerful air, observed:
"We must get out here, if you please, Mr. Yorke."

Richard hesitated; he was mistrustful of his very limbs, so severely had the sight of those
stone walls shaken him.

"Your young friend does not seem much to like the idea of lodging here," said Solomon, with
a brutal laugh.

"That is fortunate," answered the detective, dryly, "since he will not have to do so. In my
profession, Mr. Coe, we hold it a mean trick to kick a man when he is down.--This way, Sir,
if you please." For, at the sound of Solomon's voice, Richard was up and out in a moment. "It
is merely a form that you have to go through before we go before the beak."

"A form?" asked Richard, hoarsely; "what form?"

"We shall have to search you, Sir; that's all."

"That's all," echoed Solomon, with a grin.

Richard's face changed from white to red, from red to white, by turns.

"Mr. Coe will stay where he is," said Dodge, peremptorily, as he led the way into a little
room that opened from the gate-keeper's parlor.

"I thank you for that, Mr. Dodge," said Richard, gratefully.

"Not at all, Sir. If you have any thing of a compromising nature about you--revolvers or such
like--that's my business and the beak's, not his.--Officer do your duty."

Richard was searched accordingly. He had no revolver; but what astonished himself more than
it did the searcher was that a cigar was found loose in his breast-pocket.

"Why, this must be the one that I gave to you this morning, Mr. Dodge."

"Just so, Sir. I put it back again as we came along. You know my motto. When you come to be
your own master again--which I hope'll be soon--then I'll smoke it with you with pleasure;
they'll keep it for you very careful, you may depend upon it, and baccar is a thing as don't
spoil. That's a pretty bit of jewelry now--that is." Mr. Dodge's remark referred to a gold
locket, with the word "Harry" outside it, written in diamonds; and within a portrait of her,
which he had executed himself. "That's a token of some favorite brother, I dare say?"

"Yes," said Richard. "Might I keep that, if you please; or, at all events, might I ask that
it should not be shown to the man in yonder room? It's my own, Mr. Dodge," added he, earnestly,
"upon my word and honor."

"No doubt, Sir; no doubt. There's no charge against you except as to these notes. I must put
it down on the list, because that's the law; but you can keep it, and welcome, so far as I
am concerned; though I am afraid the Cross Key folks will not be so very easy with you."

"The Cross Key folks?"

"Well, Mr. Yorke, it's no use to hide from you that you will be sent to Cross Key; that's the
nearest jail to Gethin, I believe. I am afraid the beak will be for committing you; the sum
is so large, and the case so clear, that I doubt whether he'll entertain the question of bail.
You have no friends in Plymouth, either, you told me."

"None," said Richard, sadly; "unless," he added, in a whisper, "I can count you as one."

"Officer, just fetch a glass of water," said Dodge; "the prisoner says he feels faint.--Look
here, young gentleman," continued he, earnestly, as soon as they were alone, "this is no use;
I can do nothing for you whatever, except wish you luck, which I do most heartily. I am as
helpless as a baby in this matter. I can only give you one piece of good advice: when the beak
asks if you've any thing to say, unless you have something that will clear you, and can be
proved--you know best about that--say, 'I reserve my defense;' then, as soon as you're committed,
ask to see your solicitor; send for Weasel of Plymouth; your friends have money, I conclude.
Hush! Here's the water, young man; just sip a little, and you'll soon come round."

Not another word, either then or afterward, did Mr. Dodge exchange with his prisoner. Perhaps
he began to think he had acted contrary to the motto which was his guide in life in the good-will
he had already shown him. Perhaps he resented the favorable impression that the attractions
and geniality of his acquaintance at the hotel had made upon him as unprofessional. At all
events, during their drive from the jail to the office where the magistrate was sitting--it
was not open at the hour when Richard had been arrested, or he would have been searched there--Mr.
Dodge seemed to have lost all sympathy for his "young gentleman," chatting with the officer
quite carelessly upon matters connected with their common calling, and even offering Mr. Coe
a pinch from his snuff-box, without extending that courtesy to Yorke. Nay, when they were just
at their journey's end, he had the want of feeling to look his prisoner straight in the face,
and whistle an enlivening air. The melody was not so popular as it has since become, or perhaps
Mr. Dodge had doubts of his ability to render it with accuracy, but, as if to inform all whom
it might concern what it was that he was executing, he hummed aloud the fag-end of the tune,
keeping time with his fist upon his knee, "Pop goes the weasel, pop goes the weasel."

Richard understood, and thanked him with his eyes. He had no need, however, to be reminded
of the good-natured detective's word of advice. The ignominy which he had just undergone had
had the effect of revealing to him the imminence as well as the full extent of the peril in
which he stood. Henceforward he could think of nothing--not even revenge--save the means of
extricating himself from the toils which every moment seemed to multiply about him. The time
for action was, indeed, but short; if he was ever (for it already seemed "ever") to be free
again, the means must be taken to deliver him at once. The assizes would be held at Cross Key--he
had heard the Gethin gossips talk of them, little thinking that they would have any interest
for him--in three weeks. Until then, at all events, he must be a prisoner; beyond that time
he would not, dared not, look.

Within ten minutes Richard Yorke stood committed to Cross Key Jail.

He followed his friend's counsel in all respects. But the messenger dispatched for Mr. Weasel
returned with the news that that gentleman was out of town; he was very busy at that season--there
were other folks in difficulties besides our hero, urgent for his consolation and advice as
to their course of conduct before my Lord the Judge. Mr. Dodge, however, assured Richard, upon
taking leave, that he would dispatch the attorney after him that very night.

The road to Cross Key was, for many miles, the same which he had lately traveled in the reverse
direction; yet how different it looked! He had been in far from good spirits on that occasion,
but how infinitely more miserable was he now! The hills, the rocks, the streams were far more
beautiful than he had ever thought them, but they mocked him with their beauty. He longed to
get out of the vehicle, and feel the springy turf, the yielding heather, beneath his feet;
to lave his hands in the sparkling brook, to lie on the moss-grown rock, and bask in the blessed
sun. Perhaps he should never see them any more--these simple everyday beauties, of which he
had scarcely taken any account when they were freely offered for his enjoyment. He looked back
on even the day before, wherein he had certainly been wretched enough, with yearning regret.
He had at least been a free man, and when should he be free again? Ah, when! He was, as it
were, in a prison on wheels, guarded by two jailers. Escape would have been hopeless, even
had it been judicious to make the attempt. His only consolation was, that Solomon Coe was no
longer with him to jeer at his dejected looks. He had started for Gethin with the news, doubtless
as welcome to Trevethick as to himself, of the prisoner's committal. What would Harry say when
she came to hear of it? What would she not suffer? Richard cast himself back in his seat, and
groaned aloud. The man at his side exchanged a glance with his companion. "He is guilty, this
young fellow." "Without doubt, he's booked." They had their little code of signals for such
occasions.

The day drew on, and the soft sweet air of evening began to rise. They had stopped here and
there for refreshments, but Richard had taken nothing; he had, however, always accompanied
his custodians within doors at the various halting-places. He was afraid of the crowd that
might gather about the vehicle to look at the man that was being taken to prison. There was
nothing to mark him as such, but it seemed to him that nobody could fail to know it. He welcomed
the approach of night. They still traveled on for hours, since there was no House of Detention
at which he could be placed in safety on the road; at last the wheels rumbled over the uneven
stones of a little country town; they stopped before a building similar, so far as he could
see by the moonlight, to that to which he had been taken at Plymouth: all jails are alike,
especially to the eyes of the prisoner. A great bell was rung; there was a parley with the
keeper of the gate. The whole scene resembled something which Richard remembered to have read
in a book; he knew not what, nor where. A door in the wall was opened; they led him up some
stone steps; the door closed behind him with a clang; and its locks seemed to bite into the stone.

"This way, prisoner," said a gruff voice.

Door after door, passage after passage; a labyrinth of stone and iron. At last he was ushered
into a small chamber, unlike any thing he had ever seen in his life. His sleeping-room at the
keeper's lodge at Crompton was palatial compared with it. The walls were stone; the floor of
a shining brown, so that it looked wet, though it was not so. His jailer-chamberlain pointed
to a low-lying hammock, stretched upon two straps between the walls. "There, tumble in," he
said; "you will have your bath in the morning. Look alive!"

Richard obeyed him at once. "Good-night, warder," said he.

"Night!" grumbled the other; "it's morn-in'. A pretty time to be knockin' up people at a respectable
establishment. If you want any thin'--broiled bones, or deviled kidneys"--for the man was a
wag in his quaint way--"ring this 'ere bell. As for the other rules and regulations of her
Majesty's jail, you'll learn them at breakfast-time."

The door slammed behind him.

How the doors did slam in that place! And Richard was left alone. If, instead of the metal
ewer of water that stood by his bed-head, there had been a glass of deadliest poison, he would
have seized it greedily, and emptied it to the dregs.

CHAPTER XXIII.

THE LETTER LOOK.

On the day that Richard left Gethin, which was itself an incident to keep the tongues of its
gossips wagging for a good week, another occurrence took place in that favored neighborhood,
and one of even more absorbing interest--the workings of Dunloppel were suspended. This, of
course, was not a wholly unexpected catastrophe. The new vein, after giving an exceedingly
rich yield for some months, had of late, it was whispered, evinced signs of exhaustion, although
the fact was not known that for several weeks the undertaking had been carried on at a loss.
Neither Trevethick nor Solomon, who were the principal proprietors, was the sort of man to
play long at a losing game, or to send good money after bad; so, for the present, the pit was
closed. But Solomon believed in Dunloppel; contrary to his custom, he had not disposed of a
single share when the mine was at a premium, and his stake in it was very large.

Only a few minutes after Richard had departed for Plymouth with his check, Solomon returned
to the inn with thoughtful brow.

Trevethick was moodily smoking his pipe in the porch, still balancing the rival claims of his
sons-in-law elect, and dissatisfied with both of them. He did not share Solomon's hopes, and
he detested losing his money above every thing. "Well, you've packed off all those fellows,
I hope, that have been eating me out of house and home for these three weeks?"

"I've closed the mine, if that's what you mean," said Solomon. "But" (he looked cautiously
up at the windows of the inn, which were all open--the guests were out in search of the picturesque,
and Harry was on the tower, straining her eyes after Richard) "I want to have a word with you
in private, Trevethick."

"Come into the bar parlor, then," grunted the landlord, for he did not much relish the idea
of a confidential talk with Solomon just then, since it might have relation to a matter about
which he had not fully made up his mind to give him an answer.

"Is that young painter fellow out of the way, then?" asked Solomon. "We have never had a place
to ourselves, it seems to me, since he came to Gethin."

"Yes, yes, he's far enough off," answered Trevethick, more peevishly than before, for Sol's
remark seemed to foreshadow the very subject he would fain have avoided talking about. "He's
gone to Plymouth, he is, and won't be back these five days."

"Umph!" said Sol. If he had said, "I wish he would never come back at all," he could not have
expressed his feelings more clearly.

"Well," growled Trevethick, when they were in his sanctum, and had shut the door, "what is
it now? Bad news, of course, of some sort."

It was a habit with Trevethick, as it is with many men of his stamp, to have a perpetual grievance
against Providence--to profess themselves as never astonished at any bad turn that It may do
them--and, besides, he was on the present occasion desirous of taking up a position of discontent
beforehand, so that the expected topic might not appear to have produced it.

"No; it's good news, Trevethick," said Solomon, quietly--"the best of news, as it seems to
me; and I hope to bring you over to the same opinion."

"He's got some scheme for marrying Harry out of hand," thought the harassed landlord. "How
the deuce shall I put him off?"

There was not the slightest excuse for doing so; if Solomon had been of a less phlegmatic disposition,
he might have married her a year ago, young as she was. "Read this," said he, producing a letter
from his pocket, "and tell me what you think of it. It's old Stratum's report upon the mine."

"Ay, ay," said Trevethick, diving into his capacious pocket for his silver spectacles. As a
general rule, he was wont to receive all such reports with discredit, and to throw cold water
upon Sol's more sanguine views; but it was several minutes before he could get himself into
his normal state of dissatisfied depression, so much relieved was he to find that his daughter
was not to be the topic of the conversation.

"Here's the plan," continued Solomon, "which accompanied the letter. I got it just after I
dismissed the men; and, upon my life, I'd half a mind to set them on again. But I thought I'd
just have a talk with you first."

"Ay," said Trevethick--"well?" He was quite himself again now--crafty, prudent, reticent; about
as unpromising a gentleman to "get on with," far less get the better of in a bargain, as a
Greek Jew. But Solomon was quite accustomed to him.

"Stratum feels confident about the continuation of the lode, you see; and also that the fault
is not considerable. We shall not have to sink fifty feet, he thinks, before we come on the
vein again."

"He thinks" said Trevethick, contemptuously. "Is he ready to sink his own money in it?"

"It's no good asking him that," said Solomon, coolly, "because he's got none. But I have always
found Stratum pretty correct in his judgment; and, as for me, I believe in Dunloppel. The question
is, shall I go on with it single-handed, or will you go shares?"

"If it's so good a thing, why not keep it yourself, Sol?"

"Because my money is particularly well laid out at present, and I don't want to shift it."

"That's just the case with mine," said Trevethick, from behind the plan.

"I thought you might have five hundred pounds or so lying idle, that's all," returned the other.
"I'd give six per cent. for it just now."

"Oh, that's another thing. Perhaps I have. I'll see about it."

"If you could get it me at once, that would be half the battle," urged Solomon. "There are
some good men at the mine whom I should not like to lose. If I could send round to-night to
tell them not to engage, themselves elsewhere, since they're opening so many new pits just
now, that would be a relief to my mind."

"Very good; you may do that, then. I'll write for the money to-morrow."

So blunt, straightforward, and exceedingly unpleasant a man as John Trevethick was, ought to
have been the very incarnation of Truth, whereas that last observation of his was, to say the
least of it, Jesuitical. There was no occasion to write to any body for what he had got above
stairs, locked up in his private strong-box. But he did not wish all the world to know that,
nor even his alter ego, Solomon Coe.

Trevethick, although a close-fisted fellow, was no miser in the vulgar sense. He kept this
vast sum at hand, partly because he had no confidence in ordinary securities, and partly because
he wished to be in a position, at a moment's notice, to accomplish his darling scheme. If Carew
should happen to change his mind, it would be because he was in want of ready money, and he
would be in mad haste to get it. His impatience on such occasions brooked no delay on the score
of advantage; and the man that could offer him what he wanted, as it were, in his open hand,
would be the financier he would favor in preference to a much less grasping accommodator, who
might keep him waiting for a week. It was not so much the tempting bait of ready money that
caught the Squire as the fact of his wishes being obeyed upon the instant. He had not been
used to wait, and his pride revolted against it; and many a time had a usurer missed his mark
by not understanding with how great a bashaw he had to deal in the person of Carew of Crompton.
Trevethick was aware of this, and indeed the chaplain had given him a hint to keep the proposed
purchase-money within easy reach, in case the Squire's mood might alter, or his necessities
demand his consent to what Mr. Whymper honestly believed to be a very advantageous offer. Otherwise,
Trevethick was not one to keep a hoard in his house for the mere pleasure of gloating over
it. He had not looked into his strong-box for months, nor would he have done so now, but for
this unexpected demand upon it. It was safe enough, he knew, in his daughter's room; and as
for its having been opened, that was an impossibility; the padlock hung in front of it as usual,
and it would have taken a man half a lifetime to have hit upon its open sesame by trial. He
was justly proud of that letter lock, which was his own contrivance, invented when he was quite
a young man, and had been perforce compelled to turn his attention to mechanics, and he considered
it a marvel of skill. It was characteristic in him that he had never revealed its secret even
to his daughter. Indeed, with the exception of Harry, nobody at Gethin--save, perhaps, Hannah,
when she dusted her young mistress's room--had ever set eyes upon it, nor, if they had, would
they have understood its meaning.

It was therefore without the slightest suspicion of its having been tampered with, that, an
hour or two after the conversation just narrated, Trevethick repaired to his strong-box, with
the intention of taking from it the sum of money required by Solomon. The padlock was like
a little clock, except that it had the letters of the alphabet round its face instead of figures,
and three hands instead of two; this latter circumstance insured, by its complication, the
safety of the treasure, but at the same time rendered it useless--unless he broke the box open--to
the possessor himself if by any accident he should forget the letter time at which he had set
it; and accordingly Trevethick was accustomed to carry a memorandum of this about with him;
even if he lost it, it would be no great matter, for what meaning would it convey to any human
being to find a bit of paper with the letters B, N, Z upon it? Harry, as we have said, was
out of the house, so his daughter's room was untenanted. He went to a cupboard, and took down
the box from its usual shelf, with the same feeling of satisfaction that an old poet recurs
to his first volume of verse; he may have written better things, and things that have brought
him more money, but those spring leaves are dearest to him of all. So it was with Trevethick's
spring lock. He adjusted the hands, and the padlock sprang open; he lifted the lid, and the
box was empty; the two thousand pounds in Bank of England notes were gone.

He was a big bull-necked man, of what is called (in the reports of inquests) "a full habit
of body," and the discovery was almost fatal to him. His face grew purple, the veins in his
forehead stood out, and his well-seasoned head, which liquor could so little affect, went round
and round with him, and sang like a humming-top. He was on the very brink of a fit, which might
have "annihilated space and time" (as far as he was concerned), "and made two lovers happy."
But the star of Richard Yorke was not in the ascendant. The old man held on by the shelf of
the cupboard, and gradually came to himself. He did not even then comprehend the whole gravity
of the position; the sense of his great loss--not only of so much wealth, but of that which
he had secured with such toil, and laid by unproductively so long for the accomplishment of
his darling purpose--monopolized his mind. Who could have been the thief? was the one question
with which he concerned himself, and the answer was not long delayed. It was the coincidence
of amount in the sum stolen with that which Richard had gone to Plymouth to realize, that turned
his suspicions upon the young artist. Why, the scoundrel had fixed upon that very sum as the
test of his possessing an independence for a reason that was now clear enough: it was the exact
limit of what he knew he could lay his hand upon. But how did he know?--or, rather (for the
old man's thoughts were still fixed upon the mechanical mystery of his loss), how did he open
the padlock? Then there flashed upon his mind that incident of his having dropped the memorandum
out of his watch-case in the bar parlor in Richard's presence, and the whole affair seemed
as clear as day. It was Richard's intention to change the notes at Plymouth for the paper of
the Miners' Bank, or for gold, and then to exhibit it to him in its new form as his own property.
He did not believe that the young artist intended to steal it; but he was by no means less
furious with him upon that account--quite otherwise. He piqued himself upon his caution and
long-headedness, and resented every deception practiced upon him even more than an injury.
Moreover, he felt that but for Solomon's unexpected request for the loan the plan would have
succeeded. In all probability, he would not have discovered his loss until it had been too
late--he would not have known how to refuse the young man leave to become his daughter's suitor;
and once his son-in-law, he could scarcely have prosecuted him for replacing two thousand pounds'
worth of bank-notes in his strong-box by notes of another kind. Exasperated beyond all measure
as Trevethick was, it did credit to his sagacity that even at such a moment he did not conceive
of Richard Yorke as being a common thief. But he concluded him to be much worse, and deserving
of far heavier punishment, as a man that would have obtained his daughter under false pretenses.
He went down stairs, taking the box with him, to seek his friend. Solomon had just returned
from the cottage over the way, where he had been giving orders to one of the best miners to
still hold himself engaged at Dunloppel, and had bidden him tell others the same. He was in
high spirits, and was twirling about in his large hands Mr. Stratum's diagnosis of the mine.

"You may put that away and have done with it," said Trevethick, hoarsely; "I have no money
to lend you for that, nor nothing else. This box held two thousand pounds of mine, but it's
all gone now."

"Two thousand pounds!" exclaimed Solomon, too amazed at the magnitude of the sum to realize
what had happened to it. "Two thousand pounds in a box!" He had always suspected that the old
man kept something in a stocking-foot, and had often rallied him upon his unnecessary caution
with respect to investments; but this statement of his appeared incredible.

"What does it matter if it was twenty thousand, when I tell you it's gone," said Trevethick,
sullenly. "That limb of the devil, Yorke, is off with every shilling of it."

"Do you mean to say he's stolen it?" inquired the other, even more astonished than before.

"He's taken it to Plymouth with him, that's all."

Solomon Coe was a man of action, and prompt in emergencies, but for the moment he was fairly
staggered. He had no liking for Richard, but such a charge as this appeared incredible; it
seemed more likely that the old man had repented of his late offer of the loan of five hundred
pounds, and had invented this monstrous fiction to excuse himself.

"Where was the box kept?" asked Solomon, dryly.

For a moment or two Trevethick was silent.

"It is as I suspected," thought the other; "the old man is making up the story as he goes on."

But the fact was that this question had gone to the very root of the matter, and opened Trevethick's
dull eyes wide. In his chagrin at his loss (though he did believe it would be temporary), and
irritation at his sagacity having been set at naught, he had overlooked the most serious feature
of the whole catastrophe. How had Yorke come to the knowledge that the strong-box was kept
in Harry's room? and under what circumstances had he obtained access to it?

"Where's Harry?" exclaimed Trevethick, starting up with a great oath; for it flashed upon him
that she had fled with Richard. "Where's my daughter?"

"I saw her in the village just now," said Solomon, "talking to old Madge. She had been for
a stroll out Turlock way, she said. But what's the use of vexing her about the matter? Women
are much best kept in the dark when one don't want things to be talked about. The more quiet
you keep this story, the more chance you'll have of getting your money back, you may depend
upon it. It was in notes, of course?"

"Yes, in notes," answered the other, with a vacant look, and drumming on the table with his
right hand.

"Come, come, Trevethick, you must keep your head," remonstrated Solomon. "I'll act for you
quick enough, if you'll only supply me with the means. It's a great loss, but it should not
paralyze a man. You've got a memorandum of the numbers of the notes?"

"Yes, yes; I have somewhere."

"Well; go and fetch it, while I order out a horse. I can get to Plymouth before wheels can
do it, and shall catch this scoundrel yet. He'll be going there to change the notes, I reckon?"

"Yes, yes," said Trevethick; "he'll be at the George and Vulture; so he said."

"Good," replied Solomon. "I'll get a warrant from old Justice Smallgood on my way. Rouse up,
man, rouse up; you shall have your money back, I tell you, and see this rascal lagged for life
into the bargain."

"If I could only get him hanged!" answered the old man, fiercely--"if I could only get him
hanged, Sol, I'd let the money go, and welcome!"

Solomon stared after him, as he left the room and tramped up stairs in search of the list of
notes, with a ludicrous expression of wonder. In his eyes, no revenge at present seemed worth
so extravagant a price. But Trevethick had his reasons, or thought he had, for this excess
of hate; his slow-moving yet powerful nature resembled the python--it was exceedingly tenacious
when its object was once grasped, and it was apt to glut itself.

CHAPTER XXIV.

A HARD ALTERNATIVE.

Solomon had ridden off, and was half-way to Turlock before Trevethick felt himself sufficiently
collected to summon Hannah, and bid her send for her young mistress. He could not go in search
of her himself and speak what he had to ask: no bird of the air must carry her reply, no wind
of heaven breathe it, if it was such as he feared. There must be no "scene" in public to let
loose the gossips' tongues. He sat in the bar parlor, with his huge head leaning on his hands,
brooding over his wrongs, and waiting for her--for the daughter by whose wicked connivance,
as he thought, he had been despoiled of his hard-earned gains. He did not reproach himself
for having thrown her so much with Richard, in order that the latter might be kept in good-humor,
and apt to forward his plans as to Wheal Danes. He "wondered at their vice, and not his folly."
As to there being any thing beyond a flirtation between the young people, he did not suspect
it; but even as matters were, he was bitterly enraged against Harry, and would have strangled
Richard out of hand if he could have got near him. It was evident to him that this fellow had
been courting his daughter, though he knew she was plighted to another, and had wormed out
of her the secret of his hoarded wealth. Six months ago she would not for her life have dared
to tell what she knew he wished to hide; and now this young villain had wound himself so cunningly
about her that she had no will but his, and had even helped him to rob her own flesh and blood.
His heel was on that serpent's head, however, or would be in a day or two, and then--The old
man ground his teeth as though his enemy were between them.

"Well, father, here I am; Hannah said you wanted me."

Harry's voice was as calm as she could make it, but her young limbs trembled, and her face
was very pale.

"Come here--nearer!" cried Trevethick, hoarsely, seizing her by the wrist. "Do you know that
you are the only creature but two--but one, I may say, for gratitude ain't love--that I have
ever loved in this world--that I have worked for you, planned for you, and for you only, all
my life?"

"Yes, father; and I am very grateful for it," answered she, submissively.

"No doubt," sneered the old man; "and the way you show how much you feel it, the way you show
your duty and your love to your father in return, is to put a thief--a lying, cheating thief--in
the road to rob him!"

"You must be mad, father!" exclaimed Harry, in blank amazement. "I know no thief!"

"You know Richard Yorke, you wicked, wanton wench!" interrupted Trevethick, passionately. "And
how could he have heard of yonder box except through you? Of course you'll lie; a lie or two
is nothing to one like you. But here's the proof. The padlock has been opened, the money taken.
Who did it? Who could have done it, except him, or you?"

"As I am a living woman, father, as I hope for heaven," answered Harry, earnestly, "I did not
do it, and I do not know who did."

"You didn't, and you don't! The thing's incredible. Reach here that Bible." He still held her
by the wrist. "You shall swear that, and be damned forever! What! you never told that villain
where my money lay?"

"I did tell Mr. Yorke that, father. Pray, pray, be patient. It was long ago; we were talking
together about I know not what, and it slipped from me that you kept money in a strong-box.
That was all."

"All," said the old man, bitterly, and flinging her arm away from him, the wrist all black
and bruised with his angry clutch. "What more, or worse, could you have told than the one secret
I had bid you keep? You told him the exact sum, too, I'll warrant? Two thousand pounds!"

"Yes, father, I did. It was very wrong, and I was very sorry directly I had done it. But I
knew the secret would be safe with a gentleman like Mr. Yorke."

"A gentleman! A cheat, an impostor, a common rogue!"

"Oh no, oh no, father!"

"But I say 'yes.' To-morrow he will have the handcuffs on him! What! Have you tears for him,
and none for me, you slut! Perhaps you showed him where the box was kept, as well as told him!
Did you, did you?"

There was something in Harry's frightened face that made her father rise and lock the door.

"Speak low!" said he, in an awful voice; "you have something to tell me. Tell it."

"Only that I love him, father--oh, so much!" pleaded Harry, passionately. "Indeed, indeed,
I could not help it! I tried to love Sol, because you wished it, but it was no use; I felt
that even before Richard came. We walked every day together for weeks and weeks, and he was
so different from Sol, so bright and pleasant, and he loved me from the first, he said. He
told me, too, that you had listened with favor to his suit, or, at all events, had not refused
to listen--that there was good hope of your consenting to it, and without that hope he knew
he could not win me. I only promised to be his on that condition. Speak to me, father; pardon
me, father! Don't look at me so. He never meant to thieve, I am sure of that. You asked of
him some warrant of his wealth, some proof that he could afford to marry me. You would not
have done that had you set your face utterly against him. And I think--I fear--though Heaven
is my witness that I knew nothing of it until now, that he took this money only to bring it
back to you again, and win your favor. It was an ill deed, if he has really done it, which
even yet I do not credit; but it was done for my sake; then for my sake, father, pity him,
pardon him!" She had thrown herself upon her knees beside the old man's chair; her long hair
had come unfastened, and trailed upon the sanded floor; her hands were clasped in an agony
of supplication. No pictured Magdalen ever looked more wretched or more beautiful.

"You have more to tell?" said the old man, harshly.

She shook her head, and uttered a plaintive moan.

"Then I have," continued he. "You say you love this man; now I hate him! I do not regret that
he has robbed me, since, by that act, he has placed himself in my power, and I mean to use
it to the uttermost; but for his cozening me to my face, as he has done so long, and for his
smooth, false ways, and for his impudent tales, which I had half believed, and for his audacious
attempt to pluck you from the hand for which I had designed you, I hate him. I tell you," cried
out the old man, fiercely, "if this villain had fifty lives, and the law would help me to them,
I would exact them all! If he stood here, I would brain him with yonder staff; and if my curse
could follow him beyond the grave--as my vengeance shall to the grave's brink--he should perish
in eternal fire! Hate him? I almost hate you for having loved him; and if I thought you would
dare to cross me further by holding to him now, I'd drive you from my door this very hour.
You will never see him more; but I shall, once. This mouth shall witness against him to the
uttermost; these ears shall hear the judge pronounce on him his righteous doom."

"No, no," gasped the young girl, faintly. "If you do not hate me yet, I pray you to unsay those
words. When you curse Richard, father, you are cursing you know not whom." She dragged upon
his arm, and brought his ear down to the level of her mouth, and whispered in it.

The old man started to his feet, and pushed her from him with a hideous oath; then made as
though he would have unlocked the door and thrown it wide, to drive her, as he had so lately
threatened, from his roof. But there was a noise of many feet and chattering and laughter in
the passage without, which showed that some of the tourist guests had just come in. Only a
plank intervened between that little knot of giddy pleasure-seekers, with their jokes and small-talk,
and the father and daughter in their agony.

"Mercy! mercy!" cried the wretched girl.

Trevethick clapped his hand upon her little mouth, with, "Hush, fool! hush!" and she felt thankful
that he called her by no worse name.

"Forgive me--pity--pardon," murmured she.

"Listen!" said he, in a stem whisper. "Obey me now, you wicked, wanton slut, or I proclaim
your shame before them all; one minute will decide your fate! Be stubborn, and you shall go
forth through yonder door, discarded, friendless, infamous, to beg your bread, or win it how
you will; be tractable, and even yet you shall have a father and a home. Make choice, and quickly;
and having made it, be you sure of this, that it shall hold. Do you hear me, trollop?"

"I hear! I hear!" she murmured, shuddering. "I will obey you now, and ever."

"Then marry Solomon Coe--at once--within the month."

"Oh, father, mercy!"

His fingers were on the door, and the key grated in the lock.

"The sea-air makes one famish," said a gay voice outside.

"It's lucky," laughed another, "for there is sure to be nothing for dinner but the inevitable
ham and eggs."

In another instant the final barrier between herself and public shame would have been withdrawn
by that relentless hand.

"I promise--I promise--spare me!" cried the unhappy girl, and fell fainting on the floor.

The old man drew a long, deep breath, and wiped his forehead. His victory had not been lightly
won. He lifted his daughter up and carried her to the sofa; then raised the little clumsy window,
rarely opened, and propped it with a stick, so that the breeze might blow upon her tear-stained
cheek. How white and worn and emptied of all joy it looked! As he gazed upon her, a touch of
pity stole into her father's face. He poured out a little spirits in a glass, and put it to
her lips. "Take a sup of this, and you'll be better, child."

She opened her heavy eyes, and shook her head.

"You said you would have mercy, father, if I promised?"

"Yes, yes; all shall be forgotten. We will not even speak of it to one another."

"And you will pardon him? You will not hurt my Richard?"

"Your Richard!"

"Yes, for he was mine once. You will not bear witness against him before the judge? Is he not
punished enough in losing me? Am I not punished?"

"Silence!" exclaimed the old man, in a terrible voice. His hand, trembling with passion, had
struck against the strong-box, and at its touch his wrath broke out in flame. "That man is
dead to you henceforth! You gave your promise without conditions. Moreover, his fate is in
the hands of the law, and not in mine."

CHAPTER XXV.

AN UNEXPECTED GUEST.

Six days had come and gone since her lover's departure from Gethin, but no tidings of him had
reached Harry's ears. Solomon had returned on the second day, and been closeted with her father
for some hours, doubtless in consultation about Richard; but not a word had been spoken of
him, in her presence, by either. She dared not mention him to her father, and still less could
she apply for information to his rival, her now affianced bridegroom. How much, or how little,
her father had disclosed concerning him to Sol she did not know; but the latter had evidently
closed with the terms which she had in her late strait accepted on her own part. The bans had
been put up in the church upon the hill, and in a month she would be this man's wife. She had
been congratulated upon the coming event by all the neighbors. Some had slyly hinted--little
guessing the pain they gave to that sore heart--at her late "goings-on" with that young gentleman-painter;
they had almost suspected at one time that he would have supplanted her old flame; but they
were glad to see matters as they were. Solomon was a steady, sagacious man, as every body knew,
and would get on in the world; and what he gained he would not waste in foolish ways. Such
an old friend of her father's, too. Nothing could be more fitting and satisfactory in all respects.
Solomon, notoriously a laggard in love, was likened to the tortoise, who had won the race against
the hare.

To have to listen to all this well-meant twaddle was misery indeed. Perhaps, upon the whole,
good honest dullness does unknowingly inflict more grievous wounds than the barbed satiric tongue.

To think, to picture to herself the condition of her lover--deplorable, she was convinced,
from the grim satisfaction upon Solomon's face when he first came back--was torture. She could
not read, for her mind fled from the page, like breath from a mirror; there was nothing for
it but occupation. She busied herself as she had never done before with the affairs of the
house, which afforded some excuse for escaping from Sol's attentions, naturally grown somewhat
pressing, now that his wedded happiness was drawing so near. The Gethin Castle was not, however,
very full of guests. It had been wet for a few days, and rain spoils the harvest of the inn-keeper
even more than that of the farmer. One night, when it was pouring heavily, and such a windfall
as a new tourist was not to have been expected by the most sanguine Boniface, a lady arrived,
alone, and took up her quarters in the very room that Richard had vacated. Trevethick himself
was at the door when she had driven up and asked with some apparent anxiety whether she could
be accommodated. She was wrapped up, and thickly veiled, but he had observed to his daughter
what a well-spoken woman she was, and an uncommon fine one too, though her hair was gray. She
had inquired whether there were any letters waiting for her, addressed to Mrs. Gilbert; but
there was no letter.

Harry took in the new arrival's supper with her own hands. It was the time when she would otherwise
have been expected in the bar parlor, to sit by Solomon's side, and feel his arm creep round
her waist, more hateful than a serpent's fold. A fire had been lit in the sitting-room, on
account of the inclement weather, and Mrs. Gilbert was standing beside it with her elbow on
the mantel-piece. She watched Harry come in and out, without a word, but the expression of
her face was so searching and attentive that it embarrassed her. Under other circumstances
she would certainly have delegated her duties to Hannah, but to evade Solomon's society she
would have waited on the Sphinx. She brought in each article one at a time, and when there
was nothing more to bring inquired deferentially whether there was any thing else that she
could do for the lady.

"Yes," said Mrs. Gilbert, gravely; the voice was soft, but the manner most earnest and impressive.
"I want five minutes' talk with you; can I have it secure from interruption?"

"Certainly, madam," answered Harry, trembling, she knew not why.

"Close the door, girl. Come nearer, and away from the window; we must not be overheard."

Harry was constitutionally timid, and it struck her that this poor lady was not in her right
mind. She hesitated. The other seemed to read her thoughts.

"I am not mad, child," said she, sorrowfully, "though I have trouble enough to make me so.
You are the daughter of the landlord of this inn, I think?"

"Yes, madam."

"And I am the mother of Richard Yorke."

She was standing in the same position, and had spoken coldly and as sternly as such a voice
as hers could speak, when something in the young girl's face caused her whole manner to change.
With a sudden impulse she turned toward her, and held out both her arms; and Harry threw herself
into them with a passionate cry, and sobbed as though her heart would break.

"Hush! hush!" whispered the other, tenderly; "we must not weep now, but act!"

But the girl still sobbed on, without lifting up her face. Tears had been strangers to her
heated eyes for days, and she had longed in vain for one sympathizing breast on which to lay
her head. "I have been his ruin," she murmured; "but for me he would never have done wrong.
How you, who are his mother, must hate me!"

"No, Harry, no!" answered the other, putting aside those rich brown locks, and gazing upon
the fair shut face attentively. "I do not wonder at his loving you; for such beauty as yours
many a man would lose his soul! I did hate you until now. But you love my Richard truly, as
I see; and we two can not afford to be enemies. We must work together for his good to avert
the ruin of which you speak, for it is imminent. He has sent me to you, for he can not come
himself. He is in prison, Harry!"

"In prison! O Heaven, have mercy!"

She sank down on her knees, and covered her face with her hands.

"Yes, Harry, think of it. Our Richard, so bright, so dear, within prison walls! He may pass
his life there for what he has done for your sake, unless you help him."

"Help him? I would die for him!"

"Calm yourself. Sit down. To grieve is selfish where one can do better; when all is lost it
is time enough for that. All will be lost a fortnight hence, unless we bestir ourselves. Hush!
I hear a step in the passage. Who is that?"

"It is Sol, madam--Solomon Coe."

"The man you are to marry, is it not?"

A stifled groan was the girl's reply.

"I can not speak what I have to say here," said the other, thoughtfully. "Is there no other
place? Stay. I can be ill--overfatigued with my journey--and you will come and tend me in my
own room presently. That can be managed, can't it?"

"Yes, madam, yes."

"Then wipe your eyes--be a brave girl. Think of Richard, and not of yourself--think of him,
when yonder boor is clasping the hand that once rested in his--think of him, when those alien
lips press yours at parting, and be strong! If I were in your place, he would find that I had
not deserted him in his trouble."

"Desert him, madam? I? Oh, never!"

"To be weak is to desert him, girl--to let yonder man and your father suspect that any friend
of Richard's is beneath this roof is to desert him--to weep when there is need to work is to
desert him. Did I not tell you I was his own mother; and yet I shed no tears! Look up, and
learn your lesson from me."

The faces of the two women were indeed in strong contrast--the younger, yielding, feeble, despairing;
the elder, calm, patient of purpose, and inflexible. Her cheeks were plump, and radiant with
health; her form erect and composed; her eyes, indeed, betrayed anxiety, but it was from want
of confidence in the person she addressed, not in herself; the white hair seemed to fitly crown
that figure, so full of earnestness and firmness.

"I will do my best," cried the young girl, "though I know I am but weak and foolish. Pity me,
and pray for me. I am going to the torture, but I will be resolute. Tell Hannah--the servant-maid--that
you wish me to attend you in your room. Send for me soon, for mercy's sake! How I long to know
how I can help our Richard!"

As she left the room Mrs. Gilbert's face grew dark. "A fool! a dolt!" she muttered, angrily.
"How could he risk so much for such a stake! Oh, Richard! Richard!"--her voice began to falter
at that well-loved name--"was this to have been the end of all my hopes? What fatal issue,
then, may not my fears have end in! my beautiful, bright boy! The only light my lonely life
possessed! to think of you as like yourself, and then to think of you as you are now!" She
looked around her on the sordid walls, the vulgar ornaments upon the mantel-piece, the wretched
ill-chosen books; then listened to the splash of the rain in the unpaved street. "And this
was Paradise, was it, my poor boy, because this girl dwelt in it! I ought to have known that
there was danger here. His letters few and short and far between, his patient tarrying in so
wild a place, should have been enough to warn me. But not of this; in no nightmare dream could
I have conceived this unimaginable peril. Ah, me! ah, me!" She sat down at the untasted meal,
and strove to eat. "I must be strong, for Richard's sake," she murmured. But she soon laid
down her knife and fork to muse again. "This Trevethick is a hard, stern man, I see. There
is no hope in his mercy. The only path of safety is that which the lawyer pointed out; but
will this puling girl have the heart and head to tread it? Will she not faint, as she nearly
did just now, and lose her wits when my Richard most requires them? And then, and then?" As
if unable to continue such reflections, she rose and rang the bell, which Hannah answered.

"Bring me a bed-candle, girl; I will seek my room at once; and please ask Miss Trevethick to
look in upon me before she retires herself, for I feel far from well."

"Yes, ma'am." Hannah thought within herself that the new arrival looked uncommon fresh and
well considering her years, and that her young mistress had far more need of rest and "looking
to" than she; but, nevertheless, she gave the message; and Harry, at her usual time for going
to rest, repaired to the new-comer's room accordingly.

"Are they gone to bed, those men?" inquired Mrs. Gilbert, anxiously, as soon as the door was
closed.

"No, madam; my father and Solomon always sit up together now till late."

"Ay; plotting against my boy, I doubt not. Well, let us, then, counterplot. Who sleeps on either
side of this room?"

"No one, madam. Both rooms are empty at present; the last visitor, except yourself, left us
this evening."

"And the servants?"

"They have retired long ago up stairs."

"That's well. Sit here, then, close to me, and listen. You know that Richard is in prison,
placed there by your father and that other man on a false charge. They know as well as I or
you that he had no intention of committing the crime of which he stands accused, and yet they
both mean to swear the contrary."

"Oh, madam, they will surely not do that!"

"But I say 'Yes;' they want revenge upon him. I know them better than you, who have known them
all your life; or perhaps you say they will not, because you hope so. Is it possible," she
broke forth, impatiently, "that in such a strait as this, girl, you can encourage such delusions!
You are like the fool in the Scripture, of whom it is written, that though thou shouldst bray
him among wheat with a pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him."

"I know I am not like you, madam," answered Harry, piteously. "Richard has often told me how
wise and brave you are; but yet my love for him is as great as yours can be. Whatever you think
fit that I should do to help him, that shall be done. Trust me; it shall, indeed."

"That's well said, girl. Be you the hand, and I the head, then, of this enterprise, and we
shall conquer yet. I say again, that if they could, these men would swear my Richard's life
away. They might as well do that as what they mean to do, and deprive him of his liberty; cast
him for years into prison, and herd with the worst and basest of mankind; to work under a task-master
with irons on. Do you understand, girl, what it is to which, unless we can hinder them, these
wretches would doom him?"

"Yes, yes, I do," she murmured, shuddering. "It is horrible, most horrible! God help us!"

"We must help ourselves," answered Mrs. Gilbert, sternly.

"Yet God is surely on our side, and for the truth, madam. If they swear falsely--"

"You must swear also," interrupted the other, angrily; "you must meet them with their own weapons,
if you would defend the innocent against them. As it is, the law is with them, and will prove
the instrument of their vengeance. The notes were found upon his person; he strove to change
them, that he might pass their substitutes more easily. He counted upon your father not missing
them from his strong-box until it was too late. The case is clear against him that he stole them."

"Great Heaven!" cried Harry, clasping her hands in agony; "and yet he did not mean to steal them."

"Of course not; nay more, he did not steal them, for you gave them to him."

"I gave them to him? Nay, I never did."

"You did--you did, girl; you acquiesced in his plan for obtaining your father's consent to
your engagement; you undertook to supply him temporarily with the money requisite to establish
his pretensions as a man of fortune. Or, if you did not"--and here her voice assumed an intense
earnestness--"your Richard, the man you pretend to love, will be a convicted felon--a prisoner
for all the summer of his life, and for the rest an outcast!"

Harry was silent; her hands were pressed to her forehead, as though to compel her fevered brain
to think without distraction. "I see, I see," she murmured, presently; "his fate hangs upon
my word. 'So help me, God,' is what I have first to say, and then say that!"

"Why not?" rejoined the other, stoutly. "Will not these men, too, call God to witness what
they know to be a lie? Will not He discern the motive that prompts you--desire to see a wronged
man righted, the innocent set free--and the motive that prompts them--malicious hate? Or do
you deem the all-seeing eye of Heaven is purblind? I tell you this, girl, if I were in your
place, and the man I loved stood justly in such peril, I would swear a score such oaths to
set him free! Yet here, with justice on your side and truth, and Heaven itself, you hesitate;
you shrink from uttering a mere form of words, the spirit of which is contrary to the letter,
and for conscience sake, forsooth, will let your lover perish! Your lover! yes, but you were
never his, although he thinks so. I will go hence, and tell him that you refuse to speak the
thing that alone can save him from life-long wretchedness; I will go and tell him that the
girl for whose sake he has brought this load of ruin on himself will not so much as lift it
with her little finger! You fair, foul devil, how I hate you!" She drew herself up to her full
height, and regarded the wretched girl with such contemptuous scorn that even in her abject
misery she felt its barb.

"I have not earned your hate," said Harry, with some degree of firmness, "if I have earned
your scorn; nor is it meet that you should so despise me, because I fear to anger God."

"And man," added the other, with bitterness. "You fear your father's wrath far more than Heaven's."

That bolt went home: the unhappy girl did indeed stand in greater terror of her father than
of the sin of perjury; and the idea of affirming upon oath what she had but a few days before
so solemnly denied to him was filling her with consternation and dismay. Still the picture
that had just been drawn of the ruin that would assuredly befall her Richard, unless she interposed
to save him, had more vivid colors even than that of Trevethick's anger. Let him kill her,
if he would, after the trial was over, but Richard should go free.

"I will do your bidding, madam," said she, suddenly, "though I perish, body and soul."

"You say that now, girl, and it's well and bravely said; but will you have strength to put
your words to proof? When I am gone, and there are none but Richard's foes about you, will
you resist their menaces, their arguments, their cajolements, and be true as steel?"

"I will, I will; I swear it," answered Harry, passionately; "they shall never turn me from
it. But suppose they prevent me from leaving Gethin, from attending at the trial at all?"

"Well thought of!" answered Mrs. Gilbert, approvingly; "she has some wits, then, after all,
this girl. As for their forbidding you to give evidence, however, Mr. Weasel, who is Richard's
lawyer, will see to that. You will be subpoenaed as a witness for the defense. You will say,
then, that it was you who opened the strong-box, and took out the notes, and gave them into
Richard's hand."

"But how could I open the letter padlock?"

"Good, again!" answered the other; "you have asked the very question for which I have brought
the answer. Now, listen! Have you access to your father's watch at times when he does not wear it?"

"Yes; he does not always put it on--never on the day he goes to market, for instance. He comes
back late, you see."

"Just so; and sometimes, perhaps, not altogether sober. Very good. Now, you once opened that
watch from curiosity, and saw a paper in its case with B N Z upon it. Those letters formed
the secret by which the lock was opened. You tried it, just in fun at first, and found they
did. Do you understand?"

"I do," said Harry.

"You will not forget, then, what you have to say; or shall I recapitulate it?"

"There is no need," groaned Harry. "I shall remember it forever, be sure of that, and on my
death-bed most of all." With a wearied look on her wan face, and a heavy sigh, the young girl
rose to go. "Good-night, madam. We need not speak of this again to-morrow, need we?"

"Surely not, child. My mission here is done. The rain is falling still, and that will be a
sufficient excuse for my departure. I had a sick headache to-night--remember that--but it will
be better after a night's sleep."

"Do you sleep?" asked Harry, simply. "Ah me, I would that I could sleep!"

"Of course I do. Is it not necessary for Richard's sake that I should be well and strong? I
could weep all night and fast all day, if I let my foolish heart have its own will. It is easy
enough to grieve at any time; one has only to think to do that. Sleep, child, sleep, and dream
of him as he will be when you have set him free; then wake to work his freedom. I will tell
him that you will do so. Press your lips to mine, that I may carry their sweet impress back
to him. One moment more. Do not get your lesson by heart, lest they should doubt you; but hold
by this one sentence, and never swerve from it: 'I gave Richard Yorke the notes with my own
hand.' That is the key which can alone unlock his prison-door. Good-night, good-night."

CHAPTER XXVI.

MR. ROBERT BALFOUR.

An author of sensitive organization has always a difficulty in treating the subject of prison
life. If he avoids details, the critics do not ascribe it to delicacy, but to incompetence;
if, on the other hand, he enters into them, they nudge the elbow of the public, and hint that
this particular phase of human experience is his specialty--that he "ought to know," because
he has been "through the mill" himself. This is not kind, of course; but the expression, "a
little more than kin and less than kind," is exceedingly applicable to the critic in relation
to his humble brother, the author. We will take a middle course, then, and exhibit only just
so much of Cross Key as may be seen in a "justice's visit."

Twenty years ago, the system of treatment of prisoners before trial incarcerated in her Majesty's
jails was not so uniform as it now is. In some they were permitted few privileges not enjoyed
by the convicts themselves; in others a considerable difference was made between the two classes.
The establishment at Cross Key leaned to the side of indulgence. Its inmates who were awaiting
their trial were allowed to wear their own clothes; to write letters to their friends without
supervision (though not without the suspicion of it on their own part); and to mingle together
for some hours in a common room, where that unbroken silence which pervades all our modern
Bastiles, and is perhaps their most terrible feature, was not insisted upon. In this common
room Richard Yorke was sitting on the afternoon following his incarceration. The principal
meal of the day had been just concluded, and himself and his fellow-guests were brooding moodily
over their troubles. The platters, the block-tin knives, so rounded that the most determined
self-destroyer could never job himself with them into Hades, and the metal mugs had been removed,
and their places on the narrow deal table were occupied by a few periodicals of a somewhat
depressing character, though "devoted to the cultivation of quiet cheerfulness," and by a leaden
inkstand much too large to be swallowed. The prisoners--upon the ground, perhaps, of not needing
the wings of liberty for any other purpose--were expected to furnish (from them) their own
pens. There were but half a dozen of these unfortunates; all, with two exceptions, were of
the same type--that of the ordinary agricultural criminal. Ignorant, slouching, dogged, they
might have fired a rick, or killed a keeper, or even--sacrilegious but unthinking boors--have
shot a great man's pheasant. They did not make use of their privileges of conversation beyond
a muttered word or two, but stared stupidly at the pictures in the magazines, wondering (as
well they might) at the benevolent faces of the landlords, clergymen, and all persons in authority
therein portrayed, or perhaps not wondering at them at all, but rather pondering whether Bet
and the children had gone into "the House" or not by this time, or whether the man in the big
wig would be hard upon themselves next Wednesday three weeks.

One of these two exceptions was, of course, our hero, who looked, by contrast with these poor,
simple malefactors, like a being from another world, a fallen angel, but with the evil forces
of his new abode already gathering fast within him. His capacities for ill, indeed, were ten
times theirs; and the dusky glow of his dark eyes evinced that they were at work, though they
did but ineffectually reflect the hell of hate that was beginning to be lit within him. It
flamed against the whole world of his fellow-creatures, so mad he was with pride and scorn
and rage; his hand should be against every man henceforth, as theirs was now against him; his
motto, like the exeunt exclamation of the mob in the play, should be: "Fire, burn, slay!" He
was like a spoiled child who for the first time has received a severe punishment--for a wonder,
not wholly deserved--and who wishes, in his vengeful passion, that all mankind might have one
neck in common with his persecutor, that (forgetting he is no Hercules) his infant arms might
throttle it off-hand. The love which he still felt for Harry and his mother, far from softening
him toward others, rather increased his bitterness of spirit. They, too, were suffering wrong
and ill-treatment, and needed an avenger. His fury choked him, so that he had eaten nothing
of what had been set before him, and he now sat leaning with his elbows on the bare boards,
staring with heated eyes at the blank wall before him, and feeding on his own heart.

"This is your first time in quod, I guess, young gentleman," observed a quiet voice beside him.

Richard started. He had thrown one contemptuous glance upon the company when they first assembled,
and had decided that they possessed no more interest for him than a herd of cattle; buried
in his own sombre thoughts, he had lost consciousness of their very presence, as of that of
the warder, who was pacing up and down the room with monotonous tread. But now that his attention
was thus drawn to his next neighbor, he saw that he differed somewhat from the rest; not that
he was more intelligent-looking--for, indeed, there was a reckless brutality in his expression
which the others lacked--but there was a certain resolution and strength of will in his face,
which at least told of power. But it was the tone of voice, which, coming from such a man,
though it was a gruff voice enough in itself, had something conciliatory and winning in it,
that chiefly attracted Richard. Perhaps, too, the phrase "young gentleman" flattered his vanity.
We can not throw off all our weaknesses at a moment's notice, no matter how stupendous the
crisis in our fortunes, any more than, though our boat be sinking under us, we can divest ourselves
of our clothes with a single shrug; and sympathy and deferential respect had still their weight
with Richard Yorke. Perhaps, too, his nature had not yet even got quit of its gregariousness,
and he was not sorry to have his acquaintance sought, though by this hang-dog thief.

"I have never been in prison before, if that is what you mean," returned he, civilly.

He who asked the question was a stout-built, grizzled fellow, of about fifty years. He was
dressed like a well-to-do farmer, but his accent smacked of London rather than the country;
and his hands, Richard observed, were not so coarse and rough as might be expected in one used
to manual labor, though his limbs and frame were powerful enough for the most arduous toil.
His gray eyes looked keenly at Richard from under their bushy brows, as he propounded a second
inquiry:

"What are you in for? Forgery or embezzlement, I reckon--which is it?"

"Neither," answered Richard, laconically, a bitter smile parting his lips in spite of himself.

"Well, now, that's curious," observed the other, coolly. "If it was not that you were sent
here with the rest of us, and not shut up by yourself, I should have guessed 'Murder' outright,
for you were looking all that a minute ago; and since it could not be murder, I thought it
must be one of the other two."

"I don't know what I am here for," said Richard, gloomily, "except that the charge is false."

"Oh, of course," rejoined the other, with a grim chuckle; "it's always false the first time,
and as often afterward as we can get the juries to believe us. I'm an old hand myself, and
my feelings are not easily wounded; but I have never yet disgraced myself by pleading guilty.
It's throwing a chance away, unless you are a very beautiful young woman who has put away her
baby, and that I never was, nor did."

"Beauty in distress mollifies the court, does it?" inquired Richard, willing to be won from
his own wretchedness by talk even with a man like this.

"Mollifies!--yes, it makes a molly of every body. I have known a judge shed tears about it,
which he is not bound to do unless he has the black cap on--that always set him going like
an onion. Why, I've seen even an attorney use his pocket-handkerchief because of a pretty face
in trouble; but then she was his client, to be sure. Talking of attorneys, you'll have Weasel,
of course?"

Richard nodded an affirmative.

"Quite right. I should have him myself, if there was a shadow of a chance; but, as it is, it's
throwing good money out o' winder. I wish you better luck, young gentleman, than mine is like
to be; not that you want luck, of course, but only justice."

Richard did not relish this tone of banter, and he showed it in his look.

"Come, come," said the other, good-humoredly, "it is a pity to curdle such a handsome face
as yours with sour thoughts. Let us be friends, for you may be glad of even a friend like me
some dirty day."

"It is very likely," answered Richard, bitterly. "I see no fine days ahead, nor yet fine friends."

"I hope you will see both," answered the other, frankly. "The first time one finds one's self
provided for so extra careful as this," with a glance at the iron bars across the low-arched
windows, "the prospect always does seem dark. But one learns to look upon the bright side at
last. Is the figure very heavy that you're in for? Excuse my country manners: I don't mean
to be rude, nor do I ask the question from mere curiosity; but you don't look like one to have
come here for a mere trifle."

"The amount in question is two thousand pounds."

"No whistling there!" cried the warder, peremptorily, for the "old hand" had not been able
to repress an expression of emotion at this announcement. He looked at Richard with an air
of self-complacency, such as a gentleman of the middle classes exhibits on suddenly discovering
that he has been in familiar converse with a person of title, or a small trader on being brought
into unexpected connection with a merchant prince. The gigantic character of the "operation"
had invested this young man with an increased interest in the stranger's eye.

"That's a great beginning," said he, admiringly, "and could scarcely have happened with a poor
devil like me. One requires to be born a gentleman to have such opportunities. Now, I don't
mind telling you" here he sank his voice to a whisper, and looked cautiously about him, "that
I was forty years of age before I ever got such a haul as yours. I've done better since, but
it's been up-hill work, for all that."

"It doesn't seem to have been very hard work," said Richard, with a meaning glance at the other's
hand.

"Well, no, I can't say as it's been hard; a neat touch is what is wanted in my profession."

"Why, you're not a pick--" Richard hesitated from motives of delicacy.

"A pickpocket? Well, I hope not, Sir, indeed," interrupted the other, indignantly.

"Then what are you?" said Richard, bluntly.

As a coy maiden blushes and hangs her head in silence when asked the question which she is
yet both proud and pleased to answer in the affirmative, so did Mr. Robert Balfour (for such
was the name of our new acquaintance) pause and in graceful confusion rub his stubble chin
with his closed fist ere he replied: "Well, the fact is, I have been in the gold and precious
stone line these thirty years, and never in the provinces until this present summer, when I
came down here, as a Yankee pal of mine once put it, 'to open a little jewelry store.'"

"With a crowbar?" suggested Richard, with a faint smile.

"Just so," said the other, nodding; "and it so happened that yours truly, Bob Balfour, was
caught in the very act."

"And what term of punishment do you expect for such a--"

"Such a misfortune as that?" answered Mr. Balfour, hastening to relieve Richard's embarrassment.
"Well, if I had got the swag, I should--considering the testimonials that will be handed in--have
been a lifer. But since I did not realize so much as a weddin' ring, twenty years ought to
see me through it now."

Twenty years! Why, this man would be over seventy before he regained his liberty!

"Great Heaven!" cried Richard, "can you be cheerful with such a future before you! and at the
end of it, to be turned old and penniless into the wide world!"

A genuine pity showed itself in the young man's look and tone. A minute before he had thought
himself the most wretched of human beings; yet here was one whose fate was even harder, and
who met it without repining. Community of trouble had already touched the heart which he had
thought was turned to stone.

"Are you sorry for me, young gentleman," inquired the convict, in an altered voice, "you who
have got so much trouble of your own to bear?"

"I am, indeed," said Richard, frankly.

"You would not write a letter for me, though, would you?" inquired the other, wistfully. "I
should like to tell--somebody as I've left at home--where I am gone to; and the fact is, I
can't write; I never learned how to do it."

A blush came over Bob Balfour's face for the first time; the man was ashamed of his ignorance,
though not of his career of crime. "If it's too much trouble, say so," added he, gruffly. "Perhaps
it was too great a favor to ask of a gentleman born."

"Not at all," said Richard, hastily, "if the man will bring us pen and paper."

"Hush! the officer, if you please," said Balfour. "They like to be 'officered,' these gentry,
every one of them. Some friends of mine always addresses 'em as 'dogs;' but that's a mistake,
when they has to watch you."

Mr. Robert Balfour spoke a few respectful words to the warder, and the requisite materials
were soon laid upon the table. Richard dipped his pen in the ink, and waited for directions.
"It's only a few words," muttered Mr. Balfour, apologetically, "to my old mother. Perhaps you
have a mother yourself, young gentleman?"

"I have." He had written to her guardedly the previous day, before he left Plymouth, to tell
her the same sad news which he was now, as he supposed, about to repeat for another, and to
urge her to repair to Cross Key at once.

Mr. Balfour beat softly on the table with his forefinger for a moment, and then, as though
he had found the key-note of the desired composition, dictated as follows:

     "MY DEAR MOTHER,--When this comes to hand, I shall have took your
     advice, and started for the New World. There's a ship a-sailing
     from Plymouth in a day or two, and my passage in her is booked. I
     didn't like to come back to town again, for fear I should change my
     mind, and turn to the old trade. The post is queer and doubtful,
     they tell me, in these far-away parts; but you shall hear from me
     whenever I have an opportunity. All as is mine is yours, remember;
     so, use it. I have no need of money myself, for there's a place
     being kept for me, out yonder, in the carpentering line. Hoping
     this finds you well, as it leaves me, I am your dutiful son, ROBERT
     BALFOUR."

"Then you don't tell her any thing about what's happened to you?" said Richard, wonderingly.

"Why should I? The poor soul's over seventy, and will never see me again. It's much better
that she should have a pretty picture to look at than such a reality as this; ain't it?"

"Well, I suppose it is."

This delicate feeling on the part of Mr. Balfour jarred upon Richard. He had taken no pains
to break the news of his imprisonment to his mother; on the contrary, he had painted the wretchedness
of his position, with a view to set forth the urgent necessity for help, in its most sombre
colors. Of course there was a great difference in the two cases, an immense difference; but
still he resented this exhibition of natural piety, as contrasting unpleasantly with his own
conduct.

The other, however, had no suspicion of this. His thoughts, just then, were far away; and the
subject of them gave an unwonted softness to his tone as he observed: "I thank you for this,
kindly, young gentleman. Here's the address--Earl Street, Spitalfields. It's her own house;
and she will have enough, and to spare, while she lives, thank the Lord! Well, that's done
with; and if Bob Balfour can do you a good turn for it, he will. Hello, you're wanted."

"Richard Yorke!" repeated the warder, loudly. "Can't you hear?"

Richard had heard well enough; but the idea that it was his mother who had come to see him
had for the moment unmanned him; he well knew how proud she had been of him; and how was he
to meet her now, disgraced, disheartened, in prison, a reputed thief! But the next instant
he reflected that her arrival could not be possibly looked for for some days; perhaps it was
Trevethick, who had, in the mean time, learned all, and was come to announce his willingness
to withdraw from the prosecution; perhaps Harry herself was with him; perhaps--

But there was no time for further prognostication; a second warder was at the door, beckoning
impatiently, and Richard rose at once. The dull faces of the rest were all raised toward him
with a malign aspect; they feared that some good news was come for him, that they were about
to lose a companion in misfortune. Only one held out his hand, with a "Good luck to you, young
gentleman; though I never see you again, I shall not forget you."

"Silence there!" cried the officer in charge, as Richard passed out into the stone passage.
"You ought to know our ways better than that, Balfour."

CHAPTER XXVII.

ATTORNEY AND CLIENT.

In a hall of stone stood a room of glass, and in that room the inmates of Cross Key Jail were
permitted to have access to their legal advisers. They were not lost sight of by the jealous
guardians of the place, one of whom perambulated the hall throughout the interview; but though
he could see all that passed, he could hear nothing. Mr. Weasel of Plymouth was very well known
at Cross Key as being a frequent visitor to that transparent apartment, and those prisoners
whom he favored with his attentions were justly held in high estimation by the warders, as
gentlemen who, though in difficulties, had at least some considerable command of ready money.
He was waiting now, with his hat on (which he always wore, to increase his very limited stature),
in this chamber of audience; and so withered up he looked, and such a sharp, shrunk face he
had, that Richard, seeing him in the glass case, might have thought him some dried specimen
of humanity, not alive at all, had he not chanced to be in the act of taking snuff; and even
that was ghostly too, since it produced the pantomimic action of sneezing without its accompanying
sound.

"Mr. Richard Yorke, I believe?" said he, as soon as they were shut up within the walls of glass,
"I am glad to make your acquaintance, Sir, though I wish, for your sake, that it happened in
another place. You'll excuse my not offering you my hand."

Richard drew back his extended arm and turned crimson.

"Don't be offended, Sir," said the lawyer; "but the fact is, the authorities here don't like
it. There are some parties in this place who employ very queer legal advisers; and in shaking
hands, a file or a gimlet, and a bit of tobacco, are as likely to pass as not. That warder
can see every thing, my dear young Sir; but he can no more hear what we say than he can understand
what a couple of bumble-bees are murmuring about who are barred up in a double window. We can
therefore converse with one another as much without reserve as we please, or rather"--and here
the little man's eyes twinkled significantly--"as you please. What I hear from a client in
this ridiculous place is never revealed beyond it, except so far as it may serve his interests.
If Mr. Dodge (to whose favor, as I understand, I owe this introduction) has told you any thing
concerning me, he will, I am sure, have advised you to be quite frank and candid."

"There was no necessity for such a warning, Mr. Weasel, in my case, I do assure you," answered
Richard, earnestly. "I have nothing to conceal from you with respect to the circumstances of
my position: they are unfortunate, and doubtless very suspicious; but I am as innocent of this
disgraceful charge--"

"Hush, hush! my dear Sir; this will never do. It is mere waste of time, though it might have
been much worse. Good Heavens! suppose you had been guilty, and told me that! you would have
placed me in the most embarrassing situation, as your professional adviser, it is possible
for the human mind to conceive. What I want to know is your story, so far as these two thousand
pounds found in your possession are concerned. Whether it is true or not, does not matter a
button. I want to know whether it seems true; whether it will seem true to a judge and jury.
You have thought the matter over, of course; you have gone through it in your own mind from
beginning to end--now please to go over it to me."

The little man whipped out a note-book, leaned forward in his chair, and looked all eye and
ear, like a terrier watching at a rat-hole.

After a moment's pause, Richard stated his case pretty much as we are already acquainted with
it; the little lawyer interrupting him now and then by a gesture, but never by a word, in order
that he might set down a point or a memorandum.

"Very good," said Mr. Weasel, when he had quite finished. "That's your story, is it?"

"It's the truth, Sir."

"Hush! my dear young Sir. We shall have enough of that--the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth--a fortnight hence. What you and I have to consider are the probabilities. Why
did you go to Plymouth, more than any other place, to change these notes?"

"Because I had heard there was a Miners' Bank there, and Trevethick had mentioned the notes
of that company as being as good, in his opinion, as those of the Bank of England. I thought
it would be easier to get the Mining notes in exchange for those of the Bank of England, than
others of the same bank."

"The check which you showed this Trevethick was not, then, a bonâ fide piece of paper, eh?"

"It was not," said Richard, casting down his eyes.

"Very good," answered the lawyer, so cheerfully that you would have thought his client had
cleared himself of the least suspicion upon that score, at all events. "Now, where did you get it?"

"My mother sent me a blank check, at my request, and I filled it in."

"That check is destroyed, you say--you burned it, of course?"

"No; I tore it up, and threw it out of the window of the carriage."

"The devil you did!" said Mr. Weasel, in perturbation. "That is not the way to destroy checks.
Had your mother an account at the bank on which it was drawn?"

"Of course." said Richard, simply.

"There is nothing 'of course,' Mr. Yorke, in this matter," answered the lawyer, gravely. "Are
you quite sure?"

"Quite. She has always had an account there; though to no such amount as two thousand pounds."

"It is a large sum," muttered the lawyer, thoughtfully, "but still they have not lost one penny
of it. In case things went against you, Mr. Yorke, would an appeal to the prosecutor be likely
to be of service?"

"Certainly not," answered Richard, hastily. "I would not accept mercy at his hands; besides,
it is not a question of mercy."

"It may come to that," observed the other, gravely. "We must not deceive ourselves, Mr. Yorke."

"Good Heavens! do you believe, then, that I took this money with intent to steal it?"

"What my belief is is of no consequence, one way or the other; but my opinion is that the jury
will take that view, if they hear your story as you tell it. The fact is, you have left out
the most important incident of all: the whole case will hinge upon the young lady's having
given you these notes with her own hand. It is evident, of course, that she sympathized with
you in your scheme," pursued the lawyer, rapidly, and holding up his finger to forbid the protest
that was already rising to Richard's lip: "nothing could be more natural, though most imprudent
and ill judged, than her behavior. She had no more idea of stealing the money than you had;
how should she, since it was in a manner her own, she being her father's sole heiress. You
and I see that clearly enough, but to a jury used to mere matters of fact, motive has little
significance unless put into action. What we want, and what we must have, is evidence that
you got these notes, not only for this girl's sake, but from her fingers. Nobody can hurt her,
you know. Trevethick could never prosecute his own daughter; indeed, the whole affair dwindles
down to a lover's stratagem, and there is no need for prosecuting any body, if we can only
put Harry Trevethick into the witness-box. Now can we, Mr. Yorke, or can we not? that's the
question."

Richard was silent; the lawyer's argument struck him with its full force. He had no scruples
on the matter for his own part, but he feared that Harry might entertain them--they would be
only too much in keeping with her credulous and superstitious nature.

"If I could talk to her alone for five minutes," muttered Richard, uneasily.

"That is impossible," said Mr. Weasel, with decision. "We can only play with such cards as
we hold. I could go to Gethin myself, though it would be most inconvenient at this busy time,
and refresh this young woman's memory; but it is a delicate task, and would be looked upon
by the other side with some suspicion. Now, is there no judicious friend that can be thoroughly
depended upon--a female friend, if possible, since the affair may require tact and sympathy--to
effect this little negotiation? Think, my good Sir, think."

"Why, there is my mother herself!" ejaculated Richard, suddenly. "She is the wisest of women,
and the very one to conduct this matter, if properly instructed."

"Is she, now, is she?" said the lawyer, cheerily. "Come, come, that's well, and I begin to
see a little light. Let her go down to Gethin, where, as I conclude, she is not known, and
see Miss Trevethick herself. I should like to see her beforehand, however; indeed, that is
absolutely necessary."

"In my note to her, yesterday, I asked her to call at your office in Plymouth on her way hither,"
stammered Richard. "I thought it better--that is, in the first instance--that she should hear
from you how matters stood."

Mr. Weasel took a copious pinch of snuff, and shut his eyes, as though he were going to sneeze.
Whenever a client got upon an embarrassing topic Mr. Weasel took snuff, to obviate the necessity
of looking him in the face; while, in case of any compromising disclosure, Mr. Weasel sneezed,
to obviate hearing it.

"In a case of this kind, Mr. Yorke, not a moment is to be lost. I should advise your mother's
going direct to Gethin from my house, and making sure of this young lady's evidence. There
is even a possibility--I don't say it is probable, but there is just a chance, you see--that
she may be subpoenaed by the other side."

"Just so," assented Richard, so naïvely that a smile flitted across the little lawyer's face.

"Under these circumstances, then, this is what we will do, my dear young Sir: Mrs. Yorke will
go to the Gethin Castle as a guest, and, as I shall venture to suggest, under another name;
she will then find an opportunity of speaking to Miss Trevethick without awakening her father's
suspicions; and when she comes to Cross Key, she will have, I trust, some good news to bring
you, something to talk about (although you must be very careful and guarded, mind that, for
you will not be left alone together, as we are) besides mere regrets and lamentations; don't
you see, don't you see?"

Richard saw exceedingly well, and felt more grateful to the lawyer for devising such an arrangement
than he would like to have confessed; nevertheless, he did thank him heartily.

"Not at all, not at all, my dear young Sir," drawing on one of his gloves, in signal of departure.
"In a case like this, we must consult feelings as well as array our facts; we must bring heart
and head to bear together. Speaking of head reminds me, by-the-by, of the subject of counsel.
I propose to instruct Mr. Smoothbore, who leads upon this circuit; I gather from your letter
that there will be no difficulty with respect to funds."

"Whatever may be necessary, Mr. Weasel, for my defense will be, you may rest assured, forthcoming.
My mother--"

The smile disappeared from the lawyer's face with electrical rapidity. "Pardon me, my young
friend," said he; "but as a professional man, I only deal with principals in these matters.
The word forthcoming is a little vague. Counsel are paid beforehand, you must remember."

We must not be angry with Mr. Weasel, who was really a good sort of man after his kind. He
was naturally cautious, and if he had been the most trustful of mankind his experience would
have taught him prudence. He did like to see his money down; and really, as to Mr. Yorke, all
he knew of his pecuniary position was with relation to that blank check, the history of which
was not of a nature to inspire confidence.

"I was about to observe," said Richard, haughtily, "that my mother would satisfy all claims;
but, in the mean time, there were over a hundred pounds in notes and gold which were found
upon me when I was searched at Plymouth. If you doubt me, you have only to make inquiries."

"My dear young Sir," returned the lawyer, earnestly, "this is not courteous, this is not kind.
I never doubted you from the first moment that I saw you; no one with any knowledge of mankind
could do so. Professional etiquette compelled me to remark that I could treat with principals
only, that is all. Let me see," added he, consulting his note-book, "have I any thing more
to say? Yes, yes. With respect to this young lady, Miss Harry Trevethick--I did not like to
interrupt you at the time, but I see I have made a memorandum--is she pretty?"

"She is very, very beautiful," said Richard, earnestly, the remembrance of her beauty giving
a tenderness to his tone.

"That's capital!" nodded the lawyer. "Old Bantam is our judge this session, and he likes a
pretty face. So do we all, for the matter of that, I hope. You are young and good-looking yourself,
too; Smoothbore will make something of that, you may depend upon it. 'Gracious Heavens, is
the iron arm of the law to sunder these happy lovers for a mere indiscretion, and make their
bright young lives a blank forever?' He'll give them something like that, Sir, in a voice broken
by emotion, and bring you off with flying colors."

"I don't care about the colors, if he only brings me off," said Richard, grimly.

"A very natural remark, my dear young Sir, for one in your present situation; but three weeks
hence, as I both hope and believe, you will not be so easily satisfied; the more we have, the
more we want, you know--except in the matter of time. I have very little to spare of it just
now, and must therefore take my leave."

Mr. Weasel had put on his other glove and his hat, and, with a cheerful nod, had actually placed
his fingers on the door-handle, when he suddenly turned round, and said: "By-the-by, I had
almost forgotten a little form of words, which in your case I am sure will be but a form, and
yet I do not like to omit it. I never leave a client in your position without asking him the
question; so you must excuse me, my young friend, and not be offended."

"I am not in a position to be very sensitive about what is said to me," answered Richard, bitterly.
"Pray ask whatever you please."

Mr. Weasel looked cautiously round, to see that the warder was not too near, and lowered his
voice to a whisper. "Is this little affair your first, my dear young Sir? I mean," added he,
"have you ever been in trouble with the law before?"

"Certainly not," replied Richard, smiling.

"I had anticipated your answer," said the little lawyer, gayly; "but I thought it right to
make quite certain. Because, if the affair should happen to reach a stage where the question
of 'character' is mooted (though it won't get so far as that, I trust, in our case), one doesn't
like to be taken altogether by surprise, do you see? You have been a landscape-painter, you
say. A most innocent and charming occupation, I am sure, and one which Smoothbore will make
the very most of. The case altogether will afford him such opportunities that he really ought
to do it cheap. And you've never been any thing else, have you? never had any other calling,
or obtained your livelihood by any other than quite legal and permissible means--eh? What,
what? You have not been quite frank and candid with me, my dear Sir, I fear."

"It is really not of much consequence," said Richard, hesitating.

"You must allow me to be the judge of that, Mr. Yorke," said the other, gravely, taking off
his hat once more and one of his gloves. "Imagine yourself a good Catholic, if you please,
with Father Weasel for your priest."

The confession lasted for some minutes.

"I think you will admit that what I have told you has not much bearing upon the matter in hand,"
said Richard, when he had finished.

"None at all, none at all--that is, I hope not," answered the other, thoughtfully. "But what
an interesting revelation it is! What a nice point as to whether the matter is an offense against
the law or not! How prettily Smoothbore would treat the subject, if it chanced to come in his
way!" He looked at Richard with admiration. "You're a most remarkable young man, Sir; I wish
that circumstances permitted of my shaking you by the hand. Good-morning, my dear Sir. You
may depend upon my not permitting the grass to grow under my feet. When your mother comes she
will have good news for you. Good-morning."

The warder took possession of Richard, while Mr. Weasel, followed by the young man's longing
eyes, was ushered to the opposite door, on the other side of which was liberty. But the lawyer's
mind was still within the prison walls, though his legs were free, and walking up the street
of the little town toward his inn.

"Now, that is really a most remarkable young man," he murmured to himself. "A most ingenious
young fellow, upon my word. The idea of his having invented a new crime! Why, bless my heart,
it's quite an epoch--quite an epoch!"

CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE IRON CAGE.

So long as Richard had had Mr. Weasel to bear him company, half his troubles--so elastic was
his nature, and so apt for social intercourse--seemed to have been removed; but now that that
brisk, confident voice was heard no more, and the stone passages only echoed to the tread of
the warder and himself, his spirits sank even lower than they had been before. Alone in his
comfortless cell, he went over the lawyer's talk anew, and it was strange how the sparks of
comfort died out of it. It was clear that in the first instance his companion had taken a gloomy
view of his case, that he looked upon Richard's own story with utter disbelief, and was convinced
it would not hold water before a jury. His remark about the money having been recovered must
have had reference to a possible mitigation of the sentence, and therefore took conviction
for granted. Nor, upon reconsideration of the case with calmness--the calm of loneliness and
despair--was, Richard himself admitted, any other conclusion to be arrived at by a stranger.
Those who were acquainted with his rash and impulsive character and reckless ways would understand
that he had no serious intention of robbing Trevethick--except, that is, of his daughter; even
Trevethick himself must be aware of that; though, with that same exception before his eyes,
it was more than doubtful whether he would acknowledge it. Smarting with the sense of the deceit
that Richard had practiced (almost with success) upon him, he might conceal his real impression
of the affair, and treat it as a common felony. Taking the brutality of Solomon's manner to
him when he was arrested as an index of his prosecutor's purpose, he felt that this was what
would happen; and if so, what chance would he have against such evidence? Would the judge and
jury be persuaded to believe that he had acted with the romantic folly that had in reality
possessed him? And if not, to what protracted wretchedness might he not be doomed!

His old hopes, in short, lay dead within him, and he felt that his late adviser had been right
in suggesting the evidence of Harry Trevethick as the only means to secure his acquittal. He
did not look beyond that for an hour. Life for the next three weeks would have but one event
for him--his trial and its result. The little attorney, whom he had seen but once, the suasive
barrister, of whom he had only heard, were from henceforth the two persons upon earth who had
the most interest for him of all mankind. If they failed him, all was lost. If they succeeded,
all, or what had now become his all, was gained. He thought of Harry only as the being upon
whose testimony his fate depended; he did not picture her to himself in any other character,
though perhaps he would have refused to part with her even at the price of that liberty which
had become so precious in his eyes. She would surely not refuse to say the half-dozen words
which were the "open sesame" that alone could set him free! He thought of his mother, not so
much as such--the truest and most unselfish friend he had--as the person best qualified to
win Harry over to speak those words. He was no longer ashamed to see her; his heart was so
full of anxious fear that there was no room for shame; but he was glad that the lawyer had
recommended her to visit Gethin before coming to Cross Key. What he thirsted for was hope,
a gleam of sunshine, a whisper of good news. If his mother had not that to give him, let her
stay away. He did not wish his heart to be melted within him by regrets and tears; if there
was no hope, let it harden on, till it was as hard as adamant, for the hour, that, however
long delayed, must come at last--of vengeance! He thought of Solomon Coe as one of a dominant
race thinks of the slave who has become his master, and was his murderer in his heart ten times
a day. He thought of him as the man who would marry Trevethick's daughter, his own Harry, while
he (Richard) rotted in jail.

Such were the bitter reflections, creeping fears, and meagre hopes which consumed him when
he was alone, that is to say, for five-sixths of the day and all the weary night. In the society
of Balfour he found, if not solace, at least some respite from his gnawing cares. The importance
which this man had attached to the recovery of stolen goods as mitigating the punishment of
crime, and to good looks in the case of a female witness or prisoner, corroborated as it had
been by the judicial experience of Mr. Weasel, gave him confidence in the convict's intelligence;
or, at least, in his judgment with respect to the matter on which Richard's thoughts were solely
concentrated. He was never weary of asking this man's opinion on this point and on that of
his own case, the details of which he fully confided to him. Balfour, on his part, gave him
his best advice, and whatever comfort he could. He did not resent, nor even seem to be aware
of the fact, that the position in which he stood himself awoke no corresponding sympathy in
Richard. He had taken a fancy to this young fellow, so different from any companion that he
had ever known; was flattered by his confidence; and felt that enthusiasm toward him which
friendship, when it exists between two persons of widely different grades, sometimes begets
in the inferior.

A week passed on, and then, at the same time and place as before, Richard was summoned from
his fellow-prisoners. He turned pale in spite of himself, as he rose from the table to meet
for the first time, since disgrace had overwhelmed him, his mother's face.

"Don't give way, my young master," whispered Balfour, good-naturedly, "for that will only make
the old woman fret."

Richard nodded, and followed the warder, who on this occasion led the way through a different
door. "It ain't Mr. Weasel this time," said the latter, in answer to his look of surprise;
"it's a private friend, and therefore we can't let you have the glass box." He ushered him
into what would have been a stone courtyard, except that it had a roof also of stone. In the
middle of this, running right across it, was a sort of cage of iron, or rather a passage some
six feet broad, shut in on either side by high iron rails; within this paced an officer of
the prison; and on the other side of it stood a female figure, whom Richard at once recognized
as his mother. It was with this iron cage between them, and in the presence of an official,
that prisoners in Cross Key Jail were alone permitted to receive the visits of their friends
and kinsfolk. It was no wonder that in an interview under such restrictions, Mr. Weasel should
have recommended caution.

To do Richard justice, however, that was not the reflection that now passed through his mind.
For all his selfish thoughts and calculations, he had really yearned to cast himself on his
mother's breast, and feel once more her loving arms around him; to whisper in her ever-ready
ear his sorrow for the past, his anxieties for the future; and when he saw that this was not
to be, the heart that he would have poured out before her seemed to sink and shrink within
him. In this material obstacle between them he seemed to behold a type of the dread doom that
was impending over him--separation from humanity, exclusion from the world without, a life-long
entombment within stone walls. He put his hand and arm through the bars, mechanically, to touch
his mother's fingers, and when he found he could not reach them, he burst into tears. It was
only by a great effort that Mrs. Yorke could maintain her self-control; but she, nevertheless,
did do so. Her face was calm, and her eyes, though full of tenderness and pity, were tearless;
only her low, soft voice gave token of the woe within her in its tremulous and faltering tones.

"Dear Richard," it said, "my own dear Richard, take heart; a few days hence, and you will be
folded in your mother's arms; not to stray from them again, I trust, my boy, my boy!" She pressed
her forehead with its fine white hair against the cruel bars, and seemed to devour him with
her loving eyes. "All will yet be well," she continued; "your innocence can not fail to be
established, and this dreadful time will be forgotten like an evil dream."

"Have you been to Gethin, mother?"

"Yes, dear; I only came from thence this morning. Harry sent you her best love. Your faith
in her, she bade me tell you, is not misplaced; she will be in the witness-box, for certain."
This last sentence was uttered in the French tongue, and very rapidly.

"I am very sorry, ma'am," interrupted the official, who had retired to the further extremity
of the cage, "but my orders are to prohibit conversation between prisoners and their friends
in a foreign language."

"I will take care not to transgress again," said Mrs. Yorke, with a sweet smile; "your consideration
for us I am sure demands all obedience."

"Has Mr. Weasel made his arrangements, mother?"

"Yes, all; the subpoena will be sent to Gethin to morrow. He is most confident as to the result."

"And what does Mr. Smoothbore say? Have you seen him?"

"No, dear, no. But the matter on which I went to Gethin having been satisfactorily arranged,
we may consider that is all settled. Your counsel has no doubt of being able to establish your
innocence, notwithstanding the malice of your enemies."

"But what is he like, this Smoothbore?"

"Well, the fact is, Richard, we have not got him, but another man, Mr. Balais--quite his equal,
Mr. Weasel assures me, in all respects."

"Not got him!" cried Richard, impatiently. "Why, Weasel told me Smoothbore led the circuit.
Why have we not secured him?"

"He has been retained by the other side," answered Mrs. Yorke, in a tone that she in vain endeavored
to render cheerful. "To say the truth, Richard, the prosecutor is exhibiting the utmost vindictiveness,
and straining every nerve for a conviction. Money, which he was said to be so fond of, is now
no object with him, or at least he spares none. But he can not bribe twelve honest men, nor
a righteous judge."

"I knew it," exclaimed Richard, stamping his foot on the stone floor. When the Caesar of Pompey Advokatenberedsamkeit the muzzle their creator or even
let him even tighter, so that at least had lost nothing, and much was gained, better and better
regulated if elected officials and juries were appointed and the palpable bribery and intimidation
of the courts took over. But the holy Sense of justice and respect for the law, difficult
to destroy in the minds of the multitude; are heavier still recreate. As the legislature shuts
off manifold abuse the reason he could not claim to cure, and one might doubt whether the time that
all Curable heals here will bring help. ------------------------------------------------- ^ 16
"wide more often," says Cicero in his statement to the rhetoric (De orat. 2, 42, 178), first
in relation to the criminal process, "determine dislike or affection or partiality or anger or
pain or joy or hope or fear or deception, or even a passion the verdict of the people when the
evidence or the rule or a rule of law or the process of instruction or the law. "That is because
the further training for the prospective trustees founded. The -------------------------------------------------
Roman military system this time was about the same constitution as the Carthaginian to Hannibal's
time. The ruling classes are submitted, only the officers and the subjection, Plebs and provincials,
formed the army. The general was financially supported by the central government and almost
independent military and happiness in misery as much on themselves and dependent on the resources
of his diocese. Citizens and even national soul were from disappeared and the army as the only inward
band left the esprit de corps. The army had ceased to be a tool the community, politically,
they had a will of its own is not known but they could of the foreman to appropriate, they
fell under military the ordinary miserable leaders to a resolution, useless rotting down, developed
but under the right commanders to the citizen army of unattainable military Perfection. The officer
class in particular was in the deepest decline. The upper classes, Senators Ritter and weaned always
more of the weapons. If one else to the Staff Officer posts had zealously promoted, so now, every
man of Knight rank, which might serve a Tribune war and even had Make sure some of these items
with lower status men be occupied, but he who at all of the nobles still served at least tried his
service in Sicily or dismiss another province, where one was sure not to come before the enemy.
Officers of the usual bravado and usefulness were amazed as sea wonders, how especially with
Pompey for his contemporaries it in every way compromising military idolatry exaggerated. To tear
as the mutiny was generally the staff the signal, in spite of the criminal indulgence of the commander
requests for cassation distinguished officers everyday occurrences. We still have not of Caesar's
own hand ironic picture drawn, as in his own headquarters, as it go against Ariovistus should
be cursed and cried and was in wills and even worked on vacation requests. In the soldiers'
body was no trace of the better classes to discover more. Legally was still conscription, but
the levy was when the next recruitment this came about in an irregular manner, requiring many
were missed and once it has occurred thirty years and held longer with the eagles. The Roman citizen
cavalry vegetated only as a kind of mounted Nobel guard, whose fragrant ointment Cavaliers and
selected Luxury horses only at the capital's festivals played a role, the so-called Bürgerfußvolk
was one of the lowest strata of the population of citizens gathered together Lanz servant Force;
the subjects featured the cavalry and light troops and only began to also be used in more and more
infantry to. The squad leader posts in the legions quote a significant contribution of the former war,
the efficiency of the departments based and which, to the national military organization with
the soldier himself up the ranks, served were now not only regularly awarded to favor, but
not rare even to the highest bidder sold. The payment of pay was in bad financial management of government
and the venality and deceit of the great majority of officials highly inadequate and irregular.
The necessary consequence was that in the ordinary course of things the Roman armies robbing
the provinces, against the officers mutinied and ran away before the enemy, and it felt that considerable
armies, as the Macedonian of Piso in 697 (57), without actual Defeat, were completely ruined
so much by the mismanagement. Capable leaders, however, such as Pompey, Caesar, Gabinius, probably
formed from the available material capable and quick-witted, some exemplary armies, these armies alone there
were more generals than their the community. The far more complete decay of the Roman navy,
the other for everything have been antipathetic to the Romans and never completely nationalized, was
hardly necessary Mention. It was just killing them here in all directions under the oligarchic
regime been, what could ever be ruined. Caesar's reorganization of the Roman military system
limited and in essence, under the current lax and incompetent upper management loosened reins of discipline
again taut and tighten. A radical reform seemed him the Roman military system either does not
or need not be capable, and the elements of Army, he accepted ebenwie Hannibal had accepted it. The determination
of its municipal code, that in order to hold before the thirtieth years a municipal office
or sit in the council, A three-year service on horseback - that is, as an officer - or a six-year
walk was necessary to prove clearly that he wished to draw the upper classes in the army, but
also just as clear that with the increasing number of tear un-warlike spirit of the nation he himself
was no longer possible, the clothing of an honorary office of the Überstehung the service time to
make sure as ever. It will just explain the fact that Caesar no attempt was made to restore the Roman
citizen cavalry. The levy was better organized, regulated and shortened the period of service, the
way it was here that the line infantry mainly from the lower classes of Roman citizenship,
the cavalry and the light Infantry from the subjection was dug - that for the reorganization of the
Navy nothing happened, is striking. A no doubt its author even dubious innovation forced to the
unreliability of the subject horse, it was that Caesar first by the Roman system was different,
never to fight with mercenaries, and rented in the cavalry Foreigners, especially German,
stopped. Another innovation was the establishment of the Legion adjutant (Legati legionis). Until
then, the part of the citizenry, some of the relevant Governor appointed Tribune war in the way
the legions out that each of them depending six were set before and changed by this command,
a single commander of the Legion ordered a temporary and extraordinary as the general. In later
times however, appear that the Supreme Legion or Legion adjutant, partly as a permanent and organic body,
partly appointed not by the governor, which they obey; but from the high command in Rome, both
seem to Caesars to the Gabinian Law would link Institutions to go back. The reason for introducing
this important intermediate in the military hierarchy is partly in the need for a vigorous centralization
of command, partly in the palpable lack of skilled top officers, in part, and above all with
the intention to be sought, by assigning one or more of the emperor appointed the Supreme
Governor a counter-weight to give. The most significant change in the military system was to list of a permanent
war head in the Emperor, which previously instead of the non-military and in every way incompetent
government college the entire army regiment in his hands united and the same words from a mostly
only nominal management in a real and umschuf energetic command. We are not duly informed, in
what way this command to the previously placed in their dioceses powerful special commands.
Probably, in this case generally, the analogy between the Praetor and Consul or the consul
and dictator prevailing relationship with reason, so that the governor Although at the highest
military authority in his diocese, but kept the Emperor at every moment the same from him and take it
for him or his authorized representative was and that while the violence of the governor was
limited to the district, that of the Emperor again, as the royal and the older consular, extended over
the entire kingdom. Also most likely already has been the appointment of the officers, both
the war Tribune as the centurions, as far as they previously granted to the governor ^ 17, as well as
the appointment the new Legion adjutant came directly to the Emperor and as may already the arrangement
of the levies, the farewell issue, the more important criminal cases to the Headquarters have been
drawn. With this restriction of the competence of the governor and in the regulated control of the
emperor was henceforth not easy, neither a complete Neglect of the armies nor convert it into
personal followings of individual officers to fear. However decided, so the conditions for military
monarchy hindrängten Caesar and so determines the high command took only for themselves, he was still
not inclined to justify its violence and the army. Although he kept a standing army necessary
for his state, but only because its the same geographical location for comprehensive Standing cross-border
regulation and crews needed. Part in earlier periods, partly during the last civil war he had
been working at Spain's satisfaction and in Africa along the great desert in the north-west of
the kingdom on the Rhine line for the fixed positions Border defense set up. With similar plans, he
worked for the landscapes on the Euphrates and the Danube. Above all, he intended to march against
the Parthians and the to avenge Carrhae day, he had three years determined for the war and was determined
to with these dangerous enemies once and for all a carefully and thoroughly as to be expected. He
also had designed the plan that both sides of the mighty Danube rampant attack Getenkönig Burebista
and also in northeast Italy to be protected by similar marks how he created him in Gaul. Some
studies, no evidence to suggest that Caesar like Alexander a winning run in the infinite distance
had in mind, it is probably said that he of Parthia from the Caspian and the Black to the sea,
then on the north bank of the same to move up to the Danube, Scythia and Germany up to the - to ideas
of that time not too distant from the Mediterranean Sea - northern ocean to the kingdom to bring and
to return home through Gaul had intended, but not any credible Authority guarantees the existence
of these Fabulos projects. In a state that, like the Roman Caesar, already included a mass intractable
and barbaric elements in with their assimilation to be done for centuries had more than enough, would
be such Conquests, and its military feasibility thought had happened but as yet far brighter
and far more serious error than the Alexander Indian warfare. Both after Caesar's method in
Britain and Germany, as the behavior of those who the heirs of his political ideas were, it
is highly probable that Caesar, with Scipio Aemilianus, the gods called not to increase the kingdom,
but to preserve it, and that his conquest was limited to one, of course, for his great Sized
scale, border control, which ensure the Euphratlinie and instead of completely fluctuating and
militarily futile northeastern frontier of the Danube line notice and should make defensible. However
if it is only probable, that Caesar not to be described in the sense that world conqueror like
Alexander and Napoleon, then the completely certain that his new monarchy initially not to rely on
the army at all not to put the military power of the bourgeois, but the civil Community-one thought
to subordinate and to the extent possible. The invaluable support a State soldiers, those old
Gallic legions were much celebrated, precisely because of her with a civil polity incompatible
esprit de corps canceled in an honorable way and her glorious name planted only continued in
newly established urban communities. The recipient of Caesar in the dismissal with landless
soldiers were not like the Sulla in their own colonies, as it moved together militarily, but,
especially if they reside in Italy, were isolated and dispersed as possible throughout the peninsula,
only It was impossible to avoid, however, that on the available remaining parts of the Campanian
Acker's the old soldiers of Caesar but got together in the mass. The difficult task of to keep
the soldiers of a standing army within the circles of civil life, Caesar sought to satisfy
not partly by the recent detention only certain years of service, but one actually standing, that
is by no discharge interrupted service prescriptive Order, partly by the already mentioned
reduction in service, which has a more rapid change the soldier's personnel brought about, partly
through regular settlement of the worn soldiers as agricultural colonists, partly and mainly
by the fact that the army of Italy, and in general kept away from the actual seats of the
civic and political life of the nation and the soldier was pointed to where he, in the opinion
of the great king alone at his Place was, in the border stations for the defense of the foreign
enemy. The right criterion of the military state, and favor the development of the Guard troops
will also be with Caesar not. Although in the active Army, the Institute a special bodyguard
of the commander existed for a long time, this occurs but in Caesar's army in full in the guide
Background, his praetorian cohort seems essential only for orderly officers or There were
no military escorts to and never have an actual elite corps So never be the subject of jealousy
have been the regular troops. When Caesar are real even as a commander's bodyguard, had he
suffered so much less than King a guard around. Although stable, and well aware of him, around
by assassins, he pointed However the request of the Senate to establish a noble guard fired
back, and things somewhat calmed down, the Spanish convoy, which he at first in the capital uses
had, and content with the suite of legal services, as for the Roman Top officials was brought
here. How much of Caesar and the thought of his party and his Youth, a Periclean Regiment in
Rome by virtue not of the sword, but by virtue of trust need to establish the nation in its struggle
with the realities had dropped - the basic idea to establish any military monarchy, he was also
yet certain with an energy to the presents the story hardly a parallel. However, this is an
unworkable ideal was also - It was the only illusion in which the longing desire in this strong
spirit of powerful as was the clear mind. A regiment, as it was under Caesar was not only necessary highly
personal nature and had to go with the death of the author as well as the underlying related creations
Pericles' Cromwell and the death of their founder, but at the deeply dysfunctional state of the
nation it was not even believable that it the eighth king succeed only by Rome for his life
will, like his seven predecessors his fellow citizens to control only by virtue of law and
justice, and equally unlikely that he succeed going, the standing army, after it met in the last
civil war, his power and the Scheu had forgotten how to reinstate as a serving member in the
civil order. Who coolly considered, to what extent the fear of the law from the bottom as shown
in the upper strata of society had escaped, which the former had to hope rather seem a dream,
and when the Marian reform of the army, the soldier at all has ceased to be citizens, say
the Campanian mutiny and the battlefield of Thapsus with infuriating clarity, the way in which
the army is now lent to the law of her arm. Even the great democrat, could the powers that
he had unleashed, with difficulty and poor to tame again, thousands of swords flew at a sign
from the vagina, but they went back into the vagina no longer on his signal. The fatality is more
powerful as a genius. Caesar wanted to be the restorer of the civil community and was the founder
of the military monarchy which he detested, he overthrew the aristocracy and Bankers state within
the state just to put in their place the soldiers state within a state, and the Communities remained
as before and bullied exploited by a privileged minority. But it is still a privilege of the highest
natures, to make a mistake so creative. The genius Experiments of great men to realize the
ideal, if they do not reach their destination also form the best treasure of nations. It is Caesar's
work, that the Roman military state until after several centuries, was a police state and that the Roman
emperors, how little they otherwise even the great founder of their rule matched, but not
the soldier much against the citizens of related, but against the enemy army and nation, and both
stayed too high, to enforce them to the constable of the former. --------------------------------------------------
------ ^ 17 has on the appointment of a part of the war by the Tribune citizenship Caesar, also
herein Democrat, not stirred. -------------------------------------------------- ------ The
Procedure of the financial system was on the solid foundations that the immense size of the
Empire and granted the exclusion of the credit system, relatively little difficulty. If the
state had previously been in constant financial difficulty, so it was the inadequacy of state revenues
to blame the least, but rather had this level in recent years, tremendously increased. To the earlier
total revenue of 200 million sesterces (15 million pounds) struck is often through the establishment
of the provinces of Bithynia-Pontus and Syria 85 Sesterces (6500000 pounds) come, what growth,
newly opened addition to the other or increased revenue sources, including through the constantly
growing income of the luxury tax, the loss of the Campanian rents far outweighed. Also had by
Lucullus, Metellus, Pompey, Cato and other off-ordinarily have accrued to the State Treasury
enormous sums. The cause of financial embarrassment was rather ordinary part in the increased
and extraordinary expenses, business partly in confusion. Among those who took the Grain distribution
to the metropolitan set almost prohibitive sums right: by which rose from Cato 691 (63) shared their
annual expenditure for the expansion to 30 million Sesterces (2300000 pounds), and since the
abolition of the previously paid compensation in 696 (58) devoured the same even the fifth part
of the public revenue. The military budget was increased, since the crews from Spain, Macedonia
and the other provinces or the were added of Cilicia, Syria and Gaul. Among the extraordinary
expenses in the first line to call the great cost of naval armaments, for which, for example,
five years after the great raid of 687 (67) once for 34 million


Mr. Balais smiled, shrugged his shoulders. His principles of oratory were Demosthenean; his
motto was "Action, action, action." His. friends on circuit called him the Balais of action.
He had had some experience of the depravity of human nature, said the shrug, but this beat
every thing, and would be really amusing but for its atrocious infamy. Good Heavens!

"Then you never had any conversation with the prisoner with reference to your daughter at all?"

"Never."

Mr. Balais bent down and interchanged a word or two with Mr. Weasel behind him.

"Now be so good as to give me your best attention, Mr. Trevethick, for upon my next question
more may depend than you may be aware of. If you have any regard for your own interests you
will answer it truly; for as sure as--"

"Is this necessary, Brother Balais?" interrupted the judge, scratching his forehead with his
forefinger, and looking up at the sky-light, as though that matter was not satisfactorily settled
even yet.

"My lud, I am instructed that nothing less than a conspiracy has been entered into against
my unfortunate client."

The judge nodded slightly, shivered considerably, and made a mental note to complain of that
infernal draught before he should dismiss the grand jury.

"I ask you, Mr. Trevethick," continued the counsel, solemnly, "whether or not, in a conversation
which you held with the prisoner upon a certain day last month, you mentioned two thousand
pounds as the sum you must needs see in his possession before you could listen to any proposition
of his with respect to your daughter's hand?"

"I did not."

"You never spoke of that particular sum to him at all?"

"Never at all."

It was Mr. Balais who looked up at the sky-light this time--as though he expected a thunder-bolt.

"The notes, of which we have heard so much, as being hoarded in this ingenious box of yours--and
that you are a very ingenious man, Mr. Trevethick, there is no doubt--this box, I say, was
kept in a certain cupboard, was it not?"

"It was."

"And now, please to look at the jury when you answer me this question: Where was this particular
cupboard situated, Mr. Trevethick?"

Into the landlord's impassive face there stole for the first time a look of disquiet, and his
harsh, monotonous voice grew tremulous as he replied, "The cupboard was in my daughter's bedroom."

"That will do, Mr. Trevethick, for the present," observed Mr. Balais, with emphasis; "though
I shall probably have the opportunity of seeing you another time"--and he glanced significantly
toward the dock--"in another place."

CHAPTER XXX.

FOR THE DEFENSE.

When Mr. Balais rose again it was to speak for the defense, and he addressed the jury amidst
an unbroken silence. So rapt, indeed, was the attention of his audience that the smack of a
carter's whip, as he went by in the street below, was resented by many a frown as an impertinent
intrusion; and even the quarters of the church clock were listened to with impatience, lest
its iron tongue should drown a single sentence. This latter interruption did not, however,
often take place, for Mr. Balais was as brief in speech as he was energetic in action. He began
by at once allowing the main facts which the prosecution had proved--that the notes had been
taken from Trevethick's box, and found in the prisoner's possession, who had been detected
in the very act of endeavoring to change them for notes of another banking company. But what
he maintained was, that this exchange was not, as Mr. Smoothbore had suggested, effected for
the purpose of realizing the money, but simply of throwing dust in the prosecutor's eyes. He
had changed the notes only with the intention of returning his own money to Trevethick under
another form. Even so young a man, and one so thoroughly ignorant of the ways of the world
and of business matters as was his client, must surely have been aware, if using the money
for himself had been his object, that it could be traced in notes of the Mining Company as
easily as in notes of the Bank of England; nay, by this very proceeding of his, he had even
given them a double chance of being traced. He (Mr. Balais) was not there, of course, to justify
the conduct of the prisoner at the bar. It was unjustifiable, it was reprehensible in a very
high degree; but what he did maintain was that, even taking for granted all that had been put
in evidence, this young man's conduct was not criminal; it was not that of a thief. He had
never had the least intention of stealing this money; his scheme had been merely a stratagem
to obtain the object of his affections for his wife. This Trevethick was a hard and grasping
man, and it was necessary for the young fellow to satisfy him that he was possessed of certain
property before he would listen to any proposition for his daughter's hand. His idea--a wrong
and foolish one, indeed, but then look at his youth and inexperience--was to impose upon this
old miser, by showing him his own money in another form, and then, when he had gained his object,
to return it to him. Mr. Balais was, for his own part, as certain of such being the fact as
that he was standing in that court-house. Let them turn their eyes on the unhappy prisoner
in the dock, and judge for themselves whether he looked like the mere felon which his learned
friend had painted him, or the romantic, self-deceiving, thoughtless lad, such as he (Mr. Balais)
felt convinced he was. They had all heard of the proverb that all things were fair in love
as in war. When the jury had been young themselves perhaps some of them had acted upon that
theory; at all events, it was not an unnatural idea for young people to act upon. Proverbs
had always a certain weight and authority of their own. They were not necessarily Holy Writ
(Mr. Balais was not quite certain whether the proverb in question was one of Solomon's own
or not, so he put it in this cautious manner), but they smacked of it. This Richard Yorke,
perhaps, had thought it no great harm to win his love by a false representation of the state
of his finances. He could not see his way how otherwise to melt the stony heart of this old
curmudgeon, who had doubtless--notwithstanding the evidence they had heard from him that day--encouraged
the young man's addresses so long as he believed him to be Mr. Carew's lawful heir. The whole
question, in fact, resolved itself into one of motive; and if there was not a word of evidence
forthcoming upon the prisoner's part, he (Mr. Balais) would have left the case in the jury's
hands, with the confident conviction that they would never impute to that unhappy boy--who
had already suffered such tortures of mind and body as were more than a sufficient punishment
for his offense--the deliberate and shameful crime of which he stood accused. He had lost his
position in the world already; he had lost his sweetheart, for they had all heard that day
that she was about to be driven into wedlock with his rival, a man twice his age and hers;
he had lost the protection of his father--his own flesh and blood--for since this miserable
occurrence he had chosen to disown him; and yet here was the prosecutor, who had lost nothing
(except his own self-respect, and the respect of all who had listened to his audacious testimony
that morning), pressing for a conviction, for more punishment; in a word, for the gratification
of a mean revenge. If he (Mr. Balais) had nothing more, therefore, to urge in his client's
defense, he would have been content to leave the jury to deal with this case--Englishmen, who
detested oppression, and loved that justice only which is tempered with mercy. But as it so
happened, there was no need thus to leave it; no necessity to appeal to mercy at all. He had
only to ask them for the barest justice. He was happily in a position to prove that the prisoner
at the bar had no more stolen this two thousand pounds than their own upright and sagacious
foreman.

A sigh of relief was uttered from a hundred gentle breasts. "We are coming to something at
last," it seemed to say. A hundred fair faces looked at Mr. Balais--who was growing gray and
wrinkled, and found every new performance of his pantomime harder and harder--as though they
could have kissed him, nevertheless. "Yes, gentlemen of the jury, that money was given to him
by the prosecutor's daughter with her own hand."

A murmur of satisfaction ran round the court-house.

There was a romance--a love-story--in the case, then, after all.

Mr. Balais concluded a most energetic speech with a peroration of great brilliancy, in which
Richard and Harry were exhibited like a transparency in the bright colors of Youth, and Hope,
and Passion, and finally sat down amidst what would have been a burst of applause but for the
harsh voice of the usher nipping it in the bud by proclaiming silence.

There was no need for his doing that when Mr. Balais jumped up to his feet again, as though
he were on springs, and called for Harry Trevethick. The judge was taking snuff at the time;
and such was the stillness that you could hear the overplus falling on the paper before him
on which he wrote down his notes. There was a minute's delay, during which every eye was fixed
upon the witness-box, and then Harry appeared. She was very pale, and wore a look of anxious
timidity; but a bright spot came into her cheeks as she turned her face to the prisoner in
the dock, and smiled upon him. From that moment Richard felt that he was safe. Guarded as he
was, and still in peril, he forgot his danger, and once more resolved that he would cleave
to this tender creature, to whom he was about to owe his safety, to his life's end.

Harry was simply yet attractively attired in a pale violet silk dress, with a straw bonnet
trimmed with the same modest color. It was observed, with reference to this and to the innocence
and gentleness of her expression, that she looked like a dove; and a dove she seemed to Richard,
bringing him the signal that the flood was abating, the deep waters of which had so nearly
overwhelmed both soul and body. Even the judge, as Mr. Weasel had foretold, regarded her through
his double glasses with critical approval; for a most excellent judge he was--of female attractions.

Mr. Balais smiled triumphantly at the jury. "Did I not tell you," he seemed to say, "that my
client is guiltless in this matter? Here is Truth herself come to witness in his favor. Bless
her!" Richard's feverish eyes were fixed upon her; he knew no God, but here was his spring
in the wilderness, his shadow of the great rock in a weary land. As for her, she looked only
at the judge, expecting--poor little ignoramus--that it was he who would question her.

"You are the daughter of John Trevethick, of Gethin?" said Mr. Balais.

This interrogatory, simple as it was, made her color rise, coming from that unexpected quarter.

"Yes, Sir."

"He keeps an inn, does he not; the"--here Mr. Balais affected to consult his brief, to give
her time to recover herself from her modest confusion--"the Gethin Castle, I believe?"

"Yes, Sir."

"The prisoner at the bar has been staying there for some months, has he not?"

She stole another look at Richard: it spoke as plainly as looks could speak, "Oh yes; that
is how I came to know and love him." But she only murmured, "Yes, Sir."

"Speak up, Miss Trevethick," said the counsel, encouragingly; "these twelve gentlemen are all
very anxious to hear what you have to say." The judge nodded and smiled, as though in corroboration,
as well as to add, upon his own account, that it would give him also much pleasure to hear her.

"Was the prisoner staying in the inn as an ordinary guest, or did he mix with the family?"

"He was in the bar parlor most nights, Sir, along with father and me and Solomon."

"He was in the bar parlor most nights," repeated Mr. Balais, significantly, for he was anxious
that the jury should catch that answer--"'With father and me and Solomon.' And who introduced
him into the parlor?"

"Father brought him first, Sir, on the second day after he came to Gethin."

"Father brought him in, did he? Now, that is rather an unusual thing for the landlord of an
inn to do, is it not? To introduce a young man whom he had known but twenty-four hours to his
family circle, and to the society of his daughter, eh?"

"Please, Sir, I don't know, Sir."

"No, of course you don't, Miss Trevethick; how should you? But I think the jury know. You have
no idea, then, yourself, why your father introduced this young gentleman to you so early?"

"Father said he was a friend of Mr. Carew's, of Crompton, who is father's landlord."

"Just so," said Mr. Balais, with another significant glance at the attentive twelve. "Mr. Trevethick
had already discovered that this youth was of a good social position, and likely to prove an
excellent match. 'Will you walk into my parlor?' said the spider to the fly; 'I have the prettiest
daughter that ever you did spy.'"

Every body tittered at this except Mr. Smoothbore and his solicitor; even the judge blew his nose.

"Now, not only did the prisoner at the bar spend most nights in the bar parlor, but, as I am
given to understand, he spent most days there, or, at all events, in your society, did he not?"

"Father and Solomon were away most days, Sir, and so we were left a good deal together."

"Just so. Your father took care to be away most days, did he, in order that you should be left
a good deal together?"

Mr. Smoothbore started to his feet. "My lud, I submit," etc.; meaning that this was a mode
of interrogating the witness that he could not submit to for an instant.

"Very good," said Mr. Balais, smiling. "I will not put the question in that form, then. The
form is of very little consequence. You were left together, however, and the consequence was
that you two young people fell in love with one another, eh?"

Harry was crimson. "I--he--we;" and there she stuck.

"I am very sorry to embarrass you, my dear young lady, but I am necessitated to press this
question. Did you fall in love with one another or not?"

No answer. Harry was thinking of Solomon, to whom she was to be married within ten days, and
hung her head.

"Come, did he fall in love with you, then? There was ample apology for it, I am sure, and he
ought to have been ashamed of himself if he hadn't. Now, did he 'court' you? I think you must
know what that means."

No answer. Every eye was upon her, the judge's double glasses included. They might have been
burning-glasses, she felt so hot and frightened.

"Come, did this young gentleman ever give you a kiss?"

"Yes, Sir," murmured poor Harry, almost under her breath.

"Did you say 'Yes' or 'No?'" inquired the judge, dipping his pen in the ink.

"I said 'Yes,' my lord," said the unhappy Harry.

"There were more kisses than one, now, I dare say," said Mr. Balais, with a wink at the jury;
"and they were not all on one side, eh?"

No answer.

"Some of them were on the other side, were they not? I don't mean on the other cheek, for I
have no doubt he was perfectly indifferent as to that."

Again there was a little titter.

"She is your own witness, Brother Balais," observed his lordship, "but it seems to me you are
giving her unnecessary pain."

He had a very tender heart, had the old judge, where a young and pretty woman was concerned--otherwise
he was a Tartar.

"My lud, it is absolutely necessary to prove that my client's passion was reciprocated. Did
you ever return one of these many kisses, Miss Trevethick?"

"Yes, Sir."

"Did you ever meet him alone at night in a place, I believe, called the Fairies' Bower?"

"Yes, Sir."

"Yes," repeated Mr. Balais, recapitulating these facts upon his fingers; "you were left alone
with him all day; you met him alone at night, away from your father's roof; you returned his
kisses; and all this without the slightest suspicion--if we are to believe his evidence--being
aroused upon the part of your parent. Now, Miss Trevethick, you were aware that your father
kept a large sum of money--these two thousand pounds--in his strong-box, were you not?"

"I was, Sir."

"Did you ever speak to the prisoner at the bar about it?"

"I think--yes, I did, Sir, on one occasion," and here Harry's voice fluttered and faltered.
No one noticed it, however, except the prisoner; if any neighbor eyes had watched him narrowly--but
they were all fixed upon the witness--they would have seen his face whiten, and his brow grow
damp. Why should she have laid that stress upon "on one occasion?"

"You told him that the two thousand pounds were in the box in the cupboard in your bedroom?"

"I did, Sir."

"The fastening of the box was not an ordinary lock, I believe. It was what is called a letter
padlock?"

"Yes, Sir."

"Did you ever open it?"

"No, Sir."

A great bell seemed to be suddenly set tolling in Richard's brain--it was the knell of all
his hopes.

"You had never opened it at that time, eh?" continued Mr. Balais, cheerfully. "But you learned
the secret afterward?"

"I--yes--I did."

"Do you remember the letters that did open it?"

"Yes, Sir."

"What were they?"

"B, N, Z."

"Very good. We have heard from the counsel for the prosecution that they were so; and that
Mr. Trevethick kept a memorandum of them on a piece of paper that fitted into his watch-case.
Did he always carry that watch about with him?"

"Not always. When he went out to market, and was likely to be late, he sometimes left it at home."

"In his own room, I suppose, where you or any body else could get at it?"

"I suppose so, Sir."

"You suppose? You know he did, do you not? Did you not open the watch-case yourself, and so
discover the means of unlocking the box?"

"No, Sir," said Harry, faintly; and once more she turned her eyes to Richard. It was a true
and tender glance, one would have said, and accompanied by an attempt at a smile of encouragement.
But if it had been a glance of a gorgon, it could not have had a more appalling effect; it
literally seemed to turn him into stone.

"Recollect yourself, Miss Trevethick," said Mr. Balais, earnestly; "you are getting confused,
I fear. Now please to give me your attention. You say that you knew that the letters B, N,
Z were those which formed the key of the letter padlock, and yet that you did not open your
father's watch-case. How, then, did you become possessed of the secret?"

No answer. Harry caught her breath convulsively, and turned deadly pale. She could never tell
how Mrs. Yorke had endeavored to suborn her.

"Well, well, this is a matter of very little consequence--though I see my learned friend is
making a copious note of it," said Mr. Balais, gayly. "The main point is what, as you have
told us, did occur--that you found out the secret somehow. When you got it, I suppose you opened
the box?"

No answer, save from Mr. Smoothbore, who observed, tartly: "You have no right to assume that,
Sergeant."

"Let the young woman have a glass of water," suggested the kindly judge.

"My lord, my lord!" cried Harry, with sudden passion, "he is not guilty. Richard did not mean
to steal the money; indeed he did not. He only wished to get possession of it that my father
might believe him to be a man of wealth. He did but--"

"Endeavor to compose yourself, young woman," interposed the judge. "The learned counsel will
only ask what is necessary."

"Take your time. Miss Trevethick, take your time," pursued Mr. Balais, in his blandest tones.
"The question is, how the prisoner became possessed of this money. Now, tell us, did you not
give it him with your own hands?"

The bell was still tolling in Richard's brain, and yet he could hear the buzzing of a fly against
a window of the court-house, and the careless whistle of some lad in the street without. It
was the same tune that the keeper at Crompton had been wont to whistle in his leisure moments
at home; and his mind reverted with a flash to the glades of the stately park, the herds of
deer, the high-mossed gate, which he had shut in the face of the hounds when they were chasing
Carew's carriage. Was it the bang of the gate, or had Harry really answered in a firm voice,
that resounded through the silent court-house, "No, Sir?"

"What!" said Mr. Balais, raising his voice a little. "Do you mean to say, then--and recollect
that the fate of the prisoner at the bar may depend upon your reply to this question--that
Richard Yorke did not become possessed of these notes by your connivance, through your means,
at all?"

"No, Sir, no," answered Harry, passionately; "I can't say that; indeed, Sir, I can not. But
he is innocent--Richard is innocent--he never meant to steal them. O God, help me!" In her
excitement, and not because she wished to do so, she had turned about, and once more caught
sight of the prisoner at the bar. It was her turn now to shrink appalled and petrified. It
was not reproach that she saw pictured in that well-loved face, but downright hate and loathing.
"He will never, never forgive me!" cried she, with a piteous wail; and then scream followed
scream, and she was borne out in haste, and a doctor sent for.

Cross-examination was, of course, quite out of the question; and, indeed, Mr. Smoothbore was
much too sagacious a man to wish to exercise that privilege. The failure of the witness for
the defense had proved the case of the prosecution.

It was Mr. Smoothbore who could now best afford to praise the innocence and candor of the unhappy
Harry. Was it not evident that that tender creature had been tampered with, and almost persuaded
to perjure herself, for the sake of the prisoner at the bar--almost, but, happily for the ends
of justice, not quite persuaded! Her natural love of right had conquered the ignoble passion
with which she had been inspired by this unscrupulous man. What words could sufficiently paint
the baseness of the conduct of the accused! Was it not clear that he had endeavored to escape
scot-free, at the sacrifice of this poor girl's good name? She, forsooth, was to proclaim herself
thief, to save his worthless self! It was not for Mr. Smoothbore--Heaven forbid!--to exaggerate
such wickedness, but was it possible that the phrase, "Young in years, but old in vice," had
ever had a more appropriate application than in the present case! For the credit of human nature,
he trusted not. The point upon which his learned friend had mainly relied having been thus
proved wholly untenable--the fact of Richard's taking the money having been incontestably brought
home to him--it only remained for him (Mr. Smoothbore) to notice what had been said with respect
to motive. If the prisoner at the bar had even had the intention, which had been so gratuitously
imputed to him, of returning this money to the prosecutor, when once the object of his supposed
scheme had been effected, he would be no less guilty of the crime that was laid to his charge.
It was possible, indeed, in such a case, that there might be extenuating circumstances, but
those would not affect the verdict of the jury, however they might influence his lordship's
sentence after that verdict had been truly given. And this he would say, after what had just
occurred in that court--after the painful scene they had just witnessed--the breaking down
of that innocent girl in an act of self-sacrifice, culpable in itself, but infinitely more
culpable in him who had incited her to do it--for he could not for an instant suppose that
the prisoner's legal advisers could have suggested such a line of defense: taking all this
into consideration, he, Mr. Smoothbore, would confidently ask the jury whether the prisoner
at the bar was to be credited with merely a romantic stratagem, or with a crime the heinousness
of which was only exceeded by the means by which he had striven to exculpate himself from it,
and to evade the ends of justice.

When Mr. Smoothbore had thus concluded a lengthened and impassioned harangue, he sat down,
wiping his hands upon his handkerchief, as though implying that he had washed them of the prisoner
for good and all, and that a very dirty job it had been; while the judge rose and left the
court, it being the hour appointed to his system, by nature, for the reception of lunch.

CHAPTER XXXI.

THE SENTENCE.

Richard remained in the dock. The warder who had charge of him gave him the option of retiring,
but he preferred to stay where he was till all was over. He had at last caught sight of his
mother, straining her loving eyes toward him--with still some hope in them--from a distant
corner of the gallery; and he kept his gaze fixed upon that spot. They had all the world against
them now, these two, so clever, and yet so wholly unable to combat with inexorable fate. Harry's
evidence, and especially the manner of it, had not needed Mr. Smoothbore's fiery scorn to turn
all hearts against the accused. To the great mass of spectators it seemed as though Richard
would have made the girl change places with himself, and become a vicarious sacrifice for his
worthless self.

The majesty of the law having withdrawn itself, a hum of many voices filled the court-house;
a munching of biscuits, a sipping of flasks. The silence of suspense no longer reigned. The
struggle was virtually over, and the victim was only waiting his doom. It was hoped it would
be a severe one. The spectators were pitiless, and had turned their thumbs toward their breasts.
As to the verdict there was no doubt. Those who knew the character of the judge opined that
this young gentleman would "get it hot," notwithstanding that this was his first offense. Odds
were taken that he would have fourteen years. "At all events," said one of the small officials,
in answer to eager inquiries, "more than he could do on his head." With this enigmatical reply
of the oracle its astonished questioners were compelled to be content.

"Silence in the court--si-lence." The judge had returned. It was thought by some that it was
in the prisoner's favor that the judge had lunched. They were mistaken, or perhaps a fatal
economy had provided African sherry. His charge was scarcely less dead against the prisoner
than had been Mr. Smoothbore's closing speech. As for the motive, upon which such stress had
been laid by the counsel for the defense, that might be a plea for a recommendation to mercy,
if the jury believed it, but it could not affect the question of the prisoner's guilt. That
the stolen property had been found in the possession of the accused there was no sort of doubt.
If the prisoner at the bar had not himself taken it out of the prosecutor's strong-box, who had?

Such was the form in which the case was left for the jury.

"It's UP," whispered Mr. Weasel behind his hand to Mr. Balais. Mr. Balais nodded indifferently;
the case was over so far as he was concerned, and he was not going to employ significant action
gratuitously. That would have been waste of power indeed at his age. The jury did not leave
the box; they laid their heads together, like a hydra, and "deliberated" for half a minute;
that is to say, the foreman whispered, "We can return but one verdict, I should say, gentlemen;"
and the eleven answered, "But one."

"We find the prisoner guilty, your lordship."

His lordship nodded approval. "In my opinion, gentlemen, you could not have done otherwise.
Hem!" Then that common phrase, "You could have heard a pin drop," might have been used with
respect to that vast assemblage. That "hem!" was a very fatal sign with Mr. Justice Bantam,
as the bar well knew.

"I'll take you six to five in sovs he gives him seven years," whispered one learned gentleman
to another, without moving his lips.

"It seems to me you are rather fond of a good thing," returned the other, scornfully, but with
a like precaution.

"Hem!" said the judge again. "Is there any one in court able to give any information concerning
the antecedents of the prisoner?"

"We have no witnesses to character, my lud," said Mr. Balais, gravely; "we had hoped it would
not have been necessary."

"There is a witness in court, please your lud-ship, a detective of the A division of metropolitan
police, I believe," observed Mr. Smoothbore, "who knows something of the prisoner."

"Let him stand up," said the judge.

Here was an extra excitement--an additional attraction, which had not been advertised in the
bills--and the public evinced their satisfaction accordingly by craning and crowding. Richard
turned his heated eyes in the direction of this new enemy. He had no hope of seeing a friend.
The individual in question was unknown to him. He was a tall, quiet-looking man, whose face
might have been carved out of box-wood, it was so hard and serious, but for its keen eyes,
which seemed to meet his own with a look of recognition.

"I know the prisoner at the bar; that is to say, I have seen him on a previous occasion, when
he passed under the name of Chandos, and on other occasions, as I believe, under other names.
From information received I attended a competitive examination, under the authority of government."

"Do you mean that you were employed by the government, or that the examination was a government
one?" interrupted the judge.

"You'll hear something now," whispered Mr. Weasel to Mr. Balais, "by Jove!"

"Both, my lord," explained the witness. "It had come to the knowledge of the government that
there had been several cases of personation in the competitive examinations recently instituted
both for the military and civil services. Not only were young gentlemen, who had apparently
passed with credit, found grossly ignorant of the subjects which they had previously been examined
upon, but their physical appearance was sometimes such as would have seemed to have disqualified
them: it appeared incredible that they should have passed the preliminary medical examination.
One was hump-backed; another almost blind. It was understood that some systematized scheme
of imposture, of mispersonation, was at work to produce these results, and I was instructed
to inquire into it. I did so. I came to the conclusion that only one person was concerned in
the matter--the prisoner at the bar. I had had my suspicions of him for some time. I had seen
him on three separate occasions as a candidate at public examinations. His nomination was correct
and genuine, but (as I have since discovered) it had been issued to another person. He succeeded
in every instance in obtaining the appointments in question for his employers, who received
them in due course, though they have, I believe, since been canceled. In the case of Chandos,
a letter was written, by the supposed successful candidate, to the authorities of the government
branch--the India Board--under which he was to serve, so grossly misspelled that the fraud
was at once suspected. In this instance the guilt was brought home to the prisoner by the confession
of the young man Chandos himself, who paid over to him a considerable sum of money for the
service in question. But I am now in a position to prove that on several other occasions the
prisoner has committed the same offense; and, in short, if he may be said to have a calling,
it is that of personating, at competitive examinations, young gentlemen of small ability, who
are thus enabled to secure situations and appointments which they could otherwise never obtain."

Mr. Justice Bantam had his prejudices, but he had a fair and honest mind.

"This is a most unlooked-for communication, Brother Balais," said he, doubtfully; "and it is
not permitted you to cross-examine upon a point of character."

"I am sorry to say, my lud," returned Mr. Balais, after a hurried conversation with the little
attorney, "that my client is not in a position to dispute the evidence just adduced. He prefers
to throw himself upon the mercy of the court, on the ground--a very tenable one, I think--of
his youth and," he was going to add "inexperience," but, under the circumstances, he thought
it better not--"of his extreme youth, my lud; my unhappy client is barely eighteen years of age."

"Very good," said Mr. Justice Bantam, looking as if it could not be worse. "Hem! Prisoner at
the bar: after a careful and fair trial, in which you have had the benefit of the best legal
aid, you have been found guilty of the charge of which you are accused. In that verdict I cordially
concur. The offense was a very serious one; but the endeavor which you have made to screen
yourself, at the expense of that beautiful and innocent young girl, is, in my opinion, still
more heinous and contemptible than the crime itself. Having made yourself master of her affections,
you used your power to the utmost to effect her moral and social hurt. You would have had her
perjure herself, and proclaim herself guilty of a crime she did not commit, in order that you
might yourself escape justice. Nobody who heard her evidence--who saw her in yonder box--can
doubt it. Still, as your counsel has just remarked, you are but a youth in years, and I looked
about me in hopes to find some extenuating circumstances in your past career--some record of
good--which might have justified me in inflicting on you a more lenient sentence than your
offense had earned. I had no other purpose in asking whether any thing was known of your previous
career. The reply to that question has astonished and shocked me, as it has shocked and astonished
every right-thinking person in this court who heard it. We knew to what base purpose you had
used the comeliness and youth and good address with which nature had endowed you; and now we
have learned how evilly you have misused your talents--with what perverted ingenuity you have
striven, at so early an age, to set at naught those precautions by which your country has lately
endeavored to secure for itself efficient public servants."

"That's neat," whispered a learned friend to Mr. Balais, reverently shutting his eyes, as though
in rapt admiration.

"Very," returned that gentleman. "He's bidding for the Lord Chief Justiceship."

"In the whole course of my legal experience, young man," continued the judge, "I have never
seen a case which seems to me to call for more exemplary punishment than yours. The promise
of your future is dark indeed--bad for yourself, and bad for that society which, though so
fitted to adorn and benefit it, you have chosen to outrage. I will not, however, reproach you
further; I will rather express a hope that when you return to the world after your long probation--and
it will be as long as I am able to make it--you may be a wiser and better, as well as a much
older man. The sentence of the court is, that you be kept in penal servitude for the space
of twenty years."

CHAPTER XXXII.

BROODING.

Not a syllable of the judge's exhortation was lost upon the prisoner at the bar. He listened
to it as attentively as one who is waiting for the thunder listens to the muffled menace that
precedes it, and the fall of each big drop of rain. When the words of doom smote upon his ear
a solemn hush succeeded them; and then one piteous, agonized shriek, and a dull fall in the
gallery above.

"This way," said a warder, sharply; and Richard was seized by the arm, and hurried through
the trap-door, and down the stairs, by the way he had come. It seemed to him like descending
into hell itself.

Twenty years' penal servitude! It was almost an eternity of torment! worse than death! and
yet not so. He already beheld himself, at the end of his term of punishment, setting about
the great work which alone was left him to do on earth--the accomplishment of his revenge.
He had recognized his mother's voice in that agonized wail, and knew that her iron will had
given way; that the weight of this unexpected calamity had deprived even her elastic and vigorous
mind of consciousness--had crushed out of her, perhaps, even life itself. Better so, thought
he, in his bitterness, if it had; there would then be not a single human creature left to soften,
by her attachment, his heart toward his fellows--none to counsel moderation, mercy, prudence.

If the view taken by the judge had even been a correct one, as to "motive," Richard had been
hardly dealt with, most severely sentenced; but in his own eyes he was an almost innocent man--the
victim of an infamous conspiracy, in which she who, was his nearest and dearest had treacherously
joined. After flattering him with false hopes, she had deserted him at the eleventh hour, and
in a manner even more atrocious than the desertion itself. He knew, of course, that it was
mainly owing to her evidence, to which he had looked for his preservation, that his ruin had
been so complete and overwhelming; but what he hated her worst for was for that smile she had
bestowed upon him as she entered the witness-box, and which had bade him hope where no hope
was. He could not be mistaken as to that. She had known that she was about to doom him by her
silence to years of misery, and yet she had had the devilish cruelty to smile upon him, as
she had often smiled, when they had sat, cheek to cheek, together! Since they had done so,
he could never lift his hand against her (he felt that even now)--never strike her, slay her,
nor even poison her; but he would have revenge upon her for all that. He would smite her, as
she had smitten him, no matter how long the blow might be in falling: if her affections should
be entwined in any human creatures, against them should his rage be directed; he would make
her desolate, as she had rendered him; he would turn their love for her to hate, if it were
possible, and, if not, he would destroy them. As for her father--as for that stone devil Trevethick--it
choked him to think that nature herself might preserve him from his wrath, that the old man
might die before his hour of expiation could arrive. But Solomon Coe would live to feel his
vengeance. His hatred was at white heat now; what would it be after twenty years of unmerited
torture? To think that this terrible punishment had befallen him through such contemptible
agencies--through such dull brains and vulgar hands--was maddening; and yet he must needs feed
upon that thought for twenty years, and keep his senses too, that at the end they might work
out his purpose to the uttermost. There was plenty of time to plan and scheme and plot before
him, and henceforth that should be his occupation. Revenge should be his latest thought and
his earliest, and all night long he would dream of nothing else. His wrath against judge and
jury, and the rest of them--though if he could have slain them all with a word he would have
uttered it--was slight compared with the vehemence of his fury against those three at Gethin.
Rage possessed him wholly, and, though without numbing him to the painful sense of his miserable
doom, rendered him almost unconscious of what was going on about him.

When he found himself in his cell again he had no recollection of how he had got there; and
the warder had to repeat his sharp command, "Put on these clothes," before he could get him
to understand that he was to exchange his garments for the prison suit that lay before him.
It was a small matter, but it brought home to him the reality of his situation more than any
thing that had yet occurred. With the deprivation of his clothes he seemed to be deprived of
his individuality, and, in adopting that shameful dress, to become an atom in a congeries of
outcasts. From henceforth he was not even to bear a name, but must become a number--a unit
of that great sum of scoundrels which the world was so willing to forget. That he was to suffer
under a system which had authority and right for its basis made his case no less intolerable
to him; he felt like one suddenly seized and sold into slavery. That his master and tyrant
was called the Law was no mitigation of his calamity; nay, it was an aggravation, since he
could not cut its throat.

"It is no use, young fellow," said the warder, coolly, as Richard looked at him like some hunted
beast at bay. "If you was to kill me and a dozen more it would do you not a morsel of good;
the law has got you tight, and it's better to be quiet."

Richard uttered a low moan, more woeful than any cry of physical anguish. It touched his jailer,
used as he was to the contemplation of human misery. "Look here," said he; "you keep up a good
heart, and get as many V G's as you can. Then you'll get out on ticket-of-leave in fifteen
years: it ain't as if you were a lifer."

He meant it for consolation; but this unvarnished statement of the very best that could by
possibility befall poor Richard seemed only to deepen his despondency.

"Why, when you've done it," pursued the warder, "you'll be quite a young man still--younger
than I am. There's Balfour, now; he's got some call to be down in the mouth, for he'll get
it as hot as you, and he's an old un, yet he's cheery enough up yonder"--and he jerked his
head in the direction of the court-house--"you may take your 'davey he is. You get V G's."

"What are those?" said Richard, wearily.

"Why, the best marks that can be got; and remember that every one of 'em goes to shorten your
time. You must be handier with your room, to begin with. You might be reported by some officers
for the way in which that hammock is folded, and then away go your marks at once; and you must
learn to sweep your room out cleaner. We couldn't stand that in one of our regulars, you know;"
and he pointed to some specks of dust upon the shining floor. "As for the oakum pickings which
will be set you to-morrow, I'll show you the great secret of that art. Your fingers will suffer
a bit at first, no doubt, but you'll be a clever one at it before long. Only buckle to, and
keep a civil tongue in your head, young fellow, and you'll do."

"Thank you," said Richard, mechanically.

"If you'll take my advice, you'll set about something at once; sweepin', or polishin', or readin'
your Bible. Don't brood. But you will do as you like for this afternoon, since you won't begin
regular business till to-morrow."

The warder looked keenly round the cell, probably to make sure that it afforded no facilities
for suicide; but the gas was not yet turned on, and if it had been, his prisoner was unaware
that by blowing it out, and placing the jet in his mouth, more than one in a similar strait
to his own has found escape from his prison woes forever.

"I'll bring you some supper presently," he added; and with a familiar nod, good-naturedly intended
for encouragement, he slammed the iron door behind him.

That he should have become an object of pity and patronage to a man like this would in itself
have wounded Richard to the quick had he not been devoured by far more biting cares, and even
now it galled him. His twenty years might possibly, then, by extremity of good luck, be curtailed
by five. By diligent execution of menial drudgery; by performing to some overlooker's satisfaction
his daily toil; by careful obedience and subservience to these Jacks in office, themselves
but servants, and yet whose malice or ill-humor might cause them to report him for the most
trifling faults, or for none at all, and thereby destroy even this hope--he might be a free
man in fifteen years! He would, even then, he was told, be still a young man. But that he would
never be young again Richard was well aware. Within these last three weeks--nay, within that
last hour, he had already lived a life, and one that had aged him beyond the power of years.
High spirits, pleasure, hopefulness, love, and all the attributes of youth, were dead within
him for evermore. For the future he was only to be strong and vigorous in a will that could
not have its way for fifteen years at earliest.

Through the grating of his narrow window a few rays of the setting sun were streaming in, and
fell upon the bare brown wall behind him. What a flood of glory they were pouring on the woods
of Crompton, now in their autumn splendor--on the cliffs at Gethin--on the copse that hid the
Wishing Well--on the tower where he had first clasped Harry in his arms! He saw them all, and
the sunset hues upon them became suddenly blood-red. He was once more at Gethin, and in imagination
taking his revenge upon old Trevethick, and for the moment he was almost happy. "Pity on his
gray hairs?" No, not he--though the gallows loomed before him, though hell yawned for him,
he would slake his thirst in the life-blood of that perjured villain; and as for her, he would
drag her by the hair to look upon her father's corpse. Where was she? Ah, with Solomon upon
the castled rock; and see!--he had pushed him from the edge, and there he hung exactly as he
himself had hung when Harry had preserved him! How long would a man hold on like that, even
a strong man like Coe, on such a narrow ledge, with the gulls screaming about him? Not twenty
years--no, nor fifteen!

The clatter of the trap in the door of his cell, as it fell in and formed a table, awoke him
from this gloating dream. "Supper," said the warder, looking in at him through this orifice.
"What! you're still brooding, are you?--that's bad;" then marched on to the next cell.

Some gruel and bread stood upon this little improvised side-board. If they had been the greatest
luxuries imaginable, he could not have swallowed a morsel. The sunlight had faded away; his
dream of retribution was over; he seemed to be touching the utmost verge of human wretchedness.
Was it possible to kill himself? 1, p. 570 In the 'Caesar's
life' by Napoleon III. (Volume 2, Chapter 1) has been raised against this, partly that not the
result of Caesar's birth year Annalgesetz 652 (102), but 651 (103) would some particularly that
otherwise there are cases where the same has not been followed. Solo The first claim was mistaken,
for, as Cicero's example shows, called the Annalgesetz only that at the commencement of the 43rd
Office Age started, not that it covered was. The alleged exceptions to the rule but not to take all.
If Tacitus (Ann. 11, 22) says that one formerly in the forgiveness of offices no regard to age
have taken and transferred to the consulate and dictatorship all young people, so of course
he has, as well as all commentators acknowledge, this time in the earlier sense, before adopting
the Annalgesetze, the consulate of the twenty-three M. Valerius Corvus, and similar cases. That
Lucullus the highest office before the legal age received is incorrect, it is only reported
(Cic. ac second 1, 1) that due to an unspecified exception clause to us as a reward for any
act performed by him, he of the statutory two-year interval between Aedileship praetor and was
excused - in fact he was aedile 675, probably 677 praetor 680 Consul. That the case of Pompey
is an entirely different, is obvious, but ... App civ; by Pompey repeatedly reported explicitly
(Cic. imp Cn Pomp 21, 62.. 3, 88) that the Senate released him from the age laws. That this was
done for Pompey, who as a victorious general and upper-winning triumph at the head of an army,
and since its Coalition with Crassus and a powerful party, he applied to the consulate, is as
understandable, as it would be in the highest degree strange if the same for Caesar in his
Bid for the lesser offices should have happened, where it meant little more than others political
novice, and even more remarkable is that even well understood by those Exception, but not of this
more than strange to mention is so close to such references, have specifically in view of the
21-year Caesar Consul located the son would also (See, for example, App. Civ. 3, 88). If these
examples, then the erroneous conclusion drawn is that "they had in Rome observed the law of little use
if it is excellent Men acted ", it is about Rome and the Romans probably never been told as
Irriger this sentence. The size of the Roman community as no less that of his great generals
and statesmen is based above all that the law applied to them. ---------------------------------------------
Even earlier, however, as the Democrats in the capital had been in Spain, the democratic Emigrants
again stirred. The soul of this movement was Quintus Sertorius. This excellent Man, born in Nursia
in Sabinerland was organized by House of tender and even soft - Shows the almost fanatical love for his mother Raia it - and also
by the most chivalrous Bravery, as from the Cimbrian, the Spanish and the Italians war brought home
honorable scars proved. Although entirely untrained as an orator, he attracted by the natural
River and the safety of his speech striking the admiration of the learned advocate. His uncommon
statesmanship and military talent he had, especially in that of the Democrats so the mass suffering
and headless revolution led war in shining opportunity found Contrast to prove: he was recognized
as the only democratic officer, the war prepare, manage and understand, and the only Democratic statesman,
the thoughtless Bustle and fury of his party with statesmanlike energy opposed. His Spanish
Soldiers called him the new Hannibal, and not just because he like this in the war one eye had lost.
He recalls, in fact, the great Phoenician by his equally cunning as a courageous war leadership,
his rare talent, the war to organize the war, to take his skill, his interest in foreign nations
and serve his purposes to make his discretion in happiness and misfortune, his inventive use of the rapidity
in his victories in the prevention of the consequences of his defeat. One may doubt whether
any Roman statesman of the past or the current time on all sides talent with Sertorius can be compared.
After Sulla's commanders had forced him to quit Spain, he had led to the Spanish and African
coasts an unsettled life of adventure, sometimes in league, now also at war with the local Cilician pirates
and the chiefs the wandering tribes of Libya. Even here had the victorious Roman restoration
pursues him, and when he Tingis (Tanger) besieged, was the prince of the city to help the Roman Africa
Corps under Pacciaecus appeared, but was Pacciaecus of Sertorius completely defeated and taken Tingis.
On the well-resounding fame of such a war deeds the Roman refugees sent the Lusitanian, despite its
alleged subjugation under the the Roman supremacy in fact maintained their independence and annually
with the governors of the other side of Spain fought, Message to Sertorius to Africa, to invite
him to be and to transfer to the commander of its militia office. Sertorius, who twenty years earlier
served under Titus Didius had in Spain and knew the resources of the country, decided to to
make the invitation, and embarked, leaving behind a small office at the Mauritanian coast
to Spain, a (to 674 80). The straits to Spain and Africa ruled, was occupied by a Roman, led
by Squadron Cotta; durchzuschleichen to was not possible, so struck by Sertorius, and happily came
to the Lusitanians. There were no more than twenty Lusitanian communities that placed themselves
under his orders, and also of "Romans" he looked out of only 2600 men, of whom a good part about Splayed
the army of the Roman armed Pacciaecus or Africans. Sertorius it recognized that everything depended
on the loose guerrilla swarming a solid core and organized Roman to be disciplined troops,
and he reinforced this by the end of his band brought Recruitment of 4,000 infantry and 700 cavalry,
and marched with it a legion and the swarms foreign volunteers against the Romans. The command
on the other side of Spain led Lucius Fufidius, through his unconditional and the proscriptions
of Sulla proven devotion to Sergeant was moved up to propraetor; on this Baetis was completely defeated,
2000 Romans covered the battlefield. Urgent messenger summoned the governor of the neighboring
Ebroprovinz, Marcus Domitius Calvinus to the further advance of the Sertorians to set a goal,
and soon appeared (675 79) also tested the commander Quintus Metellus, sent by Sulla to the
useless Fufidius in southern Spain to replace. But it was not yet, Lord of the uprising be.
In the Ebroprovinz of the sub-commander of Sertorius, the Quaestor Lucius Hirtuleius, not only
Calvinus's army destroyed, and he killed himself, but Lucius Manlius, the Governor of Gaul, of
his colleagues to help the legions with three Pyrenees exceeded, by the same brave leader defeated.
Laboriously rescued Manlius with less team to Ilerda (Lerida), and from there to his province, on
which march he still lost by an attack of the Aquitanian peoples all his baggage. In Spain
the beyond Metellus penetrated into the Lusitanian territory: but it was Sertorius During the siege
of Longobriga (near the Tajomündung) a department Aquinus to lure them into an ambush by Metellus
himself to raise the siege and forcing the evacuation of the Lusitanian territory. Sertorius
followed him, struck at the Anas (Guadiana) Thorius the corps of the enemy, and did in-chief himself unspeakable
demolition in the small Wars. Metellus, a methodical and somewhat clumsy tactician, was over
in despair These opponents, who refused the decisive battle tenaciously, but supply and communications
him from all sides and sections idolized him constantly. This uncommon successes Sertorius in
two Spanish provinces were erfocht, the more significant because they not only won by arms, and were
not merely a military nature were. The Emigrants as such were not terrible, but also at individual
successes of the Lusitanian under this or that foreign leader was located a little. But with the
most secure political and patriotic Stroke occurred Sertorius, and some he could, rather than
the Condottiere rebelled against Rome Lusitanians as a Roman general and governor of Spain, in which
capacity he indeed been sent by the former rulers was there. He began to ^ 3, from the heads
to form a senate of emigration, the rise to three hundred members and in Roman forms should
guide the business and appoint the officials. He regarded his army as a Roman and occupied the military
posts without exception with Romans. The Spaniards against he was the governor, the virtue of his
office team and other support from them einmahnte, but of course, a governor who tries instead
of the usual despotic Regiment was to tie the provincials to Rome and to himself personally. His chivalrous
nature made him the approach to the Spanish way and easily aroused in the Spanish nobility
for congenial beautiful stranger the ardent enthusiasm; after here, as in the Celts and the Germans
existing military custom of swearing allegiance to thousands the noblest Spaniards, loyal
to their Roman general to stand up to death, and Sertorius found in them more reliable companions
in arms than in his countrymen and comrades. He did not disdain, even the superstitions of the
ruder tribes of the Spanish to harness and its military plans as the commands of the Diana by the
white doe to have to carry the goddess. Certainly, he led a just and gentle rule. His troops
had, at least as far as his eye and his arm, the strictest discipline hold, so he was generally
mild in punishment, he proved himself so relentlessly at every of his men on friendly territory committed
sacrilege. But also to facilitate permanent the position of the provincials, he was anxious,
he sat down and had the tribute to soldiers on to build barracks for the winter, so the heavy
burden of billeting was obviated, and thus a source of unspeakable evils and torture was blocked.
For the Children make the Spaniard was built in Osca (Huesca) an academy, in the Rome usual increase
youth education received, Roman and Greek speaking and Toga who learned - a remarkable measure,
which not only had the purpose of the Allies in Spain after all inevitable as hostages in friendly
manner increase, but also an outcome and an increase was the great idea of ​​Gaius Gracchus
and the Democratic Party, Romanize the provinces gradually. Here first was the start has been made
to the Romanization not eradicate the ancient inhabitants and replacing the same to accomplish
by Italic emigrants, but the provincials Romanize to themselves. The Optimates in Rome mocked
the wretched exiles, the outlier from the Italian army, the last of the robber bands of carbonate
ions, and the poor scorn fell on her own back. It was expected the crowds that were out into
the field against Sertorius were, with the inclusion of the Spanish militia at 120,000 infantry,
2000 archers and Slingers and 6000 riders. Against this monstrous power had not only to Sertorius
in a chain of lucky battles and victories claimed, but also most of Spain brought under his
control. In the opposite province, Metellus saw limited directly to the parts of the territory
occupied by his troops, where were all the nations, who could, siding with Sertorius. In this
world there were after the victories Hirtuleius of the Roman army no more. Sertorian emissaries
scoured the whole of Gaul Area; already started here to the tribes, to move, and ganged up
heaps the Alpine passes to make unsafe. The lake finally belonged as much to the insurgents
as the legitimate government, as the ally of those who pirates in the Spanish waters almost
were as powerful as the Roman warships. On the promontory of Diana (now Denia between Valencia
and Alicante) depends Sertorius a those of a fixed station, where they sometimes the Roman
ships would lie in wait, the Roman port cities and the army their needs injecting high, partly
decreased the insurgents or the goods delivered, some with their traffic Italy and Asia Minor
mediated. That this ever-ready agent of the blazing Conflagration everywhere carried the spark
was of concern to a large degree, especially in a Time when everywhere in the Roman Empire was
so much accumulated fuel. -------------------------------------------------- - ^ 3 At least the main
features of this organization have in the years 674 (80), 675 (79), 676 (78) fall, although
the version without a doubt a good deal until the later years belongs. --------------------------------------------------
- Into these relations Sulla met sudden death (676 78). As long as he lived, in whose voice is
a practiced and reliable army veterans every moment was ready to stand up, liked the oligarchy
the almost, it seemed, decisive loss of the Spanish provinces to the emigrants and the election
of the leader of the opposition at home to the highest officials of the empire at best as
temporary and misfortunes endured, though not in their short-sighted manner, but quite erroneously,
to rely on that either would not dare the opposition to to an open contest to proceed, or
that if they dare, the two-time savior of the oligarchy the same will produce a third time. Now the
state of things became different. Democratic hotheads in the capital, already impatient about
the endless hesitation and cheered on by the brilliant embassies from Spain, urged to strike,
and Lepidus, in the moment was the decision, went with all the zeal of the renegade and with
his own personal recklessness on the matter. For a moment it seemed than at the torch that
lit the funeral pyre of the regents should, even the Civil War to inflame; while Pompey's influence,
and the mood of the veterans of Sulla specific the opposition, the funeral of the regent to
pass up even more quiet. Solo only the more open one met the opening time but then the revolution.
Already echoed the market of the capital against accusations against the "caricature Romulus
and his henchmen. Even before the great man had closed his eyes, and his followers of Lepidus the
overthrow of Sulla's constitution, the restoration of the grain distributions Re-establishment of the People's Tribune for relief,
the reduction of the illegal Exiles, the return of the confiscated lands designated as open
to the aim of the agitation. Now were established with the outlaw compounds, Marcus Perpenna
where cinnanischen Time governor of Sicily, found himself in the capital. The sons of Sulla
High treason, on which the restoration of law congested with intolerable pressures, and in
general the most famous Marian minded men were invited to join, not a few, as the young Lucius Cinna,
joined them, while others followed the example of course, Gaius Caesars, which, while returned
to the news of Sulla's death, and Lepidus' plans from Asia was, but after he had become acquainted
with the character of the leader and the movement more closely, cautiously retreated. In the capital
was to Lepidus' bill in the wine houses and carousing, and the brothels advertised. In the
Etruscan malcontents finally became a Conspiracy against the new order of things instigated ^ 4 --------------------------------------------------
-------- ^ 4 The following account is based largely on the report of the Licinianus which, according
to fragmentary He is also right here, is still on the insurrection of Lepidus important information.
-------------------------------------------------- ------- All this happened under the eyes
the government. The consul and the understandable Catulus Optimates broke out immediately decided
to step in and nip the rebellion in the bud, but the majority of slack could not bring himself
to start the fight, but tried as long as possible, by a system of operations and concessions,
to deceive themselves. Lepidus was initially to the same thing in his turn one. The suggestion
that the restitution of the confiscated tribune to apply for powers, he dismissed no less than
his colleague Catulus. By contrast, the Gracchan grain distribution to a limited extent restored.
It does not seem then as under the law Sempronian all, but only a certain number - probably 40
000 - Poorer citizens of the previous donations, as she had intended Gracchus, five bushels per
month have received for the price of 6 1 / 3 aces (2 ¾ pence) to - a provision from the Ärar
an annual net loss of at least 300,000 crowns grew ^ 5 The opposition, by this half yielding
course as little satisfied as much encouraged, was in the capital all the more abrupt and violent
on, and in Etruria, the right oven all Italian Proletarierinsurrektionen broke, already from
the Civil War: the expropriated Faesulaner sat down again by force of arms in the possession
of their lost goods and more of there by Sulla settled veterans were killed in the riot.
 There were nineteen years
and three months still, however, between him and it.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

OUT OF THE WORLD.

This tedious, shameful travel came to an end at nightfall. Their way had lain all day through
landscapes of great beauty, though about to lose the last remnants of their autumn splendor;
but when they left the rail, the woods, and glens, and rivers were seen no more. All was dreary
moorland, where winter had already begun to reign. A village or two were passed, among whose
scanty population their appearance created little excitement: such sights were common in that
locality. They were on the high-road that leads to Lingmoor, and to nowhere else. The way seemed
as typical of their outcast life-path as a page out of the Pilgrim's Progress. Vanity Fair,
where they would fain have tarried if they could, was left far behind them, while to some of
them the road was doomed to be the veritable Valley of the Shadow. They were never to see the
world, nor partake of its coarse and brutal pleasures--the only ones they cared for, or perhaps
had experienced--any more. How bare, and desolate, and wretched was the prospect! There was
no living thing in sight; only the wild moorland streams hurried by, as if themselves desirous
to escape from the barren solitude. Not a tree was to be seen save Bergen Wood, which Richard's
companion indicated to him, as they neared it, by a movement of the eyelid. It had been the
tomb of many a convict, who had striven for freedom, and found death. As they emerged from
it, Lingmoor prison presented itself, solid, immense, and gloomy, as though it were built of
steel--"Castle of Giant Despair." Its guarded gate was swung back, and all were marched into
a paved courtyard, where their names were called over, and their irons removed. Then each was
stripped and searched, and another uniform substituted for that they had worn at Cross Key.
The old hands seemed to take a pride in knowing what was about to be done beforehand; in being
recognized by the warders, though their greeting was but a contemptuous shrug; and in threading
the windings of the stone labyrinths with an accustomed step. Richard was ushered into a cell
the exact counterpart of that he had lately inhabited; and yet he regarded it with the interest
which one can not fail to feel in what is to be one's home for years.

Home! Frightful misnomer for that place, warm and well-ventilated as it was, and supplied with
the latest products of civilization. The gas was burning brightly; fresh cool water flowed
at his will; at his touch a bell rang, and instantly, outside his door, an iron plate sprang
out, and indicated to the warder in what cell his presence was required. "How clean and comfortable!"
says the introduced-by-special-order visitor, to his obsequious acquaintance the governor,
on observing these admirable arrangements. "How much better are these scoundrels cared for,"
cries the unthinking public, "than are our honest poor!" It is not, however, that the convict
is pampered; but for this unkindly care he would not be able to endure the punishment which
justice has decreed for him. Science has meted out to him each drop of gruel, each ounce of
bread, each article of clothing, and each degree of warmth. Not one of all the recipients of
this cruel benevolence but would gladly have exchanged places with the shivering tramp or the
work-house pauper. To cower under the leafless branches of Bergen Wood, while the November
night-blasts made them grind and clang, would have seemed paradise compared with that snug
lodging; nay, the grave itself, with its dim dread Hereafter, has been preferred before it.

Life at Lingmoor was existence by machinery--monotony that sometimes maddened as well as slew.
To read of it is to understand nothing of this. The bald annals of the place reveal nothing
of this terrible secret.

Richard rose at five at clang of bell, cleaned out his cell, and folded up his bed more neatly
than did ever chamber-maid; at six was breakfast--porridge, and forty minutes allowed for its
enjoyment; then chapel and parade; then labor--mat-making was his trade, at which he became
a great proficient. His fingers deftly worked, while his mind brooded. At twelve was dinner--bread
and potatoes, with seventy minutes allowed for its digestion; then exercise in the yard, and
mat-making again till six in summer, and four in winter; prayers, supper, school till eight;
when the weary day was done. On Sunday, except two hours of exercise and chapel, Richard was
his own master, to brood as much as he would. There were also no less than three holidays in
the year, on which it has been whispered with horror that the convicts have pudding. There
was, however, no such excess at Lingmoor.

As for society, there was the chaplain. This gentleman could make nothing of Richard, though
he tried his best. It was evident to him that the young man had something on his mind; if he
would only confide in his spiritual adviser, he assured him comfort could be administered.
But no confidence ever took place. It was a most distressing case; here was a youth of superior
position, and well educated, as obstinate and stubborn as the most hardened criminal in the
establishment. His Bible was never opened. One of his warders had expressed his opinion that
No. 421 was vindictive, but he (the chaplain) was bound to say he had observed nothing of that.
The remarks in his note-book respecting 421 were these: "Richard Yorke--aged twenty, looks
ten years older; reserved and cynical; a hopeless infidel, but respectful, uncomplaining, and
well-mannered."

Richard had been reported more than once for "inattention to orders," and had lost some of
his good marks accordingly. The cause of this was one over which he could now be scarcely said
to have control. He had become so absent and distrait that he sometimes hardly knew what was
going on about him. The perpetual brooding in which he indulged had, in fact, already postponed
the accomplishment of the very object which enthralled his thoughts. The effect of this was
serious; and he had good reason for the apprehension which seized him, that his wits might
leave him before that day of liberty arrived, which was still so many years distant. On account
of his previous calling, which was described in the prison books as landscape-painter, he had
been put to a handicraft trade; but he now applied for harrow-work, and the surgeon seconded
his application. This change of occupation, which was destined in some respects to be beneficial,
proved at the outset most unfortunate. The outdoor toil was mostly spade and barrow labor on
the moor, on which the convicts worked in gangs--each gang under supervision of two warders,
armed with sword and musket. The first face that Richard's eyes lit on, when he found himself
in the open, with the free air of heaven blowing on him, and already, as it seemed, bearing
the seeds of health and hope, was that of Robert Balfour. In his joyous excitement he sprang
forward and held out his hand; the other hesitated--for the old cracksman was prudence itself--then,
as if with an incontrollable impulse, grasped the offered fingers, with an "I am right glad
to see you, lad." The next instant they were both in custody, and marched back to the prison,
charged with the high crime and misdemeanor of conversation, which at Lingmoor was called "colloguing,"
"conspiracy," and other terrible terms. Brought before the authorities upon this serious charge,
Richard at once confessed himself alone to blame; the fresh air had, in a manner, intoxicated
him, after his long confinement within stone walls; and the sight of his old acquaintance had
caused him to forget the rules. On the offense-list being examined, it was found, however,
that No. 421 was a good deal in the habit of forgetting. His cell-warder gave him but an indifferent
character; and Richard, in a fury, committed the fatal indiscretion of rebutting this latter
accusation by a countercharge of tyranny and ill-usage. The next instant he could have bitten
his tongue out--but it was too late; he felt that he had made an enemy of this body-servant,
who was also his master, for the remainder of his term. An "old hand," unless he is a professional
garroter (in which case he is generally too much respected to be ill-used), is always careful
to keep on good terms with his attendant; otherwise--since a warder's word, if it be not law,
is at all events worth that of ten prisoners--there may be no end to your troubles. This is
not because warders are not as a class a most respectable body of men, but simply because you
can't get all the virtues for a guinea a week. A strict and impartial sense of justice is especially
a rare and dear article--even governors have sometimes been deficient in it. Most men have
their prejudices, as women have their spites; and a prejudice against a fellow-creature is
a thing that grows. Richard's warder was no tyrant--only a sullen, ignorant fellow, in a false
position; he had an almost absolute power over his fellow-creatures, and like many--perhaps
like most who have ever possessed such a thing--it was too much for him.

"I am a tyrant, am I?" said he, significantly, as he marched Richard back to his cell after
sentence was decreed. "Very well; we'll see."

Richard got bread and water for three days certain, and, what was far worse, another "monstrous
cantle" might be cut out of that period of remission which began to be all the dearer in his
eyes the more problematical it grew. Garroters, as we have said, were respected at Lingmoor;
they are so ready with their great ape-like hands, and so dull-brained with respect to consequences;
yet Richard's warder, when he brought his bread and water, with a grin, that night, was probably
as near to death by strangling as he had ever been during his professional experience. It was
not that he was on his own account the object of his prisoner's wrath, but that by his conduct
he had, as it were, supplemented the inexpiable wrong originally committed, and earned for
himself a portion of the undying hate which was due elsewhere. "I may kill this brute some
day," thought Richard, ruefully, "in spite of myself." And he resolved on the first opportunity
to communicate a certain secret which was on his mind to a friendly ear; so that that at least
should be utilized to the disadvantage of his foes, in case incontrollable passion should one
day compel him to sacrifice a lesser victim, and make his great revenge to fail. It had not
once entered into his mind that he could forego his purpose, but only that circumstances might
render it impossible.

The occasion for which he looked was not long in coming. His days of punishment concluded,
he was once more marched out upon the moor, and again found himself in Balfour's company. Not
a sign passed between them this time, but as they delved they talked. "I fear you have been
suffering for my sake," said Richard.

"It is no matter. My shoulders are broad enough for two," returned the other, kindly. "I am
right glad to see your face again, though it is so changed. You have been ill, have you not, lad?"

"I don't know. Something is wrong with me, and I may be worse--that is why I want to speak
to you. Listen!"

"All right. Don't look this way, and sink your voice if either of these dogs comes to leeward."

"If you get away from this place, and I don't--"

"Now, none of that, lad," interrupted the old man, earnestly. "That's the worst thing you can
get into your head at Lingmoor, if you ever want to leave it. Never say die, nor even think
it. I am three times your age, and yet I mean to get out again and enjoy myself. It is but
fifteen years now, without counting remission--though I've got into disgrace with my cursed
watch-dog, and sha'n't get much of that--and you must keep a good heart."

"I shall keep a firm one," answered Richard, "never fear. I wish to guard against contingencies,
that's all. If I die--"

"Damned if you shall," said Balfour, sturdily, quite innocent of any plagiarism from Uncle Toby.

"Very good," continued Richard, coolly. "If you get out of this before me, let us merely say,
I have something to tell you which may be of service to you. There's a man in Breakneckshire
called Carew of Crompton--"

"I know him: the gentleman born as put on the gloves with Bendigo at Birmingham?"

"Very likely; at all events, every body knows him in the Midlands. He will go to the dogs some
day, and his estate will be sold. You have saved money, you tell me; if the chance occurs,
you can't invest it better than in the lot called Wheal Danes, a mine in Cornwall."

"I believe you every word," said Balfour; "but a mine would be rather over my figure, wouldn't
it? I have only got eight hundred pounds."

"That would be plenty. It's a disused mine, and supposed to be worked out. There's only one
man in England that knows it is not so, except myself. He will come or send to the auction,
expecting to get it cheap; but do you bid two hundred pounds beforehand, and get it by private
contract. Say you want the place--it's close to the sea--for building purposes; they'll laugh
at you, and jump at your offer. The fee-simple is not supposed to be worth five shillings an
acre. It will turn out a gold mine to whoever gets it."

"Wheal Danes," repeated Balfour, carefully. "I'll remember that; and what is more, lad, I'll
not forget the man as told me of it. It's not the profit that I am speaking on: that will be
yours, I hope, as it should be in all reason, and not mine; but it's the confidence." The old
man's voice grew husky with emotion. "Damme, I liked you from the first, as was natural enough;
but there was no reason why you should take a fancy to an old thief like me more than any other
among this pretty lot here. The first as speaks of secrets is of course the one as runs the
risk, but I will do what I can to show myself honorable on my side. You have trusted me, and
I'll trust you."

"Have you any plan to get away from this?" whispered Richard, eagerly. "All that I have shall
be yours: I swear it."

"Nay, lad; your word's enough," returned the other, reproachfully. "And I don't covet nothing
of yours; indeed I don't."

"I was a brute to talk so to you, Balfour," answered Richard, penitently. "But you don't mow
how I crave for freedom: it makes me mad to think of it."

"Ay, ay; I know," sighed the old fellow. "It used to be so with me once; but now it only comes
on me when my term is nearly up. One gets patient as one gets old, you'll find. No; I've no
plan just now; though, if I ever have, I promise you you shall be the man to know it. It's
another matter altogether that I meant to tell you about. You've given me an address to remember:
let me give you another in exchange for it--No. 91 Earl Street East, Spitalfields. That's where
mother lives, if the poor soul is alive to whom you wrote for me from Cross Key. She'll be
dead, however, long before you or I get out of this, that's certain, or I should not be telling
you what I do; for one's mother is the best friend of all friends, and should come first and
foremost. Well, the money will do her no good; and if any thing happens to me, I have neither
chick nor child to inherit it. I am speaking of this eight hundred pound, lad. If I get into
the world, I shall want it for myself, for I doubt my limbs will be too stiff for work by that
time; but if not, then you shall have it--every shilling. I am digging my own grave, as it
might be, with this spade, and making my will, do you see?" said the old fellow, smiling.

"I thank you for your kind intentions," returned Richard, absently; "it's very good of you,
I'm sure." His hopes of some scheme of present release had been excited by the old man's manner,
and this faint and far-off prospect of a legateeship seemed but of little worth.

"I may not have another chance to tell you about it," resumed Balfour. "It is five years now
since you and I spoke together last, and it may be another five years before such good luck
happens again; so don't forget 91 Earl Street East. It's under the middle stone of the back
kitchen, all in golden quids. You needn't mind it being 'swag;' and as for those whose own
it is by rights, I could not tell you who the half of it belonged to, if I would. It's the
savings of an industrious life, lad," added Mr. Balfour, pathetically; "and I should be sorry
to think, if any thing happened to me, that it should lie there useless, or be found accidental
like, and perhaps fall into the hands of the bluebottles. Your memory's good, my lad, I dare
say, and you won't forget the number nor the street."

"My memory is very good, friend," returned Richard, slowly; "and I have only two or three things
else to keep in it. And you, on your part, you will not forget the mine?"

"Nay, nay; I've got it safe: Wheal Danes, Wheal Danes."

"Silence, down there!" roared the warder; and nothing but the squeak of the barrow-wheel and
the clean slice of the spade was heard in all that throng of involuntary toilers.

CHAPTER XXXV.

BASIL.

It is nineteen years since Richard Yorke stood in the dock at Cross Key and heard the words
of doom. Almost a whole generation of his fellow-creatures has passed away from the earth.
Old men have died, young men have become old, and babes have grown to be young men. There are
but some half dozen persons in the world who, if reminded of him by some circumstance, can
recollect him dimly. There are two who still keep him in their thoughts continually, just as
he was--like a picture which bears no longer any resemblance to its original--and even these
never breathe his name.

Here is a young fellow walking with his mother along Oxford Street who is not unlike him, who
might be himself but for those nineteen years; and the girl that walks upon the other side
of him might also be Harry Trevethick. Youth and beauty are not dead because Richard Yorke
is dead, or as good as dead. The name of this girl is Agnes Aird, a painter's daughter, who
is also a teacher of his art. The lad is her father's pupil, and has learned beneath his roof
a lesson not included in the artistic course; you may know that by the way in which his eyes
devour the girl, the intonation of his voice when he addresses her, the silent pressure of
the arm on which her fingers rest. Charles Coe is in love with Agnes, and in all his studies
of perspective beholds her, a radiant figure beckoning him on to a happy future. His pencil
strays from its object to portray her features--to inscribe her name beside his own. Mr. Coe,
his father, exceedingly disapproves of this projected alliance, and has forbidden the young
people to associate. This ukase, however, can scarcely be obeyed while the whole party are
inmates of Mr. Aird's residence, who "lets off" the upper part of his house as furnished apartments,
which the Coes have now inhabited as lodgers for some weeks. Solomon (now a very well-to-do
personage, and a great authority on metalliferous soils) has come to town on business, and
left to his wife the choice of a residence; and she, to please her son, had chosen the artist's
dwelling, upon whose door-plate was inscribed the fact that he was a professor of drawing.
Solomon was not displeased that his son's tastes lay in that direction; it might be useful
to himself hereafter in the matter of plans and sections; but he is violently opposed to this
ridiculous love affair, which is to be stamped out at once. To that end he has instructed Mrs.
Coe to look for lodgings in a distant quarter, and it is on that errand that we now behold
her. It is characteristic of the Harry whom we once knew that she permits these young people
to accompany her--and one another--on the very quest that has their final separation for its
object. She can not resist making them happy while she can; and she can refuse her Charley
nothing. Moreover, Solomon is in the City, looking after his mining interests, and need never know.

In appearance, however, Harry Trevethick is greatly changed. She is but seven-and-thirty, yet
has already passed into the shade of middle life. Her hair, though still in profusion, is tinged
with gray; her features are worn and sharp; her brow is wrinkled; and in her once trustful
eyes dwells a certain eager care, not mere distress or trouble, but an anxiety which is almost
Fear.

The three are now in one of the streets which unite Cavendish Square with Oxford Street, as
a busy babbling rill connects the unruffled lake with the roaring river. It is composed both
of shops and private houses, the latter of which in some cases deign, notwithstanding their
genteel appearance, to accommodate visitors by the week or month.

"This is the sort of locality your father wished for, Charley," remarked Mrs. Coe, looking
about her; "it seems central, and yet tolerably quiet. Let us try this house."

The name of "Basil," without prefix, was engraved upon the door-plate; and in a corner of the
dining-room window lurked an enameled card with "Apartments" on it.

"There is no need to drag Agnes and you in," Mrs. Coe went on, as they stood waiting for the
bell to be answered. So Charles, well pleased, was left outside with the young girl, while
his mother "went over the house." In a few minutes, however, she reappeared, and in a somewhat
hurried and excited tone observed, "I think this place will do, my dears; but there is a good
deal to talk about and settle, which will take me some time. Therefore I think you had better
go home together, and leave me." Then, without waiting for a reply, she retired within and
closed the door.

"How very curious!" exclaimed Agnes, wondering.

"Oh, not at all," said the young man, cheerfully; "my mother likes to do things for herself,
and I dare say has not a very high opinion of our judgment in domestic matters. You don't seem
over-pleased, it seems to me, Agnes, at the notion of a tête-à-tête with your humble servant;"
and Mr. Charles pouted, half in fun and half with annoyance.

"No, no; it is not that, Charles," answered the girl, hastily. "You know I have no pleasure
equal to that of being with you; but I don't like your mother's looks; she had such a strange
air, and spoke so differently from her usual way. I really scarcely like to leave her."

"My dear Agnes, you don't know my mother," returned Charles, laughing. "One would sometimes
think she had all the care of the world upon her shoulders when every thing is going as smooth
as oil. You don't appreciate the grave responsibility of taking furnished lodgings for a week
certain. Come along, you little goose." And, drawing her still hesitating arm within his own,
he marched away with her.

Yet Agnes had reason for what she said; and Charles, somewhat selfish as he was, would have
foregone his flirtation and remained by his mother's side had he seen her the moment after
the house door had shut her in.

With a throbbing heart, and a face as white as the handkerchief she passed over her damp brow,
she leaned against the wall of the passage, ere, with trembling steps, she approached the open
parlor door. An aged woman stood in the centre of the room, with hair as white as snow, but
with a figure straight as a poplar, and drawn up rigidly to its full height.

"Why do you come back again?" cried she, in accents soft as milk, yet bitter as gall. "Why
do you cross my threshold, you false witch, when there is nothing more to blight and blast?
Did you think I should not know you, that you dared to come? I should know you among all the
fair-faced fiends in hell."

"Mercy, mercy, Mrs. Yorke!" cried Harry, feebly; and she fell upon her knees, and made as though
she would have clasped the other's garments with her stretched-out arms.

"Don't touch me, lest I strike you," answered the old woman, fiercely, "as, nineteen years
ago, I would have struck you on your cruel lips, and spoiled the beauty that was the ruin of
my boy! Instead
of the battle ensued, a number of disconnected battles. Labienus with the left Wing threw the Atrebates
and pursued them across the river to. The meeting urged Roman agent the Viromanduer down the slope.
 "Strike me, spit upon
me, if you will, but only hear me! Abject as I look, wretched as I feel--as I knew I must needs
look and feel--I have longed for this hour to come, as my boy longs for his bridal morning!"

"May he wake the next to find his bride a corpse; or, better still, to find her false, like you."

"I am not false; I never was; Heaven knows it!" cried Harry, passionately. "I do not blame
you for your bitter words. I have earned your curses, though I meant to earn your blessing."

"My blessing!" Contempt and hatred struggled for the mastery in her tone. "Richard, Richard!
in your chains and toil, do you hear this? This woman meant to earn my blessing!" But
those four men rose slightly above the average of the distinguished nobles this time. Catulus
was like his father, a finely educated man and an honest aristocrat but moderate talent, and especially
not a soldier. My father--he is dead, madam, and past your
judgment" (for the fury in the other's eyes had blazed up afresh at the mention of him)--"deceived
me with false hopes; for fear alone--though I was timid too--would never have caused me to
break the promise I had passed to you. He said, if I disgraced myself and him by the perjury
I contemplated, that he would thrust me from his door forever; that in the lips of all the
world my name would become another word for shame and infamy; that even the man I loved would
loathe me when I had thus served his turn. I answered him, 'No matter, so I save my Richard.'
Then he said, 'But you will not save him; you will ruin him, rather, by this very evidence
you purpose to give. We have proof enough of this Yorke's guilt, no matter what you swear;
and we have proof, besides, of his having committed other offenses, if we choose to adduce
it. All you will effect is to make yourself shameful.' Then I hesitated, not knowing what to
think. 'The case is this,' argued my father: 'I have no grudge against this young scoundrel,
since the money has been all recovered, and I don't want revenge--else, as I say, I can easily
get it. But I'll have him taught a lesson; he must be punished for the wrong he has done, but
not severely. Before the judge passes sentence, I, the prosecutor, will beg him off: such an
appeal is always listened to, you know, and I will make it. But if you dare to speak for him,
as I hear you mean to do--if you, my daughter, call yourself thief and trollop to save his
skin, then shall he rot in jail! He shall, by Heaven! His fate hangs on my lips, not yours,'"

"Can this be true?" mused the old woman.

"It is true, so help me Heaven!" cried Harry. "I was a fool, a poor, weak, shuddering fool,
but not a traitress. If you were in court, and saw me look at him--the smile I gave by which
I meant to assure him all was well, however ill it seemed--You did see it; I see you did. You
do believe me. Oh, thank Heaven--thank Heaven!"

She began to sob and cry, and caught hold of the old woman's hand and kissed it, while the
other stood silent, still in doubt.

"Oh, madam, pity me. That you have suffered torments for long years is plain to see, and yet
you have not, though he was your son, been tortured as I have. You could not have freed him
by a word as I could; and oh, I did not utter it! I seemed to be his judge, his jailer, the
cause of all his woes, to the man I loved--and loved beyond all others! I hated my own father
for his sake. I"--she shuddered--"I was married to Richard's rival. You at least have been
alone, not companioned night and day by one who helped to doom him. Your case is hard and bitter--but
mine! not our own Richard, in his chains and toil, has suffered what I have suffered! Look
at me, madam, and tell me if I speak truth or lie."

"Yes, yes," mused Mrs. Yorke, in tender tones, and passing her fingers over the other's silvering
hair and haggard face; "I do--I must believe it. I should not have known you to-day had you
not called me by my name. You must have mourned for him indeed. Is this the cheek he loved
to kiss? Is this the hair a lock of which I took to comfort him in prison? Poor soul--poor soul!"

"How is he, madam?" whispered Harry, hoarsely. "Is he well? Is he free?"

"Not yet, Harry. In a year hence he will be. I had a letter only yesterday. But you must never
see him; and if you really love him--I speak it for his sake, not theirs--you must never let
him set eyes on your husband or your boy."

"I do not wish to see him; it would be too terrible to bear," groaned Harry.

"But he must not see them," insisted the other, gravely. "You must put the sea between yourselves
and him, or there will be murder done. His wrath is terrible, and will be the destruction of
both them and him. The hope of vengeance is the food he lives upon, and without which he would
have perished years ago. Even if you persuaded him, as you have convinced me, that you yourself
are innocent of his ruin, that would only make him firmer in his purpose against your husband.
He will have his life-blood, and then his own will pay for it. If I had not seen you, I meant
to see this man, and give him warning six months before Richard left the prison."

"Solomon would never heed it," exclaimed Harry, "nor even believe it if I told him."

"He will believe me," said the other, composedly. "You must bring him here that I may tell
him. Your Solomon must be a fool indeed not to hearken when a mother warns him against her
own son. Mind, I do not blame my Richard, woman!" continued Mrs. Yorke, with sudden passion;
"he has had provocation enough; it is but right to kill such vermin, and I could stand by and
smile to see him do it. But they must be kept apart, I say--this man and Richard--lest a worse
thing befall him than has happened already."

"Never to see him more!" moaned Harry, covering her face with her hands; "never to tell him
I was not the wretch I seemed! only to fear him as an enemy to me and mine--" As not
currently in Greece for more than seven pale stars of the Alexandrian playwright, but the classical
theater, especially the Euripides tragedy unfolding in the richest scenic resources claimed the
stage, it was preferably also in Rome at the time of Cicero the tragedies of Ennius, and Pacuvius
Accius, the comedies of Plautus given. If the latter in the previous season by more tasteful,
but of course in comic force lower Terence had been displaced, so now seemed Roscius and Varro, that
is the theater and philology combined to give it to prepare a similar resurrection, as Shakespeare
by Garrick and Johnson happened to, and Plautus had this drop in the susceptibility and suffer the
restless haste of spoiled by the short and wobbly antics audience so that the Directorate to excuse
the length of Plautus comedies, and perhaps also deleted and was forced to change. The more limited
the repertoire was, the more was directed both the activities of the directing staff and executioners,
and the interest of the audience to the stage performances of the pieces. There was hardly in
Rome more profitable business than that of the actor and dancer of the first order. The royal
Assets of the tragic actor Esop was already mentioned, be even higher celebrated Contemporary
Roscius struck his annual income at 600,000 sesterces (46000 pounds) of ^ 7 and the dancer Dionysia
theirs at 200,000 sesterces (15,000 pounds). In addition, they asked enormous Sums on decorations
and costumes: occasionally exceeded trains of six hundred aufgeschirrten Mules on the stage
and the theater Trojan army was used to the public a Samples in the show off by Pompey defeated nations
in Asia. The recitation of the inserted Vocal pieces accompanying music also became larger and more
independent role, as the wind waves, says Varro, it directs the experienced flute player the minds
of the listeners with any variation of the melody. She got used to take the rapid pace and forced by
the actor to more vigorous action. The musical and stage connoisseurship developed certainty,
and every piece of music Habitué recognized at the first note and knew the lyrics by heart;
any musical recitation or alleged error was strictly from the audience. Vividly remembers the
Roman stage nature of the Ciceronian period to today's French theater. As the loose panels of the days
of the Roman mime pieces corresponding to those as for nothing to good, and nothing was too
bad, so shall also the same in both the traditional classical Tragedy and comedy, to admire, or
at least applaud the educated man is required by law. The amount is being done, by taking in
the farce be finds himself, gazed at the spectacle of the decorative pomp and the general impression
an ideal world receives, the higher educated care in theater is not the play, but only to the
artistic representation. At last the Roman art of acting itself commuted in their various spheres,
much like the French, between Cottage and the salon. It was not unusual that the Roman dancers
during the final of the Robe dropped and the audience a dance in his shirt gave the best, on the
other hand was devoted to the Roman Talma as the highest law of his art is not the truth of
nature, but the symmetry. -------------------------------------------------- ------ ^ 7 From
State he received for every match in 1000 denars (300 pounds) and also the remuneration for his
Force. In later years he rejected for the fee.
 Man and wife
had few things in common, and affection was not one of them. Solomon had married Harry with
the full consciousness that another was preferred before him; the disclosures at the trial,
and the subsequent gossip of his neighbors, had placed that fact beyond a doubt. But he was
not to be balked of the bride that had been promised him so long; nor, above all, should his
rival enjoy even the barren victory of Harry's remaining unwedded for his sake. There are marriages
born of pique and spite on man's part as well as woman's; and Solomon's was one of them, although
he reaped, of course, material advantages besides. Trevethick had survived more than ten years,
during which he had largely increased his savings; and at his death all these had reverted
to his daughter and her husband. The wealth that had thus poured in upon Solomon through Harry's
means did not purchase for her any new regard; he had never ill-treated her, in a material
sense, but he had spoken ash-sticks, though he had used none. On the slightest quarrel, that
"jail-bird friend of yours" had been thrown in her face, and the cowardly missile was still
cast at her upon occasion. The birth of their child had not cemented their union. As he grew
up his character showed itself as foreign to that of his father as was his personal appearance.
He was slight in figure, delicate in appearance (though not in constitution), and fastidious
in taste. His choice of an artist's calling was not so objectionable to Solomon as might be
imagined; he had not sensitiveness enough to abhor it from association, and, as has been said,
he thought it might be made to co-operate with his own commercial schemes. But the artist nature
was in antagonism to his own, and Charles and his father were not on affectionate terms with
one another.

The wayward, handsome lad was, on the other hand, adored by his mother. Her intelligence, not
naturally acute, was quickened to see his faults, not indeed as such, but as possible causes
of misfortune to him. His too lively impulses, his indecision, his love of pleasure, were all
sources of apprehension to her, though scarcely ever of rebuke. She saw in Agnes Aird, his
tutor's daughter--so simple, yet so sensible and sterling, so faithful, pure, and true--the
very girl to make her son a fitting wife; an antidote for what was amiss in him; her honest
heart a sheet-anchor to hold him fast, not in the turbid ocean of excess, for her Charley was
too good to tempt it, but through that sparkling sea of gayety in which he was too apt to plunge.
She was beautiful enough even for him to mate with; she was better born and better trained
than he; for old Jacob Aird was none of those irregular geniuses of the pencil, addicted to
gin-punch and Shelley, and selfish to the core, but a plain honest man, who had brought up
his daughter well--in tastes a lady, but housewifely and wisely too. As for the inequality
of wealth between them, her son would have enough for both; and it was certain that Agnes did
not love him for his expectations, for they were unknown alike to her and him. Harry had never
led him to believe that he would be a rich man; her love, as we have said, had made her wise
in all that concerned Charley; and as for his father, he was naturally reticent in such matters.
He did not spend one fifth part of his income. His habits were as inexpensive as they had been
in the old days at Gethin; and if the village folks had ever hinted to the young fellow of
his father's wealth, he had no conception of its real extent. The idea itself, too, would have
had no great interest for him; he liked to have money for the pleasure of spending it, but
it was never the object of his thoughts; he was too careless, too much the creature of the
hour, to forecast his future. His mother gave him all she could, but he was aware that it was
obtained with difficulty; the cost of his very education, which he had received at a school
near Turlock, had, he knew, been grudged; his father had often grumbled that it was money thrown
away, for, "Look at me," said he; "I taught myself." There was always, in short, a tightness
in the Coe money market that augured any thing but pecuniary prosperity.

The very fact of their having taken lodgings at Mr. Aird's house, situated as it was in Soho,
a respectable but far from fashionable locality, argued but moderate means, and placed the
artist out of all suspicion of setting his pretty daughter as a matrimonial snare for Charley.
She was pretty enough and good enough, the old man justly thought, for him or for his betters;
and though he regarded the good-will which the young people evidently entertained for one another
with favor, he saw in it neither condescension nor advantage. Solomon, much engaged in business
affairs away from home, and estimating, besides, the power of love at a low rate, was not seriously
alarmed at the growing attachment between his son and Agnes, nor would have been had it advanced
much farther. He thought he had only to say "No," to put a stop to it at any point. Still he
had determined to place the boy out of the reach of such temptation as a pretty girl living
beneath the same roof must always offer to susceptible youth; and hence it was that Mrs. Coe
had engaged new lodgings. But even now, so lightly did his father think of the matter, that
Charley was still to be permitted to visit at Mr. Aird's daily, and take his drawing-lessons
as heretofore.

An excuse for the change of residence had been afforded in the fact that Soho was too far from
the parks, in which alone Mrs. Coe took pleasure in walking. She was quite unaccustomed to
town life, and the roar and tumult of the streets annoyed and even alarmed her. In some respects,
indeed, she was even a more nervous, timid creature than she had been as a girl; the warning
just received from Mrs. Yorke had not fallen upon her altogether unexpectedly, though she could
not have been said to be prepared for it. A vague apprehension of Richard's vengeance had haunted
her whole married life; she did not fear for her own safety; something told her that his anger
would scorn to harm herself; that it would pass over her head like a flaming sword, and smite
her husband and her boy; and as face after face passed by her in the crowded street, she would
shrink and tremble, thinking that that of Richard Yorke would come one day, and recognize her
own, and track it home. Was he not fated to work their common ruin? Did not the spectre ship
cross Turlock Sands before she met his face for the first time? Though so mature in years,
Harry was indeed as superstitious as ever. A curious instance of this occurred on the day that
the Coes moved into their new lodgings. The mother and son had arrived first--Solomon being
engaged in the City until evening--and Charley had strolled into the ground-floor parlor, while
the landlady (whom he had not yet seen) was engaged with his mother up stairs in the distribution
of the luggage. Above the chimney-piece hung that striking if not attractive portrait of Joanna
Southcott and her amanuensis, with which we are already acquainted; and it tickled the young
man's fancy amazingly. He concluded it was a family group--the likeness, perhaps, of Mrs. Basil
and her late husband engaged in making out their weekly accounts. "I will beg Agnes not to
be jealous of our charming landlady," thought he, and took out his note-book with the intention
of transferring the likeness for that young lady's amusement. While engaged in this occupation
the door opened, and in stepped Mrs. Basil and her new tenant. In his alarm and haste he stepped
back suddenly, and overthrew a little table, on which were some ornaments, he knew not what,
which rolled to his mother's feet. She uttered a cry of horror; and the landlady herself stood
still, regarding him with a face of astonishment, and even terror.

"Is that--your--son?" exclaimed she, clutching his mother by the arm.

But Mrs. Coe did not seem to hear her.

"Look, look!" cried she; "the skull, the skull! Oh, is it not a frightful omen!"

"I am really very sorry," said Charley, picking up the article in question; "it was very stupid
of me, Mrs. Basil."

"Don't mention it, young Sir," said the landlady, who had apparently recovered from her sudden
tremor; "the skull is no worse for its roll, you see; he was fortunately a hard-headed gentleman
who originally owned it."

"Indeed," said Charley, taking it from her hand with some curiosity, "it seems a curious ornament
for a sitting-room. May I ask whom it belonged to when it had flesh about it?"

"It is the skull of Swedenborg," answered Mrs. Basil. "A near relative of mine was a disciple
of his, and left it to me as a most precious relic."

"But how the deuce did he get possession of it?" inquired the young man.

"Well, not very fairly, as it seems to me," smiled the landlady. "While your mother sits down
and rests herself--for I am afraid you have frightened her a bit--I'll tell you the story."

"Yes, yes," said Mrs. Coe, faintly; "I shall be better presently; don't mind me."

"Well, the tale runs thus, Sir. Swedenborg was buried in the vault beneath the Swedish embassador's
chapel in Princes Square, Ratcliffe Highway; and a certain theologian having once affirmed
that all great philosophers took their bodies with them into the world of spirits, and that
this gentleman had done the like, leave was obtained to settle this point by actual examination.
The body was found, and the theologian confuted, but no trouble was taken to solder on again
the lid of the coffin. A thieving Swede, attending a funeral of one of his countrymen in the
same vault, remarked this circumstance, and stole the skull, with the intention of selling
it to some disciple of the great philosopher's; and I am ashamed to say that he found a purchaser
in my respected relative: and that's how I became possessed of Swedenborg's skull."

"Very curious, though rather larcenous," observed the young man, laughing. "And this good lady
over the mantel-piece, who is she?"

"That's Joanna Southcott. But, my good young gentleman, I will answer all your questions another
time. Your mother and I will have enough to do to arrange matters before your father comes
home. You will excuse my freedom, Sir."

"Certainly," said Charley, rather amused than otherwise with the landlady's bluntness. "I know
I'm in the way just now; so I'll step out for half an hour or so. I am sorry I frightened you,
dear mother."

He stooped and kissed her fondly; and then, with a smile and a nod at Mrs. Basil, stepped into
the little passage and out of doors, and, whistling, passed the window down the street.

"Your son has a light heart," said Mrs. Basil, looking at Harry very earnestly. "How old is he?"

"Eighteen--or a little less."

"He looks his age at least," observed the other, emphatically.

"Yes; dark people always do."

"And your husband is dark, like him, I remember."

"Yes; his complexion is swarthy, though he is not slim, like Charles."

Mrs. Coe, still in the arm-chair into which she had first sunk, here closed her eyes; either
the faintness of which she had complained was coming on again, or she did not wish to meet
the other's searching gaze.

There was a long pause, during which Mrs. Basil went to the cellaret, and pouring out a glass
of sherry, put it to her tenant's lips.

"Do you feel better now?" said she, when Harry had drunk it.

"Yes, yes; much better. But that skull--oh, horrible! it rolled from him to me. What an omen
on your very threshold! Heaven guard my Charles from evil!"

"This is weakness, Mrs. Coe. The skull is harmless; and it rolled because your son upset it."

"Yes, my son," gasped the other, trembling. "It is for him I fear. It augurs death--death--death!"

There was a ring at the front-door, decisive, sharp, and resonant.

"Great Heaven!" cried Harry; "if it should be he himself! Hide me away; put me out of sight."
Her terror was piteous to behold: she shook in every limb.

"It is the post," said Mrs. Basil, contemptuously; and she was right. The servant brought in
a letter for her mistress.

"I don't know the hand," mused she. "Black-bordered, and black-sealed too." She opened it without
excitement, and read it through: it was but a few lines.

"Your omen has proved true for once, Mrs. Coe," said she, in quiet tones. "This speaks of death."

"Whose death?" cried Harry.

"My husband's, Richard's father. Carew of Crompton died last night."

There was no sorrow in the aged woman's face: a gravity, unmixed with tenderness, possessed
it. Carew was naught to her, and had been naught for twoscore years. But the tide of memory
was at its flow within her brain; and because the Past is Past it touches us. This man had
loved her once, after his own scornful manner, when he was young, and before power and selfishness
had made him stone. He had been the father of her only son, and now he was Dead.

"I am so sorry," said Harry, not quite knowing what to say.

"There is no need for sorrow," replied the other, quietly. "Let us go up stairs and finish
our work."

CHAPTER XXXVII.

WITCHERY.

Carew of Crompton was really dead, as men said, "at last," not that he had been long dying,
or was an old man, but that he had eventually succumbed to one of those deadly risks to which
he had so often voluntarily exposed himself. On the occasion which had been fatal to him he
had started from home one frosty morning at the gallop, with a cigar in his mouth, the reins
on his horse's neck, and both his hands in his pockets, and had been pitched off and broken
his neck within half a mile of his own door. His chaplain, who had dispatched the news to Mrs.
Basil, had been riding by his side at the very moment. "He was a good friend to me," was the
laconic remark that poor Parson Whymper had added to the bare intelligence.

To judge by the regretful excitement in the Midlands, Carew might have been a good friend to
every body. The news was at once telegraphed to town, and appeared in the evening papers. The
public interest in his mad freaks had of late years grown somewhat faint--his extravagances
were, perforce, on a less splendid scale--but his death revived it. "So that mad Carew has
killed himself, after all," was the observation frequently overheard that evening, as acquaintance
met acquaintance on their homeward way from business. "Well, he's had his whack of most things,"
was the reply of the philosophers; "He has not left much to tempt his heirs to be extravagant,
I reckon," of the cynics; "He was a deuced good fellow at bottom, I believe," remarked those
who were secretly desirous of earning the same eulogium for themselves; "He was altogether
wrong at top," answered the charitable.

Solomon Coe came home to his new abode in such a state of elation that it even made him communicative
to his wife. Mrs. Basil happened to be with her in the drawing-room, but he only acknowledged
her presence by a hasty nod. "Well, what d'ye think, Carew of Crompton, that was your father's
landlord and mine"--Solomon never said "ours" with reference to property--"has broken his neck
at last!"

Of course the very name of Carew was a sore subject between man and wife, on account of Richard
Yorke's connection with him; but it suited Solomon's purpose on this occasion to ignore that
circumstance. It would be necessary for some time to come to allude to the Crompton property
more or less, and it was just as well to begin at once; it was also less embarrassing to do
so in the presence of a third person.

"Yes, Solomon, I knew Mr. Carew was dead," said Harry, gravely. The next instant she turned
scarlet with the consciousness of her thoughtless indiscretion.

"Oh," grunted her husband, annoyed at what he deemed her sulky manner, when he himself was
so graciously inclined to be conciliatory, and also displeased to find his news anticipated,
"you've been buying an evening paper, have you? You must have more money than you know what
to do with, it seems to me."

Harry was thankfully accepting this imputation in silence, when Mrs. Basil's soft voice was
heard. "No, Sir; it was I who told your good lady. I had a letter from Crompton by the afternoon's
post."

"The devil you did!" cried Solomon, turning sharply upon her. "How came that about?"

"I was housekeeper at Crompton, Sir, in old Mrs. Carew's time, for some years, and one of the
servants wrote to let me know of the accident."

"Housekeeper, were you?" said Solomon, with interest. "That must have been a good place, with
deuced good pickings, eh?"

"Solomon, Solomon," remonstrated his wife, in a low voice, "Mrs. Basil is quite a lady. Don't
you see that you offend her?"

It is more than probable that, under ordinary circumstances, Mr. Coe would have resented this
rebuke with choleric vehemence; but he had his reasons for being good-humored in the present
instance. "You must excuse my country manners, Mrs. Basil," said he. "As my wife will tell
you, I must always have my joke; but I mean no offense. So you were housekeeper at Crompton,
were you? Well, now, that's curious, for Mrs. Coe's father and I myself, as you heard me saying,
have had a great deal to do with Carew. You knew him well, of course?"

"Yes, Sir; I did."

"And the place too, of course. It was a very fine one, was it not? Plenty of pictures, and
looking-glasses, and things?"

"It was very richly furnished."

It was curious to mark the difference of manner between questioner and respondent. Solomon,
usually so reticent and reserved, was grown quite voluble. Mrs. Basil, on the other hand, naturally
so apt in speech, seemed to reply with difficulty. She was weighing every word.

"The estate, I suppose, was out of your beat; you did not have much to do with that?"

"I used to walk in the park, Sir, most days."

"Ay; but the property generally? The friend who writes you to-day don't say any thing about
that, I suppose--whether any of it is to be sold or not, for instance?"

"The report--of course, being a servant, she can only speak from report--is that Mr. Carew's
affairs are in a sad state. Every thing, I believe, is to be sold at once. The whole estate
is said to be--I don't know if I use the right term--mortgaged."

"Just so," replied Solomon; "yes, yes. That is so, no doubt." There was a slight pause; Mrs.
Basil courtesied, and was about to leave the room. "Stop a bit, ma'am," said Solomon. "My wife
tells me that you are a lone woman--a widow. Perhaps you'd like to take a bit of dinner with
us to-day?"

Harry began to think her husband was intoxicated. He did get occasionally so when any particularly
good stroke of business was in course of progress, and on such occasions his manner was unusually
affable; but she had never seen him half so gracious as at present. Hospitality, though he
did sometimes bring a mining agent or a broker home to dinner, was by no means his strong point.
Mrs. Basil looked doubtfully at her dress, which, though homely, was perfectly well-made and
lady-like, and murmured something about its being almost the dinner-hour, and there being "no
time."

"Oh, never mind your gown" (which, by-the-by, Solomon pronounced "gownd"); "we're quite plain
people ourselves, as my wife will tell you. You shall take pot-luck with us. Where's Charley?
That boy's always late."

But at that very moment the young gentleman in question entered the room, at the same time
as did the servant with the announcement that dinner was on the table.

The astonishment of the domestic at seeing her mistress taken down to the dining-room by the
new lodger was only exceeded by that of Charley, as, with his mother on his arm, he followed
the strangely assorted pair. "I knew she was a witch," he murmured, "with her human skull and
her Joanna Southcott; but this beats old Margery's doings at Gethin."

"Hush, hush!" whispered his mother, for Charley's high spirits and audacity always terrified
her when exhibited in his father's presence: "they have found they have a common acquaintance,
and so made friends."

"Father didn't know Swedenborg, did he?" answered the young man, slyly. "My belief is, he has
fallen in love with her. I saw a black cat on the stairs. She can make any body do it, as I
was telling Aggey" (the young rogue had been to Soho since the morning); "I shall be the next
victim, no doubt. It's no use saying to myself, 'Thou shalt not marry thy grandmother.' Her
charms are too powerful for the rubric. You'll see she'll not say grace."

Mr. Charles was right in that particular of his diagnosis of their new guest. Mrs. Basil did
treat that devotional formula, which Mrs. Coe never omitted to pronounce, in spite of her husband's
contemptuous shrugs, with considerable indifference. She sat opposite to Charley, and more
than once, when he looked up suddenly, he caught her gaze fixed earnestly upon him. Those wondrous
eyes of hers yet shone forth bright and clear; her cheeks were still smooth; and, though her
brow had many a wrinkle, they were the footprints of thought and care, rather than of years.

The conversation, as was natural where the company and the guest were strangers to each other,
turned upon the topics of the day, and the objects in the room, some of which, as we know,
were sufficiently remarkable. At Charley's request Mrs. Basil once more narrated the story
of the skull; and then epitomized, with caustic tongue, the biography of poor Joanna. Up stairs,
she said, she had one of that lady's "seals"--a passport to eternal bliss--which she would
bestow as a present upon the young gentleman opposite. Her cynical humor delighted Charley,
and won the approbation of his father--not the less so, perhaps, since he saw it annoyed his wife.

Poor Harry was a simple well-meaning woman in her way, and, had the circumstances of her life
been less exceptional, would have earned the reputation of a good creature and steadfast chapel-goer.
But our lives do not always fall in the places most suitable to our dispositions; the restive
are often compelled to run in harness; and the quiet low-action goers, who would welcome restraint,
are left without guide, and with no course marked out for them. Thus it was with Mrs. Coe.
The situation in which Fate had placed her it was altogether beyond her powers to fill. She
knew that Mrs. Basil was rapidly ingratiating herself with her husband, and so far was furthering
their common plan; but, notwithstanding its supreme importance, she shrank from the means that
were bidding fair to accomplish her own end. She shuddered at her husband's vulgar ejaculations
of assent and approval; at her son's thoughtless laughter; at this woman's sparkling and audacious
talk, which seemed so purposeless, and yet was so full of design and craft. She had feared
her and shrank from her at Gethin, and she feared her now. And yet how necessary was her assistance!
Of her own self she was well aware that she could do nothing to avert that coming peril from
her husband and her son, the shadow of which had darkened all her married life, and was now
deepening into blackest doom. It was absolutely necessary that Mrs. Basil should obtain the
confidence of Solomon, and perhaps of Charley also, and yet this unlooked-for and swift success
of hers was far from welcome to poor Harry. It really almost seemed that there was truth in
what her son had spoken in jest--that there was witchcraft in it.

Solomon was now talking earnestly to Mrs. Basil in low tones, while Charley looked toward his
mother with raised eyebrows, and a comic expression, which seemed to say, "She's got him, you
see; I did see a black cat on the stairs."

If she could have overheard her husband's talk, it would still have been inexplicable to her.

"Then you think this sale at Crompton will take place directly after the funeral?"

"I should certainly imagine so--yes."

"There is something--you needn't tell my wife, because I wish it to be a surprise for her--that
I should like to buy at it; something I have long had my eye on."

"Some piece of furniture, I suppose. Well, you must be prepared to give a good sum, I fear.
From the curiosity of the thing--the reputation, I mean, of poor Mr. Carew--it is likely things
will fetch more than their price."

"Perhaps so. But I should like to know, as soon as possible, when the sale comes off. From
your connection with the place, you will be able to get news of this before the general public--I
mean the exact date."

"No doubt. I will write to-morrow, and beg that the information may be sent me."

"I should feel much obliged if you would, Mrs. Basil."

"I'll write this very night. You wish to know the day on which the sale of the furniture may
be fixed?"

"Yes; and of all the other things: of the estates as well, for instance; there may be some
land that may prove a good investment. Don't make a fuss about it, but say you have a friend
who is interested. The catalogue of effects, with the dates appointed for the sale of each,
will, of course, be settled down there. I want to have an early copy."

"That is very simple," said Mrs. Basil, making a memorandum in her pocket-book: "you shall
be among the very first to get one, Mr. Coe--you may rely on that."

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

OVER THE ROOF.

Richard Yorke is still at Lingmoor; and though but a twelvemonth intervenes between him and
freedom--or perhaps partly because of it--prison life is growing insupportable. It is the last
year of "a long term," as all "old hands" will tell you, which is the most trying. Impatience
becomes more incontrollable as the limit of suffering is neared; and just as, after a tedious
and dangerous illness, the convalescent will rise too soon, and risk a relapse in his feverish
desire to be well, so a prisoner will often make some wild endeavors to escape, when, if he
did but wait a little--a span of time compared with that in which he has lain captive--his
jealous doors would open of themselves to let him pass in safety. But there are other reasons
which are pressing Richard toward flight, and goading him (as he feels) to madness if he remain
quiescent. He has quarreled with all about him, and has suffered for it; and he is now menaced
with worse things. His sullenness, his brooding ire, have long transformed his nature; civility,
and even obedience, have become impossible for him. He kicks, as it were, against a chevaux-de-frise
of steel. He has been starved on bread and water, and grown thin and fierce. He has been put,
and not for nothing, into the dark cell for hours, to brood, as usual, and has come forth a
more reckless devil than he went in.

His warder and he are open foes. That cross-grained official has taken a strong antipathy to
him, which is more than reciprocated; and every, time he enters his cell sets foot, though
unconscious of the fact, on the very threshold of the grave. He is the keeper of one who is
almost a madman; but the latter is sane on one point yet--he knows to whom his vengeance is
mainly due; and while that knowledge lasts his lesser foe is safe from him--safe, that is,
at present; but a provocation may be given which would compel this long-suffering victim--in
years scarce a middle-aged man, in appearance gray and withered as the oldest within those
prison walls--to give his passion way, and slay him. If something should take place, which
this warder himself has prophesied would happen, it will be so; and all Richard's hoarded hate
would then be useless, since it would have no heir. There has been flogging in the prison--an
unusual punishment, and only inflicted for great offenses, or for continued contumacy and bad
conduct. A conspiracy was discovered, and seven of the ringleaders received three dozen lashes
each, in presence of all the inmates of the jail. It was a punishment perhaps deserved and
necessary, but sickening enough to witness. Richard's warder stood beside him, and while the
cat was descending on one wretch's naked back, observed in a grim whisper: "Do you take warning,
my man; for if you are reported again, the governor says you are to have a dose of the same
medicine." was for the grading of the Seven Hills city, nor done anything, except where such The debris
pile was cleared. The streets were narrow and crooked hill and down and were kept miserable,
narrow and poorly paved the sidewalks. The ordinary houses of bricks were also built as dissolute
giddy high, mostly from speculative Architects for the account of the small owners, while those
filthy rich, these were to beggars. As individual islands in this sea of ​​miserable buildings
appeared the glittering palaces Rich, the small homes as well as their owners narrowed the room
the little people their civil rights in the state and find its marble pillars and Greek statues,
the decaying Temple with its largely just carved wooden idols made a sorry figure. Of a road, a
bank, fire and building inspection hardly been mentioned, if the government Each year the incoming
floods, fires and even Häusereinstürze are troubled, it was to the State of theologians report
and concerns about the true to seek meaning of such signs and wonders. Try to imagine a London
think with the Slave population of New Orleans, with the police of Constantinople, with the Industrielosigkeit
the modern-day Rome and moved from a policy along the lines of Paris of 1848, and one will
gain an idea of ​​the Republican glory to their doom Cicero and his comrades in their letters Schmoll
mourn. -------------------------------------------------- - ^ 19 was in the country of production
of Roman Sicily bushel within a few years to 2 and sold to 20 sesterces, you expect it, as are
the price fluctuations in Rome, had that lived from overseas and the headquarters of the grain speculators were.
-------------------------------------------------- - Caesar did not mourn, but he sought help
to help the time came. Rome was, of course, what it was, a world city. The attempt to turn him
a distinctively Italian character to give would not only have been impracticable, but would not fit in Caesar's plan. Similar
to Alexander for his Greek-Oriental empire adequate capital found in the Hellenic-Jewish-Egyptian,
and especially cosmopolitan Alexandria, it should also at the heart of the Orient and Occident
capital in the new Roman-Hellenic Empire not be an Italian community, but the capitals of many denationalized
Nations. Therefore, it suffered Caesar, that in addition to the Father Jove, the newly established
Egyptian Gods were worshiped, and even allowed the Jews the freedom to exercise their strange strange
Rituals in the capital of the empire. How disgusting multicolored always parasitic, especially Hellenic-oriental
population in Rome interfered, he joined them from spreading anywhere in the way, it is significant
that in its capital's festivals spectacles not only in Latin and Greek, but also in other tongues,
probably in Phoenician, Hebrew, Syriac perform, Spanish left. But if the basic character of Caesar
the capital as he found him, accepted with full consciousness, he was still energetically attention
to the improvement of the prevailing there, miserable and shameful conditions. Sorry just the
basic evil were the least austilgbar. Slavery with their train of calamities Caesar could
not leave, it remains to be seen whether he tried over time would limit the slave population
in the capital, at least, as he did on other areas undertook. Nor could Caesar a free metropolitan industry
to pull out of the ground, but helped the huge buildings of the Nahrungslosigkeit there somewhat from
the proletariat and opened a source narrow but honest purchase. Other hand, Caesar had vigorously
aim to reduce the mass of the proletariat free. The stationary flow of those leading the cereal
donations to Rome, was by transformation them into a solid head on a limited number of arms supply
if not completely blocked ^ 20, but limited very much. granted under the existing proletariat
on the one hand the courts, which have been instructed to intervene with unrelenting severity against
the mob, other hand, the extensive overseas colonization, of the 80 000 colonists, Caesar
in the few years of his reign led to the sea, a very large part of the lower layers of the capital's
population will be taken, as for most of Corinthian Settlers were freedmen. That, notwithstanding
the previous order, the freedman any urban voluntary shut, Caesar them in its colonies the door of
City Hall was opened, without doubt, the better off of them for emigration to . Win This emigration
but must also have been more than a merely temporary event; Caesar, like any sensible man
believe that the only true means to the misery of the proletariat in a well-regulated Kolonisierungssystem
exists, and the nature of the kingdom set in the state, the same in almost unbounded expansion
to realize the intention to have had hereby permanently continue and the ever- to re-open
to producing a lasting evil deduction. Measures were also taken to the evil of the most important food
price fluctuations on the capital's markets Boundaries. The newly revised and liberally managed public
finances provided for this purpose the means and two newly appointed officials Getreideädilen
took over, the special supervision supplier and market of the capital. The club was being effectively
than by Prohibitivgesetze was possible, controlled by the change in constitution by the Republic and the
Republican elections and the courts on corruption and rape of the election and Judge colleges,
in general the Saturnalia of the political scum of course came to an end. In addition, the
Clodische by the law which came into being dissolved compounds and just put the whole sector
association under the supervision of government authorities. With Exception of the traditional
guilds and assemblages, the religious associations the Jews and other special categories of exempt,
for which the simple display of the Senate appears to have been sufficient to permit a permanent
company with solid constituting meeting deadlines and related margined on a regular basis by
the Senate and probably after will be outdated views of the monarch to be granted subject concession.
Then there was a more severe criminal justice and a vigorous police. The laws, including regarding
the crime of rape, have been tightened and the unreasonable determination the Republican right,
the criminals of the transfer was authorized by Selbstverbannung part of the forfeited penalty
to withdraw, as removed cheaply. The detailed Regulatory element, the Caesar of the Metropolitan
Police adopted is largely preserved and it can, because who wants to convince himself that
the emperor, not scorned, the homeowner for the repair of roads and paving of sidewalks in
all its width with to stop stone blocks and make adequate provision to carry the litters and
the to issue driving the car used in the condition of the roads only for the evening or night
were allowed to circulate freely in the capital. The supervision of the local police remained
as previously relied largely aediles the four, which, if not earlier, at least now were to monitor
each police district within a certain limited to the capital. Finally, the main urban construction
and the related insurance for profit Institutions adopted by Caesar at all, the desire to build the
Roman and the organizers in the united, a sudden upturn, which not only the mismanagement of the last
anarchist Times embarrassed, but also everything that made the Roman aristocracy in their prime
had so far left behind, like Caesar's genius, the honorable efforts of Marcie and the Aemilius.
It was not merely the extension of the building itself and the size of it related Sums by Caesar
surpassed his predecessors, but the real statesman and non-profit Sense of what Caesar did for the
public institutions of Rome, of all similar services distinguished. He not built, as his successor,
temples and other magnificent buildings, but he relieved the market of Rome, which still have
the town meetings, the main course sites, the stock market and the daily business transactions such
as the daily idleness crowded together, at least by the assemblies and the courts by a new thing
for those places that Saepta Iulia on the Campus, for a particular address these markets, the forum
between Iulium Capitol and create Palatine, left. Similar spirit is the originating device from him,
that the capital's £ 3 million oil baths annually, mostly from Africa, delivered and these were set
by the state in which the bathers for anointing the body required The administering oil free of
charge - after the old one much founded on bathing and ointments Dietetics most appropriate measure
of cleanliness and health police. However, this great facilities were only the beginnings of a complete
transformation of Rome. Even the designs were made into a new town hall, a new grand bazaar
Pompe tables with a rival theater, a public Latin and Greek Library, modeled on the recently perished
of Alexandria - the first institution so in Rome - to finally be a temple of Mars, the wealth and glory
of all previous have gone before would be outbid. Genius was the idea, once through the Pomptinischen
marshes to lay a channel and to derive their water after Tarracina then, the lower to change
the course of the Tiber River and stream at him from the present Ponte Molle, held between Vatican and the
Champ de Mars through, rather the field and the Vatican Janiculum to run around to Ostia, where poor
roads make a fully satisfying art Hafenplatz should. Through this plan a giant hand was the
most dangerous enemy of the capital, the bad air of the neighborhood, dispelled at a stroke
the other hand, very limited Baugelegenheit in the capital in the way extended to the order on
the left bank of the Tiber Vatican moved to the field office of the Campus Martius and enter the
spacious field for Mars public and private buildings could be used, while at the same time so painful
safe harbor was missing. It seemed as if the emperor move mountains and rivers and dare to nature
itself the race. Meanwhile, however much the new order, the Rome gained in comfort and splendor,
its political supremacy it was, as I said was, irretrievably lost by just the same. That the
Roman state with the city of Rome coincided was indeed over time, always unnatural and perverse
become, but the sentence was so intimately with the nature of the Roman Republic, that he did not
even go before this object could. Only in the new state was Caesar He, for example with the exception
of some legal fiction, completely removed and the main urban Communities before the law into line
with all other municipalities, such as Caesar, Here, as everywhere, trying not only to arrange
the matter, but it officially at the right to name names, his Italian community order, no
doubt intentionally, at the same time adopted for the capital and for other municipalities.
It may be added that Rome, precisely because it is a living being as local capital was not capable
behind the other Municipalities of the Empire even mainly the result stood. Republican Rome was
a Den of thieves, but also the State, the Rome of the monarchy, although with all the glories
three continents and adorn themselves in gold and marble began to shimmer, was nothing in
the state as the Palace in connection with the poor house, that is a necessary evil. -------------------------------------------
^ 20 It is not without interest that a later, but insightful political writer, author of the
under Sallustius' name Caesar addressed letters, the Council approved, the main urban grain distribution
in the individual municipalities to install. Criticism has its good sense, because as the great have
prevailed in municipal orphanage care Traian apparently similar thoughts. -------------------------------------------
If in the capital is only a question of police regulations by the largest hinwegzuräumen scale
palpable evils, it was against a far more difficult Task aufzuhelfen the deeply dysfunctional
Italian economy. The primary disease were already highlighted in detail earlier, the shrinkage
of the agricultural cooperation and the unnatural increase in the commercial population, what
an incalculable entourage other evils attached himself. What about the Italian economy will
bottom, the Readers be forgotten. Despite the earnest attempts of destruction of small landed
property control, but in this era was hardly in a landscape of the real Italy, about except the Apennines
and Abruzzentäler, the peasant economy, the predominant style of operation. As for the landownership,
it is between the previously described Catonian and those Varro tells us to perceive no essential
difference, except that the latter in Better or the worse increased from the big city life
in Rome shows the traces. "Otherwise," says Varro, "the barn on the property was greater than the
mansion, and now it wont vice versa to be. "In the field Tiburtine Tusculan and Mark, on the
shores of Tarracina and Baiae rose where the old Latin and Italian peasantry had sown and harvested,
now barren shine the villas of the Roman Great some of which with the associated gardens and water
lines, the fresh and salt water reservoirs for keeping and breeding of river and sea fish, snails
and dormice breeding, the wild Schonungen for bracketing of hares, rabbits, deer and wild boar,
and the Bird houses, were held in which even cranes and peacocks, the space of a regular city
covered. But the big-city luxury and some diligent hand makes rich diet and more Arms than the
alms-giving love of humanity. Those bird houses and fish ponds make the Men were, of course, usually
a very expensive hobby. Solo extensive and had this intensive economy has been performing so high that, for example, the stock of
a Colombier was up to 100,000 sesterces (7600 dollars) estimate, that the efficient Mästungswirtschaft
was developed and gained in the bird houses fertilizer for agriculture considered came, that a single
bird dealer at one time 5000 thrushes - because they knew they to cherish - the piece to 3
dinars (21 pence), one fish pond owners in 2000 moray was able to deliver and from the left
by Lucius Lucullus fish 40 000 sesterces (3050 dollars) have been resolved. Understandably,
could under such circumstances, who said economic business and operational intelligence, with
relatively little investment capital very high Profit. A small beekeepers that time, sold by its more
than an acre, located near Falerii thyme garden year after year to Honey for at least 10,000
sesterces (760 pounds). The emulation of the fruit growers went so far as that in an elegant country houses,
the fruit chamber marmorgetäfelte often at the same time as board rooms was established, also probably
bought there, superb fruit exhibited as a separate plant. In that time, the first in Asia Minor
cherry fruit trees and other foreign planted in the Italian gardens. The vegetable gardens,
roses and violets in flower beds Lazio Campania and threw off enough income and the Vienna market
(forum cupedinis) next to the Holy Road to be offered for sale where fruits, honey and wreaths
used to play an important Role in metropolitan life. In general landownership was the plantation
economy as it was difficult to economically on a surpassing level of development. The Valley
of Rieti, the neighborhood of Fucine lake, the scenery on the Liris and Volturnus, indeed central Italy in general,
were in the most prosperous agricultural state, and even some industries that are suitable were to join
in the operation of the estate by means of slaves, the intelligent Farmers with recorded and,
where conditions were favorable, inns, mills and especially brick-built on the estate. The Italian
producers, especially of wine and oil-served, not just the Italian markets, but also made in two
articles considerable overseas exports. A simple way of scientific writing Time compares Italy
a large orchard, and the descriptions that a simultaneous Poet from his beautiful home designs,
where the well watered lawn, the lush field of corn the funny vine hill of the dark line of
olive trees is surrounded in the decoration of the country, laughing in a variety of grace, the loveliest
gardens in his lap and entertains himself by food-giving tree is encircled these descriptions,
apparently faithful picture of the poet daily standing in front of his eyes put landscape, we
in the flourishing strokes of Tuscany and Terra di Lavoro. Grazing, however, the causes of the
previously developed especially in the south and south-east of Italy always advanced further,
was in every respect a Regression, but they also took part but to some extent in education Increase
of the company, as was done for the improvement of breeds and as much Breeding donkey 60000
(4600 pounds), 100000 (7570 pounds), so 400 000 sesterces (30,000 pounds) paid were. The dignified
Italian soil economy achieved in this time when the general Development of intelligence and
the abundance of capital they fertilized by far brighter Results than ever had the old peasant
economy can be, and even went out already beyond the borders of Italy by the Italian economist in
the provinces of large tracts cattle breeding and grain self-relying exploited. What dimensions
but next to that on the Ruin of the small peasant landownership unnatural thriving industry took
the money, as the Italian merchants to the Jews a race in all provinces and client states the
kingdom had poured, all capital flowed together at last in Rome, this is it, to point to the earlier
it is said, meet here on the only fact that on the capital's regular money market rate of
interest at this time six per cent, the Money so there was cheaper by half than usual average
in ancient times. As a result these well-founded as agrarian to mercantile capital masses and speculation
economy the terrible imbalance resulted in the distribution of the assets. The frequently used and
often abused by a speech made millionaires and beggars assembled community take perhaps nowhere
as complete as in the Rome of the last days of the Republic; and nowhere is probably the key sentence
of the slave state that the rich man of the Activities of his slaves, lives necessary respectable,
poor man, who by his own labor lives, is necessary in common with so horrible security than
the irrefutable idea of all public and private transport was recognized ^ 21


This locket contained the little picture of Harry painted by Richard himself, and which, though
he had contrived to secrete while at Cross Key, had been taken from him at Lingmoor.

Harry's breast was agitated by conflicting emotions. To know that her boy was safe--that there
could be no murder done--gave her a sense of intense relief, which could scarcely be called
selfish. But that reflection was but transient, and a passionate burst of sorrow succeeded
it. The only man she had ever loved--around whom, centred her most precious memories--had died,
then, thus miserably, after miserable years of bondage endured on her account. She saw him
with her mind's eye once more as when he had clasped her in his arms for the first time upon
the ruined tower--as when he had rained his kisses on her lips beside the Wishing Well--in
his youth and beauty and passion. Her nineteen years of loveless wedlock were swept away, and
left her as she saw herself in the little portrait he himself had painted, and which was now
his legacy. His menaces and vows of vengeance against her and hers were all forgotten; her
woman's heart was loyal to him whom she had owned its lord, and once more did him fealty.

"Oh, Richard, Richard, my dear love," cried she; "God knows I would have died to save you!"

"Come here, Harry--come here," whispered Mrs. Basil, "and let me kiss you. I would that I could
weep like you; but the fountain of my tears has long been dry. I thought you would have been
glad to feel that you and yours were safe--that retribution was averted from the man, your
husband; but I now see I did you wrong. Your heart is touched--you remember him as he was before
the taint of crime was on him."

"It never was!" cried Harry, passionately. "He never meant to wrong my father of a shilling."

"Well said, dear Harry; well said. He was himself a wronged--a murdered man. Imprisoned for
nineteen years, and then to perish thus! And yet men talk of Heaven's justice! My boy! my boy!"

The two women were silent for a while--the one gazing with dry eyes but tender yearning face
upon the other, as she rocked herself to and fro, and shook with stifled sobs.

"Dear Harry, you must not desert me now," pleaded the former, pitifully; "I am very old, and
this has broken me. He was my all--my only one on earth--and he is dead. I shall not trouble
you long. We two, child, were the only ones that loved him, and we love him still. Let me cling
to you, Harry, since it is but for a little while; and let us talk of him together, when we
are alone, and think of what he was. So bright, so gay, so--Oh, my boy! my boy!"

The tears rushed to the mother's eyes at last. Hard Fate was softened for a while toward it's
life-long victim; and side by side sat the two bereaved women, each striving to comfort the
other, after woman's fashion, by painting in its brightest colors that dead Past which both
deplored. Begotten of their common sorrow, Love sprang up between them, and on one side confidence;
and into Mrs. Basil's hungry ears Harry, for the first time, poured the story of her courtship.
Richard's death had cemented between them the bond which it would seem to have destroyed. The
fatal letter lay open on Harry's lap, but the envelope had fallen on the floor. Stooping to
pick it up, she found something still within it--some folded slips from a local newspaper,
with an account of the inquest, the details of which the governor's clerk had, perhaps humanely,
preferred to communicate in that form, to be read or not as the mother's feelings might dictate
to her. The two women read it together, not aloud, for neither had the voice for that. With
most of the evidence there recounted we are already familiar. It was proved that No. 421 had
long been in a desponding, brooding state; but, as only a year intervened between the expiration
of his term of punishment, his attempt to escape was almost unaccountable, and certainly unparalleled.
No punishment was impending over him. The opinion of the authorities was expressed that the
convict's reason was unhinged. The method of obtaining his freedom showed indeed considerable
cunning, but also an audacity that was scarcely consistent with sanity. The height of the prisoner
was known, and his proportionate reach of arm; and it seemed incredible how he could have succeeded
in reaching the parapet above his cell window; in that attempt he must have risked certain
death. His descent from the roof was explained by the presence of the rope. The immediate means
by which he surmounted the external wall were, of course, evident enough, since the rope was
there also; but the question was, how did it come there? The prisoner must have been assisted
by some one outside the wall. The warder who fired the shot which subsequently proved fatal
had seen but one man; but the night was dark, and the whole affair had passed very rapidly.
Indeed, the convict had only fully shown himself when at the top of the wall, and the musket
had been fired almost at a venture. On the alarm being given, pursuit was at once attempted;
but, under cover of the night, the fugitive had gained Bergen Wood. The next morning his footsteps
were traced so far, and it was proved that he was unaccompanied. A cordon was placed round
the wood, and the place itself thoroughly searched for many days. It was deemed certain, from
the report of the scouts who were made use of on such occasions, that the convict had not left
that covert to seek shelter in any hamlet in the neighborhood; the quest was therefore still
continued. Not, however, until three weeks afterward was No. 421 discovered. It was supposed
that the unhappy fugitive had died of his wounds upon the very night of his escape, for the
body was so decomposed that it could never have been identified but for its convict clothes;
the nights had been wet and tempestuous, and it lay in an unsheltered part of the wood, a mere
sodden heap of what had been once humanity. The bullet that had been the cause of death was,
however, detected in the remains.

What an end to the high-spirited, handsome lad that had been the pride of his mother, the joy
of his betrothed! What wonder that they sat over the bald record of it with bowed-down faces,
and filled up the gaps with only too easily imagined horrors! Each kept hold of the other's
hand, as though in sign of the dread bond between them, and sat close to one another in silence.
Presently Harry started up, at the sound of a latch-key in the house door.

"That is Solomon," cried she.

"Impossible," said Mrs. Basil. "He told me himself that he should stop for the last day's sale,
and to-day is but the fifth."

"Hush! it is."

Yes, it was certainly Solomon's voice in the passage; and apparently, by the answering tone,
he had a male companion with him.

Harry seized the letter, with its inclosures, and thrust them into her bosom, which, full of
grief for his victim, seemed to spurn her husband's approach. Then she heard him calling her
impatiently, as was his wont, from the foot of the stairs.

"Harry, come down; I have brought a gentleman home with me. Let's have something to eat at
once, will you?"

"Answer him--answer him!" gasped Harry. She could not speak; her tongue seemed paralyzed.

Mrs. Basil rose at once, walked with steady step to the door, and opened it. "Your wife is
here, Mr. Coe. I am glad you are come home, for she is far from well, and I was getting quite
nervous about her."

"She must be ill," grumbled Solomon, "not to be able to say 'Here,' when I am breaking a blood-vessel
with holloing to her in the attics. Come in here, Sir." This to his companion--a man considerably
his senior, thin and spare, who stood peering curiously at the landlady. "I am sorry to see
you unwell, wife. I have brought a friend to stay with us for a day or two. Mr. Robert Balfour--Mrs.
Coe."

CHAPTER XL.

A PROJECTED PARTNERSHIP.

Though by no means in either the mental or physical condition in which a lady should be who
is called upon to play the part of hostess, Harry was not displeased that Solomon had not returned
alone. The presence of this stranger, whom she greeted mechanically, and almost without a glance
at his features, was welcome to her, because it was likely to distract from herself her husband's
regards. What she would like to have done would have been to shut herself up alone in her chamber,
to weep and pray. As it was, she had to be cheerful, to affect an interest in her husband's
late expedition, and pleasure at his unexpected return. Mrs. Basil was here invaluable; you
would never have imagined that it was the same woman--so stricken and full of anguish but a
few minutes before, and now so self-possessed and cheerful. But she had been used to playing
parts throughout her life, and acting was easy to her. She dreaded silence, lest with it should
come observation and remark upon the agitation and distress only too visible in Harry's countenance;
and yet it was difficult, even for her, to keep up the ball of small-talk, for Solomon was
always slow and scant of speech, and the new-comer rarely opened his mouth, and then only to
utter a monosyllable. His manner, too, was embarrassing; he turned his white and stony face
from one woman to the other, like an automaton, but with a weird and searching gaze.

They had never so much as heard his name before, for Richard had been cautious never to mention
Balfour in his letters, since they were, of course, perused by the authorities, and friendships
were not encouraged at Lingmoor; but, on the other hand, it was evident that these ladies had
an interest for the visitor. Presently, while they were yet all below stairs, arrived Charles
and Agnes, which effected, indeed, diversion enough, but also a great disturbance and alteration
for the worse in Mr. Coe's temper. No sooner, as it seemed to him, had his back been turned,
then, than the intimacy between this girl and his son, which he had strictly forbidden, had
been recommenced, and with the connivance and encouragement of his wife too, or else how should
the lad dare thus to bring her home? For the first time Solomon was openly rude to Agnes; and
the latter, being a girl of spirit, resented it by quietly rising to depart. Charley, rash
and impetuous, rose to accompany her. Solomon stormed displeasure; and it seemed that the presence
of the visitor would have been wholly inadequate to prevent a family scene, when Agnes herself
interposed with dignity. "No, Charles; I would rather go alone. If your father objects to my
presence here, it shall not be intruded; and if he considers your company a condescension,
I can not accept it upon such terms."

Charles would have taken her arm, in defiance of all consequences, and led her off under Solomon's
nose; but this opposition on her part offended him. He was almost as angry with her for thwarting
him as he was with his father. It was a triangular duel, the combatants in which were narrowly
watched by the disregarded stranger. When Agnes got her way and departed, "That's a girl of
character," observed he, with a cynical smile.

"She is a girl without a penny," answered Solomon, gloomily, with a scowl at his son, "upon
whom this young fool wishes to throw himself away."

"What! so early?" observed Mr. Balfour, good-humoredly addressing Charles. "When I was your
age, I thought of enjoying life, and not of marriage. I don't wonder, however, that any girl
should strive to enslave so handsome a young fellow as your son, Sir. It is quite natural,
and there is no need to blame her, and far less him."

Ashamed, perhaps, of having exhibited such violence of temper before his guest, Solomon was
very willing to be mollified, and grimly smiled approval of these sentiments; Charles, too,
though fully resolved to set himself right with Agnes on the morrow, was not displeased with
the visitor's remark; but the two women justly resented it as an impertinent freedom. If Charles's
thoughts had not been so preoccupied with his own wrongs--the deprivation of his Agnes's society,
which he had promised himself for the rest of the day, and the snub which he conceived she
had administered to him--he would have noticed too, for he was by no means wanting in observation,
that the new-comer's manner to his hostess and Mrs. Basil was not what it should have been.
It was not absolutely rude, but it was studiously careless of their presence. He no longer
stared at them as at first, but, on the contrary, seemed to ignore the fact of their existence--never
addressed them; and if either spoke to him, replied as briefly as possible, and then turned
at once to Solomon or his son. Mrs. Basil concluded that he was a vulgar fellow, who, having
penetration enough to discover that the males had the upper hand in the establishment, did
not give himself the trouble to conciliate the less important members of it; but Harry, always
timid and suspicious, was alarmed at him; his air had, in her eyes, something hostile in it
as well as contemptuous. She could not understand, and therefore mistrusted, the influence
he had evidently obtained over her husband, and which already had superseded that of Mrs. Basil.

That Solomon should no longer take pains to make himself agreeable to the latter, now that
he had obtained from her his object, was, to any one who knew his character, explicable enough;
but why should this stranger have taken her place as his counselor and friend? The idea of
some personal advantage was, of course, at the bottom of it; but it was clear, not only to
sage Mrs. Basil, but even to Harry--since even a moderately skillful looker-on sees more of
the game than the best player--that in any contest of wits Solomon would have small chance
with his new friend. The opinion of Mrs. Basil was, that some new speculation, in some manner
connected with the Crompton sale, had been entered into by the two men, and that Mr. Balfour
would in the end secure the oyster, while Mr. Coe was left with the shell. But Harry had darker
forebodings still; she was instinctively confident that there was enmity at work in the new-comer,
as well as the readiness common to all speculators to overreach a friend. There was a look
in his pallid face, when it glanced, as he thought unheeded, on either Charles or Solomon,
which, to her mind, boded ill. If it did so, it was certainly unsuspected by those on whom
it fell. Mr. Coe had apparently never found a companion so agreeable to him; and, curiously
enough, this idea seemed to be shared by Charles. According to his own account, Mr. Balfour
had been abroad in Western America for many years, and had there retrieved a fortune which,
originally inherited, had been speedily dissipated in the pleasures of the town. His long absence
from such scenes had by no means dulled his taste for them, and his conversation ran on little
else. He had a light rattling way with him--that, to Harry's view, resembled youthful spirit
no more than galvanism in a corpse resembles life, and which was certainly not in harmony with
his age and appearance--and very graphic powers of description; he expressed himself curious
about the changes in public amusements since he left town, near twenty years ago, and seriously
placed himself under Charles's guidance on the expeditions of pleasure for which the latter
was always ready. To this, strangely enough, Solomon made no objection, notwithstanding that
his own purse-strings had to be drawn pretty wide to supply these extravagances. His new friend
had only to suggest that he should give the lad a five-pound note to enjoy himself with, and
the thing was done at once.

As for himself, Mr. Balfour seemed to be made of money, so freely did he spend it; and if he
did not offer the use of his purse to his young companion, it was only, as he told him, because
he feared to offend his pride. "Besides," said he, when they were alone together on one of
these expeditions of amusement, from which Solomon, whose notions of enjoyment were mainly
confined to money-making, always excused himself upon pretense of having business to do, "it
is only right your father should be made to fork out; he is as rich as Croesus. It is quite
unreasonable that he should stint you in enjoyment when, one day or another, you will have
all the pleasures of life to pick and choose from."

It would have tested Solomon's new-born friendship severely if he could have heard Mr. Balfour
dilate upon this topic, which he did with such earnestness and fervor that the lad was soon
convinced of those great expectations which the cautious reticence of his parents had so long
concealed from him. On the other hand, Charley's companion deduced an argument from this fair
prospect which was not so welcome to the lad; he maintained that, under the circumstances,
it would be madness to risk his father's displeasure by uniting himself irretrievably to Agnes,
or to any other young woman. "My good offices will be always at your disposal, my lad," urged
he, gravely, "and I don't deny that, at present, I have considerable influence with Mr. Coe;
but it would not be proof against so flagrant an act of disobedience as that which you contemplate.
The great bulk of his property is at his own disposal; and his nature, if I may speak plainly
to you in so important a matter, is obstinate and implacable. At all events, there is no hurry,
since you and this charming young lady are but boy and girl at present. Life is uncertain,
and you may be your own master any day; wait till you are so, or wait for a little, at all
events, to see what may turn up; and in the mean time, lad, enjoy yourself." The last part
of Mr. Balfour's advice, at all events, was palatable enough, and that much of it Charles accepted;
in doing which, as was anticipated, the whole intention of his Mentor became fulfilled. Plunged
in dissipation, the young man thought less and less of his love; gave himself little trouble,
though he still avowed his unalterable attachment, to set himself right with her; grew more
and more dissatisfied with his own home, at the same time that that of Agnes became less and
less attractive; and, in short, he drifted away daily farther and farther from the safe moorings
of love and duty.

Harry perceived all this with a dread so deep that it even drove her to invoke her husband's
aid against this man, who, inexplicable as his hostility might be, was bent, she firmly believed,
upon the ruin of her darling boy. With Solomon, as she well knew, the fact of his son's dissipation
was not likely to move him to interfere; he saw that the companionship of Balfour was gradually
producing an estrangement between Charles and the portionless artist's daughter, and so far
he cordially approved of it, nor cared to question by what means this new friend made himself
agreeable. She had no argument available except that of expense, and, to her astonishment and
dismay, this failed to affect her prudent spouse.

"Just let things be a while," was Solomon's reply, "and mind your own business. It is quite
true the lad's throwing my money in the gutter at a fine rate; but in the end I shall get it
all back again, and more with it. This Balfour takes me for a foolish doting father, but he
shall pay for all himself before I've done with him. I throw a sprat to catch a whale; and
neither you nor any other fool shall interfere with my fishing."

Harry dared not say more; her husband had been in the worst of humors ever since he had returned
from Crompton, and was all the more brutal and tyrannical to her that he had to be civil and
conciliatory to his new friend, and involuntarily indulgent, upon his account, to Charles.
The unhappy mother was powerless to check the evil the growth of which was so patent to her
loving instinct, and there was none to whom she could look for help. Mrs. Basil had no longer
any influence with Solomon, and, besides, she was seriously ill, and had now been confined
to her own room for weeks. In her extremity, Harry had even resolved to make a personal appeal
to this man Balfour; to ask him in what her husband had injured him, to adjure him to forgive
the wrong, or at least not to visit it upon her Charley's innocent head. But she shrank with
an inexplicable terror from putting this design into effect; she felt she should humiliate
herself to no purpose; he would deny, in his cold, cynical way, that he entertained any thing
but friendship for her astute husband and affection for her bright and impulsive son. Besides,
to say truth, she was afraid to speak with the man; and she had a suspicion that this weird
and shadowy fear was in some degree shared by Mrs. Basil; at times she even imagined that it
was not so much indisposition as a desire to avoid his presence that caused the landlady to
absent herself from the family circle.

Mr. Coe, at all events, entertained no such prejudice against his guest; day by day he grew
more communicative with him, and more solicitous to hear his opinions, with which he seldom
failed to agree. The two men were in reality, as it was easy to see, as opposite in character
as the poles. Mr. Balfour was, and apparently always had been, a man of pleasure; but he had
seen men and cities, and his remarks were shrewd, and selfish, and worldly-wise enough. It
was rarely that his talk ever strayed to matters of business, so that Solomon was perforce
a listener; but that unambitious part he played to admiration.

Upon one occasion, however, their after-dinner converse happened to turn upon partnerships;
Solomon urged their great convenience, how one man brought money and the other brains, and
how pleasant it must be for the former to live at ease while the latter gathered honey for
him, both for present use and for the wintry store. He rose with the familiar subject to quite
a flight of poetry.

Mr. Balfour, with half-shut eves and a mocking smile, dilated upon the sentiment involved in
such communities of enterprise, the sympathy engendered by them, and the happy social effects
that were produced by them. His host either did not, or would not, perceive that these remarks
were ironical, and pursued the subject to its details, proportions of profits, balance-sheets,
etc., until Charles rose with a yawn, and left his two elders together.

"Well, Balfour," said Solomon, frankly, as soon as they were alone, "this talk reminds me of
the matter that first introduced us to one another--your purchase of that outlying bit of the
Crompton property, Wheal Danes."

"Ay," replied the other, carelessly lighting another cigar. It was quite wonderful to see how
many cigars Mr. Balfour got through daily; you might have almost thought that he had been denied
tobacco for years by his physician, and had only just been permitted to resume the habit.

"Yes; you disappointed me there immensely, I must confess. I went down to the sale on purpose
to secure it."

"So you told me, or, at least, so I guessed from your manner; and yet I don't know why you
should have been so sweet upon it. It's only a bare bit of ground with a round hole in it,
close by the sea."

"That's all," said Solomon, puffing at his clay pipe. "What on earth could have made you buy it?"

"Well, I told you once. I lost my yacht off Turlock, when coming to England last autumn, and
very nearly my life with it. When one escapes with a whole skin from such a storm as wrecked
me there, the first piece of dry land one comes to seems very attractive. I happened to be
cast ashore beneath that very spot, and so I took a fancy to it. If I had been a good Papist
I should have built a chapel there to my patron saint in gratitude for my preservation; as
it was, I resolved to erect a villa for myself there. It will have an excellent view, and the
situation is healthy. If you seek for any other reason for the purchase, I have none to give
you; it was a whim, if you like, but then I can afford to indulge my whims."

"This one cost you a good deal, however; you gave five hundred pounds for it, did you not?"

Balfour nodded assent.

"A great sum for a few barren acres," said Solomon, thoughtfully.

"Yes; and so the trustees of the estate thought, Mr. Coe. They closed with my offer sharp enough,
and withdrew the lot from public competition; else, perhaps, I should have got it cheaper."

"Not if I had been bidding against you," observed the host, significantly.

"You don't say so! You were never shipwrecked thereabouts, were you? Oh, I remember: you were
brought up in the neighborhood. You had some tender recollection of the spot, perhaps, with
relation to madame up stairs. What creatures of sentiment you men of business sometimes are--dear
me!"

"I did live near the spot," said Solomon, slowly, "though I should deceive you if I pretended
that that had any thing to do with my wish to possess it."

"You would not deceive me, my good friend," answered Balfour, coolly; "but, as you were about
to say, it would not be frank. Let us be frank and open, above all things."

"I wish to be so, I assure you," was Solomon's meek reply. "When I offered you a hundred pounds
for your bargain, I think I showed you that deception was no part of my nature. In all matters
of business I always go straight to the point at once."

"As in the present instance, for example," remarked the guest, with an imperturbable smile.

"I am coming to the point, Mr. Balfour--once for all. I will give you a thousand pounds down
for that Crompton lot--twice the money that you gave for it within a month; that's twelve hundred
per cent, per annum."

Balfour shook his head. "I am not a religious man, my dear Sir--far from it. But I believe,
like Miss Joanna yonder, in inspirations: all my whims are inspirations, and therefore sacred.
It was an inspiration that made me buy Wheal Danes, and I mean to keep it. If you offered me
ten thousand pounds, I'd keep it."

Solomon was silent for a while, his heavy brows knit in thought; then once again he advanced
to the attack. "You may keep it, and yet share the profit, Mr. Balfour."

"The profit?"

"Ay, the profit. I told you I was going to be frank with you, but you would never guess how
frank. I am about to put thousands a year into your pocket, on condition that you will let
me fill my own at the same rate. We were talking of partnerships just now; let us be partners
in Wheal Danes."

"Balfour and Coe sounds natural enough," returned the other, coolly. "But I must hear your plan."

"My plan is a secret--invaluable, indeed, as such--but which, once told, will be worth nothing--that
is, to me."

"You may do as you like, my friend, about revealing it," yawned Mr. Balfour. "I care nothing
for your plan; only, until I hear it I stick to my plot, my lot, my acreage. Tell me the whole
story without reservation--don't attempt to deceive me on the slightest point--and then you
shall have your way. We will divide this land of gold between us, or, as seems to me much more
likely, browse like twin donkeys on its crop of thistles."

"I have nothing but your bare word to trust to," said Solomon, doubtfully; "but still, I must
risk it. Come, it's a bargain. Then, here's my hand upon it."

"Never mind my hand, my good friend," returned the other, coolly. "In the part of the world
from which I hailed last, folks didn't shake hands, and I've fallen out of the habit. Come,
give us this story of Wheal Danes."

"It's a very old one, Mr. Balfour. The plot of ground you purchased gets its strange name from
an ancient tin mine that is comprised in it, once worked by the Romans, but disused since their
time. There are many such in Cornwall."

"So I've heard," said Balfour, while the other sipped his glass. It was curious to contrast
the grave and earnest manner of the host with the careless and uninterested air of his guest,
who presently, as the narrative proceeded, leaned his face upon his hand and gazed into the
fire, an occasional glance sideways at his companion through his fingers alone testifying that
his attention was still preserved. He never stirred a limb nor winked an eyelid when Solomon
came out with his great secret.

"This mine that is said to be worked out, Mr. Balfour, and which you have purchased by mere
accident, as being in the same lot with your proposed building-ground, will, I have reason
to believe, turn out a gold mine."

"You don't say so! I did not know that there was gold in Cornwall."

"There is as good, or at least there are metals that bring gold--tin and copper; and Wheal
Danes is full of the latter. The old Romans worked it for tin only, and left their prize just
as it was getting to be worth having. There's a copper vein in the lowest level of that mine
that may be worth all the old Carew estate."

"And you have seen this vein?"

"No; but my wife's father, John Trevethick, as good a judge as any man on earth, or under it,
saw it, and told me of its existence on his death-bed--"

"When did he die, and how? Was it a lingering, painful death, or was he struck down suddenly?"
interposed Balfour. "I ask," added he, hastily, for Solomon looked up in wonder at his companion's
vehemence, "because the credibility of such a story as you tell me would depend upon the state
of the man's brain."

"He did die a painful and a lingering death, but his wits were clear enough," answered Solomon.
"It was ten years ago, and more, but I mind it as well as though it was but yesterday--indeed,
I've thought of little else since. 'The best legacy I have to leave you, Sol, lies in these
last words of mine,' said he; 'so do you listen, and lay them to heart.' Then he told me how,
as a boy, he had once explored Wheal Danes in play with other boys, and found the copper lode
in a certain spot. He was not so young even then but that he knew the value of such a find,
and he had held his tongue; and though he visited the place pretty often--for he couldn't help
that--he kept the secret close from that time until his death."

"He had never told any other person but yourself, you think?" inquired Balfour, curiously.

"No one to speak of. There was one fellow who had an inkling of the thing, it seems, but he
is dead now. I read of it in the newspaper quite lately. He died in jail, or rather in escaping
from it, and had never been in a position to profit by his suspicion. You may say, in fact,
that not a living soul besides John Trevethick ever knew this secret. For fifty years he strove
to possess himself of this mine; he even offered for it, valueless as it was thought to be,
four times the money you did; only Carew was mad and obstinate; and now, for ten years, I have
had my own eyes fixed upon it, and got the earliest news of when it was in the market, as I
thought, when, here, without a hint to guide you, a whiff of fortune blows it to your hand.
It's a hard case I call it--devilish hard."

"Well, it is hard," said Balfour; "that is, supposing all you say is true. But frankly, my
good Sir, I don't believe you. I mean no offense; but, since you have not seen the lode with
your own eyes, you must pardon me for doubting its existence."

"Well, then, Sir, I have seen it, and that's the long and short of it. I would not take such
a thing on trust from an angel."

"So I suspected," observed Balfour, coolly. "But as you have told me one lie you may tell me
another. What am I to believe now?"

"The mine is yours, Sir," answered Solomon, gruffly. "Let us go down together and look at it.
If Trevethick and I were mistaken--and I'll bet you a thousand pounds that we were not--it
is but coming back again, and--"

"And being made the laughing-stock of all the folks among whom I mean to spend my days," interrupted
Balfour. "No, no. If we go, I'll not have a soul to know of it. And mind you, if this turns
out to be a mare's nest, I sha'n't be pleased, my friend."

"It will not do that, Sir, you may take my word for it," answered Solomon, earnestly; "and
as for going incog., that matter's easy. I can start for Gethin, which is my home, and but
a stone's-throw from the very place, on pretense of business; and you, a day or two after,
may come down to the inn at Turlock, just to see your purchase. We need not be so much as seen
together, if you so prefer it."

"I would much prefer it," observed Balfour, sententiously.

"Very good. Then here's my plan: my father-in-law used to visit Wheal Danes at night; from
his doing so, instead of its drawing dangerous attention to the place, as one would think,
the rumor arose that the old mine was haunted; corpse-candles, with no hand to carry them,
were seen there going up and down the levels, and so the poor fools shunned it after dark.
Well, let us take torch and ladder, and play at corpse-candle. What say you?"

"Well, I'll come," said Balfour, reluctantly, "though I don't much like the chance of being
made a fool of. What day will suit you best to start? All's one to me."

"I'll start to-morrow," said Solomon, with excitement. "Do you come down, as if into Midlandshire,
on Friday: that's an unlucky day with Turlock folk, but not with you, I reckon?"

"You're right there, man," answered Balfour, slowly. "Well?"

"On Saturday, at midnight, I will meet you at the old pit's mouth. Come, there's my hand upon it."

This time Balfour took his companion's hand, and griped it firmly.

"Then, that's a bargain, partner," cried Solomon, gayly. "Fill up your glass. Here's luck to
the old mine!"

"Here's luck," echoed Balfour, looking steadily at his host, "and to our next merry midnight
meeting!"

"Ay, good! Here's luck!" quoth Solomon.

CHAPTER XLI.

IN THE TOILS.

Solomon started for Gethin on the ensuing morning; but his wife did not, as usual, find his
departure a relief, since Balfour remained behind. Her last instructions from her husband were
to treat this unwelcome guest with marked consideration, and to let him have his way in every
thing. He also hinted, though it was scarcely necessary to insure her obedience, at certain
brilliant prospects which were about to present themselves, through Balfour's means, if he
were only kept in good-humor. Harry would have much preferred to relinquish his favor at the
price of his absence; but not so her son. Notwithstanding the disparity in their ages, he and
this new acquaintance were already fast friends. The latter had laid himself out to please
the lad, and had succeeded; partly, perhaps, from the very novelty of companionship, for Charley
knew no one in town, and was tired of taking his pleasure therein alone, but chiefly through
his store of agreeable anecdotes, all illustrative of the enjoyments which wealth conferred,
with which Balfour tickled his ears.

"In a few years--perhaps sooner, who knows?--all these things of which I speak will be within
your own means. You will be rich; and he who is so can please himself in almost every thing.
You can then marry your Agnes, if you will, without fear of being disinherited; or, what is
better and more likely, you may choose from a score of Agneses, or even take them all."

He had a light amusing way with him, this Balfour, that hid the cynicism which would otherwise
have jarred upon his young companion; for Charles, though selfish and fond of pleasure, was
good-natured, and had not reached that period of life when our sherry must needs not only be
dry, but have bitters in it. He was genuinely fond of his mother; yet even in this short time
Balfour, as she well knew, had taught him to disobey her; not setting her at open defiance,
indeed, but regarding her advice and remonstrances with a sort of tender contempt. She meant
all for his good, his Mentor admitted, but women had not much knowledge of the world; and if
a young man was not to be his own master at eighteen, he must look to be in leading-strings
all his life. Harry perceived her darling's plastic nature changing daily for the worse in
the hands of this crafty potter; and though it was an admission humiliating to her, as a mother,
to make, she made it to Mrs. Basil in her sick-room.

"Mr. Balfour is doing my Charley harm," she said. "He is an altered boy already, and yet my
husband talks as though we are never to be rid of the man. What money, what gain, can ever
compensate for the demoralization of our child?"

"Nothing, indeed," said Mrs. Basil, quietly. "But have a little patience. Is not this gentleman
going on Friday?"

"Yes; but he will come back again. It is only some business that calls him into Midlandshire.
He does not even take all his luggage away. I have a great mind to tell him point-blank that
his presence in this house--at all events in Mr. Coe's absence--is unwelcome; but I dare not
do it; I am afraid."

"Yes, your husband would be very angry, without doubt," said Mrs. Basil, thoughtfully.

"That is not it. I am afraid of the man himself. He reminds me of that hateful creature--what
is he?--in the opera, for which Mr. Aird gave us the tickets, and which Agnes went with us
to see--Mephistopheles."

"What a strange fancy! He is only a sour, pleasure-jaded man. If I was not so ill I would speak
to him myself; but you are right not to do so; that is your husband's place, who has brought
him here. Let things be as they are till Friday."

Harry sighed, but perforce assented. Friday came, and Mr. Balfour went as he had designed,
but not without stating at breakfast his intention of returning on the ensuing Monday or Tuesday
at latest, and even making an engagement with Charley to spend the latter evening with him
at the theatre.

"Do you happen to know when my husband will be home?" inquired Harry, timidly.

"No, madam. He was good enough to say, however, that his absence was to make no difference
as to my remaining here as his guest."

This reply, which might easily have been made offensive, was delivered with the most studied
courtesy: it cut the hostess's ground from under her; for it had answered the very objection
which she had intended to imply. She felt herself not only defeated, but reproved.

"Let us hope you will both return together," said she.

"I do not think that very probable," answered Mr. Balfour, slowly.

An hour later and he had departed, his hostess, under pretense of being engaged with her sick
friend up stairs, not having so much as shaken his hand. Charles, indignant at this slight,
would have accompanied him to the railway station, but Balfour would not hear of it. For this
he had two reasons: in the first place, he was anxious to keep his route secret; and secondly,
it was a part of his system to give the young man no sort of trouble or inconvenience on his
account. He wished every association that linked them together to be one of pleasure.

Mrs. Basil, as we have said, had not made her appearance that morning below stairs; she was,
in fact, no better, but rather worse: that news from Lingmoor, outwardly borne so well, had
shaken her to the core. Still, no sooner had Balfour left than she made shift to rise, and
even came down to dinner. She discussed with Charley, who had a considerable regard for her,
the character of their late guest--not with hostility, as his mother was wont to do, but with
the air of one who asks for information, and has confidence in the verdict which she seeks.
The lad, flattered by this implied compliment to his sagacity, answered her questions readily
enough. He praised his friend, of course, and thought he praised him even when he spoke ill
of him. He repeated his pungent sayings, and served up his anecdotes--such of them as were
adapted, at least, for the ears of the ladies--anew. By this means he hoped to bring his hearers
to a better opinion of so capital a fellow; and in Mrs. Basil's case he apparently succeeded.
His mother still reiterated her opinion that Mr. Balfour was a dangerous personage, and not
a fit companion for any young man. Charles smiled at this, for it was the almost literal fulfillment
of a prophecy which Balfour had made to him, and believed in that gentleman's sagacity, accordingly,
more than ever. Women were so ludicrously prejudiced; the fact of Mrs. Basil's--"the white
witch"--not being so was an exception that proved the rule. She had been evidently interested
in his anecdotes, of one of which she had even requested to hear the particulars twice over;
not that, in his own judgment, it was the best, but, being of a weird sort, it had probably
struck her fancy. It had lost in the telling, too--for he did not pretend to have the gift
of narrative, as Mr. Balfour had--and his mother had seen in the story in question nothing at all.

Mrs. Basil came down stairs no more after that evening. She grew worse and worse, and was not
only confined to her room, but to her bed. Harry was not much with her; she seized with avidity
this opportunity of being alone with Charley to undo, as far as she could, Mr. Balfour's work
with him. This was not hard, for the boy was a creature of impulse, and swayed for good or
ill with equal ease. But she discovered that it would be useless to attempt henceforth to conceal
from him the nature of his future prospects. He was now firmly convinced that he was the heir
to a large fortune, and she regretted too late that she had left the disclosure to a stranger.
What grieved her much more, and with reason, was that an attempt which she now made to bring
the influence of Agnes to hear upon him proved unsuccessful; the girl resolutely refused to
come to the house in the absence of its master, and contrary, as she knew, to his express commandment.
Charley himself, too, whose visits to Mr. Aird's studio had been intermitted for some time,
was received in Soho with coldness. It was not in Harry's nature to understand this independence
of spirit, and she deeply deplored it on her son's account. She had looked to this young girl
to be his guardian angel, and had never anticipated that she could possibly decline to watch
over a charge so precious. She would not allow, even to herself, that her son's own conduct
was as much the cause of this as her husband's ill favor; but she saw in it, clearly enough,
the mark of the cloven hoof, the work of Balfour.

Sick Mrs. Basil could give her small comfort, though she did not attempt to defend their late
visitor, as she had so unwarrantably appeared to do when discussing him with Charley.

"The man is gone, my dear," said she, wearily; "perhaps he may never come back: let us not
meet troubles half-way. Charley has a kind, good heart"--for "the white witch" showed great
favor to the lad at all times--"and all will come right at last."

She seemed too ill and weary to argue the matter, and Harry left her, as she thought, to repose.
No sooner was she gone, however, than the closed lids of Mrs. Basil were opened wide, and revealed
a sleepless and unutterable woe. Her sharp, pinched face showed pain and fear. Her parched
lips muttered unceasingly words like these, which were, perhaps, the ravings of her fevered
brain: "I am sure of it now, quite sure; those stags, those stags! There is no room for hope.
His heart has become a stone, which no power can soften. It is no use to speak, or rather I
am like one in a dream who watches murder done, and can not cry out."

CHAPTER XLII.

THE MINE AT MIDNIGHT.

Mr. Balfour--for so we must call him now, since he is attired respectably, travels first-class,
and, moreover, even looks like a gentleman--did not go to the Midlands, as he had given out
was his purpose, but took his ticket to Plymouth, to which place the railway had just extended
in those days. He bought neither book nor newspaper, but sat in the corner, with his hat drawn
over his eyes, for the whole nine hours, thinking. From Plymouth he posted to Turlock, where
he arrived late at night, and without having broken fast since morning. He took no pains either
to divulge or conceal his name; he asked no questions, nor was asked any except "whether he
preferred to sleep between sheets or blankets"--for Turlock was still an out-of-the-way region,
and the little inn about three-quarters of a century behind our modern caravansaries, with
their "daily fly-bills" and "electric bells."

After dinner, which he scarcely touched, he wandered out--it was his habit to do so, as he
told the hostler, who was also the night-chamberlain--and did not return till long after midnight.
He observed, as he gave the man half a crown for sitting up for him to so late an hour, that
the moon looked very fine upon the sea.

"You must be a painter, I guess, Sir," said the hostler, with a grin of intelligence.

"Why?" asked Balfour, sharply. "What makes you think that?"

"Well, Sir," returned the man, apologetically, "I mean no offense; but it is always the gentlemen-painters--or,
at least, so they say at Gethin, and I wish more of 'em came here--as is so free with their
money, and so fond of the moon."

"Lunatics, eh?" said the new arrival, with a loud, quick laugh. "Well, I'm no painter, my friend."

Then he took his candle and retired to his room, but not to bed. He disarranged the bed-clothes
and rumpled the pillow; then walked softly to and fro in his slippers until morning. On the
following day he made no attempt to visit his newly acquired property, but strolled about the
harbor, or stood, in sheltered and, therefore, secluded places in the rocks, watching the winter
sea. His meals at the inn were sent down almost as they were served up, yet he showed no sign
of weakness or fatigue, but in the evening sallied forth as before. The night was very cloudy,
with driving showers, and the landlady good-naturedly warned him of the danger of venturing
on the cliff-path, which was narrow, and had been broken in places by a late storm.

"I will take care," said he, mechanically.

"Perhaps you would like supper--some cold meat, or something--since you have eaten so little,
placed in your sitting-room against your return?"

"Yes, yes," said he, approvingly; "you are right; I shall doubtless be hungry to-night." Then
he went out into the bleak, black night.

He hung about the harbor as before until near eleven, when all the lights of the little town
had faded away, save that at the inn, which was burning for him alone; then he climbed the
cliff, and pushed southward along the very path against the dangers of which he had been cautioned.
He walked fast, too, with his gaze fixed before him, like one who has an appointment of importance
for which there is a fear of being late. Presently he struck inland over the down, when he
began to move less quickly, and to peer cautiously before him. All was dark: the grass on which
he trod seemed to be black, until he suddenly arrived at a large circular patch of it which
was black, and made the surrounding soil less sombre by contrast. This was the mouth of a great
pit; and he sat on the brink of it, with his face to seaward, and his ear in his hollowed hand,
listening. Nothing was to be heard, however, but the occasional scud of the rain, and the ceaseless
roar of the now distant waves. Far out to sea there was a round red light, which fell upon
him at regular intervals, its absence making the place which it had filled more dark than elsewhere.
It had a weird effect, as though some evil spirit was keeping watch upon him, but he knew it
for what it was--the revolving lamp of a light-house. Presently, in the same direction as the
red light, he perceived a white one, which, though moving slowly, was certainly advancing toward
him; nor did it, like the other, become obscure.

"He is coming," said Balfour to himself, with a great sigh. He had begun to have doubts of
the other's keeping his appointment; though, indeed, it was not yet the time that he had himself
fixed for it. The light came on, quite close to the ground, and with two motions--across as
well as along. It was that of a lantern, which guided thus the footsteps of a tall, stout man,
who bore upon his shoulders a ladder so long that it both projected above his head and trailed
behind him. Balfour rose up, and stood motionless in the path of the new-comer till this light
fell full upon him. "Hollo!" cried the man, a little startled by the white, worn face that
so suddenly confronted him, although he had been looking for it. "Is that you, Mr. Balfour?"

"Yes. Hush! There is no need to mention names."

"Quite true, Sir; but you gave me quite a turn," remonstrated the other, "coming out of the
darkness like a ghost. This Wheal Danes, at midnight, puts queer thoughts into one's head."

"John Trevethick was not afraid of coming here," observed Balfour.

"Well, so he always said. He told me at the last that he only pretended to believe in any of
the foolish stories that folks talk about, and in favor of which he used to argue. But he's
dead and gone, and that don't make this place less uncanny. Nobody since his time has been
a-near it; they think he haunts the pit, it seems, so every body gives it a wide berth, both
night and day. We shall see, however, and pretty soon, I hope, whether that notion can not
be got over. Why, in six months' time we ought to have a hundred men at work here."

"Let us hope so. But in the mean time you say nobody comes here even in the daytime, eh?"

"Never. The place lies out of the way, you see: about midway between the cliff-path and the road."

"That's well," said Balfour, mechanically. "And you have not been babbling to any one of our
prospects, Mr. Coe--nor of me, I hope?"

"Certainly not, Sir; that was the first article of our partnership, as I understood. Not a
soul at Gethin has heard a whisper of Wheal Danes, or of your coming; they think I'm fast asleep
at my own house, this instant. But it's been hard work lugging this cursed ladder up here in
such a breakneck night as this, I can tell you, and I am glad enough to rest a bit."

"Well, it's all over now, Mr. Coe."

"Except that I have got to take it back again," grumbled Solomon.

"True, I had forgotten that. We must not leave it here, must we?"

"Of course not. I do not complain of the trouble, however, only you must admit I've kept my
tryst under some little difficulties, eh, partner?" and Solomon chuckled self-approval.

"You will be paid in full for all, my good Sir," answered Balfour, gravely; "that is," he added,
hastily, "if the mine should turn out as you predict. How deep is it? That ladder of yours
will surely never reach the bottom."

"No, indeed. Did I not tell you that there are three levels, each about the same depth? The
copper lode lies at the bottom of the last, in the northeastern corner. You will find I have
concealed nothing from you. Well, I have got my breath again now. Are you ready, Mr. Balfour?"

"Quite; but walk slowly, I beg, for your lantern is very dim."

"Yes, yes. But wait a minute; I came here yesterday and hid something." Solomon seated himself
upon the edge of the pit, with his legs hanging over, and began to peer and feel about him.

"Take care what you are at," cried Balfour, eagerly; "you may slip down and kill yourself,
sliding along like that."

Solomon laughed contemptuously. "Never fear, Sir; I have had too many mischances with mines
to fear them. I have fallen down worse places, and been shut up in others far deeper and darker
than Wheal Danes, without food or candle, for a week, and yet lived through it. The shaft has
not yet been dug, I reckon, as will prove--Oh, here's the torch."

He dragged from under the overhanging rim of the pit a piece of wood like a bludgeon, one end
of which was smeared with pitch; and placing the lantern with its back to the wind, pushed
the stick inside, which came out a torch, flaming and dropping flame.

"There's our corpse-candle!" cried Coe, triumphantly; "that would keep us without witnesses,
even if any one were so bold as, in a night like this, to venture near Wheal Danes, to trespass
on Tom Tiddler's ground, where we shall pick up the gold and the silver." There was a wild
excitement, quite foreign to his habit, about this man, and he whirled the torch about his
head in flaring circles.

"Keep your wits steady, if you please," observed Balfour, sternly.

"It is over now, Sir, and I am in the counting-house again," answered Solomon, submissively.
"I felt a little exhilarated at the prospect of plucking a fruit that has been ripening for
fifty years, that's all. This Wheal Danes is the very aloe of mines, and it is about to blossom
for us only. You had better take the torch yourself; the lantern will serve for me; but just
show a light here while I place the ladder."

Balfour held the blazing pine aloft, and disclosed the gaping mouth of the old pit, its margin
wet with the rain, and its sheer sides slippery with the damps of ages.

"It would be easy enough to get down without this contrivance," observed Solomon, grimly, as
he carefully adjusted the ladder, the foot of which was lost in gloom; "but it would take us
some trouble to find our way back again without wings."

"In daylight, however, I dare say it looks easier," said Balfour, carelessly.

"It may look so, but it ain't. Nothing but a sea-gull ever goes in and out of Wheal Danes;
even the bats keep there, where indeed they are snug and warm enough."

"It doesn't feel very warm at present," replied the other, who did not seem to be in a hurry
to explore this unpromising territory.

"Ay, but you wait till we get to the lower level; you might live there, if the rats would let
you, for a whole winter, and never need a fire."

"Oh, there are rats, are there? Why, what do they live upon?"

"Well, that's their look-out," laughed Solomon; "they would be very glad to have us, no doubt.
It would be only just in my case, for I have lived on them before now; with rats and water
a man may do very well for a week or two."

"What! there is water laid on in this establishment, is there?"

"No; the low levels are quite dry. But come, let us see for ourselves. We are losing time.
I will start first, and do you follow close upon me, but without treading on my fingers;" and
Solomon placed his heavy foot upon the first rung.

"No, no," said Balfour, drawing back; "I will not trust myself on the same ladder with a man
of your weight. When you are at the bottom give me a call, and then I'll join you."

"As you like, Sir," responded Solomon, civilly; but his thick lips curled contemptuously, and
he muttered, "So this man is lily-livered after all; so much the better: it is well to have
a coward for a partner."

The next moment his descending form was lost in the gloom.

Balfour waited, torch in hand, until an "All right," that sounded like a voice from the tomb,
assured him that his companion had reached terra firma. Then he descended very carefully, and
joined him.

"Stand close to the wall, Sir, while I move the ladder," said Coe; "your head don't seem made
for these deep places. Ah, here's the spot. This is a drop of twenty feet."

"And what is the depth of the last level?"

"Five-and-twenty. But don't you be afraid; the ladder will just reach it, only you won't have
so much to hold on by at the top. It's only the getting down that's unpleasant; you'll find
going back quite easy work. And then, just think of the lode!"

Solomon began to be anxious lest his companion's fears should induce him to give up the expedition
altogether. It had never entered into his mind that what was so easy to himself could prove
so formidable to another; and, besides, he had somehow concluded that Balfour was a man of
strong nerves.

"Make haste," said the latter, in the tone of one who has achieved some mental victory: "let
us go through with it."

In the second level it was perceptibly warmer. Dark, noiseless objects began to flit about
the torch, and once something soft struck against Balfour's foot, and then scampered away.

He looked behind him, and not a trace of light was to be discerned, while before him was impenetrable
gloom, except for the feeble gleam of his companion's lantern. Above him the roof was just
discernible, from which long strings of fungi, white and clammy, hung down and brushed against
his face as he moved slowly forward.

"Come on!" said Solomon, impatiently, whose spirits seemed to rise in this familiar scene.
"We are only a few score yards from Golconda."

Balfour stopped short. "I thought you said there was another level?" There was a strange look
of disappointment in his face, and even of rage.

"Yes, yes, and here it is," cried the other, putting down the ladder, which he had carried
from place to place. "It is only depth that separates us from it. They dug well, those Romans,
but left off, as you shall see, upon the very threshold of fortune. You have only to be a little
careful, because the ladder does not quite reach."

He descended, as before, in advance, while Balfour followed slowly and cautiously. "How steep
and smooth the rock is!" observed he, examining its surface.

"Yes, indeed; it is like a wall of marble. But what matters that? It baffles the rats, but
not us. Here is the land of gold, here is--What the devil are you at?"

Solomon, in his impatience, had stridden on to the object of his desires; and Balfour, halting
midway in his descent, suddenly retraced his footsteps, and having reached the top, was dragging
the ladder up after him.

Solomon heard this noise, with which his ear was familiar, and his tone had some alarm in it
as he cried out, "I say, no tricks, Mr. Balfour."

There was no reply. He hastened back to the spot he had just left, and from thence could dimly
perceive his late companion sitting on the verge of the steep wall, peering down upon him.

"Come, come, a joke is a joke," remonstrated Coe. "What a fellow you are to be at such games
when an important matter is at stake! Why, here is the lode, man."

"It is very valuable, I dare say, Mr. Coe, but it is worth more to one man than to two."

"Great Heaven! what do you mean?" cried Solomon, while a sudden sweat bedewed his forehead.
"You would not murder a man to dissolve a partnership?"

"Certainly not. I shall leave him to die, that's all. He and the rats will have to settle it
together. Six months hence, perhaps, we may have a picnic here, and explore the place. Then
we shall find, where you are now standing, some well-picked bones and the metal part of your
lantern. That will cause quite an excitement; and we shall search further, and in the northeast
corner there will be found a copper lode. I will take your word for that."

"Mr. Balfour, I am sure you will not do this," pleaded the wretched man. "It is not in man's
nature to treat a fellow-creature with such barbarity. You are trying to frighten me, I know,
and I own you have succeeded. I know what it is to be shut up in desolate, dark places alone,
out of reach of succor; and even for eight-and-forty hours or so it is terrible."

"What must it be, then, to suffer so for twenty years?"

It was a third voice that seemed to wake the echoes of that lonesome cavern. Solomon looked
up in terror, and beheld a third face, that of Robert Balfour, but transfigured. He held the
glowing brand above him, so that his deep-lined features could be distinctly seen, and they
were all instinct with a deadly rage and malice. There was a fire in his eyes that might well
have been taken for that of madness, and Solomon's heart sank within him as he looked.

"Mr. Balfour," said he, in a coaxing voice, "come and look at your treasure. It sparkles in
the light of my lantern like gold, and you shall have it all if you please; I do not wish to
share it with you."

"So you take me for a madman, do you? Look again; look fixedly upon me, Solomon Coe. You do
not recognize me even yet? I do not wonder. It is not you that are dull, but I that am so changed
by wrong and misery. My own mother does not know me, nor the woman of whom you robbed me nineteen
years ago. Yes, you know me now. I am Richard Yorke!"

"Mercy, mercy!" gasped Solomon, dropping on his knees.

Richard laughed long and loud. The echoes of his ghastly mirth died slowly away, and when his
voice was heard again it was stern and solemn. "It is my turn at last, man; I am the judge
to-day, as you were the witness nineteen years ago who doomed me wrongfully to shame and misery.
Night and day I have had this hour in my mind; the thought of it has been my only joy--in chains
and darkness, in toil and torment, fasting and wakeful on my prison pillow, I have thought
of nothing else. I did not know how it would come about, but I was sure that it would come.
You swore falsely once that I was a thief; I am now about to be a murderer, and your whitening
bones will not be able to witness against me."

"I never swore it, Mr. Yorke," pleaded Solomon, passionately.

"Your memory is defective," answered Richard, gloomily; "you forget that I was in court myself
on that occasion. You did your very worst to blacken me before judge and jury, and you succeeded."

"But it was Trevethick--it was father-in-law who urged me to do it; it was indeed."

"I know it," replied the other, coldly; "he was a greater villain than yourself, but unhappily
an older one. Death has robbed me of him, and made my vengeance incomplete. Still there is
something left for me. While you die slowly here--But no; I shall wait at Turlock for that
to happen. A strong man like you, who have rats to live upon, may last ten days, perhaps. Well,
when you are dead, I shall return to your London house, and lead your son to ruin. You permitted
me to begin the work in hopes of getting half this mine; I shall finish it while you are in
sole possession of the whole of it."

"Devil!" cried Solomon, furiously.

"The appellation is a true one, my good Sir; but I was a man once. Evil is now my good, thanks
to your teaching. Look at me--look at me, and see what you have brought me to at eight-and-thirty!
You almost drove me mad, and it was easy, for I had the Carew blood in my veins; but I contrived
to keep my wits for the enjoyment of this hour. I feel very old, and have few pleasures left,
you see. It is impossible, unfortunately, to return here and see you rot; there would be danger
in it; just the least risk in the world of somebody coming here to look for us. I must be off
now, too, for there is a worthy man sitting up for me at the inn, and I have got to take this
ladder back to Gethin."

A cry of mingled rage and despair burst forth from Richard's foe.

"What! you had calculated upon the absence of that ladder producing suspicion? It is curious
how great wits jump together: that had also struck me. I shall take it back, for I well know
where it ought to be; I am quite familiar with your house at Gethin, as you may remember, perhaps.
You may keep the lantern, which will not be missed; but, if you will take my advice, you will
put out the light, to preserve the candle--as an article of food. Put it somewhere where the
rats can not eat it, and it may prolong your torments half a day. You can also eat the horn
of the lantern, but you will doubtless preserve that for a bonne bouche. You are not superstitious,
else I would suggest that your father-in-law's spirit is exceedingly likely to haunt that northeastern
corner down yonder."

Here there was a dull scrambling noise, a violent struggle as of feet and hands against a wall,
and then a heavy thud.

"Now that is very foolish of you, Solomon, to attempt to get out of a place which you yourself
informed me could never be escaped from without wings. I sincerely hope you have not hurt yourself
much. I hear you moving slowly about again, so I may leave you without anxiety. Good-by, Solomon."
Richard waited a moment, a frightful figure of hate and triumph, peering down into the pit
beneath, where all was now dark. "You are too proud to speak to a convict, perhaps. Well, well,
that is but natural in so honest a man. I take my leave, then. You have no message, I conclude,
for home?"

An inarticulate cry, like that of a wild animal caught in a snare, was the only reply.

"That is the worst of letting his candle go out," mused Richard, aloud; "some rat has got hold
of him already." Then, with a steady foot and smiling face, which showed how all his previous
fears had been assumed, he retraced his steps, and mounted to the upper air. The sky was clearer
now; and, casting the torch, for which he had no further need, far into the mine, and shouldering
the ladder, he started for Gethin at good speed. It was past two o'clock before he reached
his inn at Turlock; but before he retired to rest he sat down to the supper that had been prepared
for him, but without the appetite which he had anticipated.

CHAPTER XLIII.

THE SMOKING-ROOM OF THE GEORGE AND VULTURE.

Robert Balfour did not remain at Turlock, as he had originally intended. Perhaps the vicinity
to Wheal Danes was not so attractive to him as he had promised himself that it would be, although
not for a single instant did his purpose of revenge relax. Other considerations, had he needed
them, were powerful, now that he had taken the first step, to keep him on that terrible path
which he had so long marked out for himself. To disclose the position of his victim now would
have been not only to make void his future plans, but to place his own fate at Solomon's mercy.
Yet he found his heart less hard than the petrifaction it had undergone, the constant droppings
of wrong and hardship for twenty years, should have rendered it. He did not wake until late,
and the first sound that broke upon his ear was the tinkling of the bell of the little church,
for it was Sunday morning. He compared it for a moment with something that he had been dreaming
of: a man in a well chipping footsteps for himself in the brick wall, up which he climbed a
few feet, and then fell down again. Then a pitiful, unceasing cry of "Help, help!--help, help!"
rang in his ears, instead of the voice that called people to prayers. Even when that ceased,
the wind and rain--for the weather was wild and wet--beating against the window-pane, brought
with them doleful shrieks. Sometimes a sudden gust seemed to bear upon it confused voices and
the tramp of hurrying feet; and then he would knit his brow and clench his hand, with the apprehension
that they had found his enemy, and were bringing him to the door. Not the slightest fear of
the consequences to himself in such a case agitated his mind; he had quite resolved what to
do, and that no prison walls should ever hem him in again; but the bare idea that Solomon should
escape his vengeance drove him to the brink of frenzy. He would have left the place at once,
but that he thought the coincidence of his departure with the disappearance of his foe might
possibly awaken suspicion; so he staid on through the day, waiting for the news which he knew
must arrive sooner or later. At noon he thought the landlady wore an unusually grave air, and
he felt impelled to ask her what was the matter. But then, if there was nothing--if she only
looked sour, as folks often did, just because it was Sunday--she might think him too curious.

From his window, a little later, he saw a knot of people in the rain talking eagerly together,
and one of them pointing with his hand toward Gethin. But they were too far off to be overheard,
and he did not dare go down and interrogate them. It was his object to appear utterly indifferent
to local affairs, and as a total stranger. He felt half stifled within doors, and yet, if he
should go out, he knew that he would be incontrollably impelled to take the cliff path that
he had followed the preceding night, to watch that nobody came near the place that held his
prey, and thereby, like the bird who shows her nest by keeping guard too near, attract attention.
The tidings for which he waited came at six o'clock, just as he was sitting down to his dinner.
The parlor-maid who served him had that happy and excited look which the possession of news,
whether it be good or bad, but especially the latter, always imparts to persons of her class.

"There's strange news come from Gethin, Sir," said she, as she arranged the dishes.

"Indeed," said Balfour, carelessly, though he felt his brain spin round and his heart stop
at the same moment. "What is it?"

"Mr. Coe, Sir, a very rich man--he as owns all Dunloppel--has disappeared."

"How's that?"

"Well, Sir, he went to his room last night, they say, at his usual hour, but never slept in
his bed, and the front-door was found unlocked in the morning, so that he must have gone away
of himself. That would not be so odd, for he is a secret sort of man, as is always coming and
going; but he has taken nothing with him; only the clothes he stood in."

"Well, I dare say he has come back again by this time, my good girl. What's this? Is there
no fish?"

"No, Sir; the weather was too bad yesterday for catching them, and all last night there was
a dreadful sea: that's what they fear about Mr. Coe--that he has fell into the sea. His footsteps
have been tracked to the cliff edge, and there they stop."

"Poor fellow! Has he any relatives?"

"Oh yes, Sir; a wife and son--a very handsome, nice young gentleman."

"Then his widow will be rich, I suppose?"

"Oh, pray, don't call her a widow yet, Sir; let us hope her husband may be found. It's a dreadful
thing to be drowned like that on a Sunday morning; and for one who knows the cliff path so
well as he did, too. He was a hard man, and no favorite, but one forgets that now, of course."

"You have also forgotten the Harvey Sauce, my good girl; oblige me by bringing it, will you?"
said Mr. Balfour, beginning to whistle something which did not sound like a psalm tune. "You
must excuse my hard-heartedness, but I had not the pleasure of knowing this gentleman."

An hour afterward the solitary guest had left the inn, and was on his road to Plymouth. His
departure caused little surprise, for the weather was such as to induce no visitor to prolong
his stay.

Whether from his long enforced abstinence from society, or from the unwelcome nature of his
thoughts, Robert Balfour was always disinclined to be alone. His expeditions with Charley in
search of pleasure had been, though he did not find pleasure, more agreeable to him than the
being left to his own resources; and now this was more the case than ever. He preferred even
such company as that which the smoking-room of an hotel afforded to none at all. The voices
of his fellow-creatures could not shape themselves, as every inarticulate sound did to his
straining ear, into groans and feeble cries for aid. Not twenty-four hours had elapsed since
his prisoner was placed in hold, so that such sounds of weakness and agony must have been in
every sense chimerical; and yet he heard them. What, then, if these echoes from the tomb should
always be heard? A terrible idea indeed, but one which bred no repentance. It was not likely
that remorse should seize him in the very place where his hated foe had clutched and consigned
him to his living grave.

The hotel at which he now put up was the same at which he had then lodged; this public room
was the same in which he had smoked his last cigar upon his fatal visit to the Miners' Bank.
He had had only one companion then, but now it was full of people. By their talk it was evident
that they were townsfolk, and all known to one another; in fact, it was a tradesmen's club,
which met at the George and Vulture on Sunday nights through the winter months. In spite of
his willingness to be won from his thoughts, he could not fix his attention on the small local
gossip that was going on about him. Men came in and out without his observing them; and indeed
it was not easy to take note of faces through the cloud of smoke that filled the room; he was
fast relapsing into his own reflections, wondering what Solomon was doing in the dark, and
if he slept much, when an event occurred which roused him as thoroughly as the prick of a lance
or a sudden douche of cold water.

"Let us have no misunderstanding and no obligation--that is my motto."

The speaker was a thin, gray man, whose entrance into the apartment Balfour had not perceived,
and who was seated in an elevated chair, which had apparently been reserved for him as president
of the assembly. The face was unfamiliar, for twenty years had made an old man of the astute
and lively detective; but his phrase, and the manner of delivering it, identified him at once
as his old friend Mr. Dodge.

"It was in this very room," continued the latter, "that I sat and talked with him as sociable
as could be, not a quarter of an hour before I put the darbies on him; and it's a thing that
has been upon my mind ever since. I was only doing my duty, of course, but still it seemed
hard to take advantage of such a frank young fellow. As for stealing them notes, it's my belief
he had no more intention of doing it than I had."

"And yet he got it hot at the 'sizes, Mr. Dodge, didn't he?" inquired one of the company.

"Got it hot, Sir?" replied Mr. Dodge, with dignity; "he got an infamous and most unjustly severe
sentence, if you mean that, Sir. Of course what he did was contrary to law, but it's my opinion
as the law was strained agin him. There was some as swore hard and fast to get him punished
as knew he deserved no such treatment. Why, the girl as he loved, and whose picture I found
upon him myself when I searched him, and gave it him back, too--ay, that I did--even she took
a false oath, as Weasel himself told me, who was his lawyer, and had built up his case with
that same hussy for its corner-stone. Ah!" said Mr. Dodge, with a gesture of abhorrence, "if
there ever was a murdered man, it was that poor young fellow, Richard Yorke."

"But I thought he got twenty years' penal servitude," observed the same individual who had
interposed before, and whose thankless office it seemed to be to draw the old gentleman out
for the benefit of society.

"I say he was murdered, Sir. He was shut up for nigh twenty years, and then shot in the back
in trying to get away from Lingmoor. It was the hardest case I ever knew in all my professional
experience. Lord, if you had seen him--the handsomest, brightest, gayest young chap! And he
was what some folks call well-born, too; he was the son--that is, though, in a left-handed
sort of way, it's true--of mad Carew of Crompton, about whose death the papers were so full
a month ago or so; and that, in my judgment, was the secret of all his misfortune: it was the
Carew blood as did it. To take his own way in the world; to seek nobody's advice, nor use it
if 'twas given; to be spoiled and petted by all the women and half the men as came nigh him;
to own no master nor authority; to act without thought, and to scorn consequences--well, all
that was bred in the bone with him."

"Then he had never any one to look after him at home, I reckon, Mr. Dodge?"

"Well, yes; he had a mother; and though she was a queer one too, she loved him dearly. She
was the cleverest woman, Weasel used to say, as ever he had to do with; and a perfect lady
too, mind you. She worked to get the poor lad off like a slave; and when all was over, instead
of breaking down, as most would, she swallowed her pride, and went down on her bended knees
to that old miserly devil, Trevethick, the prosecutor, and to his son-in-law, Coe, likewise:
they lived down Cross Key way--where was it?--at Gethin--and begged and prayed him to join
in petitioning in her son's favor. She got down there the very day after his lying daughter
was married to Solomon Coe, he as has got Dunloppel, and is a big man now. But he'll never
be any thing but a scurvy lot, if he was to be king o' Cornwall. I shall never forget the way
he insulted that poor young fellow when he was took up. Damme, I would have given a ten-pound
note to have had him charged with something, and I'd ha' seen that the handcuffs weren't none
too big for his wrists neither."

"And this Trevethick refused to help the lady, did he?"

"Why, of course he did. He broke her heart, poor soul. I saw her when she passed through Plymouth
afterward, and she looked twenty years older than before that trial. Even then she didn't give
the matter up, but laid it before the crown. But poor Yorke had offended government--helped
some fool or another through one of them public examinations; he had wits enough for any thing,
had that young fellow. But there--I can't a-bear to talk about him; and yet somehow I can't
help doing on it when I get into this room. He sat just where that gentleman sits yonder. I
think I see him now, smoking the best of cigars, one of which he offered to me--for he was
free as free; but I was necessitated to restore it, for I couldn't take a gift from one as
I was just a-going to nab. 'Thank you kindly,' says I, 'but let us have no misunderstanding
and no obligation.' Poor fellow! poor fellow!"

No more was said about the case of Richard Yorke; but it was evidently a standing topic with
the chairman of the George and Vulture club. A yearning to behold and embrace that mother who
had done and suffered so much for his sake took possession of Richard's soul. His heart had
been steeled against her when he found harbored under her roof the objects of his rage and
loathing; but he felt now that that must have come to pass with some intention of benefit to
himself. The very truth, indeed, flashed upon him that she entertained some plan of frustrating
his revenge against them, with the idea of protecting him from the consequences that were likely
to ensue from it; and he forgave her, while he hated his foes the more. He would carry out
his design to the uttermost, but very cautiously, and with a prudence that he would certainly
not have used had his own safety been alone concerned; and then, when he had avenged himself
and her, he would disclose himself to her. The statement he had just heard affected him deeply,
but in opposite ways. The justification of himself in no way moved him--he did not need that;
it was also far too late for his heart to be touched by the expression of the old detective's
good-will, though the time had been when he would have thanked him for its utterance with honest
tears; but the revelation of his mother's toil and suffering in his behalf reawakened all his
dormant love for her, while it made his purpose firmer than ever to be the Nemesis of her enemies
and his own.

As he went to bed that night the clock struck twelve. It was just four-and-twenty hours since
he had left his victim in the bowels of Wheal Danes. If a free pardon could have been offered
to him for the crime, and the mine been filled with gold for him to its mouth, he would not
have stretched out his hand to save him.

CHAPTER XLIV.

STILL HUMAN.

Mr. Balfour atoned for his previous indifference to the wares of the news-boy by sending him
next morning to the station for all the local papers. In each, as he expected, there was a
paragraph headed Mysterious Disappearance, and as lengthened an account as professional ingenuity
could devise of the unaccountable departure of Mr. Solomon Coe from his house at Gethin. The
missing man was "much respected;" and, "as the prosperous owner of the Dunloppel mine, which
had yielded so largely for so many years, he could certainly not have been pressed by pecuniary
embarrassments, and therefore the idea of suicide was out of the question." Unlikely as it
seemed in the case of one who knew the country so well, the most probable explanation of the
affair was that the unfortunate gentleman, in taking a walk by night along the cliff top, must
have slipped into the sea. The weather had been very rough of late and the wind blowing from
off the land, which would have accounted--if this supposition was correct--for the body not
having been washed ashore. "In the mean time an active search was going on."

Balfour had resolved not to return to London for at least ten days. Mrs. Coe and her son would,
without doubt, be telegraphed for, and he could not repair to their house in their absence.
The idea of being under the same roof alone with his mother was now repugnant to him. He felt
that he could not trust himself in such a position. It had been hard and grievous, notwithstanding
his resentment against her, to see her in company with others, and her absence of late from
table had been a great relief to him. With his present feeling toward her it would be impossible
to maintain his incognito; and, if that was lost, his future plans--to which he well knew she
would oppose herself--would be rendered futile. He had seen with rage and bitter jealousy that
both Harry and her boy, and especially the latter, were dear to her; and it was certain she
would interfere to protect them, for their sake as well as for his own. He had other reasons
also for not returning immediately to town. It might hereafter be expedient to show that he
had really been to Midlandshire, where he had given out he had designed to go; and, moreover,
though his purpose was relentless as respected Solomon, he did not perhaps care to be in a
house where hourly suggestions would be dropped as to the whereabouts of his victim, or the
fate that had happened to him. Harry and her son might even not have gone to Gethin, and in
that case their apprehensions and surmises would have been insupportable.

Richard was more human than he would fain believe himself to be. Though he had gone to bed
so inexorable of purpose, it had been somewhat shaken through the long hours of a night in
which he had slept but little, and waked to think on what his feverish dreams had dwelt upon--the
fate of his unhappy foe, perishing slowly beside his useless treasure. More than once, indeed,
the impulse had been strong upon him that very morning to send word anonymously where Solomon
was to be found to the police at Plymouth. Remorse had not as yet become chronic with him,
but it seized him by fits and starts.

There had been a time when he had looked (through his prison bars) on all men with rage and
hatred; but now he caught himself, as it were, at attempts at self-justification with respect
to the retribution he had exacted even from his enemy. Had he not been rendered miserable,
he argued, supremely wretched, for more than half his lifetime, through this man's agency?
for it was certain that Solomon had sworn falsely, in the spirit if not in the letter, and
caused him to be convicted of a crime which his rival was well aware he had not in intention
committed. His conduct toward him on the occasion of his arrest had also been most brutal and
insulting; while, after conviction had been obtained, this wretch's malice, as Mr. Dodge had
stated, had known no cessation. In the arms of his young bride he had been deaf to the piteous
cry of a mother beseeching for her only son.

But, on the other hand, had not he (Richard) deeply wronged this man in the first instance?
Had he not robbed him--for so much at least must Solomon have known--of the love of his promised
wife? If happiness from such an ill-assorted union was not to have been anticipated, still,
had he not rendered it impossible? If their positions had been reversed, would not he have
exacted expiation from such an offender to the uttermost? He would doubtless have scorned to
twist the law as Solomon had done, and make it, as it were, the crooked instrument of his revenge.
He would not, of course, have evoked its aid at all. But was that to be placed to his credit?
He had put himself above the law throughout his life; he had never acknowledged any authority
save that of his own selfish will; nay, he owned to himself that his bitterness against his
unhappy victim had been caused not so much by the wrong he had suffered at his hands as by
the contempt which he (Richard) had entertained for him. Without materials such as his father
had possessed to back his pretensions he had imagined himself a sort of irresponsible and sovereign
being. (Such infatuation is by no means rare, nor confined to despots and brigands, and when
it exists in a poor man it is always fatal to himself.) His education, if it could be called
such, had doubtless fostered this delusion; but Mr. Dodge was right; the Carew blood had been
as poison in his veins, and had destroyed him.

All this might be true; but such philosophy could scarcely now obtain a hearing, while his
enemy was dying of starvation in his living tomb. It was in vain for him to repeat mechanically
that he had also suffered a sort of lingering death for twenty years. The present picture of
his rival's torments presented itself in colors so lively and terrible that it blotted out
the reminiscence of his own. The recollection of his wrongs was no longer sufficient for his
vindication. He therefore strove to behold his victim in another light than as his private
foe--as the murderer of his friend Balfour, the history of whose end may here be told.

On the night that Richard escaped from Lingmoor, it was Balfour, of course, who assisted him,
and who was awaiting him in person at the foot of the prison wall. The old man's arms had received
him as he slipped down the rope; and the object at which the sentry had fired had been two
men, though in the misty night they had seemed but one. Balfour had been mortally wounded,
and it was with the utmost difficulty that, laden with the burden of his dying friend, Richard
had contrived to reach Bergen Wood. As his own footsteps were alone to be traced along the
moor, the idea of another having accompanied his flight--though they knew there was complicity--had
not occurred to the authorities. Balfour had hardly reached that wretched asylum when he expired,
pressing Richard's hand, and bidding him remember Earl Street, Spitalfields. "What you find
there is all yours, lad," was his dying testament and last words of farewell. And over his
dead body Richard swore anew his vow of vengeance against the man that had thus, though indirectly,
deprived him of his only friend. He had watched by the dead body, on its bed of rotten leaves,
through that night and the whole of the next day; then, changing clothes with it, he had fled
under cover of the ensuing darkness, and got away eventually to town.

He had found the house in Earl Street a wretched hovel, tenanted by a few abjects, whom the
money found on Balfour--which he had received on leaving prison--was amply sufficient to buy
out. Once alone in this tenement, he had easily possessed himself of the spoil so long secreted,
and, furnished with it, he had hastened down to Crompton--the news of Carew's death having
reached London on the very day that he found himself in a position to profit by it. The very
plan which he had suggested to Balfour, whose name he also assumed, he himself put into execution.
He made a private offer for the disused mine, which was gladly accepted by those who had the
disposal of the property, acting under the advice of Parson Whymper. Trevethick, the only man
that had attached any importance to the possession of it, was dead; and it was not likely that
any one at the sale should bid one-half of the sum which this stranger was prepared to give
for the mere gratification of his whim. The mine itself, indeed, had scarcely been mentioned
in the transaction; it merely formed a portion in the lot comprising the few barren acres on
which this capricious purchaser had expressed his fancy to build a home. "Disposed of by private
contract" was the marginal note written in the auctioneer's catalogue which dashed Solomon's
long-cherished hopes to the ground.

Richard staid on in the neighborhood to attend the sale. It attracted an immense concourse;
and no less than a guinea a head was the price of admission to those who explored the splendid
halls of Crompton, discussing the character of its late owner, and retailing wild stories of
his eccentricities. Poor Parson Whymper, who had not a shilling left to him--for Carew had
died intestate, though, thanks to him, not absolutely a beggar--was perhaps the only person
present who felt a touch of regret. He had asked for his patron's signet-ring, as a keepsake,
and this request had been refused on the part of the creditors; he wandered among the gay and
jeering crowd like a ghost, little thinking that the one man who looked at him with a glance
of pity was he whom he had once regarded as the heir of Crompton. It was the general opinion
now that the unhappy chaplain had been Carew's evil genius, and had "led him on." Even Richard
bestowed but that single glance upon him; he was looking in vain for the face that had so terrible
an interest for himself. He had not heard that Trevethick was dead, but he knew it was so the
instant that his eyes fell upon Solomon Coe, and all his hate was at once transferred to his
younger enemy. The business upon which this man had come was as clear to him as though it had
been written on his forehead. The first gleam of pleasure which had visited his dark soul for
twenty years was the sight of Solomon's countenance when, on the sixth day's sale, the auctioneer
gave out that lot 970 had been withdrawn. Solomon might have received the intimation long before
but for the cautious prudence which had prevented him from making any inquiries upon the subject.
For a minute or two he stood stunned and silent, then hurriedly made his way to the rostrum.
Richard, who was sitting at the long table with the catalogue before him, kept his eyes fixed
upon its pages while the auctioneer pointed him out as the purchaser of the lot in question.
He knew the inquiry that was being asked, and its reply; he knew whose burly form it was that
thrust itself the next minute in between him and his neighbor; every drop of blood in his body,
every hair on his head, seemed to be cognizant that the man he hated most on earth was seated
cheek by jowl with him--that the first step in the road of retribution had been taken voluntarily
by his victim himself. The rest is soon told. Solomon at once commenced his clumsy efforts
at conciliation; and his endeavors to recommend himself to the stranger's friendship were suffered
quickly to bear fruit. He invited him to his house in London, which, to Richard's astonishment
and indignation, he found to be his mother's home; and, in short, fell of his own accord into
the very snare which the other, had he had the fixing of it, would himself have laid for him.

And now, as we have said, when all had gone exactly as Richard would have had it go, and Solomon
was being punished to the uttermost, the executor of his doom was beginning to feel, if not
compunction, at all events remorse. No adequate retribution had indeed overtaken Harry. To
have made her a widow was, in fact, to have freed her from the yoke of a harsh and unloved
master; but the fact was, notwithstanding the perjury of which he believed her to have been
guilty, he had never hated her as he had hated the other authors of his wrongs. She had once
on the rock-bound coast at Gethin preserved his life; she had accorded to his passion all that
woman can grant, and had reciprocated it; not even in his fiercest hour of despair had he harbored
the thought of raising his hand against her; he had hated her, indeed, as his betrayer, and
as Solomon's wife, but never regarded her with that burning detestation which he felt toward
her husband. There was another motive also, though he did not even admit it to himself, which,
now that his chief foe was expiating his offense, had no inconsiderable weight in the scale
of mercy as regarded the others.

His endeavors to win Charley's favor had had a reflex action. In spite of himself, a certain
good-will had grown up in him toward this boy, whom his mission it was to ruin. If there had
been less of his mother in the lad's appearance, or any thing of his father in his character,
his heart might have been steeled against his youth and innocence of transgression. As a mere
son of Solomon Coe's he would have beheld in him the whelp of a wolf, and treated him accordingly;
but between the wolf and his offspring there was evidently as little of affection as there
was of likeness. The very weaknesses of Charley's character--his love of pleasure, his credulity,
his wayward impulsiveness, of all which Balfour had made use for his own purposes--were foreign
to the nature of the elder Coe; while the lad's high spirit, demonstrativeness, and geniality
were all his own. If he had one to guide as well as love him--a woman with sound heart and
brain, such as this Agnes Aird was represented to be, what a happy future might be before this
youth! Without such a wise counselor, how easy it would be, and how likely, for him to drift
on the tide of self-will and self-indulgence to the devil! The decision rested in Richard's
own hands, he knew. Should he blast this young life in the bud, in revenge for acts for which
he was in no way accountable, and which were already being so bitterly expiated? The apprehension
that Solomon might even yet be found alive perhaps alone prevented Richard from resolving finally
to molest Harry and her son no further. If his victim should have been rescued, his enmity
would have doubtless blazed forth afresh against them as inextinguishable as ever, but in the
mean time it smouldered, and was dying out for want of fuel. If he had no penitence with respect
to the terrible retribution he had already wrought, the idea of it disturbed him. If he had
no scruples, he had pangs: when all was over--in a day or two, for even so strong a man as
Solomon could scarcely hold out longer--he would doubtless cease to be troubled with them;
when he was once dead Richard did not fear his ghost; but the thought of this perishing wretch
at present haunted him. He was still not far from Gethin, and its neighborhood was likely to
encourage such unpleasant feelings. Otherwise
it looked when we crossed the Roman frontier. The great Celtic nation, be suppressed began in
the southern provinces already from the Italian immigration to moved north of the Cevennes still
standing freedoms. It is not the first Time to meet that we her, with the branches and outposts
of the immense strain had the Italians already on the Tiber and the Po, in the mountains of Castile
and Carinthia, so deep inside Asia Minor fought, but this was only the main floor of his seeds
of their attacks detected. The Celtic tribe had on its investment in Central Europe, mainly
through the rich river valleys and the beautiful, hilly land of present-day France, with the
inclusion of Western Lines in Germany and Switzerland and from there poured from at least the southern
part of England, perhaps even then the whole of Great Britain and Ireland ^ busy 2, more than
anywhere otherwise he was here a broad, geographically closed population cull. Despite the differences
in language and customs, which of course did not fail within this vast area seems nevertheless a
close reciprocal movement, a spiritual sense of community, the nations tied together by the
Rhone and Garonne to the Rhine and the Thames to have, whereas the same with the Celts in Spain and
Austria today probably locally to some extent interdependent, but sometimes the mighty mountain sheaths
of the Pyrenees and the Alps, some of which here also acting upper grips of the Romans and the
Germanic tribes on the market and the spiritual connection the kinsmen interrupted quite different
from the narrow Meerarm the continental and the British Celts. Unfortunately we were not granted,
the inner history the strange people in this his headquarters from stage to stage to pursue,
we must content ourselves, the cultural, historical and political state, as here in Caesar's time
we meet to present at least in outline. ------------------------------------------------- ^ 2 On
a longer time through continued immigration of Belgian Celts to Britain indicate the English
name borrowed from Belgian provinces peoples on both shores the Thames, as the Atrebates of the Belgians, yes, the
Brit Anner himself, who at the the Amiens Somme below based Brit cannon first on a British district
and then to the whole island seems to be transmitted. The English gold coin is from the Belgian
derived originally identical with it. -------------------------------------------------- -
Gaul was following the reports of relatively well-populated old. Individual details can be To
conclude that came in the Belgian districts around 900 heads to the square mile - a Relationship
as it is now about to Wallis and Livonia, - in the Helvetic canton about 1100 ^ 3, it is likely that
in the districts that were more cultured than the Belgian and less mountainous than the Helvetic,
as in the Bituriges, Arverni, Aedui, the figure set even higher. The crop was probably driven
in Gaul, as for even Caesar's contemporaries in the Rhine area, the custom of the marls noticed
^ 4 and the ancient Celtic custom to prepare beer from barley (cervesia), also for early and
wide Dissemination of the cereal crop speaks, but he was not respected. Even in the civilized South
it was still for the free Celts as not decent, to guide the plow. Much higher was among the Celts,
the livestock for which the Roman landowners of this period is Celtic cattle of both the shock
and the brave, competent and of riding with the care of familiar animals like Celtic slaves
preferably served ^ 5 Especially in the northern Celtic landscapes predominated livestock well. Brittany
was in Caesar's time grain-poor country. In the northeast ranged dense forests, to the heart
of the Ardennes, then, almost without interruption from the North Sea to the Rhine, and on today
so blessed corridors Flanders and Lorraine at the time of grazing and Menapian Treveri Shepherd
in impenetrable Eichenwald his half-wild swine. Ebenwie in the Po valley by the Romans in the place
of the Celtic Acorn production of wool and grain cultivation came, so go the sheep and the farm
economy in the levels of the Scheldt and the Meuse on her back. Even in Britain was the threshing
Grain common yet, and in the more northern lines heard here entirely on agriculture and was
the only known breeding ground use. The oil and wine, of the Massiliots rich yield threw off, was not
yet beyond the Cevennes in Caesar's time operated. --------------------------------------------------
--- ^ 3 The first contingent of Belgian cantons only the Remi, that the landscape between the Seine and the
Scheldt, and from east to Reims and Andernach from 2000-2200 square miles, is calculated at about
300,000 men, that when the specified ratio for the Bellovaci the first call-up to the entire
able-bodied team considered a general, the number of able-bodied Belgians at 500000 and then the total
population to at least 2 million was raised. The Helvetians with the by-nations were before their departure 336 000 Heads, assuming that they were
back then displaced from the right bank of the Rhine, can you Area to about 300 square miles
to be posted. Whether the slaves counted here are, the less can decide when we do not know which
form of slavery adopted by the Celts had, what Caesar (Gal 1, 4) of Orgetorix 'slaves, serfs and Debtors
says, speaks in favor than against keeping score. That way, every such attempt what is lacking
in ancient history, above all, the statistical basis, by combining to replace, should be taken
with caution cheaper, the thoughtful reader will no more than dump him so absolutely unmistakable.
^ 4 "In Gaul, in the inland side of the Alps on the Rhine, I have, "says Scrofa in Varro rust.
1, 7, 8," I commanded there, some Strokes entering, where neither the vine nor the olive is
still continuing the fruit tree, where with white chalk pit fertilize the fields where it
has neither mine nor sea salt, but the salty Coal burned some wood used instead of salt. "This
description is probably referring vorcaesarische the time and in the eastern stretches of the old
province, such as Allobroges the landscape, later describes Pliny (national 17, 6, 42f.) detail the
Gallo-Britannic marl. ^ 5 "From good impact in Italy especially the Gallic Oxen for field work namely;
whereas obtain the Ligurian nothing right "(Varr. rust. 2, 5, 9). Here, although the Cisalpine
Gaul is meant there but the livestock industry but undoubtedly goes back to the Celtic era. The
"Gallic Klepper (Gallici canterii does) already Plautus (Aul. 3, 5, 21). "Not every race is
becoming to the pastoral business; neither the Bastuler nor Turduler (both in Andalusia) are suitable
for it; are best the Celts, especially for riding and pack animals (iumenta) "(Varro rust. 2, 10, 4).
-------------------------- --------------- Together the settling of the Gauls were inclined house,
was open to all villages and the Helvetic canton had its own in 696 (58), four hundred out
of a set individual farms. But there was no lack of walled cities, the walls of timber both
by their relevance than by the delicate interplay addition of beams and stones the Romans noticed
during course even in the towns of the buildings alone Allobroges lists were made of wood. Such
cities also had the same number of the twelve and Helvetii Suessiones; However, whereas in
the more northern districts, for example in the Nervii, it probably Cities were, but the population in
more wars in the swamps and forests as behind the walls of protection sought and the Thames
beyond even the primitive bulwark of Waldverhacke was certainly the place of the cities and in war the only refuge for people
and herds was. With the relatively important is the development of urban life in close connection,
the alertness of transport on land and water. Everywhere there were streets and bridges. The
river traffic, including streams, such as Rhone, Garonne, Loire and Seine by itself asking
was, handsome and rich. But far more remarkable still is the maritime the Celts. Not only the Celts
seems to be the one nation that the first Atlantic Ocean has traveled regularly, but we also find
here the art, ships build and steer on a remarkable height. The shipping of the peoples of the Mediterranean
is, as is understandable when the nature of the traffic from them waters, relatively time stood
still at the helm: the war vessels of the Phoenicians, Greeks and Romans were at all times
rowing galleys to which the sail is just as random amplification of Rudder was used, only the
merchant ships are in the epoch of the developed ancient Civilization itself have been sailors
^ 6 The Gauls, however, served while on the channel to Caesar's time as long afterwards a sort
of leather portable barges, which essentially been ordinary rowing boats seem to be, but drove
on the west coast of Gaul, the Santones that Pictones, especially the Venetians with great,
albeit crudely-built ships were not moved by oars, but provided with leather sails and iron
anchor chains were related and this not only for their trade with Britain, but also in the
naval battle. So here we encounter not only the first cruise on the open ocean, but this has
also taken the first sailing ship completely the place of the rowing boat - progress, the alertness
of course, the sinking of the old world is not understood to use and whose immeasurable results only rejuvenated
our culture period is employed to move gradually. --------------------------------------------------
--------- ^ 6 then out the name of the Merchant or the "round" as opposed to the "long" or
the Warship and the similar position against each of the "rowing boats (επίκωποι νήες) and
the "merchant" (. ολκάδες "Dion Hal 3, 44.); also the low manning of merchant vessels, the very
largest to the no longer than 200 men was (Rheinisches Museum NF 11, 1874 P. 625), as used on the tops
of three ordinary galley rowers already 170 were. See FK Movers, The Phoenicians. Bonn-Berlin
1840-56, vol 2, 3, p. 167f. -------------------------------------------------- -------- For
this regular shipping between the British and Gallic coast very close political connection between
residents on both sides of the channel as well explained how the flourishing of overseas trade
and fishing. It was the Celts, especially Brittany, who brought the tin mines of Cornwall in
England and on the river and country roads of Gaul to Massilia Narbo and proceeded. The indication
that lived in Caesar's time some tribes on the Rhine estuary of fish and bird eggs, one can probably
relate to the fact that here the sea fishing and the gathering of Seevögeleier was operated
in expanded scale. Combining the scattered and scanty information which Celtic remained on
the trade and transport us, in addition to thoughts together, we can understand it, that the
duties of the river and sea ports in the budgets of Canton, For example, in which played the
Aedui and the Veneti, a major role and that the chief god of their nation was regarded as the protector
of roads and commerce and also as the inventor the trades. All of then have been invalid is
not the Celtic industry, how for imitating the unusual place of the Celts and their peculiar
skill, any pattern and execute each instruction is also emphasized by Caesar. appears in most branches but the unions have with them not risen
above the level of the ordinary to, the later in the central and northern Gaul flourishing
manufacture of linen and woolen fabrics is proven to have been caused only by the Romans to
life. An exception, and as far as we know the only one that makes the processing of metals. The
often technically excellent and still smooth copper device that is in the graves to the fore
of Gaul comes, and the carefully adjusted Arvernian gold coins are still living witnesses the
skill of Celtic gold and copper workers, and probably agree to the reports the ancients, that
the Romans learned from the Bituriges tinning, silvering the Alesi - Inventions, the first of
which was laid by the tin trade but close enough and the probably both are still made in the
period of Celtic freedom. Hand in Hand with the skill in the processing of metals was the
art of winning, the partially achieved, especially in the iron mines on the Loire, such a
mining height was that the miners played in the sieges an important role. The Romans, this time common
view that Gaul was one of the richest countries in the world gold, is indeed contradicted by
the well-known soil conditions and the Fund resources Celtic graves in which gold is only
economical and far less frequently than in the similar findings of the true home countries of the gold,
it is also this idea probably been caused only by what travelers Greek and Roman soldiers, without
Doubt, not without strong exaggeration, to their countrymen of the splendor of the kings Arvernian
and could describe the treasures of the Toulouse temple. But totally attacked from the air but
not the narrator. It is very credible, that in and along rivers, which from the Alps flow and
the Pyrenees, gold prospectors and laundry shops, which at the present value of Worker are unproductive,
in ruder times and in slavery with advantage and in significant quantities were operated,
moreover, may not like the commercial relations of Gaul, rarely the semi-civilized peoples, the
clumping of a dead capital favors precious metals have. Noteworthy is the low level of fine art,
the mechanical skill in the treatment of metals emerges all the more glaring. The preference for
bright and shiny Ornaments to the lack of sense of beauty, and an unfortunate confirmation
of the grant Gallic Coins with their soon simply, sometimes adventurous, but always designed
and childish almost without exception, with unparalleled brutality exported images. It is perhaps
without precedent that a centuries practiced with a certain technical skill Coinage was limited
essentially on two or three Greek stamp ever over and over distorted recut. By contrast, the
high poetry of the Celts appreciated and grew together closely with the religious and even with
the political institutions of the nation, we find the spiritual as the court and begging poetry
in bloom. And natural science and philosophy were, even in the forms and the bonds of the country's
theology, on Celts some maintenance and the Hellenic humanism a ready reception, where and as
he approached them. The news of the writing was generally at least among the priests. For the
most part they operated in the free Gaul in Caesar's time, the Greek, as among others, the Helvetii
did, was only in the southern districts of the same Even then mainly due to the movement of the
Romanized Celts the Latin, for which we Example on the coins of this time Arvernian meet. The political
development Celtic Nation offers very remarkable phenomena. The state Constitution rests with
her as anywhere in the Geschlechtsgau with the prince, the Council of Elders and the community
the free able-bodied men, but this is their peculiar that it has no such Gauverfassung never get
out is. Among the Greeks and Romans came very early to the office of the district as the basis of the
political unity of the city wall: where two districts in the same walls, came together, they merged into one
community, where a part of their citizenship Fellow citizens a new city wall was instructed to
regularly so that a new, just by the bonds of filial piety and a maximum of clientele with the mother
church of linked state. The Celts, however remains the "citizenship" at all times of the clan,
the district and not any city in front of Prince and the Council, and the general Gautag is the
last resort in the state. The city has, as in the East, only mercantile and strategic, not political
Importance, because why the Gallic towns, even walled and very handsome such as Vienna and
Genava, the Greeks and Romans are but villages. At the time of Caesar was the original Constitution
nor clan unchanged significantly to the island and the Celts northern provinces of the mainland:
the national community claimed the highest authority, the prince was bound by its decisions on key issues,
the council was numerous - He had six hundred members in each clan - but does not seem to mean
than the Senate under the Roman kings. In contrast, in the lively south of the country was one
or two generations before Caesar - the children of the last kings lived his Time - at least
among the major clans, the Arverni, Aedui, Sequani, Helvetic, a Revolution occurred that the
kingdom abolished the nobility and the power in the hands was. It is only the reverse side of
the newly designated Neten complete lack of urban communities among the Celts that the opposite
pole of political development, chivalry, in Celtic Clan Constitution prevails so completely.
The Celtic aristocracy was apparently after a high nobility, perhaps most of the members of the
royal and formerly royal Families, how is it significant that the heads in the opposite parties same
clan members very often the same sex. These large families united in her hand the economic, military
and political superiority. They monopolized the Parcels of the usable rights of the state. They
needed the commoners, the tax burden crushed, to borrow from them and in fact first as debtor,
then legally impaired to go to their freedom. They developed in the Gefolgwesen, that is the
prerogative the nobility, surrounded himself with a number gelöhnter Reisiger servants, known
Ambakten ^ 7, and thus to form a state within a state, and based on this defied its own people
them with legal authorities and the community levy and actually blew up the community. When
are in a clan, had about 80,000 weapons-capable, a single aristocrat with 10,000 slaves, not counting
the hearing and the debtor, could appear on the diet, it is evident that such was an independent
Dynast more than a citizen of his clan. It was added, that the leading families of the different
clans among them were connected intimately and Between marriages, and special contracts, as it
formed a covenant against which the individual clan was powerless. Therefore, the municipalities
could no longer the peace to maintain and governed by common law of the jungle. Protection was
only the impaired Man with his master, the duty and interest compelled the wrongs inflicted
on his client punish to shield the Free State no longer had the power, so this many to be hearing
a Mighty own tasks. The local council lost its political Importance, and the principality that
had the abuses of the nobility should control, died of same with the Celtics as good as in Lazio.
 He would have thrown away his life for
nothing.

"No, Sir, indeed--and he never will be," replied the inn-keeper. "When the sea don't give a
man up in four-and-twenty hours, it keeps him for good--at least we always find it so at Gethin."

"Well, listen to me. My name is Balfour. I knew Mr. Coe, and have had dealings with him. We
had arranged a partnership together in a certain mine; and it is my opinion that he came down
here upon that business."

"Very like, Sir. He was much engaged that way, and made, they say, a pretty penny at it."

"I was at Plymouth, on my way to join him, when I heard this sad news. I came to-day post-haste
in consequence of it. The search for him must be renewed to-night."

"Lor, Sir, it is easy to see you are a stranger in these parts! I wouldn't like to go myself
where poor Mr. Coe met his end, on so dark a night as this. It's a bad path even in daylight
along Turlock cliff."

"He did not take that way, at least I think not. Have you a ladder about the premises?"

"Yes, sure."

"And a lantern?"

"Now that's strange enough, Sir, that you should have inquired for a lantern; for we wanted
one just now to see to your horses, and, though they're looking for it high and low, it can't
be found nowhere."

"It doesn't strike you, then, that Mr. Coe might have taken it with him?"

"Lor, Sir," cried the inn-keeper, with admiration, "and so he must ha' done! Of course it strikes
one when the thing has been put into one's head. Well, 'twas a good lantern, and now 'tis lost.
Dear me, dear me!"

Golden visions of succeeding to the management of the inn, and of taking to the furniture and
fixings in the gross, had flitted across this honest gentleman's brain, and the disappearance
of the lantern affected him with the acute sense of pecuniary damage. The general valuation
would probably be no less because of the absence of this article.

"Send out and borrow another, as many, in fact, as you can get," said Richard, impatiently;
"and get ready a torch or two besides. Pick out four of the strongest men yonder, and bid them
come with me, and search Wheal Danes."

"What! that old pit. Sir? You'll not find a man to do it--no, not if they knowed as master
was at the bottom of it. You wait till morning."

"Your master is at the bottom of it. I feel sure he took the lantern with him to search that
mine. I will give them a pound apiece to start at once. Pack up this food, and lend them a
mattress to bring him home upon. Be quick! be quick!"

Richard's energy fairly overpowered the phlegmatic inn-keeper, whose conscience, perhaps, also
smote him with respect to his missing master; and he set about the execution of these orders
promptly. Wheal Danes, he had truly hinted, was a very unpopular spot with its neighbors after
nightfall; but, on the other hand, sovereigns were rare in Gethin, and greatly prized. In less
than half an hour the necessaries which Richard had indicated were procured, and a party, consisting
of himself, four stalwart miners, and the inn-keeper, started for the pit. These were followed
by half the inhabitants of the little village, attracted by the rumor of their purpose, which
had oozed out from the bar of the Gethin Castle. The windy down had probably never known so
strange a concourse as that which presently streamed over it, with torch and lantern, and stood
around the mouth of the disused mine. The night was dark, and nothing could be seen save what
the flare of the lights they carried showed them--a jagged rim of pit without a bottom. Notwithstanding
their numbers there was but little talk among them; they had a native dread of this dismal
place, and, besides, there might now be a ghastly secret hidden within it. A muffled exclamation,
half of admiration, half of awe, broke from the circling crowd as, the ladder planted, Richard
was seen descending it torch in hand. No other man followed; none had volunteered, and he had
asked for no companion. They watched him, as the countrymen of those who had formerly worked
Wheal Danes might have watched Curtius when he leaped into the gulf; and as in his case, when
they saw the ladder removed, and the light grow dim, and finally die out before their eyes,
it seemed that the pit had closed on Richard--that he was swallowed up alive. No one, unless
the strange story about their missing neighbor which this man had brought was true, had ventured
into Wheal Danes for these fifty years! They kept an awe-struck silence, straining eye and
ear. Some thought they could still see a far-off glimmer, others that they could hear a stifled
cry, when the less fortunate or the less imaginative could hear or see nothing. But after a
little darkness and silence reigned supreme beneath them; they seemed standing on the threshold
of a tomb.

CHAPTER XLVII.

WHAT WAS FOUND IN WHEAL DANES.

A full half hour--which to the watchers above seemed a much longer interval--had elapsed since
Richard had disappeared in the depths of Wheal Danes, and not a sign of his return had reached
the attentive throng.

"I thought he'd come to harm," muttered a fisherman to his neighbor; "it was a sin and a shame
to let him venture."

"Ay, you may say that," returned the other, aloud. "I call it downright murder in them as sent
him."

"It was not I as sent him," observed the inn-keeper, with the honest indignation of a man that
has not right habitually on his own side. "What I said to the gentleman was, 'Wait till morning.'
Why should I send him?" Here he stopped, though his reasons for not wishing to hurry matters
would have been quite conclusive.

"Why was he let to go down at all, being a stranger?" resumed the first speaker. "Why didn't
somebody show him the way?"

"Because nobody knowed it," answered one of the four miners whose services Richard had retained,
and who justly imagined that the fisherman's remark had been a reflection on his own profession.
"I'd ha' gone down Dunloppel with him at midnight, or any other mine as can be called such;
but this is different."

"Ay, ay, that's so," said a second miner. "We know no more of this place than you fishermen.
There may be as much water in it as in the sea, for aught we can tell."

"It's my belief they're more afraid of the Dead Hand than the water," observed a voice from
the crowd, the great majority of which was composed of fisher folk.

No reply was given to this; perhaps because the speaker, an old cripple, the Thersites of the
village, was beneath notice, perhaps because the remark was unanswerable. The miners were bold
enough against material enemies, but they were superstitious to a man.

"If Solomon Coe were alive," continued the same voice, "he wouldn't ha' feared nothin'."

"That's the first word, old man, as ever I heard you speak in his favor," said a miner, contemptuously;
"and you've waited for that till he's dead."

"Still, he would ha' gone, and you durstn't," observed the old fellow, cunningly, "and that's
the p'int."

These allusions to the Dead Hand and to the missing Solomon were not of a nature to inspire
courage in those to whom it was already lacking, and a silence again ensued. There was less
light, for a torch or two had gone out, and the mine looked blacker than ever.

"Well, who's a-going down?" croaked the old cripple. "The gentleman came from your inn, Jonathan,
and it's your place, I should think, to look after him."

"Certainly not," answered the inn-keeper, hastily. "These men here were hired for this very
service."

"That's true," said the first miner. "But what's the use of talking when the gentleman has
got the ladder with him?"

"There's more ladders in the world than one," observed the cripple. "Here's my grandson, John;
he and half a dozen of these young fellows would fetch Farmer Gray's in less than no time.
Come, lads--be off with ye."

This suggestion was highly applauded, except by the miner who had so injudiciously compromised
himself, and was carried out at once.

When the ladder arrived the three other miners, ashamed of deserting their comrade, volunteered
to descend with him. The excitement among the spectators was great, indeed, when these four
men disappeared in the levels of Wheal Danes, as Richard had done before them. The light of
their combined torches lingered a little in their rear; the sound of their voices, as they
halloed to one another or to the missing man, was heard for several minutes. But darkness and
silence swallowed them up also, and the watchers gazed on one another aghast.

It is not an easy thing, even for those accustomed to underground labor, to search an unfamiliar
spot by torch-light; the fitful gleam makes the objects on which it falls difficult of identification.
It is doubtful whether one has seen this or that before or not--whether we are not retracing
old ground. Even to practiced eyes these objects, too, are not so salient as the tree or the
stone which marks a locality above-ground; add to this, in the present case, that the searchers
were momently in expectation of coming upon something which they sought and yet feared to find,
and it will be seen that their progress was of necessity but slow. They kept together, too,
as close as sheep, which narrowed the compass of their researches, and caused their combined
torches to distribute only as much light as one man would have done provided with a chandelier.
They knew, however, that their predecessor had descended into the second level, so that they
did not need to explore the first at all. The ground was hard, and gave forth echoes to their
cautious but heavy tread; their cries of "Hollo!" "Are you there?" which they reiterated, like
nervous children playing hide-and-seek, reverberated from roof to wall.

Presently, when they stopped to listen for these voices of the rock to cease, there was heard
a human moan. It seemed to come up from a great depth out of the darkness before them. They
listened earnestly, and the sound was repeated--the faint cry of a man in grievous pain.

"There must be another level," observed the miner who had volunteered the search. "This man
has fallen down it."

They had therefore to go back for the ladder. Pushing this before them, the end began presently
to run freely, and then stopped; it had adjusted itself by the side of the shorter ladder which
Richard had brought down with him.

"He could not have fallen, then," observed a miner, answering his comrade's remark--as is the
custom with this class of great doers and small talkers--at a considerable interval.

"Yes, he could," replied the one who had first spoken. "See, his ladder was short, and he may
have pitched over."

They stood and listened, peering down into the darkness beneath them; but there was no repetition
of the cries. The wounded man had apparently spent his last strength, perhaps his last breath,
in uttering them.

"He must be down here somewhere. Come on."

The situation was sufficiently appalling; but these men had lost half their terrors, now that
they knew there was a fellow-creature needing help. They descended slowly; and he who was foremost
presently cried out, "I see him; here he is."

The man was lying on his face quite still; and when they lifted him, each looked at the other
with a grave significance--they had carried too many from the bowels of the earth to the pit's
mouth not to know when a man was dead. Even a senseless body is not the same to an experienced
bearer as a dead weight. The corpse was still warm, but the head fell back with a movement
not of life.

"You were right, mate. His neck is broke; the poor gentleman pitched over on his head."

"Stop a bit," exclaimed the man addressed; "see here. Why, it ain't him at all--it's Solomon Coe."

An exclamation of astonishment burst involuntarily from the other three.

"Then where's the other?" cried they all together.

"I am here," answered a ghastly whisper.

Within but a few feet of Solomon, so that they could hardly have overlooked him had not the
former monopolized their attention, lay Richard, grievously hurt. Some ribs were broken, and
one of them was pressed in upon the lungs. Still he was alive, and the men turned their attention
first to him, since Solomon was beyond their aid. By help of the two ladders, side by side,
they bore him up the wall of rock; and so from level to level--a tedious and painful journey
to the wounded man--to the upper air.

He was carried to the inn upon the mattress which his own care had provided for another; while
the four miners, to the amazement of the throng, once more descended into the pit for a still
more ghastly burden.

Richard could speak a little, though with pain. By his orders a messenger was dispatched that
night to Plymouth to telegraph the news of the discovery of her husband's body to Mrs. Coe.
His next anxiety was to hear the surgeon's report, not on his own condition, but on that of
Solomon. This gentleman did not arrive for some hours, and Richard was secretly well pleased
at his delay. It was his hope, for a certain reason, that he would not arrive until the body
was stiff and cold.

He saw Richard first, of course. The case was very serious; so much so that he thought it right
to mention the fact, in order that his patient might settle his worldly affairs if they needed
settlement.

"There is no immediate danger, my good Sir; but it is always well in such cases to have the
mind free from anxiety."

"I understand; it is quite right," said Richard, gravely. "Moreover, since the opportunity
may not occur again, let me now state how it all happened."

"Nay, you must not talk. We know it all, or at least enough of it for the present."

"What do you know?" asked Richard, with his eyes half shut, but with eager ears.

"That in your benevolent attempt to seek after Mr. Coe you met with the same accident--though
I trust it will not have the same ending--as that unfortunate gentleman himself. He pitched
upon his head and broke his neck, while you fell upon your side."

"That is so," murmured Richard. "He and I were partners, you see--"

"There, there; not a word more," insisted the doctor; "your deposition can wait."

And having done what he could for his patient, he left him, in order to examine the unfortunate
Solomon. His investigation corroborated all that he had already heard of the circumstances
of his death, with which also Richard's evidence accorded. An observation made by one of the
miners who had found the body, to the effect that it was yet warm when they had come upon it,
excited the surgeon's ridicule.

"It is now Tuesday morning, my friend," said he, "and this poor fellow met with his death on
Saturday night for certain. He could not, therefore, have been much warmer when you found him
than he is now."

"Well, me and my mate here we both fancied--"

"I dare say you did, my man," interrupted the doctor; "and fancy is a very proper word to apply
to such an impression. If you take my advice, however, you will not repeat such a piece of
evidence when put upon your oath, for the thing is simply impossible."

"Then I suppose we be in the wrong," said Dick to Jack; and on that supposition they acted.

In this way too self-reliant Science, whose mission it is to explode fallacies, occasionally
assists in the explosion or suffocation of a fact, for Solomon Coe had not been dead half an
hour when his body was found.

When Richard, alone on his errand of mercy, was approaching the brink of the third level, he
could hear Solomon calling lustily for help. Nay, it was not only "Help!" but "Murder!" that
he cried out; and notwithstanding the menace that that word implied toward himself, Richard
hurried on, well pleased to hear it; the vigor of the cry assured him that his enemy was not
only living, but unhurt. As the light he carried grew more distinct to him, indeed, these shouts
redoubled; but when it came quite near, and disclosed the features of its bearer, there was
a dead silence. The two men stood confronting one another--the one in light, distinctly seen,
looking down upon the other in shade, just as they had parted only eight-and-forty hours ago.
To one of them, as we know, this space had been eventful; but to the other it had seemed a
lifetime--an age of hopes and fears, and latterly of cold despair, which had now been warmed
once more to hope only to freeze again. For was not this man, to whom he had looked for aid,
his cruel foe come back to taunt him--to behold him already half-way toward death, and to make
its slow approach more bitter? But great as was his agony Solomon held his peace, nor offered
to this monarch of his fate the tribute of a groan.

"I am come to rescue you," said Richard, in low but distinct tones; "to undo the evil that
I have already done, although it was no less than you deserved, nor an overpayment of the debt
I owed you. In return you will doubtless denounce me as having meant to murder you."

No answer. If Richard had not heard his cries, it would have seemed that this poor wretch had
lost the power of speech. His huge head drooped upon his shoulder, and he leaned against the
rocky wall as though his limbs could not have otherwise supported themselves; they shook, indeed--but
was it with weakness or with hate?--as though he had the palsy.

"Well, you will have reason to do so," continued Richard, calmly, "for I did mean to murder
you. In ten minutes hence you will find yourself among your neighbors, free to act as you please.
I shall make no appeal to your mercy; it would, I know, be as fruitless as was yours to mine
the other day; but if you abstain from molesting me, this mine, with all its hidden treasure,
shall be your own. During the three-year administration of Sicily
by Gaius Verres, the number of arable farmers in Leontinoi fell from 84 to 32, in Motuka of 187
to 86, in Herbita from 252 to 120, in Agyrion from 250 to 80, so that in four of the most fertile
Districts of Sicily hundred landowners their 59 acres are left fallow rather than they ordered
in this regiment. And these arable farmers were, as their small number shows and is also said
explicitly, not small farmers but handsome plantation owner and most of them Roman citizens! In the client-states
were the forms of taxation something different, but the expense even if possible, even worse,
since in addition to the Romans also nor the local courts extorted. In Cappadocia and Egypt was
the farmer as the king bankrupt and that the tax collector to satisfy creditors of the Roman
incapable. This came as the actual extortion not only of the governor, but also his "friends", each
as it were to have a statement on the governor said and a right to come back with him from the
Province as a made man. The Roman Oligarchy, resembled in this respect fully operational band
of robbers and the looting the provincial occupational and hand-factory: a capable member does
not handle too neatly , since they had indeed to share with the trustees and the jury and the
more to the more safe steel. The thieves honor had already developed the great robber looked at
the small, this mere disdain for the thief down, who was once sentenced miraculously was did
great with the high point of blackmailing him as evidence of sums. Sun well managed in the offices
of the successors of those men who by their management to bring anything home been used as the
gratitude of the subjects, and the applause of their fellow citizens. But perhaps even worse and
even less of a control subject lived in the Italian businessmen the unhappy provincials. The most
profitable pieces of land ownership and the entire Trade and monetary system concentrated in the
offices in their hands. The goods in the overseas territories, which Italian nobles were, were
all the misery of economic managers suspended and never saw their Lord, except as the hunting
parks, which already in this Time in Transalpine Gaul, with an area almost to a German square
mile . Happen The usury flourished as never before. The small landowners in Illyricum, Asia, Egypt already
well managed to Varro's time actually mostly as debt slaves to their Roman or not Roman ebenwie
creditors, once the plebeians for their interest patrician masters. It happened that capital were
lent itself monthly to municipalities to four percent. It was something routine that an energetic
and influential businessman in better Operation of its business by either the Senate, the ambassador-^
28, or from the Governor give the officer's title was, and perhaps also to team, is a certified way a
case of telling where one of these honorable military bankers, concerning a claim to the city
of Salamis in Cyprus the same council was blocked in the town hall as long to five of the council
members had died of hunger. -------------------------------------------------- --- ^ 28 This is
the so-called "free mission" (liberal legatio), namely, an embassy without proper public procurement.
-------------------------------------------------- --- At that pressure doubled, each of which
alone was unbearable and their engagement better be regulated were then added the general tribulations,
but which also the Roman government to blame, in large part at least indirectly contributed. In the multiple
Wars were soon adopted by the barbarians, now by the Roman armies from the large capital Land
taken away and more spoiled. When the annulment of the Roman land and maritime police swarming
everywhere by land and pirates. In Sardinia, and in the interior of Asia Minor Volume economic-endemic,
in Africa and in the beyond Spain, they made it necessary to use all to secure outside of the
urban part of building curtain walls with walls and towers. The terrible scourge of piracy was
already described in another context. The Panaceas of the prohibitive system, between them down
to those of the Roman governor, used to if, as the missing under such circumstances could, money
clip or bread inflation entered, the prohibition of gold and grain exports from the province,
accounted for the thing not better.
 His fear was, lest, having been compelled to take so active a
part in the rescue of the unhappy Solomon, something should arise to implicate him in his incarceration.

Fortunately he was far too ill to be summoned as a witness. His deposition alone could be taken,
and that he framed with the utmost caution, and as briefly as was possible. His wounded lung
defended him from protracted inquiries. Solomon himself had proposed the idea of a partnership
in Wheal Danes, and his interest in the mine, the knowledge of which had suggested to Richard
the place of his concealment, had evidently proved fatal to him. That he should have broken
his neck just as Richard had broken his ribs on such a quest was by no means extraordinary;
but how he ever reached the spot where he was found at all, without the aid of a ladder, was
inexplicable. The line of evidence was smooth enough but for this ugly knot, and it troubled
Richard much, though, as it happened, unnecessarily. Had the place of the calamity been a gravel-pit
at Highgate, it would have been guarded by constabulary, and all things preserved as they were
until after the official investigation. But Wheal Danes, from having been a deserted mine,
had suddenly become the haunt of the curious and the morbid. There was nothing more likely
than that Solomon's ladder had been carried off, and perhaps disposed of at a high price per
foot as an interesting relic. The presence of the half-extinguished torch that Richard had
flung away in the second level (and which should by rights have been found in the third) was
still more easily explained: there were a score of such things now lying about the mine, which
had been left there by visitors. In short, an "active" coroner and an "intelligent" jury could
have come to no other conclusion than that of "accidental death;" and they came to it accordingly.

Other comforters had arrived to the wounded man, before the receipt of that good news, in the
persons of Harry and her son and Agnes. There was a reason why all three should be now warmly
attracted toward him, which, while it effectually worked his will in that way, gave him many
a twinge. They looked upon him, as did the rest of the world, as the man who had lost his life
(for his wound was by this time pronounced to be fatal) to save his friend. When these arrived, and then gradually appeared on the battlefield, lost Scipio and
Juba, the desire to risk a battle, and Caesar had no means to influence them in to force their
extraordinary superiority of light cavalry into one. About Marches and skirmishes in the neighborhood
of Ruspina and Thapsus, mainly to the discovery under its common basement hiding (silos) and to spread
the items are moved passed, almost two months. Caesar, compelled by the enemy's horsemen, as far
as possible to the heights to hold or to cover his flanks by entrenched lines accustomed, but during
this laborious and futile war reaching its soldiers the strange Martial way. Friend and foe
acknowledged in the cautious fencing master of his men carefully and often personally one shoulder,
the generals were not rapid and almost again mistaken in this as in the delay in shutting unchanging
championship. Finally turned Caesar, after he had drawn his last reinforcements in itself
sideways against Thapsus. Scipio had this city, as I said, severely understaffed, thus committing
the mistake his opponent to hold onto a lightly darzubieten object of attack, he added quickly
to the first the second, still less pardonable add that desired by Caesar and Scipio Been refused
legal battle now to save Thapsus to deliver on a terrain the decision in the hands of the infantry
of the line was. Directly on the beach, Caesars Bearing opposite, came to Scipio and Juba
legions, the front rows of combat ready, the back deals to beat an entrenched camp, at the same time
prepared the crew Thapsus of failure before. The latter rejected enough Caesars camp guards.
His usual legions war, after the uncertain closed up and the bad Divide the enemy properly
appreciating forced, while over there was still geschanzt and before the commander gave the
signal, a trumpeter to sound the attack, and went around the Line ahead, led by Caesar himself,
who, as he waiting for his family without his command saw advance, eingaloppierte at their head to the
enemy. The right wing, the other Departments, leading drove to him opposing line of the elephants
- it this was the last major battle in which the beasts have been used - by spin balls and Arrow
back to their own people. The coverage team was cut down, the left Wing of the enemy exploded
and rolled up the whole line. The defeat was all the more devastating, as the new camp of the
defeated army not ready yet and the old removed significantly was, both were subsequently captured
almost without resistance. The bulk of the defeated army threw away their weapons and asked
for quarters, but Caesar's soldiers were not the same, willing to abstain from Ilerda the
battle at Pharsalia spared the defenseless honor had.
 Had he been poor and dependent, she would have forgiven him
readily enough; nor are such natures unparalleled in her sex, notwithstanding the pictures
which are nowadays presented to us as types of girlhood.

Such, then, was the mutual relation in which these two young people stood, who ministered by
turns (for Harry was always with him) to the wants of the dying Balfour. The feelings with
which he was regarded by all three were in curious contrast with their former ones. What those
of Harry were now toward him we can easily guess; her hate and fear had vanished to make room
for love--not the love of old times, indeed, but a deeper and a purer passion; it could never
bear fruit, she knew--it was but a prolonged farewell. To-morrow, or the next day, Death would
interpose between them; but in the mean time they were together, and she clung to him.

Charley, on the other hand, with whom Balfour had once been such a favorite, felt, though attentive
to his needs, by no means cordially toward him. Gratitude for the fancied service he had done
to his late father compelled him to give Richard his company; but it was not accorded willingly,
as heretofore. He could not but set down to the account of his companionship the present frigidity
of Agnes, and at first he had even seen him a material obstacle to his hopes. This audacious
man of the world, who had at one time so excited his admiration, had suddenly become in his
eyes an impudent roué, who even on his sick-bed was only too likely to make their past adventures
together the subject of his talk. True, his mother had told him that Mr. Balfour was now an
altered man; but the young gentleman had entertained some reasonable doubts of this conversion.
His manner to the sick man was so reserved and cool, indeed, that it seemed to all but Richard
(who guessed the cause of it, and yet felt its effect more bitterly than all) unkind. This
behavior on the part of his former ally did not injure Balfour in the regards of Agnes; she
resented Charley's conduct, and did her best to redress it by manifesting her own good-will;
she had herself had experience of his shifting moods and causeless changes of demeanor, and
perhaps she was willing to show what small importance she attached to his capricious humors.
Thus it happened that Richard and herself "got on" together much better (as well, of course,
as much more speedily) than the former could have hoped for; for indeed he had, with reason,
expected to find a bitter enemy in Agnes. He improved this advantage to the utmost by taking
occasion, in Charley's absence, to praise the lad, under whose displeasure he manifestly lay.
She answered that he had not, at least from Mr. Balfour's lips, deserved such praise.

"Nay, nay," said Richard, gently; "it is I who have not deserved the lad's good-will; and you,
my dear young lady, ought to be the last to pity me, as I see you do."

"How so?" asked she, in surprise.

"Because," answered he, gravely, "I once strove to keep him from you."

She looked annoyed, and cast a hurried glance toward the place where Mrs. Coe had been sitting;
but there was now only an empty chair there. The widow had purposely withdrawn herself, in
accordance with Richard's wish. Agnes could scarcely leave the sick man without attendance.

"When I say, 'keep him from you,'" continued Richard, "I mean that, being lonely and friendless
(as you see I am but for you three), the society of this bright boy was very dear to me, and
I selfishly strove to secure it when he would fain have been elsewhere. I needed, as you may
well imagine, authority to back me in such efforts, but, unhappily for him, I possessed its
aid. He now resents, and very naturally, the restraint which my companionship once imposed
upon him, and sets down to my account the estrangement which he so bitterly rues. An old man's
friendship is of no great worth at any time; but weighed in the balance against a woman's love--"

"Sir!" interrupted Agnes, with indignation.

"Pardon me," continued Richard, gently; "I see you do not love him. I am deeply grieved, for
the sake of this poor lad, who is as devoted to you as ever, to find it so, and to feel that
it was in part my fault. I will ask him to forgive me if he can."

"Nay, Mr. Balfour, I beseech you, don't do that," cried Agnes, with crimson cheeks.

"As you please," murmured he, gravely. "But, remember, a few days hence, or perhaps a few hours,
and I may be beyond his forgiveness. It will then rest with you, young lady, to clear my memory.
You are not angry with me--you can not be vexed with a dying man."

"No, no." She was sobbing violently; her heart was touched, not only by his own condition,
as she would have had him believe, but by these confidences respecting Charley. There is nothing
more dear to a young girl than the testimony of another man to her lover's fealty; the witness
himself is even guerdoned with some payment of the rich store he bears; and from that moment
Balfour was not only forgiven by Agnes, but even beloved by her.

CHAPTER XLIX.

REST AT LAST.

That the termination of Richard's malady would be fatal did not from the first admit of doubt,
but he lingered on beyond all expectation. The spring came on and found him yet alive at Gethin.
He was never moved from the room to which he had been carried after his mischance--the same
which had been his bedroom in the old times, when he was full of strength and vigor--wherein
he had so often lain awake, revolving schemes to win his Harry, or slept and dreamed of her.
The comparison of his "now" and "then" was melancholy enough, but it was not bitter. His pain
was great, but not out of proportion to his comfort. He had still Harry's love, and he had
even that of two other hearts besides, which he had reconciled and drawn together. In him Charles
had had an unwearying advocate with Agnes, and at last he had won his cause. She had been driven
to take refuge in her last intrenchment--her poverty--and Richard had made that untenable.

"You will not be an heiress, perhaps, my dear," he had said to her, "though you deserve to
be one; but neither will you be undowered. I have left you all I have. Nay, it is not much--a
few score acres by the sea--but they will soon be yours."

She had accepted them unwillingly, and under protest; but a day came when it became necessary
for her to remonstrate with the sick man once again concerning this matter, sorry as she was
to thwart or vex him; she therefore requested, to have a few minutes' talk alone with him.

"Dear Mr. Balfour," said she, gently, "I am going to disobey you in once more reopening the
matter of your kind bequest. Something has happened which has given the affair a wholly different
aspect. Among the visitors yesterday to that dreadful mine, to which people still flock, there
was a Mr. Stratum--a young engineer, it seems, of some reputation; and in his researches in
Wheal Danes they say he has hit upon a great treasure, or what may turn out to be such."

"Ay," said Richard, with a smile; "what's that?"

"A copper lode. It is curious that so many folks should have come and gone there and never
found it before; but there it is, for certain. Mr. Stratum has seen Charles, and tells him
that he can hardly trust himself to speak of its probable value."

"Well, I congratulate you, my dear, on being an heiress."

"Nay, my dear Mr. Balfour, but this must not be. Overborne by your kind pressure I consented
to receive this bequest--a considerable one in itself, indeed--for what it was. I could not
now take advantage of your ignorance of its real value; it distresses me deeply to give you
trouble in your present sad condition, but you must see yourself that circumstances compel me."

"Give me the will, my dear; it is in yonder drawer. Here is a letter folded in it in my handwriting.
What does the superscription say?"

"To Agnes Aird."

"Just so. You were to have opened it after my death, but you may read it now. Please to do
so aloud."

"MY DEAR YOUNG LADY,--When I am gone, it is my earnest desire that your marriage with Charles
Coe shall take place as early as may be found convenient. He will make a good husband to you,
I think; I am sure you will make him a good wife. He loves you for your own sake, which is
the only love worth having. But, as it happens, you are very rich. In the mine which I have
left you--in the northeastern corner of the bottom level--there is a copper lode, the existence
of which is known to me, and to me only. I have every reason to believe that it will be found
in the highest degree productive, and for your dear sake I trust it may be so. True, you will
have money enough and to spare for your own needs, but wealth will not spoil you--in your hands
it will be a great good. To the two injunctions which here follow I have no means to give effect,
and must trust solely to your loyal heart to carry them out. I do so with the most perfect
confidence. Afr. 45). "In the fencing of the old way," says Napoleon was "the Battle of
nothing but two battles, in the mouths of today's soldiers would be boasting, what was only
right that the centurions. "From the soldier spirit that permeated Caesars army his memoirs lay the
attached reports of the African and the Second Spanish War, of which an officer of that second-rate
seems to have the author, this one is in every respect subaltern camp journal, living proof
from. -------------------------------------------------- ---- So when Caesar had the one thing that did not: unlimited political
and military force reliable and quick-witted army, extended his power only over relatively a very
limited room.

This is a 'sick man's fancy,' some will tell you; and yet you will not neglect it."

       *       *       *       *       *

"And you will not, Agnes dear?" whispered Richard, eagerly, when she had thus finished. "This
is the last favor I shall ever ask of you. Promise me! promise me!"

"Oh, Sir, I promise you," cried Agnes, earnestly, and scared by his anxious feebleness; "your
wishes shall be obeyed in all points."

"Good girl, good girl," sighed he; and though the effort pained him sharply, his face exhibited
a great content. "Send Charley to me," said he, presently, in a faint voice.

"But you are tired already," remonstrated Agnes. "You have talked enough for to-day; see him
to-morrow."

"To-morrow!" repeated Richard, with a smile that chilled her heart. "There will be no to-morrow,
dear, for me. Reflect hereafter that you made my last day a happy one. Kiss me, daughter."
This term, which was uttered very fondly, did not surprise her, for she little guessed its
full significance. She bent down, and kissed his forehead. "Send me Charley."

Those were the last words she ever heard him speak.

Agnes had told the young fellow how much feebler Mr. Balfour seemed that day, and warned him
to make his interview as brief as possible; but Charley was of a sanguine temperament, and
to his view the sick man looked better. The recent excitement had heightened his color, and,
besides, he always strove to look his best and cheerfulest with Charley.

Balfour told him all that he had already said to Agnes respecting the provision he had made
for her; he thought it better to relieve her from that task. But, to do Charley justice, he
was neither grasping nor jealous. Nothing seemed more natural to him, or even more reasonable,
than that Agnes should be made sole heiress.

"As for me, I should only make a mess of so much money," said he, laughing. 3, 83 Frontin. substrate. 2, 3, 22). But the camp of Pompey may not
have been here, but only on the slope of the heights of the right Cynoscephalae Bank of Enipeus,
partly because they laid out for Caesar Scotussa, partly because their line of retreat apparently located
on the hills above the camp went to Larisa, she had, after Leakes (vol. 4, p. 482) the reception,
storage east of Pharsalia on the left bank of the Enipeus, they could never be right here
by this deep creek (Leake, vol 4, P. 469) go north and Pompey would have had to flee instead
to Larisa to Lamia. Probably that is the Pompey hit on the right bank of the Fersaliti their
camp and passed the river to beat both, than after the battle to get back to their camp by where they
are then the slopes of Krannon Scotussa and went up, the latter of the Locations to the heights
of the peaks Cynoscephalae. This was not impossible. The Enipeus is a narrow, slowly flowing
stream, the Leake in November was two feet deep and in hot weather is often quite dry (Leake,
Volume 1, p. 448 and vol 4, p. 472; see Lucan. 6, 373), and the battle was fought in the summer.
Also faced the armies the battle three quarters miles apart (App. civ. 2, 65), so that the
Pompeian all preparations could meet and also to ensure the connection with their stock properly
by bridges. Would the battle into a complete rout gone out, of course, would have the retreat and the river
can not be executed, and no doubt for this reason, understood Pompey reluctant to do to beat
here. The most distant from the left rear bases Wing of Pompey, this is also seen, but at least
the withdrawal of their center and of her right wing was not done in such haste that he, under
the given Conditions would be impracticable. Caesar and his inquirer to conceal the excess of
the river, because the same way from all over the story resulting battle lust Pompey to make
clear to the light would, and also the cheap for these moments of retreat.


"Good-by, dear lad--good-by."

Richard well knew it was good-by, not for the present, but forever.

When Mrs. Coe came into the sick man's room she perceived in him a change for the worse, so
marked that it alarmed her greatly, and she was about to softly pull the bell, when Richard
stopped her with a look.

"Don't ring," whispered he, faintly. "Sit down by me, Harry; put your little hand in mine.
I am quite happy. Our boy has kissed me."

"You did not tell him? He does not know?" inquired Harry, anxiously.

"Nay, dear, nay; I am not quite so selfish as that," answered he, gently.

There was a long pause.

"Do you think my mother knew about him?" asked Richard, presently.

"Oh yes--though I strove to deceive her--from the first moment she saw him, Richard, she knew
it well. We never spoke of it, but it was a secret we had in common. She loved him as though
he had been your very self; I am sure of that."

"And she knew me too, Harry."

"Impossible! She could never have concealed that knowledge--with you before her; for you were
her idol, Richard."

"It was afterward," murmured the dying man. "When I had left the house Charley told her something
I had related to him, which convinced her of my identity. I see it all now. She felt that I
was bent on vengeance, and sent you after me to use that weapon of which she knew you were
possessed. If we once came face to face, and you reproached me, my secret was certain to come
out--just as it did, Harry--and then you had but to say, 'Charley is your son.'"

"But why did she not tell me who you were?"

"Because, if you were too late--if the mischief had been done on which she deemed me bent--if
your--if Solomon had come to harm, she would not have had you know that Richard Yorke--the
father of your child--had blood upon his hands. Oh, mother, mother, your last thought was to
keep my memory free from stain!"

He spoke no more for full a minute; no sound was heard except the distant murmur of the sea,
for the day was fine and windless. The April sun shone brightly in upon the pair, as if to
bless their parting.

"Where is Charley?" murmured he.

"He is gone with Agnes for a walk; they will not be long; they talked of going to the Watch
Tower. You remember the old Watch Tower, Richard?"

"Well, ah, well!" answered he, smiling. "It is just twenty years ago. How often have I thought
of it!"

For a moment--before they separated forever--these two seemed to themselves to relive the youth
to which another generation had succeeded.

"Agnes is a far better girl than I was, Richard; but she can not love our boy more than I loved
you."

Richard answered with a smile that glorified each ghastly feature, and brought out in them
a likeness to himself of old.

"She will be his good angel, Harry," whispered Richard, gravely, "and will guard him from himself.
He will need her aid, but it will be sufficient. I trust, I believe, that evil is not Bred
in the Bone with him, as it was with me."

There was a long, long silence, broken by a silvery laugh, which came through the half-opened
window like a strain of cheerful music, then was suddenly cut short.

"Hush, Charley; you forget," said the soft voice of Agnes; "he may be sleeping."

Through the calm spring air the reproof was borne into the sick man's room as clearly as the
sound which had called it forth.

"He is so happy," whispered Harry, gently; "you must forgive him; remember he does not know."

"Yes, yes; it is better so. Dear Charley--happy, happy Charley!"

And a smile once more came over the sick man's face, which did not pass away, for Death had
frozen it there.

L'ENVOI.

Years have passed since Richard Yorke was laid in the church-yard on the hill at Gethin, close
beside his mother, whose bones Harry's pious care had caused to be transported thither. "In
time," thought Harry, "I too shall lie by his side, at last, once more."

Old Trevethick's prophecy was accomplished in the almost fabulous success that attended the
working of Wheal Danes. If its shares are not quoted in the market, that is because the family
have retained it in their own hands, in spite of the most dazzling offers.

Mr. Dodge has a codicil to his story at The George and Vulture now, and expresses his infinite
satisfaction at the fact that "that 'ere Coe" came to grief in the end, as he had so richly
deserved to do. "I don't doubt," says he, "that while he was underground with the bats and
rats he thought of that poor lad as he had treated so spiteful. Things mostly does work round
all right" (he would add) "under Providence, whose motto (if I may say so without disrespect)
is summat like mine: 'Let us have no misunderstandings and no obligation.'" On the other hand,
what "sticks in Mr. Dodge's throat," as he expresses it, and is "a'most enough to make a man
an infidel," is, that "the widow of that 'ere Coe--she as was young Yorke's ruin--is living
at Crompton (in the very house his father had) with all her brood."

Mr. Dodge is right in his facts, if not in his deductions. Out of the proceeds of the mine
the whole home-estate of Crompton has been purchased by Charles Coe, or rather by his wife;
and they both dwell there quite unconscious that he is the lineal descendant of the mad Carew,
with whose wild exploits the country side still teems. If the old blood shows itself, it is
but in quick starts of temper, and occasional "cursory remarks," which sound quite harmless
in halls that have echoed to the Squire's thunderous tones; and even at such times Agnes can
calm him with a word. If the open hand which is Bred in the Bone with him scatters its largesse
somewhat broadcast, the revenues of Crompton, thanks to her, are in the main directed to good
ends. In that stately mansion, whose hospitality is as proverbial though less promiscuous than
of old, not only is there room for Mrs. Coe the elder to dwell with her young folks, without
jar, but in a certain ground-floor chamber, the same he used to inhabit in old times, there
dwells an ancient divine, once Carew's chaplain. New pieces were not played. That even in
time of Sulla the audience to expect them to see this show Time belonging to repeat performances
of Plautus comedies exchanged with titles and personal names, with the Directorate added well that it
was better to a good old, bad as a new piece to see. Of these, because they had not far to
the complete grant of the stage to the dead poets, we find in the Ciceronian period and the
Alexandrianism to not opposed.
 The castled rock, up which
she used to run so lightly, is beyond her powers; she is content to gaze on that with dewy
eyes; but she never fails to seek the church-yard on the hill.

"He was what one would call a hardish husband to her, was old Solomon," say the neighbors;
"and yet you see, when a man is dead, how a wife will keep his memory green!"

THE END

