Unable to plead Karen as the cause for his abstention since Madame von Marwitz regretted that
Karen had missed the piece, Gregory said that he had heard too much perhaps. "I don't believe
I should care for anything the man wrote," he confessed.

"Tiens!" said Madame von Marwitz, opening her eyes. "You know him?"

"Heaven forbid!" Gregory ejaculated, smiling with some tartness.

"But why this rigour? What have you against M. Saumier?"

It was difficult for a young Englishman of conventional tastes to formulate what he had against
M. Saumier. Gregory took refuge in evasions. "Oh, I've glanced at reviews of his plays; seen
his face in illustrated papers. One gets an idea of a man's personality and the kind of thing
he's likely to write."

"A great artist," Madame von Marwitz mildly suggested. "One of our greatest."

"Is he really? I'd hardly grasped that. I had an idea that he was merely one of the clever
lot. But I never can see why one should put oneself, through a man's art, into contact with
the sort of person one would avoid having anything to do with in life."

Madame von Marwitz listened attentively. "Do you refuse to look at a Cellini bronze?"

"Literature is different, isn't it? It's more personal. There's more life in it. If a man's
a low fellow I don't interest myself in his interpretation of life. He's seen nothing that
I'm likely to want to see."

Madame von Marwitz smiled, now with a touch of irony. "But you frighten me. How am I to tell
you that I know M. Saumier?"

Gregory was decidedly taken back. "That's a penalty you have to pay for being a celebrity,
no doubt," he said. "All celebrities know each other, I suppose."

"By no means. I allow no one to be thrust upon me, I assure you. And I have the greatest admiration
for M. Saumier's talent. A great artist cannot be a low fellow; if he were one he would be
so much more than that that the social defect would be negligible. Few great artists, I imagine,
have been of such a character as would win the approval of a garden party at Lambeth Palace.
I am sorry, indeed sorry, that you and Karen missed La Gaine d'Or. It is not a play for the
jeune fille; no; though, holding as I do that nothing so fortifies and arms the taste as liberty,
I should have allowed Karen to see it even before her marriage. It is a play cruel and acrid
and beautiful. Yes; there is great beauty, and it flowers, as so often, on a bitter root. Ah,
well, you will waive your scruples now, I trust. I will take Karen with me to see it when we
are next in Paris together, and that must be soon. We will go for a night or two. You would
like to see Paris with me again; pas vrai, chérie?"

Gregory had been uncomfortably aware of Karen's contemplation while he defended his prejudices,
and he was prepared for an open espousal of her guardian's point of view; it was, he knew,
her own. But he received once more, as he had received already on several occasions, an unexpected
and gratifying proof of Karen's recognition of marital responsibility. "I should like to be
in Paris with you again, Tante," she said, "but not to go to that play. I agreed not to go
to it when Gregory and I were there. I should not care to go when he so much dislikes it."
Her eyes met her guardian's while she spoke. They were gentle and non-committal; they gave
Gregory no cause for triumph, nor Tante for humiliation; they expressed merely her own recognition
of a bond.

Madame von Marwitz rose to the occasion, but--oh, it was there, the soft pressure, never more
present to Gregory's consciousness than when it seemed most absent--she rose too emphatically,
as if to a need. Her eyes mused on the girl's face, tenderly brooded and understood. And Karen's
voice and look had asked her not to understand.

"Ah, that is right; that is a wife," she murmured. "Though, believe me, chérie, I did not know
that I was so transgressing." And turning her glance on Gregory, "Je vous fais mes compliments,"
she added.

Karen said that he must bring his cigar into the drawing-room, for Tante would smoke her cigarette
with him, and there, until bedtime, things went as well as they had at dinner--or as badly;
for part of their badness, Gregory more and more resentfully became aware, was that they were
made to seem to go well, from her side, not from his.

She had a genius, veritably uncanny for, with all sweetness and hesitancy, revealing him as
stiff and unresponsively complacent. It was impossible for him to talk freely with a person
uncongenial to him of the things he felt deeply; and, pertinaciously, over her coffee and cigarettes,
it was the deep things that she softly wooed him to share with her.

He might be stiff and stupid, but he flattered himself that he wasn't once short or sharp--as
he would have been over and over again with any other woman who so bothered him. And he was
sincerely unaware that his courtesy, in its dry evasiveness, was more repudiating than rudeness.

When Karen went with her guardian to her room that night, the little room that looked so choked
and overcrowded with the great woman's multiplied necessities, Madame von Marwitz, sinking
on the sofa, drew her to her and looked closely at her, with an intentness almost tragic, tenderly
smoothing back her hair.

Karen looked back at her very firmly.

"Tell me, my child," Madame von Marwitz said, as if, suddenly, taking refuge in the inessential
from the pressure of her own thoughts, "how did you find our Tallie? I have not heard of that
from you yet."

"She is looking rather pale and thin, Tante; but she is quite well again; already she will
go out into the garden," Karen answered, with, perhaps, an evident relief.

"That is well," said Madame von Marwitz with quiet satisfaction. "That is well. I cannot think
of Tallie as ill. She is never ill. It is perhaps the peaceful, happy life she leads--povera--that
preserves her. And the air, the wonderful air of our Cornwall. I fixed on Cornwall for the
sake of Tallie, in great part; I sought for a truly halcyon spot where that faithful one might
end her days in joy. You knew that, Karen?"

"No, Tante; you never told me that."

"It is so," Madame von Marwitz continued to muse, her eyes on the fire, "It is so. I have given
great thought to my Tallie's happiness. She has earned it." And after a moment, in the same
quiet tone, she went on. "This idea of yours, my Karen, of bringing Tallie up to town; was
it wise, do you think?"

Karen, also, had been looking at the flames. She brought her eyes now back to her guardian.
"Wasn't it wise, Tante? We had asked her to come and stay--long ago, you know."

"Had she seemed eager?"

"Eager? No; I can't imagine Mrs. Talcott eager about anything. We hoped we could persuade her,
that was all. Why not wise, Tante?"

"Only, my child, that after the quiet life there, the solitude that she loves and that I chose
for her sake, the pure sea air and the life among her flowers, London, I fear, would much weary
and fatigue her. Tallie is getting old. We must not forget that Tallie is very old. This illness
warns us. It does not seem to me a good plan. It was your plan, Karen?"

Karen was listening, with a little bewilderment. "It seemed, to me very good. I had not thought
of Mrs. Talcott as so old as that. I always think of her as old, but so strong and tough. It
was Gregory who suggested it, in the first place, and this time, too. When I told him that
I was going he thought of our plan at once and told me that now I must persuade her to come
to us for a good long visit. He is really very fond of Mrs. Talcott, Tante, and she of him,
I think. It would please you to see them together."

Karen spoke on innocently; but, as she spoke, she became aware from a new steadiness in her
guardian's look, that her words had conveyed some significance of which she was herself unconscious.

Madame von Marwitz's hand had tightened on hers. "Ah," she said after a moment. She looked away.

"What is it, Tante?" Karen asked.

Madame von Marwitz had begun to draw deep, slow breaths. Karen knew the sound; it meant a painful
control. "Tante, what is it?" she repeated.

"Nothing. Nothing, my child." Madame von Marwitz laid her arm around Karen's shoulders and
continued to look away from her.

"But it isn't nothing," said Karen, after a little pause. "Something that I have said troubles
or hurts you."

"Is it so? Perhaps you say the truth, my child. Hurts are not new to me. No, my Karen, no.
It is nothing for us to speak of. I understand. But your husband, Karen, he must have found
it thoughtless in me, indelicate, to force myself in when he had hoped so strongly for another
guest."

A slow flush mounted to Karen's cheek. She kept silence for a moment, then in a careful voice
she said: "No, Tante; I do not believe that."

"No?" said Madame von Marwitz. "No, my Karen?"

"He knew, on the contrary, that I hoped to have you soon--at any time that you could come,"
said Karen, in slightly trembling tones.

Madame von Marwitz nodded. "He knew that, as you tell me; and, knowing it, he asked Tallie;
hoping that with her installed--for a long visit--my stay might be prevented. Do not let us
hide from each other, my Karen. We have hidden too long and it is the beginning of the end
if we may not say to each other what we see."

Sitting with downcast eyes, Karen was silent, struggling perhaps with new realisations.

Madame von Marwitz bent to kiss her forehead and then, resuming the tender stroking of her
hair, she went on: "Your husband dislikes me. Let us look the ugly thing full in the face.
You know it, and I know it, and--parbleu!--he knows it well. There; the truth is out. Ah, the
brave little heart; it sought to hide its sorrow from me. But Tante is not so dull a person.
The loneliness of heart must cease for you. And the sorrow, too, may pass away. Be patient,
Karen. You will see. He may come to feel more kindly towards the woman who so loves his wife.
Strange, is it not, and a chastisement for my egotism, if I have still any of that frothy element
lingering in my nature, that I should find, suddenly, at the end of my life--so near me, bound
to me by such ties--one who is unwilling to trust me, oh, for the least little bit; so unwilling
to accept me at merely my face value. Most people," she added, "have loved me easily."

Karen sat on in silence. Her guardian knew this apathetic silence, and that it was symptomatic
in her of deep emotion. And, the contagion of the suffering beside her gaining upon her, her
own fictitious calm wavered. She bent again to look into the girl's averted face. "Karen, chérie,"
she said, and now with a quicker utterance; "it is not worse than I yet realise? You do not
hide something that I have not yet seen. It is dislike; I accept it. It is aversion, even.
But his love for you; that is strong, sincere? He will not make it too difficult for me? I
am not wrong in coming here to be with my child?"

Karen at length turned her eyes on her guardian with a heavy look. "What would you find too
difficult?" she asked.

Madame von Marwitz hesitated slightly, taken aback. But she grasped in an instant her advantage.
"That by being here I should feel that I came between you and your husband. That by being here
I made it more difficult for you."

"I should not be happier if you were away--if what you think is true, should I?" said Karen.

"Yes, my child," Madame von Marwitz returned, and now almost with severity. "You would. You
would not so sharply feel your husband's aversion for me if I were not here. You would not
have it in your ears; before your eyes."

"I thought that you talked together quite easily to-night," Karen continued. "I saw, of course,
that you did not understand each other; but with time that might be. I thought that if you
were here he would by degrees come to know you, for he does not know you yet."

"We talked easily, did we not, my child, to shield you, and you were not more deceived by the
ease than he or I. He does not understand me? I hope so indeed. But to say that I do not understand
him shows already your wish to shield him, and at my expense. I do understand him; too well.
And if there is this repugnance in him now, may it not grow with the enforced intimacy? That
is my fear, my dread."

"He has never said that he disliked you."

"Said it? To you? I should imagine not, parbleu!"

"He has only said," Karen pursued with a curious doggedness, "that he did not feel that you
cared for him to care."

"Ah! Is it so? You have talked of it, then? And he has said that? And did you believe it? Of me?"

But the growing passion and urgency of her voice seemed to shut Karen more closely in upon
herself rather than sweep her into impulsive confidence. There was a hot exasperation in Madame
von Marwitz's eye as it studied the averted, stubborn head. "No," was the reply she received.

"No, no, indeed. It was not the truth that he said to you and you know that it was not the
truth. Oh, I make no accusation against your husband; he believed it the truth; but you cannot
believe that I would rest satisfied with what must make you unhappy. And how can you be happy
if your husband does not care for me? How can you be happy if he feels repugnance for me? You
cannot be. Is it not so? Or am I wrong?"

"No," Karen again repeated.

"Then," said Madame von Marwitz, and a sob now lifted her voice, "then do not let him put it
upon me. Not that! Oh promise me, my Karen! For that would be the end."

Karen turned to her suddenly, and passed her arms around her. "Tante--Tante," she said; "what
are you saying? The end? There could not be an end for us! Do not speak so. Do not. Do not."
She was trembling.

"Ah--could there not! Could there not!" With the words Madame von Marwitz broke into violent
sobs. "Has it not been my doom, always--always to have what I love taken from me! You love
this man who hates me! You defend him! He will part you from me! I foresee it! From the first
it has been my dread!"

"No one can ever part us, Tante. No one. Ever." Karen whispered, holding her tightly, and her
face, bending above the sobbing woman, was suddenly old and stricken in its tormented and almost
maternal love. "Tante; remember your own words. You gave me courage. Will you not be patient?
For my sake? Be patient, Tante. Be patient. He does not know you yet."

CHAPTER XXIV

Gregory heard no word of the revealing talk; yet, when he and Karen were alone, he was aware
of a new chill, or a new discretion, in the atmosphere. It was as if a veil of ice, invisible
yet impassable, hung between them, and he could only infer that she had something to hide,
he could only suspect, with a bitterer resentment, that Madame von Marwitz had been more directly
exerting her pressure.

The pressure, whatever it had been, had the effect of making Karen, when they were all three
confronted, more calm, more mildly cheerful than before, more than ever the fond wife who did
not even suspect that a flaw might be imagined in her happiness.

Gregory had an idea--his only comfort in this sorry maze where he found himself so involved--that
this attitude of Karen's, combined with his own undeviating consideration, had a disconcerting
effect upon Madame von Marwitz and at moments induced her to show her weapon too openly in
their wary duel. If he ever betrayed his dislike Karen must see that it was Tante who wouldn't
allow him to conceal it, who, sorrowfully and gently, turned herself about in the light she
elicited and displayed herself to Karen as rejected and uncomplaining. He hoped that Karen
saw it. But he could be sure of nothing that Karen saw. The flawless loyalty of her outward
bearing might be but the shield for a deepening hurt. All that he could do was what, in former
days and in different conditions, Mrs. Talcott had advised him to do; "hang on," and parry
Madame von Marwitz's thrusts. She had come, he more and more felt sure of it, urged by her
itching jealousy, for the purpose of making mischief; and if it was not a motive of which she
was conscious, that made her but the more dangerous with her deep, instinctive craft.

Meanwhile if there were fundamental anxieties to fret one's heart, there were superficial irritations
that abraded one's nerves.

Karen was accustomed to the turmoil that surrounded the guarded shrine where genius slept or
worked, too much accustomed, without doubt, to realise its effect upon her husband.

The electric bells were never silent. Seated figures, bearing band-boxes or rolls of music,
filled the hall at all hours of the day and night. Alert interviewers button-holed him on his
way in and out and asked for a few details about Mrs. Jardine's youth, and her relationship
to Madame Okraska.

Madame von Marwitz rose capriciously and ate capriciously; trays with strange meals upon them
were carried at strange hours to her rooms, and Barker, Mrs. Barker and Rose all quarrelled
with Louise.

Madame von Marwitz also showed oddities of temper which, with all her determination to appear
at her best, it did not occur to her to control, oddities that met, from Karen, with a fond
tolerance.

It startled Gregory when they saw Madame von Marwitz, emerging from her room, administer two
smart boxes upon Louise's ears, remarking as she did so, with gravity rather than anger: "Voilà
pour toi, ma fille."

"Is Madame von Marwitz in the habit of slapping her servants?" he asked Karen in their room,
aware that his frigid mien required justification.

She looked at him through the veil of ice. "Tante's servants adore her."

"Well, it seems a pity to take such an advantage of their adoration."

"Louise is sometimes very clumsy and impertinent."

"I can't help thinking that that sort of treatment makes servants impertinent."

"I do not care to hear your criticism of my guardian, Gregory."

"I beg your pardon," said Gregory.

Betty Jardine met him on a windy April evening in Queen Anne's Gate. "I see that you had to
sacrifice me, Gregory," she said. She smiled; she bore no grudge; but her smile was tinged
with a shrewd pity.

He felt that he flushed. "You mean that you've not been to see us since the occasion."

"I've not been asked!" Betty laughed.

"Madame von Marwitz is with us, you know," Gregory proffered rather lamely.

"Yes; I do know. How do you like having a genius domiciled? I hear that she is introducing
Karen into a very artistic set. After the Bannisters, Mr. Claude Drew. He is back from America
at last, it seems, and is an assiduous adorer. You have seen a good deal of him?"

"I haven't seen him at all. Has he been back for long?"

"Four or five days only, I believe; but I don't know how often he and Madame von Marwitz and
Karen have been seen together. Don't think me a cat, Gregory; but if she is engaged in a flirtation
with that most unpleasant young man I hope you will see to it that Karen isn't used as a screen.
There have been some really horrid stories about him, you know."

Gregory parted from his sister-in-law, perturbed. Indiscreet and naughty she might be, but
Betty was not a cat. The veil of ice was so impenetrable that no sound of Karen's daily life
came to him through it. He had not an idea of what she did with herself when he wasn't there,
or, rather, of what Madame von Marwitz did with her.

"You've been seeing something of Mr. Claude Drew, I hear," he said to Karen that evening. "Do
you like him better than you used to do?" They were in the drawing-room before dinner and dinner
had been, as usual, waiting for half an hour for Madame von Marwitz.

Gregory's voice betrayed more than a kindly interest, and Karen answered coldly, if without
suspicion; "No; I do not like him better. But Tante likes him. It is not I who see him, it
is Tante. I am only with them sometimes."

"And I? Am I to be with them sometimes?" Gregory inquired with an air of gaiety.

"If you will come back to tea to-morrow, Gregory," she answered gravely, "you will meet him.
He comes to tea then."

For the last few days Gregory had fallen into the habit of only getting back in time for dinner.
"You know it's only because I usually find that you've gone out with your guardian that I haven't
come back in time for tea," he observed.

"I know," Karen returned, without aggressiveness. "And so, to-morrow, you will find us if you
come."

He got back at tea-time next day, expecting to make a fourth only of the small group; but,
on his way to the drawing-room, he paused, arrested, in the hall, where a collection of the
oddest looking hats and coats he had ever seen were piled and hung.

One of the hats was a large, discoloured, cream-coloured felt, much battered, with its brown
band awry; one was of the type of flat-brimmed silk, known in Paris as the Latin Quartier;
another was an enormous sombrero. Gregory stood frowning at these strange signs somewhat as
if they had been a drove of cockroaches. He had, as never yet before, the sense of an alien
and offensive invasion of his home, and an old, almost forgotten disquiet smote upon him in
the thought that what to him was strange was to Karen normal. This was her life and she had
never really entered his.

In the drawing-room, he paused again at the door, and looked over the company assembled under
the Bouddha's smile. Madame von Marwitz was its centre; pearl-wreathed, silken and silver,
she leaned opulently on the cushions of the sofa where she sat, and Karen at the tea-table
seemed curiously to have relapsed into the background place where he had first found her. She
was watching, with her old contented placidity, a scene in which she had little part. No, mercifully,
though in it she was not of it. This was Gregory's relieving thought as his eye ran over them,
the women with powdered faces and extravagant clothes and the men with the oddest collars and
boots and hair. "Shoddy Bohemians," was his terse definition of them; an inaccurate definition;
for though, in the main, Bohemians, they were not, in the main, shoddy.

Belot was there, with his massive head and sagacious eyes; and a famous actress, ugly, thin,
with a long, slightly crooked face, tinted hair, and the melancholy, mysterious eyes of a llama.
Claude Drew, at a little table behind Madame von Marwitz, negligently turned the leaves of
a book. Lady Rose Harding, the only one of the company with whom Gregory felt an affinity,
though a dubious one, talked to the French actress and to Madame von Marwitz. Lady Rose had
ridden across deserts on camels, and sketched strange Asiatic mountains, and paid a pilgrimage
to Tolstoi, and written books on all these exploits; and she had been to the Adirondacks that
summer with the Aspreys and Madame von Marwitz, and was now writing a book on that. In a corner
a vast, though youthful, German Jew, with finely crisped red-gold hair, large lips and small,
kind eyes blinking near-sightedly behind gold-rimmed spectacles, sat with another young man,
his hands on his widely parted knees, in an attitude suggesting a capacity to cope with the
most unwieldy instruments of an orchestra; his companion, black and emaciated, talked in German,
with violent gestures and a strange accent, jerking constantly a lock of hair out of his eyes.
A squat, fat little woman, bundled up, clasping her knees with her joined hands, sat on a footstool
at Madame von Marwitz's feet, gazing at her and listening to her with a smile of obsequious
attention, and now and then, suddenly, and as if irrelevantly, breaking into a jubilant laugh.
Her dusty hair looked as though, like the White Queen's, a comb and brush might be entangled
in its masses; the low cut neck of her bodice displayed a ruddy throat wreathed in many strings
of dirty seed-pearls, and her grey satin dress was garnished with dirty lace.

Gregory had stood for an appreciable moment at the door surveying the scene, before either
Karen or her guardian saw him, and it was then the latter who did the honours of the occasion,
naming him to the bundled lady, who was an English poetess, and to Mlle. Suzanne Mauret, the
French actress. The inky-locked youth turned out to be a famous Russian violinist, and the
vast young German Jew none other than Herr Franz Lippheim, to whom--this was the fact that
at once, violently, engaged Gregory's attention--Madame von Marwitz had destined Karen.

Franz Lippheim, after Gregory had spoken to everybody and when he at last was introduced, sprang
to his feet and came forward, beaming so intently from behind his spectacles that Gregory,
fearing that he might, conceivably, be about to kiss him, made an involuntary gesture of withdrawal.
But Herr Lippheim, all unaware, grasped his hand the more vigorously. "Our little Karen's husband!"
"Unserer kleinen Karen's Mann!" he uttered in a deeply moved German.

In the driest of tones Gregory asked Karen for some tea, and while he stood above her Herr
Lippheim's beam continued to include them both.

"Sit down here, Franz, near me," said Karen. She, too, had smiled joyously as Herr Lippheim
greeted her husband. The expression of her face now had changed.

Herr Lippheim obeyed, placing, as before, his hands on his knees, the elbows turned outward,
and contemplating Karen's husband with a gaze that might have softened a heart less steeled
than Gregory's.

This, then, was Madame von Marwitz's next move; her next experiment in seeing what she could
"do." Was not Herr Lippheim a taunt? And with what did he so unpleasantly associate the name
of the French actress? The link clicked suddenly. La Gaine d'Or, in its veiling French, was
about to be produced in London, and it was Mlle. Mauret who had created the heroine's role
in Paris. These were the people by means of whom Madame von Marwitz displayed her power over
Karen's life;--a depraved woman (he knew and cared nothing about Mlle. Mauret's private morality;
she was the more repulsive to him if her morals weren't bad; only a woman of no morals should
be capable of acting in La Gaine d'Or;) that impudent puppy Drew, and this preposterous young
man who addressed Karen by her Christian name and included himself in his inappropriate enthusiasm.

He drank his tea, standing in silence by Karen's side, and avoiding all encounter with Herr
Lippheim's genial eyes.

"It is like old times, isn't it, Franz?" said Karen, ignoring her husband and addressing her
former suitor. "It has been--oh, years--since I have heard such talk. Tante needs all of you,
really, to draw her out. She has been wonderful this afternoon, hasn't she?"

"Ah, kolossal!" said Herr Lippheim, making no gesture, but expressing the depths of his appreciation
by an emphasized solemnity of gaze.

"You are right, I think, and so does Tante, evidently," Karen continued, "about the tempo rubato
in the Mozart. It is strange that Monsieur Ivanowski doesn't feel it."

"Ah! but that is it, he does feel it; it is only that he does not think it," said Herr Lippheim,
now running his fingers through his hair. "Hear him play the Mozart. He then contradicts in
his music all that his words have said."

But though Karen talked so pointedly to him, Herr Lippheim could not keep his eyes or his thoughts
from Gregory. "You are a musician, too, Mr. Jardine?" he smiled, bending forward, blinking
up through his glasses and laboriously carving out his excellent English. "You do not express,
but you have the soul of an artist? Or perhaps you, too, play, like our Karen here."

"No," Gregory returned, with a chill utterance. "I know nothing about music."

"Is it so, Karen?" Herr Lippheim questioned, his guileless warmth hardly tempered.

"My husband is no artist," Karen answered.

It was from her tone rather than from Gregory's that Herr Lippheim seemed to receive his intimation;
he was a little disconcerted; he could interpret Karen's tones. "Ach so! Ach so!" he said;
but, his good-will still seeking to find its way to the polished and ambiguous person who had
gained Karen's heart,--"But now you will live amongst artists, Mr. Jardine, and you will hear
music, great music, played to you by the greatest. So you will come to feel it in the heart."
And as Gregory, to this, made no reply, "You will educate him, Karen; is it not so? With you
and the great Tante, how could it be otherwise?"

"I am afraid that one cannot create the love of art when it is not there, Franz," Karen returned.
She was neither plaintive nor confiding; yet there was an edge in her voice which Gregory felt
and which, he knew, he was intended to feel. Karen was angry with him.

"Have you seen Belot's portrait of Tante, yet, Franz?"--she again excluded her husband;--"It
is just finished."

Herr Lippheim had seen it only that morning and he repeated, but now in preoccupied tones,
"Kolossal!"

They talked, and Gregory stood above them, aloof from their conversation frigidly gazing over
the company, his elbow in his hand, his neat fingers twisting his moustache. If he was giving
Madame von Marwitz a handle against him he couldn't help it. Over the heads of Karen and Herr
Lippheim his eyes for a moment encountered hers. They looked at each other steadily and neither
feigned a smile.

Eleanor Scrotton arrived at six, flushed and flustered.

"Thank heaven, I haven't missed her!" she said to Gregory, to whom, to-day, Eleanor was an
almost welcome sight. Her eyes had fixed themselves on Mlle. Mauret. "Have you had a talk with
her yet?"

"I haven't had a talk and I yield my claim to you," said Gregory. "Are you very eager to meet
the lady?"

"Who wouldn't be, my dear Gregory! What a wonderful face! What thought and suffering! Oh, it
has been the most extraordinary of stories. You don't know? Well, I will tell you about her
some time. She is, doubtless, one of the greatest living actresses. And she is still quite
young. Barely forty."

He watched Eleanor make her way to the actress's side, reflecting sardonically upon the modern
growths of British tolerance. Half the respectable matrons in London would, no doubt, take
their girls to see La Gaine d'Or; mercifully, they would in all probability not understand
it; but if they did, was there anything that inartistic London would not swallow in its terror
of being accused of philistinism?

The company was dispersing. Herr Lippheim stood holding Karen's hands saying, as she shook
them, that he would bring das Mütterchen and die Schwesterchen to-morrow. Belot came for a
last cup of tea and drank it in sonorous draughts, exchanging a few words with Gregory. He
had nothing against Belot. Mr. Drew leaned on Madame von Marwitz's sofa and spoke to her in
a low voice while she looked at him inscrutably, her eyes half closed.

"Lucky man," said Lady Rose to Gregory, on her way out, "to have her under your roof. I hope
you are a scrupulous Boswell and taking notes." In the hall Barker was assorting the sombrero,
the Latin Quartier and the cream-coloured felt; the last belonged to Herr Lippheim, who was
putting it on when Gregory escorted Lady Rose to the door.

Gregory gave the young man a listless hand. He couldn't forgive Herr Lippheim. That he should
ever, under whatever encouragements from Karen's guardian, have dared to aspire to her, was
a monstrous fact.

He watched the thick rims of Herr Lippheim's ears, under the cream-coloured felt, descending
in the lift and wondered if the sight was to be often inflicted upon him.

When he went back to the drawing-room, Karen was alone. Madame von Marwitz had taken Miss Scrotton
to her own room. Karen was standing by the tea-table, looking down at it, her hands on the
back of the chair from which she had risen to say good-bye to her guardian's guests. She raised
her eyes as her husband came in and they rested on him with a strange expression.

CHAPTER XXV

"Will you shut the door, Gregory?" Karen said. "I want to speak to you." The feeling with which
he looked at her was that with which he had faced her sleeping, as he thought, after their
former dispute. The sense of failure and disillusion was upon him. As before, it was only of
her guardian that she was thinking. He knew that he had given Madame von Marwitz a handle against
him.

He obeyed her and when he came and stood before her she went on. "Before we all meet at dinner
again, I must ask you something. Do not make your contempt of Tante's guests--and of mine--more
plain to her than you have already done this afternoon."

"Did I make it plain?" Gregory asked, after a moment.

"I think that if I felt it so strongly, Tante must have felt it," said Karen, and to this,
after another pause, Gregory found nothing further to say than "I'm sorry."

"I hardly think," said Karen, holding the back of her chair tightly and looking down again
while she spoke, "that you can have realized that Herr Lippheim is not only Tante's friend,
but mine. I don't think you can have realized how you treated him. I know that he is very simple
and unworldly; but he is good and kind and faithful; he is a true artist--almost a great one,
and he has the heart of a child. And beside him, while you were hurting and bewildering him
so to-day, you looked to me--how shall I say it--petty, yes, and foolish, yes, and full of
self-conceit."

The emotion with which Gregory heard her speak these words, deliberately, if in a hardened
and controlled voice, expressed itself, as emotion did with him, in a slight, fixed smile.
He could not pause to examine Karen's possible justice; that she should speak so, to him, was
the overpowering fact.

"I imagined that I behaved with courtesy," he said.

"Yes, you were courteous," Karen replied. "You made me think of a painted piece of wood while
he was like a growing tree."

"Your simile is certainly very mortifying," said Gregory, continuing to smile. But he was not
mortified. He was cruelly hurt.

"I do not wish to mortify you. I have not mortified you, because you think yourself above it
all. But I would like, if I could," said Karen, "to make you see the truth. I would like to
make you see that in behaving as you have you show yourself not above it but below it."

"And I would like to make you see the truth, too," Gregory returned, in the voice of his bitter
hurt; "and I ask you, if your prejudice will permit of it, to make some allowance for my feeling
when I found you surrounded by--this rabble."

"Rabble? My guardian's friends?" Karen had grown ashen.

"I hope they're not; but I'm not concerned with her friends; I'm concerned with you. She can
take people in, on the artistic plane, whom it's not fit that you should meet. That horrible
actress,--I wouldn't have her come within sight of you if I could help it. Your guardian knows
my feeling about the parts she plays. She had no business to ask her here. As for Herr Lippheim,
I have no doubt that he is an admirable person in his own walk of life, but he is a preposterous
person, and it is preposterous that your guardian should have thought of him as a possible
husband for you." Gregory imagined that he was speaking carefully and choosing his words, but
he was aware that his anger coloured his voice. He had also been aware, some little time before,
in a lower layer of consciousness, of the stir and rustle of steps and dresses in the passage
outside--Madame von Marwitz conducting Eleanor Scrotton to the door. And now--had she actually
been listening, or did his words coincide with the sudden opening of the door?--Madame von
Marwitz herself appeared upon the threshold.

Her face made the catastrophe all too evident. She had heard him. She had, he felt convinced,
crept quietly back and stood to listen before entering. His memory reconstructed the long pause
between the departing rustle and this apparition.

Madame von Marwitz's face had its curious look of smothered heat. The whites of her eyes were
suffused though her cheeks were pale.

"I must apologise," she said. "I overheard you as I entered, Mr. Jardine, and what I heard
I cannot ignore. What is it that you say to Karen? What is it that you say of the man I thought
of as a possible husband for her?"

She advanced into the room and laying her arm round Karen's shoulders she stood confronting him.

"I don't think I can discuss this with you," said Gregory. "I am very sorry that you overheard
me." The slight smile of his pain had gone. He looked at Madame von Marwitz with a flinty eye.

"Ah, but you must discuss it; you shall," said Madame von Marwitz. "You say things to my child
that I am not to overhear. You seek to poison her mind against me. You take her from me and
then blacken me in her eyes. A possible husband! Would to God," said Madame von Marwitz, with
sombre fury, "that the possibility had been fulfilled! Would to God that it were my brave,
deep-hearted Franz who were her husband--not you, most ungrateful, most ungenerous of men."

"Tante," said Karen, who still stood looking down, grasping her chair-back and encircled by
her guardian's arm, "he did not mean you to hear him. Forgive him."

"I beg your pardon, Karen," said Gregory, "I am very sorry that Madame von Marwitz overheard
me; but I have said nothing for which I wish to apologize."

"Ah! You hear him!" cried Madame von Marwitz, and the inner conflagration now glittered in
her eyes like flames behind the windows of a burning house. "You hear him, Karen? Forgive him!
How can I forgive him when he has made you wretched! How can I ever forgive him when he tears
your life by thrusting me forth from it--me--and everything I am and mean! You have witnessed
it, Karen--you have seen my efforts to win your husband. You have seen his contempt for me,
his rancour, his half-hidden insolence. Never--ah, never in my life have I faced such humiliation
as has been offered to me beneath his roof--humiliations, endured for your sake, Karen--for
yours only! Ah"--releasing Karen suddenly, she advanced a step towards Gregory, with a startling
cry, stretching out her arm--"ungrateful and ungenerous indeed! And you find yourself one to
scorn my Franz! You find yourself one to sneer at my friends, to stand and look at them and
me as if we were vermin infesting your room! Did I not see it! You! justes cieux! with your
bourgeois little world; your little--little world--so small--so small! your people like dull
beasts pacing in a cage, believing that in the meat thrust in between their bars and the number
of steps to be taken from side to side lies all the meaning of life; people who survey with
their heavy eyes of surfeit the free souls of the world! Hypocrites! Pharisees! And to this
cage you have consigned my child! and you would make of her, too, a creature of counted paces
and of unearned meat! You would shut her in from the life of beauty and freedom that she has
known! Ah never! never! there you do not triumph! You have taken her from me; you have won
her love; but her mind is not yours; she sees the cage as I do; you do not share the deep things
of the soul with her. And in her loyal heart--ah, I know it--will be the cry, undying, for
one whose heart you have trod upon and broken!"

With these last words, gasped forth on rising sobs, Madame von Marwitz sank into the chair
where Karen still leaned and broke into passionate tears.

Gregory again was smiling, with the smile now of decorum at bay, of embarrassment rather than
contempt; but to Karen's eyes it was the smile of supercilious arrogance. She looked at him
sternly over her guardian's bowed and oddly rolling head. "Speak, Gregory! Speak!" she commanded.

"My dear," said Gregory--their voices seemed to pass above the clash and uproar of stormy waters,
Madame von Marwitz had abandoned herself to an elemental grief--"I have nothing to say to your
guardian."

"To me, then," Karen clenched her hands on the back of the chair; "to me, then, you have something
to say. Is it not true? Have you not repulsed her efforts to come near you? Have you not, behind
her back, permitted yourself to speak with scorn of the man she hoped I would marry?"

Gregory paused, and in the pause, as he observed, Madame von Marwitz was able to withhold for
a moment her strange groans and gaspings while she listened. "I don't think there has been
any such effort," he said. "We were both keeping up appearances, your guardian and I; and I
think that I kept them up best. As for Herr Lippheim, it was only when you accused me of rudeness
to him that I confessed how much it astonished me to find that he was the man your guardian
had wished you to marry. It does astonish me. Herr Lippheim isn't even a gentleman."

"Enough!" cried Madame von Marwitz. She sprang to her feet. "Enough!" she said, half suffocated.
"It is the voice of the cage! We will not stay to hear its standards applied. Come with me,
Karen, that I may say farewell to you."

She caught Karen by the arm. Her face was strange, savage, suffused. Gregory went to open the
door for them. "Base one!" she said to him. "Ignominious one!"

She drew Karen swiftly along the passage and, still keeping her sharp clasp of her wrist while
she opened and closed the door of her room, she sank, encircling her with her arms, upon the
sofa, and wept loudly over her.

Karen, too, was now weeping; heavy, shaking sobs.

"My child! My poor child!" Madame von Marwitz murmured brokenly after a little time had gone.
"I would have spared you this. It has come. We have both seen it. And now, so that your life
may not be ruined, I must leave it."

"But Tante--my Tante--" sobbed Karen--Madame von Marwitz did not remember that Karen had ever
so sobbed before--"you cannot mean those words. What shall I do if you say this? What is left
for me?"

"My child, your life is left you," said Madame von Marwitz, holding her close and speaking
with her lips in the girl's hair. "Your husband's love is left; the happiness that you chose
and that I shall shatter if I stay; ah, yes, my Karen, how deny it now? I see my path. It is
plain before me. To-night I go to Mrs. Forrester and to-morrow I breathe the air of Cornwall."

"But Tante--wait--wait. You will see Gregory again? You will let him explain? Oh, let me first
talk with him! He says bitter things, but so do you, Tante; and he does not mean to offend
as much as you think."

At this, after a little pause, Madame von Marwitz drew herself slightly away and put her handkerchief
to her eyes and cheeks. The violence of her grief was over. "Does he still so blind you, Karen?"
she then asked. "Do you still not see that your husband hates me--and has hated me from the
beginning?"

"Not hate!--Not hate!" Karen sobbed. "He does not understand you--that is all. Only wait--till
to-morrow. Only let me talk to him!"

"No. He does not understand. That is evident," said Madame von Marwitz with a bitter smile.
"Nor will he ever understand. Will you talk to him, Karen, so that he shall explain why he
smirches my love and my sincerity? You know as well as I what was the meaning of those words
of his. Can you, loving me, ask me to sue further for the favour of a man who has so insulted
me? No. It cannot be. I cannot see him again. You and I are still to meet, I trust; but it
cannot again be under this roof."

Karen now sobbed helplessly, leaning forward, her face in her hands, and Madame von Marwitz,
again laying an arm around her shoulders, gazed with majestic sorrow into the fire. "Even so,"
she said at last, when Karen's sobs had sunken to long, broken breaths; "even so. It is the
law of life. Sacrifice: sacrifice: to the very end. Life, to the artist, must be this altar
where he lays his joys. We are destined to be alone, Karen. We are driven forth into the wilderness
for the sins of the people. So I have often seen it, and cried out against it in my tortured
youth, and struggled against it in my strength and in my folly. But now, with another strength,
I am enabled to stand upright and to face the vision of my destiny. I am to be alone. So be it."

No answer came, from Karen and Madame von Marwitz, after a pause, continued, in gentler, if
no less solemn tones: "And my child, too, is brave. She, too, will stand upright. She, too,
has her destiny to fulfil--in the world--not in the wilderness. And if the burden should ever
grow too heavy, and the road cut her feet too sharply, and the joy turn to dust, she will remember--always--that
Tante's arms and heart are open to her--at all times, in all places, and to the end of life.
And now," this, with a sigh of fatigue, came on a more matter-of-fact note--"let a cab be called
for me. Louise will follow with my boxes."

Karen's tears had ceased. She made no further protest or appeal.

Rising, she dried her eyes, rang and ordered the cab to be called and found her guardian's
white cloak and veiled hat.

And while she shrouded her in these, Madame von Marwitz, still gazing, as if at visions, in
the fire, lifted her arms and bent her head with almost the passivity of a dead thing. Once
or twice she murmured broken phrases: "My ewe-lamb;--taken;--I am very weary. Mon Dieu, mon
Dieu,--and is this, then, the end...."

She rested heavily on Karen's shoulder in rising. "Forgive me," she said, leaning her head
against hers, "forgive me, beloved one. I have done harm where I meant to make a safer happiness.
Forgive me, too, for my bitter words. I should not have spoken as I did. My child knows that
it is a hot and passionate heart."

Karen, in silence, turned her face to her guardian's breast.

"And do not," said Madame von Marwitz, speaking with infinite tenderness, while she stroked
the bent head, "judge your husband too hardly because of this. He gives what love he can; as
he knows love. It is as my child said; he does not understand. It is not given to some to understand.
He has lived in a narrow world. Do not judge him hardly, Karen; it is for the wiser, stronger,
more loving soul to lift the smaller towards the light. He can still give my child happiness.
In that trust I find my strength."

They went down the passage together. Gregory came to the drawing-room door. He would have spoken,
have questioned, but, shrinking from him and against Karen, as if from an intolerable searing,
Madame von Marwitz hastened past him. He heard the front door open and the last silent pause
of farewell on the threshold.

Louise scuttled by past him to her mistress's vacated rooms. She did not see him and he heard
that she muttered under her breath: "Ah! par exemple! C'est trap fort, ma parole d'honneur!"

As Karen came back from the door he went to meet her.

"Karen," he said, "will you come and talk with me, now?"

She put aside his hand. "I cannot talk. Do not come to me," she said. "I must think." And going
into their room she shut the door.

CHAPTER XXVI

The telephone sounded while Gregory next morning ate his solitary breakfast, and the voice
of Mrs. Forrester, disembodied of all but its gravity, asked him, if he would, to come and
see her immediately.

Gregory asked if Madame von Marwitz were with her. He was not willing, after the final affront
that she had put upon him, to encounter Madame von Marwitz again in circumstances where he
might seem to be justifying himself. But, with a deeper drop, the disembodied voice informed
him that Madame von Marwitz, ten minutes before, had driven to the station on her way to Cornwall.
"You will understand, I think, Gregory," said Mrs. Forrester, "that it is hardly possible for
her to face in London, as yet, the situation that you have made for her."

Gregory, to this, replied, shortly, that he would come to her at once, reserving his comments
on the imputed blame.

He had passed an almost sleepless night, lying in his little dressing-room bed where, by a
tacit agreement, never explicitly recognized, he had slept, now, for so many nights. Cold fears,
shaped at last in definite forms, stood round him and bade him see the truth. His wife did
not love him. From the beginning he had been as nothing to her compared with her guardian.
The pale, hard light of her eyes as she had said to him that afternoon, "Speak!" seemed to
light the darkness with bitter revelations. He knew that he was what would be called, sentimentally,
a broken-hearted man; but it seemed that the process of breaking had been gradual; so that
now, when his heart lay in pieces, his main feeling was not of sharp pain but of dull fatigue,
not of tragic night, but of a grey commonplace from which all sunlight had slowly ebbed away.

He found Mrs. Forrester in her morning-room among loudly singing canaries and pots of jonquils;
and as he shook hands with her he saw that this old friend, so old and so accustomed that she
was like a part of his life, was embarrassed. The wrinkles on her withered, but oddly juvenile,
face seemed to have shifted to a pattern of perplexity and pained resolution. He was not embarrassed,
though he was beaten and done in a way Mrs. Forrester could not guess at; yet he felt an awkwardness.

They had known each other for a life-time, he and Mrs. Forrester, but they were not intimate;
and how intimate they would have to become if they were to discuss with anything like frankness
the causes and consequences of Madame von Marwitz's conduct! A gloomy indifference settled
on Gregory as he realized that her dear friend's conduct was the one factor in the causes and
consequences that Mrs. Forrester would not be able to appraise at its true significance.

She shook his hand, and seating herself at a little table and slightly tapping it with her
fingers, "Now, my dear Gregory," she said, "will you, please, tell me why you have acted like
this?"

"Isn't my case prejudged?" Gregory asked, reconstructing the scene that must have taken place
last night when Madame von Marwitz had appeared before her friend.

"No, Gregory; it is not," Mrs. Forrester returned with some terseness, for she felt his remark
to be unbecoming. "I hope to have some sort of explanation from you."

"I'm quite ready to explain; but it's hardly possible that my explanation will satisfy you,"
said Gregory. "You spoke, just now, when you called me up, of a situation and said I'd made
it. My explanation can only consist in saying that I didn't make it; that Madame von Marwitz
made it; that she came to us in order to make it and then to fix the odium of it on me."

Already Mrs. Forrester had flushed. She looked hard at the pot of jonquils near her. "You really
believe that?"

"I do. She can't forgive me for not liking her," said Gregory.

"And you don't like her. You own to it."

"I don't like her. I own to it," Gregory replied with a certain frosty relief. It was like
taking off damp, threadbare garments that had chilled one for a long time and facing the winter
wind, naked, but invigorated. "I dislike her very much."

"May I ask why?" Mrs. Forrester inquired, with careful courtesy.

"I distrust her," said Gregory. "I think she's dangerous, and tyrannous, and unscrupulous.
I think that she's devoured by egotism. I'm sorry. But if you ask me why, I can only tell you."

Mrs. Forrester sat silent for a moment, and then, the flush on her delicate old cheek deepening,
she murmured: "It is worse, far worse, than Mercedes told me. Even Mercedes didn't suspect
this. Gregory,--I must ask you another question: Do you really imagine that you and your cruel
thoughts of her would be of the slightest consequence to Mercedes Okraska, if you had not married
the child for whose happiness she holds herself responsible?"

"Of course not. She wouldn't give me another thought, if I weren't there, in her path; I am
in her path, and she feels that I don't like her, and she hasn't been able to let me alone."

"She has not let you alone because she hoped to make your marriage secure in the only way in
which security was possible for you and Karen. What happiness could she see for Karen's future
if she were to have cut herself apart from her life; dropped you, and Karen with you? That,
doubtless, would have been the easy thing to do. There is indeed no reason why women like Mercedes
Okraska, women with the world at their feet, should trouble to think of the young men they
may chance to meet, whose exacting moral sense they don't satisfy. I am glad you see that,"
said Mrs. Forrester, tapping her table.

"It would have been far kinder to have dropped Karen than deliberately to set to work, as she
has done, to ruin her happiness. She hasn't been able to keep her hands off it. She couldn't
stand it--a happiness she hadn't given; a happiness for which gratitude wasn't due to her."

"Gregory, Gregory," Mrs. Forrester raised her eyes to him now; "you are frank with me, very
frank; and I must be frank with you. There is more than dislike here, and distrust, and morbid
prejudice. There is jealousy. Hints of it have come to me; I've tried to put them aside; I've
tried to believe, as my poor Mercedes did, that, by degrees, you would adjust yourself to the
claims on Karen's life, and be generous and understanding, even when you had no spontaneous
sympathy to give. But it is all quite clear to me now. You can't accept the fact of your wife's
relation to Mercedes. You can't accept the fact of a devotion not wholly directed towards yourself.
I've known you since boyhood, Gregory, and I've always had regard and fondness for you; but
this is a serious breach between us. You seem to me more wrong and arrogant than I could trust
myself to say. And you have behaved cruelly to a woman for whom my feeling is more than mere
friendship. In many ways my feeling for Mercedes Okraska is one of reverence. She is one of
the great people of the world. To know her has been a possession, a privilege. Anyone might
be proud to know such a woman. And when I think of what you have now said of her to me--when
I think of how I saw her--here--last night,--broken--crushed,--after so many sorrows--"

Tears had risen to Mrs. Forrester's eyes. She turned her head aside.

"Do you mean," said Gregory after a moment, in which it seemed to him that his grey world preceptibly,
if slightly, darkened, "do you mean that I've lost your friendship because of Madame von Marwitz?"

"I don't know, Gregory; I can't tell you," said Mrs. Forrester, not looking at him. "I don't
recognize you. As to Karen, I cannot imagine what your position with her can be. How is she
to bear it when she knows that it is said that you insulted her guardian's friends and then
turned her out of your house?"

"I didn't turn her out," said Gregory; he walked to the window and stared into the street.
"She went because that was the most venomous thing she could do. And I didn't insult her friends."

"You said to her that the man she had thought of as a husband for Karen was not a gentleman.
You said that you did not understand how Mercedes could have chosen such a man for her. You
said this with the child standing between you. Oh, you cannot deny it, Gregory. I have heard
in detail what took place. Mercedes saw that unless she left you Karen's position was an impossible
one. It was to save Karen--and your relation to Karen--that she went."

Gregory, still standing at the window, was silent, and then asked: "Have you seen Herr Lippheim?"

"No, Gregory," Mrs. Forrester returned, and now with trenchancy, the concrete case being easier
to deal with openly. "No; I have not seen him; but Mercedes spoke to me about him last winter,
when she hoped for the match, and told me, moreover, that she was surprised by Karen's refusal,
as the child was much attached to him. I have not seen him; but I know the type--and intimately.
He is a warm-hearted and intelligent musician."

"Your bootmaker may be warm-hearted and intelligent."

"That is petulant--almost an insolent simile, Gregory. It only reveals, pitifully, your narrowness
and prejudice--and, I will add, your ignorance. Herr Lippheim is an artist; a man of character
and significance. Many of my dearest friends have been such; hearts of gold; the salt of the
world."

"Would you have allowed a daughter of yours, may I ask, to marry one of these hearts of gold?"

"Certainly; most certainly," said Mrs. Forrester, but with a haste and heat somewhat suspicious.
"If she loved him."

"If he were personally fit, you mean. Herr Lippheim is undoubtedly warm-hearted and, in his
own way, intelligent, but he is as unfit to be Karen's husband as your bootmaker to be yours."

They had come now, on this lower, easier level, to one of the points where temper betrays itself
as it cannot do on the heights of contest. Gregory's reiteration of the bootmaker greatly incensed
Mrs. Forrester.

"My dear Gregory," she said, "I yield to no one in my appreciation of Karen; owing to the education
and opportunities that Mercedes has given her, she is a charming young woman. But, since we
are dealing with, facts, the bare, bald, worldly aspects of things, we must not forget the
facts of Karen's parentage and antecedents. Herr Lippheim is, in these respects, I imagine,
altogether her equal. A rising young musician, the friend and protégé of one of the world's
great geniuses, and a penniless, illegitimate girl. Do not let your rancour, your jealousy,
blind you so completely."

Gregory turned from the window at this, smiling a pallid, frosty smile and Mrs. Forrester was
now aware that she had made him very angry. "I may be narrow," he said, "and conventional and
ignorant; but I'm unconventional and clear-sighted enough to judge people by their actual,
not their market, value. Of Herr Lippheim I know nothing, except that his parentage and antecedents
haven't made a gentleman, or anything resembling one, of him; while of Karen I know that hers,
unfortunate as they certainly were, have made a lady and a very perfect one. I don't forgive
Madame von Marwitz for a great many things in regard to her treatment of Karen," Gregory went
on with growing bitterness, "chief among them that she has taken her at her market value and
allowed her friends to do the same. I've been able, thank goodness, to rescue Karen, at all
events, from that. Madame von Marwitz can't carry her about any longer like a badge from some
charitable society on her shoulder. No woman who really loved Karen, or who really appreciated
her," Gregory added, falling back on his concrete fact, "could have thought of Herr Lippheim
as a husband for her."

Mrs. Forrester sat looking up at him, and she was genuinely aghast.

"You are incredible to me, Gregory," she said. "You set your one year of devotion to Karen
against Mercedes's life-time, and you presume to discredit hers."

"Yes. I do. I don't believe in her devotion to Karen."

"Do you realize that your attitude may mean a complete rupture between Karen and her guardian?"

"No such luck; I'm afraid!" said Gregory with a grim laugh. "My only hope is that it may mean
a complete rupture between Madame von Marwitz and me. It goes without saying, feeling as I
do, that, if it wouldn't break Karen's heart, I'd do my best to prevent Madame von Marwitz
from ever seeing her again."

There was a little silence and then Mrs. Forrester got up sharply.

"Very well, Gregory," she said. "That will do."

"Are you going to shake hands with me?" he asked, still with the grim smile.

"Yes. I will shake hands with you, Gregory," Mrs. Forrester replied. "Because, in spite of
everything, I am fond of you. But you must not come here again. Not now."

"Never any more, do you really mean?"

"Not until you are less wickedly blind."

"I'm sorry," said Gregory. "It's never any more then, I'm afraid."

He was very sorry. He knew that as he walked away.

CHAPTER XXVII

Mrs. Forrester remained among her canaries and jonquils, thinking. She was seriously perturbed.
She was, as she had said, fond of Gregory, but she was fonder, far, of Mercedes von Marwitz,
whom Gregory had caused to suffer and whom he would, evidently, cause to suffer still more.

She controlled the impulse to telephone to Eleanor Scrotton and consult with her; a vague instinct
of loyalty towards Gregory restrained her from that. Eleanor would, in a day or two, hear from
Cornwall and what she would hear could not be so bad as what Mrs. Forrester herself could tell
her. After thinking for the rest of the morning, Mrs. Forrester decided to go and see Karen.
She was not very fond of Karen. She had always been inclined to think that Mercedes exaggerated
the significance of the girl's devotion, and Gregory's exaggeration, now, of her general significance--explicable
as it might be in an infatuated young husband--disposed her the less kindly towards her. She
felt that Karen had been clumsy, dull, in the whole affair. She felt that, at bottom, she was
somewhat responsible for it. How had Gregory been able, living with Karen, to have formed such
an insensate conception of Mercedes? The girl was stupid, acquiescent; she had shown no tact,
no skill, no clarifying courage. Mrs. Forrester determined to show them all--to talk to Karen.

She drove to St. James's at four o'clock that afternoon and Barker told her that Mrs. Jardine
was in the drawing-room. Visitors, evidently, were with her, and it affected Mrs. Forrester
very unpleasantly, as Barker led her along the passage, to hear rich harmonies of music filling
the flat. She had expected to be perhaps ushered into a darkened bedroom; to administer comfort
and sympathy to a shattered creature before administering reproof and counsel. But Karen not
only was up; she was not alone. The strains were those of chamber-music, and a half-perplexed
delight mingled with Mrs. Forrester's displeasure as she recognized the heavenly melodies of
Schumann's Pianoforte Quintet. The performers were in the third movement.

Karen rose, as Barker announced her, from the side of a stout lady at the piano, and Mrs. Forrester,
nodding, her finger at her lips, dropped into a chair and listened.

The stout lady at the piano had a pale, fat, pear-shaped face, her grizzled hair parted above
it and twisted to a large outstanding knob behind. She wore eyeglasses and peered through them
at her music with intelligent intensity and profound humility. The violin was played by an
enormous young man with red hair, and the viola, second violin and 'cello by three young women,
all of the black-and-tan Semitic type.

Mrs. Forrester was too much preoccupied with her wonder to listen as she would have wished
to, but by the time the end of the movement was come she had realized that they played extremely
well.

Karen came forward in the interval. She was undoubtedly pale and heavy-eyed; but in her little
dress of dark blue silk, with her narrow lawn ruffles and locket and shining hair, she showed
none of the desperate signs appropriate to her circumstances nor any embarrassment at the incongruous
situation in which Mrs. Forrester found her.

"This is Frau Lippheim, Mrs. Forrester," she said. "And these are Fräulein Lotta and Minna
and Elizabeth, and this is Herr Franz. I think you have often heard Tante speak of our friends."

Her ears buzzing with the name of Lippheim since the night before, Mrs. Forrester was aware
that she showed confusion, also that for a brief, sharp instant, while her eyes rested on Herr
Franz, a pang of perverse sympathy for Gregory, in a certain aspect of his wickedness, disintegrated
her state of mind. He was singular looking indeed, this untidy young man, whose ill-kept clothes
had a look of insecurity, like arrested avalanches on a mountain. "No, I can feel for Gregory
somewhat in this," Mrs. Forrester said to herself.

"We are having some music, you see," said Karen. "Herr Lippheim promised me yesterday that
they would all come and play to me. Can you stay and listen for a little while? They must go
before tea, for they have a rehearsal for their concert," she added, as though to let Mrs.
Forrester know that she was not unconscious of the matter that must have brought her.

There was really no reason why she shouldn't stay. She could not very well ask to have the
Lippheims and their instruments turned out. Moreover she was very fond of the Quintet. Mrs.
Forrester said that she would be glad to stay.

When they went on to the fourth movement, and while she listened, giving her mind to the music,
Mrs. Forrester's disintegration slowly recomposed itself. It was not only that the music was
heavenly and that they played so well. She liked these people; they were the sort of people
she had always liked. She forgot Herr Franz's uncouth and mountainous aspect. His great head
leaning sideways, his eyes half closed, with the musician's look of mingled voluptuous rapture
and cold, grave, listening intellect, he had a certain majesty. The mother, too, all devout
concentration, was an artist of the right sort; the girls had the gentle benignity that comes
of sincere self-dedication. They pleased Mrs. Forrester greatly and, as she listened, her severity
towards Gregory shaped itself anew and more forcibly. Narrow, blind, bigoted young man. And
it was amusing to think, as a comment on his fierce consciousness of Herr Lippheim's unfitness,
that here Herr Lippheim was, admitted to the very heart of Karen's sorrow. It was inconceivable
that anyone but very near and dear friends should have been tolerated by her to-day. Karen,
too, after her fashion, was an artist. The music, no doubt, was helpful to her. Soft thoughts
of her great, lacerated friend, speeding now towards her solitudes, filled Mrs. Forrester's
eyes more than once with tears.

They finished and Frau Lippheim, rubbing her hands with her handkerchief, stood smiling near-sightedly,
while Mrs. Forrester expressed her great pleasure and asked all the Lippheims to come and see
her. She planned already a musical. Karen's face showed a pale beam of gladness.

"And now, my dear child," said Mrs. Forrester, when the Lippheims had departed and she and
Karen were alone and seated side by side on the sofa, "we must talk. I have come, of course
you know, to talk about this miserable affair." She put her hand on Karen's; but already something
in the girl's demeanour renewed her first displeasure. She looked heavy, she looked phlegmatic;
there was no response, no softness in her glance.

"You have perhaps a message to me, Mrs. Forrester, from Tante," she said.

"No, Karen, no," Mrs. Forrester with irrepressible severity returned. "I have no message for
you. Any message, I think should come from your husband and not from your guardian."

Karen sat silent, her eyes moving away from her visitor's face and fixing themselves on the
wall above her head.

The impulse that had brought Mrs. Forrester was suffering alterations.

Gregory had revealed the case to her as worse than she had supposed; Karen emphasized the revelation.
And what of Mercedes between these two young egoists? "I must ask you, Karen," she said, "whether
you realise how Gregory has behaved, to the woman to whom you, and he, owe so much?"

Karen continued to look fixedly at the wall and after a moment of deliberation replied: "Tante
did not speak rightly to Gregory, Mrs. Forrester. She lost her temper very much. You know that
Tante can lose her temper."

Mrs. Forrester, at this, almost lost hers. "You surprise me, Karen. Your husband had spoken
insultingly of her friends--and yours--to her. Why attempt to shield him? I heard the whole
story, in detail, from your guardian, you must remember."

Again Karen withdrew into a considering silence; but, though her face remained impassive, Mrs.
Forrester observed that a slight flush rose to her cheeks.

"Gregory did not intend Tante to overhear what he said," she produced at last. "It was said
to me--and I had questioned him--not to her. Tante came in by chance. It is not likely, Mrs.
Forrester, that my version would differ in any way from hers."

"You mustn't take offence at what I say, Karen," Mrs. Forrester spoke with more severity; "your
version does differ. To my astonishment you seem actually to defend your husband."

"Yes; from what is not true: that is not to differ from Tante as to what took place." Karen
brought her eyes to Mrs. Forrester's.

"From what is not true. Very well. You will not deny that he so intensely dislikes your guardian
and has shown it so plainly to her that she has had to leave you. You will not deny that, Karen?"

"No. I will not deny that," Karen replied.

"My poor child--it is true, and it is only a small part of the truth. I don't know what Gregory
has said to you in private, but even Mercedes had not prepared me for what he said to me this
morning."

"What did he say to you this morning, Mrs. Forrester?"

"He believes her to be a bad woman, Karen; do you realise that; has he told you that; can you
bear it? Dangerous, unscrupulous, tyrannous, devoured by egotism, were the words he used of
her. I shall not forget them. He accused her of hypocrisy in her feeling for you. He hoped
that you might never see her again. It is terrible, Karen. Terrible. It puts us all--all of
us who love Mercedes, and you through her, into the most impossible position."

Karen sat, her head erect, her eyes downcast, with a rigidity of expression almost torpid.

"Do you see the position he puts us in, Karen?" Mrs. Forrester went on with insistence. "Have
you had the matter out with Gregory? Did you realise its gravity? I must really beg you to
answer me."

"I have not yet spoken with my husband," said Karen, in a chill, lifeless tone.

"But you will? You cannot let it pass?"

"No, Mrs. Forrester. I will not let it pass."

"You will insist that he shall make a full apology to Mercedes?"

"Is he to apologise to her for hating her?" Karen at this asked suddenly.

"For hating her? What do you mean?" Mrs. Forrester was taken aback.

"If he is to apologise," said Karen, in a still colder, still more lifeless voice, "it must
be for something that can be changed. How can he apologise to her for hating her if he continues
to hate her?"

"He can apologise for having spoken insultingly to her."

"He has not done that. It was Tante who overheard what she was not intended to hear. And it
was Tante who spoke with violence."

"It amazes me to hear you put it on her shoulders, Karen. He can apologise, then, for what
he has said to me," said Mrs. Forrester with indignation. "You will not deny that what he said
of her to me was insulting."

"He is to tell her that he has said those words and then apologise, Mrs. Forrester? Oh, no;
you do not think what you say."

"Really, my dear Karen, you have a most singular fashion of speaking to a person three times
your age!" Mrs. Forrester exclaimed, the more incensed for the confusion of thought into which
the girl's persistence threw her. "The long and short of it is that he must make it possible
for Mercedes to meet him, with decency, in the future."

"But I do not know how that can be," said Karen, rising as Mrs. Forrester rose; "I do not know
how Tante, now, can see him. If he thinks these things and does not say them, there may be
pretence; but if he says them, to Tante's friends, how can there be pretence?"

There was no appeal in her voice. She put the facts, so evident to herself, before her visitor
and asked her to look at them. Mrs. Forrester was suddenly aware that her advice might have
been somewhat hasty. She also felt suddenly as though, on a reconnoitring march down a rough
but open path, she found herself merging in the gloomy mysteries of a forest. There were hidden
things in Karen's voice.

"Well, well," she said, taking the girl's hand and casting about in her mind for a retreat;
"that's to see it as hopeless, isn't it, and we don't want to do that, do we? We want to bring
Gregory to reason, and you are the person best fitted to do that. We want to clear up these
dreadful ideas he has got into his head, heaven knows how. And no one but you can do it. No
one in the world, my dear Karen, is more fitted than you to make him understand what our wonderful
Tante really is. There is the trouble, Karen," said Mrs. Forrester, finding now the original
clue with which she had started on her expedition; "he shouldn't have been able, living with
you, seeing your devotion, seeing from your life, as you must have told him of it, what it
was founded on, he shouldn't have been able to form such a monstrous conception of our great,
dear one. You have been in fault there, my dear, you see it now, I am sure. At the first hint
you should have made things clear to him. I know that it is hard for a young wife to oppose
the man she loves; but love mustn't make us cowardly," Mrs. Forrester murmured on more cheerfully
as they moved down the passage, "and Gregory will only love you more wisely and deeply if he
is made to recognize, once for all, that you will not sacrifice your guardian to please him."

They were now at the door and Karen had not said a word.

"Well, good-bye, my dear," said Mrs. Forrester. Oddly she did not feel able to urge more strongly
upon Karen that she should not sacrifice her guardian to her husband. "I hope I've made things
clearer by coming. It was better that you should, realize just what your guardian's friends
felt--and would feel--about it, wasn't it?" Karen still made no reply and on the threshold
Mrs. Forrester paused to add, with some urgency: "It was right, you see that, don't you, Karen,
that you should know what Gregory is really feeling?"

"Yes," Karen now assented. "It is better that I should know that."

CHAPTER XXVIII

Gregory when he came in that evening thought at first, with a pang of fear, that Karen had
gone out. It was time for dressing and she was not in their room. In the drawing-room it was
dark; he stood in the doorway for a moment and looked about it, sad and tired and troubled,
wondering if Karen had gone to Mrs. Forrester's, wondering whether, in her grave displeasure
with him, she had even followed her guardian. And then, from beside him, came her voice. "I
am here, Gregory. I have been waiting for you."

His relief was so intense that, turning up the lights, seeing her sitting there on a little
sofa near the door, he bent involuntarily over her to kiss her.

But her hand put him away.

"No; I must speak to you," she said.

Gregory straightened himself, compressing his lips.

Karen had evidently not thought of changing. She wore her dark-blue silk dress. She had, indeed,
been sitting there since Mrs. Forrester went. He looked about the room, noting, with dull wonder,
the grouped chairs, and open piano. "You have had people here?"

"Yes. The Lippheims came and played to me. I would have written to them and told them not to
come; but I forgot. And Mrs. Forrester has been here."

"Quite a reception," said Gregory. He walked to the window and looked out. "Well," he said,
not turning to his wife, "what have you to say to me, Karen?" His tone was dry and even ironic.

"Mrs. Forrester came to tell me," said Karen, "that you had seen her this morning."

"Yes. Well?"

"And she told me," Karen went on, "that you had a great deal to say to her about my guardian--things
that you have never dared to say to me."

He turned to her now and her eyes from across the room fixed themselves upon him.

"I will say them to you if you like," said Gregory, after a moment. He leaned against the side
of the window and folded his arms. And he examined his wife with, apparently, the cold attention
that he would have given to a strange witness in the box. And indeed she was strange to him.
Over his aching and dispossessed heart he steeled himself in an impartial scrutiny.

"It is true, then," said Karen, "that you believe her tyrannous and dangerous and unscrupulous,
and that you think her devoured by egotism, and hypocritical in her feeling for me, and that
you hope that I may never see her again?"

She catalogued the morning's declarations accurately, like the witness giving unimpeachable
testimony. But it was rather absurd to see her as the witness, when, so unmistakably, she considered
herself the judge and him the criminal in the dock. There was relief in pleading guilty to
everything. "Yes: it's perfectly true," he said.

She looked at him and he could discover no emotion on her face.

"Why did you not tell me this when you asked me to marry you?" she questioned.

"Oh--I wasn't so sure of it then," said Gregory. "And I loved you and hoped it would never
come out. I didn't want to give you pain. That's why I never dared tell you, as you put it."

"You wanted to marry me and you knew that if you told me the truth I would not marry you; that
is the reason you did not dare," said Karen.

"Well, there's probably truth in that," Gregory assented, smiling; "I'm afraid I was an infatuated
creature, perhaps a dishonest one. I can't expect you to make allowances for my condition, I know."

She lowered her eyes and sat for so long in silence that presently, rather ashamed of the bitterness
of his last words, he went on in a kinder tone: "I know that I can never make you understand.
You have your infatuation and it blinds you. You've been blind to the way in which, from the
very beginning, she has tracked me down. You've been blind to the fact that the thing that
has moved her hasn't been love for you but spite, malicious spite, against me for not giving
her the sort of admiration she's accustomed to. If I've come to hate her--I didn't in the least
at first, of course--it's only fair to say that she hates me ten times worse. I only asked
that she should let me alone."

"And let me alone," said Karen, who had listened without a movement.

"Oh no," Gregory said, "that's not at all true. You surely will be fair enough to own that
it's not; that I did everything I could to give you both complete liberty."

"As when you applauded and upheld Betty for her insolent interference; as when you complained
to me of my guardian because she asked that I should have a wider life; as when you hoped to
have Mrs. Talcott here so that my guardian might be kept out."

"Did she suggest that?"

"She showed it to me. I had not seen it even then. Do you deny it?"

"No; I don't suppose I can, though it was nothing so definite. But I certainly hoped that Madame
von Marwitz would not come here."

"And yet you can tell me that you have not tried to come between us."

"Yes; I can. I never tried to come between you. I tried to keep away. It's been she, as I say,
who has tracked me down. That was what I was afraid of if she came here; that she'd force me
to show my dislike. Can you deny, Karen, I ask you this, that from the beginning she has made
capital to you out of my dislike, and pointed it out to you?"

"I will not discuss that with you," said Karen; "I know that you can twist all her words and
actions."

"I don't want to do that. I can see a certain justice in her malice. It was hard for her, of
course, to find that you'd married a man she didn't take to and who didn't take to her; but
why couldn't she have left it at that?"

"It couldn't be left at that. It wasn't only that," said Karen. "If she had liked you, you
would never have liked her; and if you had liked her she would have liked you."

The steadiness of her voice as she thus placed the heart of the matter before him brought him
a certain relief. Perhaps, in spite of his cold realizations and the death of all illusion
as to Karen's love for him, they could really, now, come to an understanding, an accepted compromise.
His heart ached and would go on aching until time had blunted its hurts, and a compromise was
all he had to hope for. He had nothing to expect from Karen but acceptance of fact and faithful
domesticity. But, after all the uncertainties and turmoils, this bitter peace had its balms.
He took up her last words.

"Ah, well, she'd have liked my liking," he analysed it. "I don't know that she'd have liked
me;--unless I could have managed to give her actual worship, as you and her friends do. But
I'm not going to say anything more against her. She has forced the truth from me, and now we
may bury it. You shall see her, of course, whenever you want to. But I hope that I shall never
have to speak of her to you again."

The talk seemed to have been brought to an end. Karen, had risen and Barker, entering at the
moment, announced dinner.

"By Jove, is it as late as that," Gregory muttered, nodding to him. He turned to Karen when
Barker was gone and, the pink electric lights falling upon her face, he saw as he had not seen
before how grey and sunken it was. She had made no movement towards the door.

"Gregory," she said, fixing her eyes upon him, and he then saw that he had misinterpreted her
quiet, "I tell you that these things are not true. They are not true. Will you believe me?"

"What things?" he asked. But he was temporizing. He saw that the end had not come.

"The things you believe of Tante. That she is a heartless woman, using those who love her--feeding
on their love. I say it is not true. Will you believe me?"

She stood on the other side of the room, her arms hanging at her sides, her hands hanging open,
all her being concentrated in the ultimate demand of her compelling gaze.

"Karen," he said, "I know that she must be lovable; I know, of course, that she has power,
and charm, and tenderness. I think I can understand why you feel for her as you do. But I don't
think that there is any chance that I shall change my opinion of her; not for anything you
say. I believe that she takes you in completely."

Karen gazed at him. "You will still believe that she is tyrannous, and dangerous, and false,
whatever I may say?"

"Yes, Karen. I know it sounds horrible to you. You must try to forgive me for it. We won't
speak of it again; I promise you."

She turned from him, looking before her at the Bouddha, but not as if she saw it. "We shall
never speak of it again," she said. "I am going to leave you, Gregory."

For a moment he stared at her. Then he smiled. "You mustn't punish me for telling you the truth,
Karen, by silly threats."

"I do not punish you. You have done rightly to tell me the truth. But I cannot live with a
man who believes these things."

She still gazed at the Bouddha and again Gregory stared at her. His face hardened. "Don't be
absurd, Karen. You cannot mean what you say."

"I am going to-night. Now," said Karen.

"Going? Where?"

"To Cornwall, back to my guardian. She will take care of me again. I will not live with you."

"If you really mean what you say," said Gregory, after a moment, "you are telling me that you
don't love me. I've suspected it for some time."

"I feel as if that were true," said Karen, looking now down upon the ground. "I think I have
no more love for you. I find you a petty man." It was impossible to hope that she was speaking
recklessly or passionately. She had come to the conclusion with deliberation; she had been
thinking of it since last night. She was willing to cast him off because he could not love
where she loved. How deeply the roots of hope still knotted themselves in him he was now to
realize. He felt his heart and mind rock with the reverberation of the shattering, the pulverizing
explosion, and he saw his life lying in a wilderness of dust about him.

Yet the words he found were not the words of his despair. "Even if you feel like this, Karen,"
he said, "there is no necessity for behaving like a lunatic. Go and stay with your guardian,
by all means, and whenever you like. Start to-morrow morning. Spend most of your time with
her. I shall not put the smallest difficulty in your way. But--if only for your own sake--have
some common-sense and keep up appearances. You must remain my wife in name and the mistress
of my house."

"Thank you, you mean to be kind, I know," said Karen, who had not looked at him since her declaration;
"But I am not a conventional woman and I do not wish to live with a man who is no longer my
husband. I do not wish to keep up appearances. I do not wish it to be said--by those who know
my guardian and what she has done for me and been to me--that I keep up the appearance of regard
for a man who hates her. I made a mistake in marrying you; you allowed me to make it. Now,
as far as I can, I undo it by leaving you. Perhaps," she added, "you could divorce me. That
would set you free."

The remark in its childishness, callousness, and considerateness struck him as one of the most
revealing she had made. He laughed icily. "Our laws only allow of divorce for one cause and
I advise you not to seek freedom for yourself--or for me--by disgracing yourself. It's not
worth it. The conventions you scorn have their solid value."

She had now turned her head and was looking at him. "I think you are insulting me," she said.

For the first time he observed a trembling in her voice and interpreted it as anger. It gave
him a hurting satisfaction to have made her angry. She had appalled and shattered him.

"I am not insulting you, I am warning you, Karen," he said. "A woman who can behave as you
are behaving is capable of acts of criminal folly. You don't believe in convention, and in
your guardian's world you will meet many men who don't."

"What do you mean by criminal folly?"

"I mean living with a man you're not married to."

He had simply and sincerely forgotten something. Karen's face grew ashen.

"You mean that my mother was a criminal?"

Even at this moment of his despair Gregory was horribly sorry. Yet the memory that she recalled
brought a deeper fear for her future. He had spoken with irony of her suggestion about divorce
and freedom. But did not her very blood, as well as her environment, give him reason to emphasise
his warning?

"I didn't mean that. I wasn't thinking of that," he said, "as you must know. And to be criminally
foolish is a very different thing from being a criminal. But I'm convinced that to break social
laws--and these laws about men and women have deeper than merely social sanctions--to break
them, I'm convinced, can bring no happiness. I feel about your mother, and what she did--I
say it with all reverence--that she was as mistaken as she was unfortunate. And I beg of you,
Karen, never to follow her example."

"It is not for you to speak of her!" Karen said, not moving from her place but uttering the
words with a still and sudden passion that he had never heard from her. "It is not for you
to preach sermons to me on the text of my mother's misfortunes. I do not call them misfortunes--nor
did she. I do not accept your laws, and she was not afraid of them. How dare you call her unfortunate?
She lost nothing that she valued and she gained great happiness, and gave it, for she was happy
with my father. It was a truer marriage than any I have known. She was more married than you
or I have ever been or could ever have been; for there was deep love between them, and trust
and understanding. Do not speak to me of her. I forbid it."

She turned to the door. Gregory sprang to her side and seized her wrist. "Karen! Where are
you going? Wait till to-morrow!" he exclaimed, fear for her actual safety surmounting every
other feeling.

She stood still under his hand and looked at him with her still passion of repudiation. "I
will not wait. I shall go to-night to Frau Lippheim. And to-morrow I shall go to Cornwall.
I shall tell Mrs. Barker to pack my clothes and send them to me there."

"You have no money."

"Frau Lippheim will lend me money. My guardian will take care of me. It is not for you to have
any thought for me."

He dropped her arm. "Very well. Go then," he said.

He turned from her. He heard that she paused, the knob of the door in her hand. "Good-bye,"
she then said.

Again it was, inconceivably, the mingled childishness, callousness and considerateness. That,
at the moment, she could think of the formality, suffocated him. "Good-bye," he replied, not
looking round.

The door opened and closed. He heard her swift feet passing down the passage to their room.

She was not reckless. She needed her hat and coat at least. Quiet, rational determination was
in all her actions.

Yet, as he waited to hear her come out again, a hope that he knew to be chimerical rose in
him. She would, perhaps, return, throw herself in his arms and, weeping, say that she loved
him and could not leave him. Gregory's heart beat quickly.

But when he heard her footsteps again they were not returning. They passed along to the kitchen;
she was speaking to Mrs. Barker--Gregory had a shoot of surface thought for Mrs. Barker's astonishment;
they entered the hall again, the hall door closed behind them.

Gregory stood looking at the Bouddha. The tears kept mounting to his throat and eyes and, furiously,
he choked them back. He did not see the Bouddha.

But, suddenly becoming aware of the bland contemplative gaze of the great bronze image, his
eyes fixed themselves on it.

He had known it from the first to be an enemy. Its presage was fulfilled. The tidal wave had
broken over his life.

PART II

CHAPTER XXIX

Karen sat in her corner of the railway carriage looking out at familiar scenery.

Reading and the spring-tide beauties of the Thames valley had gone by in the morning. Then,
after the attendant had passed along the corridor announcing lunch, and those who were lunching
had followed him in single file, had come the lonely majesty of the Somerset downs, lying like
great headlands along the plain, a vast sky of rippled blue and silver above them. They had
passed Plymouth where she had always used to look down from the high bridges and wonder over
the lives of the midshipmen on the training-ships, and now they were winding through wooded
Cornish valleys.

Karen had looked out of her window all day. She had not read, though kind Frau Lippheim had
put the latest tendenz-roman, paper-bound, into the little basket, which was also stocked with
stout beef-sandwiches, a bottle of milk, and the packet of chocolate and bun in paper bag that
Franz had added to it at the station.

Poor Franz. He and his mother had come to see her off and they had both wept as the train moved
away, and strange indeed it must have been for them to see the Karen Jardine who, only yesterday,
had been, apparently, so happy, and so secure in her new life, carried back to the old; a wife
who had left her husband.

Karen had slept little the night before, and kind Franz must have slept less; for he had given
her his meagre bedroom and spent the night on the narrowest, hardest, most slippery of sofas
in the sitting-room of the Bayswater lodging-house where Karen had found the Lippheims very
cheaply, very grimly, not to say greasily, installed. It was no wonder that Franz's eyes had
been so heavy, his face so puffed and pale that morning; and his tears had given the last touch
of desolation to his countenance.

Karen herself had not wept, either at the parting or at the meeting of the night before. She
had told them, with no explanations at all, that she had left her husband and was going back
to her guardian, and the Lippheims had asked no questions.

It might have been possible that Franz, as he sat at the table, his fingers run through his
hair, clutching his head while he and his mother listened to her, was not so dazed and lost
as was Frau Lippheim, who had not seen Gregory. Franz might have his vague perceptions. "Ach!
Ach!" he had ejaculated once or twice while she spoke.

And Frau Lippheim had only said: "Liebes Kind! Liebes, armes Kind!"

She was, after all, going back to the great Tante and they felt, no doubt, that no grief could
be ultimate which had that compensatory refuge.

She was going back to Tante. As the valleys, in their deepened shadows, streamed past her,
Karen remembered that it had hardly been at all of Tante that she had thought while the long
hours passed and her eyes observed the flying hills and fields. Perhaps she had thought of
nothing. The heavy feeling, as of a stone resting on her heart, of doom, defeat and bitterness,
could hardly have been defined as thought. She had thought and thought and thought during these
last dreadful days; every mental cog had been adjusted, every wheel had turned; she had held
herself together as never before in all her life, in order to give thought every chance. For
wasn't that to give him every chance? and wasn't that, above all, to give herself any chance
that might still be left her?

And now the machinery seemed to lie wrecked. There was not an ember of hope left with which
to kindle its activity. How much hope there must have been to have made it work so firmly and
so furiously during these last days! how much, she hadn't known until her husband had come
in last night, and, at last, spoken openly.

Even Mrs. Forrester's revelations, though they had paralyzed her, had not put out the fires.
She had still hoped that he could deny, explain, recant, own that he had been hasty, perhaps;
perhaps mistaken; give her some loophole. She could have understood--oh, to a degree almost
abject--his point of view. Mrs. Forrester had accused her of that. And Tante had accused her
of it, too. But no; it had been slowly to freeze to stillness to hear his clear cold utterance
of shameful words, see the folly of his arrogance and his complacency, realise, in his glacial
look and glib, ironic smile, that he was blind to what he was destroying in her. For he could
not have torn her heart to shreds and then stood bland, unaware of what he had done, had he
loved her. Her young spirit, unversed in irony, drank in the bitter draught of disillusion.
They had never loved each other; or, worse, far worse, they had loved and love was this puny
thing that a blow could kill. His love for her was dead.

She still trembled when the ultimate realization surged over her, looking fixedly out of the
window lest she should weep aloud.

She had only one travelling companion, an old woman who got out at Plymouth. "Leebie Granger is
young," he went on insultingly, in a collected even voice which he strove to make jaunty in tone.
"She's as fresh an' young. An' you're auld, an' fat an' as ugly as hell, an' if I dae gang to
Leebie you hae damn all to dae wi' it. As I said, you've had your innin's, an' been gey well
paid for it, an' I dinna gie a damn for you."

"Dae you no'?" she cried now livid with anger and losing all control over her words and actions,
her eyes flashing with maddened rage and the froth working from her lips. "I'll let you ken
or no'. I'll tear the pented face off your new doll; and I'll sort
you too, you dirty black brute that you are."

"Gang to hell!" he shouted, starting out of the door so suddenly that he almost ran into the
next door neighbor who hearing the noise had crept noiselessly on
tiptoe to the door the better to hear all that was going on.

"What the hell's wrang wi' you?" he demanded turning in rage upon the eavesdropper. "Have you
naething else to dae than that? Gang in an' get your dirty midden o' a hoose cleaned an' I'll
see that you don't stay lang in Lowwood to spy on ony mair folk!" and cowering in shame the
poor woman backed into the door and shut it, making up her mind that
her man would be sacked that day, and wondering where they would flit
to, so as to find work and a house.

Walker strode up the row with Mag Robertson shouting behind him and the neighbors all coming to
the doors as they passed, and craning their necks, while keeping
their bodies safe hidden within the doorways of their homes.

"We're surely gettin' an entertainment the day," observed one fat old woman to another woman
two doors away, as they both looked after Mag as she followed Walker
up the row, shouting her worst names at him, and vowing what she'd
do with Leebie Granger, when she got hands on her.

"Ay," replied the other woman stealing along the wall to the doorway of the older woman, and slipping
inside as if she were afraid of being detected. "It's a hell o' a business when blackguards
cast oot."

"Wheest, Annie, dinna swear," remonstrated the old woman. "I dinna like to hear folk swearin'
at a'.

I wonner the Lord disna open the grun' to swallow the half o' the folk noo-a-days; for I never heard
sic swearin' a' my life."

"Och, there's nae harm meant," returned Annie, taken aback by the old woman's admonition. "It's
jist a habit that folk get into an' they canna help it. But listen to her," she broke off, alluding
to Mag Robertson again.

"She micht think shame o' hersel', the shameless lump that she is. She'd hae been faur better
to hae keepit her mouth shut, Phemie."

"That's true, Annie," replied Phemie.

"Listen to her.

My, she's no' canny an' she's fairly givin' him a bellyfu'. But they're
a' yae swine's pick an' no' yin o' them decent.

I wadna be in her shoon for a' the money that ever was made in Lowwood. She micht hae kent hoo
it wad end. Hark at her.

My, but it's awfu'."

"Keep in, Annie," Phemie admonished as they both craned their necks to look up the row as she
saw Walker turning to face Mag. "Dinna let him see you or your man
will get the sack.

My! but she's layin' it in tae' him. What a tongue."

"Lord bless
us! He's strucken her, Phemie," said Annie, clutching her neighbor's
shoulder as she spoke. "My, he's gaen her an awfu' blow on the mouth
an' knocket her doon. Come inside for as sure as daith it'll end in
a coort case, an' I'm no wanting to be mixed up in it," and they went
inside and shut the door, looking at each other with frightened eyes.
Then Annie, stealing to the window and lifting the curtain a little
at the side, gazed sideways up the row, reporting to Phemie everything
that happened.

"He's kicking her, Phemie. Eh, the muckle beast that
he is. My God, he'll kill her afore he's finished wi' her. He's hitting
her on the face every time she tries to rise an' gaein' her anither
kick aye when she fa's doon again. Oh! my God, will naebody interfere.
He'll kill her as sure as death," and she stepped back with blanched
face sickened at the spectacle she had described.

"Here she comes,
Annie," said her neighbor after a few moments. "My! what a face. Dinna
look you at her," cried Phemie in alarm pushing back Annie who had
moved near to the window to get a better view. "In God's name, woman,
dinna you look at her. You shouldna ha' looked at onything that has
taken place. If onything is wrang wi' your bairn when it is born I'll
never forgi'e' mysel' for lettin' you look at this business at a'.

In her astonishment, she stood still for a moment; then, like a great, white, widely-winged
moth, she came forward, rapidly, yet with hesitant, reconnoitring pauses, her eyes on the girl
who stood in the doorway looking blindly towards her.

"Karen!" she exclaimed sharply. "What brings you here?"

"I have come back to you, Tante," said Karen.

Tante stood before her, not taking her into her arms, not taking her hands.

"Come back to me? What do you mean?"

"I have left Gregory," said Karen. She was bewildered now. What had happened? She did not know;
but it was something that made it impossible to throw herself in Tante's arms and weep.

Then she saw that another person was with them. A man was seated on the distant sofa. He rose,
wandering slowly down the room, and revealed himself in the dim light that came from the evening
sky and sea as Mr. Claude Drew. Pausing at some little distance he fixed his eyes on Karen,
and in the midst of all the impressions, striking like chill, moulding blows on the melted
iron of her mood, she was aware of these large, dark eyes of Mr. Drew's and of their intent
curiosity.

The predominant impression, however, was of a changed aspect in everything, and as Tante, now
holding her hands, still stood silent, also looking at her with intent curiosity, the impression
vaguely and terribly shaped itself for her as a piercing question: Was Tante not glad to have
her back?

There came from Tante in another moment a more accustomed note.

"You have left your husband--because of me--my poor child?"

Karen nodded. Mr. Drew's presence made speech impossible.

"He made it too difficult for you?"

Karen nodded again.

"And you have come back to me." Madame von Marwitz summed it up rather than inquired. And then,
after another pause, she folded Karen in her arms.

The piercing question seemed answered. Yet Karen could not now have wept. A dry, hard desolation
filled her. "May I go to my room, Tante?"

"Yes, my child. Go to your room. You will find Tallie. Tallie is in the house, I think--or
did I send her in to Helston?--no, that was for to-morrow." She held Karen's hand at a stretch
of her arm while she seemed, with difficulty still, to collect her thoughts. "But I will come
with you myself. Yes; that is best. Wait here, Claude." This to the silent, dusky figure behind
them.

"Do not let me be a trouble." Karen controlled the trembling of her voice. "I know my way."

"No trouble, my child; no trouble. Or none that I am not glad to take."

Tante had her now on the stair--her arm around her shoulders. "You will find us at sixes and
sevens; a household hastily organized, but Tallie, directed by wires, has done wonders. So.
My poor Karen. You have left him. For good? Or is it only to punish him that you come to me?"

"I have left him for good."

"So," Madame von Marwitz repeated.

With all the veils and fluctuations, one thing was growing clear to Karen. Tante might be glad
to have her back; but she was confused, trying to think swiftly, to adjust her thoughts. They
were in Karen's little room overlooking the trees at the corner of the house. It was dismantled;
a bare dressing-table, the ewer upturned in the basin, the bed and its piled bedding covered
with a sheet. Madame von Marwitz sat down on the bed and drew Karen beside her.

"But is not that to punish him too much?"

"It is not to punish him. I cannot live with him any longer."

"I see; I see;" said Madame von Marwitz, with a certain briskness, as though, still, to give
herself time to think. "It might have been wiser to wait--to wait for a little. I would have
written to you. We could have consulted. It is serious, you know, my Karen, very serious, to
leave one's husband. I went away so that this should not come to you."

"I could not wait. I could not stay with him any longer," said Karen heavily.

"There is more, you mean. You had words? He hates me more than you thought?"

Karen paused, and then assented: "Yes; more than I thought."

Above the girl's head, which she held pressed down on her shoulder, Madame von Marwitz pondered
for some moments. "Alas!" she then uttered in a deep voice. And, Karen saying nothing, she
repeated on a yet more melancholy note: "Alas!"

Karen now raised herself from Tante's shoulder; but, at the gesture of withdrawal, Madame von
Marwitz caught her close again and embraced her. "I feared it," she said. "I saw it. I hoped
to hide it by my flight. My poor child! My beloved Karen!"

They held each other for some silent moments. Then Madame von Marwitz rose. "You are weary,
my Karen; you must rest; is it not so? I will send Tallie to you. You will see Tallie--she
is a perfection of discretion; you do not shrink from Tallie. And you need tell her nothing;
she will not question you. Between ourselves; is it not so? Yes; that is best. For the present.
I will come again, later--I have guests, a guest, you see. Rest here, my Karen." She moved
towards the door.

Karen looked after her. An intolerable fear pressed on her. She could not bear, in her physical
weakness, to be left alone with it. "Tante!" she exclaimed.

Madame von Marwitz turned. "My child?"

"Tante--you are glad to have me back?"

Her pride broke in a sob. She hid her face in her hands.

Madame von Marwitz returned to the bed.

"Glad, my child?" she said. "For all the sorrow that it means? and to know that I am the cause?
How can I be glad for my child's unhappiness?"

She spoke with a touch of severity, as though in Karen's tears she felt an unexpressed accusation.

"Not for that," Karen spoke with difficulty. "But to have me with you again. It will not be
a trouble?"

There was a little silence and then, her severity passing to melancholy reproof, Madame von
Marwitz said: "Did we not, long since, speak of this, Karen? Have you forgotten? Can you so
wound me once again? Only my child's grief can excuse her. It is a sorrow to see your life
in ruins; I had hoped before I died to see it joyous and secure. It is a sorrow to know that
you have maimed yourself; that you are tied to an unworthy man. But how could it be a trouble
to me to have you with me? It is a consolation--my only consolation in this calamity. With
me you shall find peace and happiness again."

She laid her hand on Karen's head. Karen put her hand to her lips.

"There. That is well," said Madame von Marwitz with a sigh, bending to kiss her. "That is my
child. Tante is sad at heart. It is a heavy blow. But her child is welcome."

When she had gone Karen lay, her face in the billows of the bed, while she fixed her thoughts
on Tante's last words.

They became a sing-song monotone. "Tante is sad at heart. But her child is welcome. It is a
heavy blow. But her child is welcome."

After the anguish there was a certain ease. She rested in the given reassurance. Yet the sing-song
monotone oppressed her.

She felt presently that her hat, wrenched to one side, and still fixed to her hair by its pins,
was hurting her. She unfastened it and dropped it to the floor. She felt too tired to do more
just then.

Soon after this the door opened and Mrs. Talcott appeared carrying a candle, a can of hot water,
towels and sheets.

Karen drew herself up, murmuring some vague words of welcome, and Mrs. Talcott, after setting
the candle on the dressing-table and the hot water in the basin, remarked: "Just you lie down
again, Karen, and let me wash your face for you. You must be pretty tired and dirty after that
long journey."

But Karen put her feet to the ground. They just sustained her. "Thank you, Mrs. Talcott. I
will do it," she said.

She bent over the water, and, while she washed, Mrs. Talcott, with deliberate skill, made up
the bed. Karen sank in a chair.

"You poor thing," said Mrs. Talcott, turning to her as she smoothed down the sheet; "Why you're
green. Sit right there and I'll undress you. Yes; you're only fit to be put to bed."

She spoke with mild authority, and Karen, under her hands, relapsed to childhood.

"This all the baggage you've brought?" Mrs. Talcott inquired, finding a nightdress in Karen's
dressing-case. She expressed no surprise when Karen said that it was all, passed the nightdress
over her head and, when she had lain down, tucked the bed-clothes round her.

"Now what you want is a hot-water bottle and some dinner. I guess you're hungry. Did you have
any lunch on the train?"

"I've had some chocolate and a bun and some milk, oh yes, I had enough," said Karen faintly,
raising her hand to her forehead; "but I must be hungry; for my head aches so badly. How kind
you are, Mrs. Talcott."

"You lie right there and I'll bring you some dinner." Mrs. Talcott was swiftly tidying the room.

"But what of yours, Mrs. Talcott? Isn't it your dinner-time?"

"I've had my supper. I have supper early these days."

Karen dimly reflected, when she was gone, that this was an innovation. Whoever Madame von Marwitz's
guests, Mrs. Talcott had, until now, always made an acte de présence at every meal. She was
tired and not feeling well enough after her illness, she thought.

Mrs. Talcott soon returned with a tray on which were set out hot consommée and chicken and
salad, a peach beside them. Hot-house fruit was never wanting when Madame von Marwitz was at
Les Solitudes.

"Lie back. I'll feed it to you," said Mrs. Talcott. "It's good and strong. You know Adolphe
can make as good a consommée as anybody, if he's a mind to."

"Is Adolphe here?" Karen asked as she swallowed the spoonfuls.

"Yes, I sent for Adolphe to Paris a week ago," said Mrs. Talcott. "Mercedes wrote that she'd
soon be coming with friends and wanted him. He'd just taken a situation, but he dropped it.
Her new motor's here, too, down from London. The chauffeur seems a mighty nice man, a sight
nicer than Hammond." Hammond had been Madame von Marwitz's recent coachman. Mrs. Talcott talked
on mildly while she fed Karen who, in the whirl of trivial thoughts, turning and turning like
midges over a deep pool, questioned herself, with a vague wonder that she was too tired to
follow: "Did Tante say anything to me about coming to Cornwall?"

Mrs. Talcott, meanwhile, as Madame von Marwitz had prophesied, asked no questions.

"Now you have a good long sleep," she said, when she rose to go. "That's what you need."

She needed it very much. The midges turned more and more slowly, then sank into the pool; mist
enveloped everything, and darkness.

CHAPTER XXX

Karen was waked next morning by the familiar sound of the Wohltemperirtes Clavier.

Tante was at work in the music-room and was playing the prelude in D flat, a special favourite
of Karen's.

She lay and listened with a curious, cautious pleasure, like that with which, half awake, one
may guide a charming dream, knowing it to be a dream. There was so much waiting to be remembered;
so much waiting to be thought. Tante's beautiful notes, rising to her like the bubbles of a
spring through clear water, seemed to encircle her, ringing her in from the wider consciousness.

While she listened she looked out at the branches of young leaves, softly stirring against
the morning sky. There was her wall-paper, with the little pink flower creeping up it. She
was in her own little bed. Tante was practising. How sweet, how safe, it was. A drowsy peace
filled her. It was slowly that memory, lapping in, like the sinister, dark waters of a flood
under doors and through crevices, made its way into her mind, obliterating peace, at first,
rather than revealing pain. There was a fear formless and featureless; and there was loss,
dreadful loss. And as the sense of loss grew upon her, consciousness grew more vivid, bringing
its visions.

This hour of awakening. Gregory's eyes smiling at her, not cold, not hard eyes then. His hand
stretched out to hers; their morning kiss. Tears suddenly streamed down her face.

It was impossible to hide them from Mrs. Talcott, who came in carrying a breakfast tray; but
Karen checked them, and dried her eyes.

Mrs. Talcott set the tray down on the little table near the bed.

"Is it late, Mrs. Talcott?" Karen asked.

"It's just nine; Mercedes is up early so as to get some work in before she goes out motoring."

"She is going motoring?"

"Yes, she and Mr. Drew are going off for the day." Mrs. Talcott adjusted Karen's pillow.

"But I shall see Tante before she goes?" It was the formless, featureless fear that came closer.

"My, yes! You'll see her all right," said Mrs. Talcott. "She was asking after you the first
thing and hoped you'd stay in bed till lunch. Now you eat your breakfast right away like a
good girl."

Karen tried to eat her breakfast like a good girl and the sound of the Wohltemperirtes Clavier
seemed again to encircle and sustain her.

"How'd you sleep, honey?" Mrs. Talcott inquired. The term hardly expressed endearment, yet
it was such an unusual one from Mrs. Talcott that Karen could only surmise that her tears had
touched the old woman.

"Very, very well," she said.

"How'd you like me to bring up some mending I've got to do and sit by you till Mercedes comes?"
Mrs. Talcott pursued.

"Oh, please do, Mrs. Talcott," said Karen. She felt that she would like to have Mrs. Talcott
there with her very much. She would probably cry unless Mrs. Talcott stayed with her, and she
did not want Tante to find her crying.

So Mrs. Talcott brought her basket of mending and sat by the window, sewing in silence for
the most part, but exchanging with Karen now and then a quiet remark about the state of the
garden and how the plants were doing.

At eleven the sound of the piano ceased and soon after the stately tread of Madame von Marwitz
was heard outside. Mrs. Talcott, saying that she would come back later on, gathered up her
mending as she appeared. She was dressed for motoring, with a long white cloak lined with white
fur and her head bound in nun-like fashion with a white coif and veil. Beautiful she looked,
and sad, and gentle; a succouring Madonna; and Karen's heart rose up to her. It clung to her
and prayed; and the realisation of her own need, her own dependence, was a new thing. She had
never before felt dependence on Tante as anything but proud and glad. To pray to her now that
she should never belie her loveliness, to cling to that faith in her without which all her
life would be a thing distorted and unrecognisable, was not pride or gladness and seemed to
be the other side of fear. Yet so gentle were the eyes, so tender the smile and the firm clasp
of the hands taking hers, while Tante murmured, stooping to kiss her: "Good morning to my child,"
that the prayer seemed answered, the faith approved.

If Madame von Marwitz had been taken by surprise the night before, if she had had to give herself
time to think, she had now, it was evident, done her thinking. The result was this warmly cherishing
tenderness.

"Ah," she said, still stooping over Karen, while she put back her hair, "it is good to have
my child back again, mine--quite mine--once more."

"I have slept so well, Tante," said Karen. She was able to smile up at her.

Madame von Marwitz looked about the room. "And now it is to gather the dear old life closely
about her again. Gardening, and reading; and quiet times with Tante and Tallie. Though, for
the moment, I must be much with my guest; I am helping him with his work. He has talent, yes;
it is a strange and complicated nature. You did not expect to find him here?"

Karen held Tante's hand and her gaze was innocent of surmise. Mr. Drew had never entered her
thoughts. "No. Yes. No, Tante. He came with you?"

"Yes, he came with me," said Madame von Marwitz. "I had promised him that he should see Les
Solitudes one day. I was glad to find an occupation for my thoughts in helping him. I told
him that if he were free he might join me. It is good, in great sorrow, to think of others.
Now it is, for the young man and for me, our work. Work, work; we must all work, ma chérie.
It is our only clue in the darkness of life; our only nourishment in the desert places." Again
she looked about the room. "You came without boxes?"

"Yes, Mrs. Barker is to send them to me."

"Ah, yes. When," said Madame von Marwitz, in a lower voice, "did you leave? Yesterday morning?"

"No, Tante. The night before."

"The night before? So? And where did you spend the night? With Mrs. Forrester? With Scrotton?
I have not yet written to Scrotton."

"No. I went to the Lippheims."

"The Lippheims? So?"

"The others, Tante, would have talked to me; and questioned me. I could not have borne that.
The Lippheims were so kind."

"I can believe it. They have hearts of gold, those Lippheims. They would cut themselves in
four to help one. And the good Lise? How is she? I am sorry to have missed Lise."

"And she was, oh, so sorry to have missed you, Tante. She is well, I think, though tired; she
is always tired, you remember. She has too much to do."

"Indeed, yes; poor Lise. She might have been an artist of the first rank if she had not given
herself over to the making of children. Why did she not stop at Franz and Lotta and Minna?
That would have given her the quartette,"--Madame von Marwitz smiled--she was in a mildly merry
mood. "But on they go--four, five, six, seven, eight--how many are there--bon Dieu! of how
many am I the god-mother? One grows bewildered. It is almost a rat's family. Lise is not unlike
a white mother-rat, with the small round eye and the fat body."

"Oh--not a rat, Tante," Karen protested, a little pained.

"A rabbit, you think? And a rabbit, too, is prolific. No; for the rabbit has not the sharpness,
not the pointed nose, the anxious, eager look--is not so the mother, indeed. Rat it is, my
Karen; and rat with a golden heart. How do you find Tallie? She has been with you all the morning?
You have not talked with Tallie of our calamities?"

"Oh, no, Tante."

"She is a wise person, Tallie; wise, silent, discreet. And I find her looking well; but very,
very well; this air preserves her. And how old is Tallie now?" she mused.

Though she talked so sweetly there was, Karen felt it now, a perfunctoriness in Tante's remarks.
She was, for all the play of her nimble fancy, preoccupied, and the sound of the motor-horn
below seemed a signal for release. "Tallie is, mon Dieu," she computed, rising--"she was twenty-three
when I was born--and I am nearly fifty"--Madame von Marwitz was as far above cowardly reticences
about her age as a timeless goddess--"Tallie is actually seventy-two. Well, I must be off,
ma chérie. We have a long trip to make to-day. We go to Fowey. He wishes to see Fowey. I pray
the weather may continue fine. You will be with us this evening? You will get up? You will
come to dinner?"

She paused at the mantelpiece to adjust her veil, and Karen, in the glass, saw that her eyes
were fixed on hers with a certain intentness.

"Yes, I will get up this morning, Tante," she said. "I will help Mrs. Talcott with the garden.
But dinner? Mrs. Talcott says that she has supper now. Shall I not have my supper with her?
Perhaps she would like that?"

"That would perhaps be well," said Madame von Marwitz. "That is perhaps well thought." Still
she paused and still, in the glass, she fixed cogitating eyes on Karen. She turned, then, abruptly.
"But no; I do not think so. On second thoughts I do not think so. You will dine with us. Tallie
is quite happy alone. She is pleased with the early supper. I shall see you, then, this evening."

A slight irritation lay on her brows; but she leaned with all her tenderness to kiss Karen,
murmuring, "Adieu, mon enfant."

When the sound of the motor had died away Karen got up, dressed and went downstairs.

The music-room, its windows open to the sea, was full of the signs of occupancy.

The great piano stood open. Karen went to it and, standing over it, played softly the dearly
loved notes of the prelude in D flat.

She practised, always, on the upright piano in the morning-room; but when Tante was at home
and left the grand piano open she often played on that. It was a privilege rarely to be resisted
and to-day she sat down and played the fugue through, still very softly. Then, covering the
keys, she shut the lid and looked more carefully about the room.

Flowers and books were everywhere. Mrs. Talcott arranged flowers beautifully; Karen recognized
her skilful hand in the tall branches of budding green standing high in a corner, the glasses
of violets, the bowls of anemones and the flat dishes of Italian earthenware filled with primroses.

On a table lay a pile of manuscript; she knew Mr. Drew's small, thick handwriting. A square
silver box for cigarettes stood near by; it was marked with Mr. Drew's initials in Tante's
hand. How kind she was to that young man; but Tante had always been lavish with those of whom
she was fond.

Out on the verandah the vine-tendrils were already green against the sky, and on a lower terrace
she saw Mrs. Talcott at work, as usual, among the borders. Mrs. Talcott then, had not yet gone
to Helston and she would not be alone and she was glad of that. In the little cupboard near
the pantry she found a pair of old gardening gloves and her own old gardening hat. The day
was peaceful and balmy; all was as it had always been, except herself.

She worked all the morning in the garden and walked in the afternoon on the cliffs with Victor.
Victor had come down with Tante.

Mrs. Talcott had adjourned the trip to Helston; so they had tea together. Her boxes had not
yet come and when it was time to dress for dinner she had nothing to change to but the little
white silk with the flat blue bows upon it, the dress in which Gregory had first seen her.
She had left it behind her when she married and found it now hanging in a cupboard in her room.

The horn of the returning motor did not sound until she was dressed and on going down she had
the music-room to herself for nearly half an hour. Then Mr. Drew appeared.

The tall white lamps with their white shades had been brought in, but the light from the windows
mingled a pale azure with the gold. Mr. Drew, Karen reflected, looked in the dual illumination
like a portrait by Besnard. He had, certainly, an unusual and an interesting face, and it pleased
her to verify and emphasize this fact; for, accustomed as she was to watching Tante's preoccupations
with interesting people, she could not quite accustom herself to her preoccupation with Mr.
Drew. To account for it he must be so very interesting.

She was not embarrassed by conjectures as to what, after her entry of last night, Mr. Drew
might be thinking about her. It occurred to her no more than in the past to imagine that anybody
attached to Tante could spare thought to her. And as in the past, despite all the inner desolation,
it was easy to assume to this guest of Tante's the attitude so habitual to her of the attendant
in the temple, the attendant who, rising from his seat at the door, comes forward tranquilly
to greet the worshipper and entertain him with quiet comment until the goddess shall descend.

"Did you have a nice drive?" she inquired. "The weather has been beautiful."

Mr. Drew, coming up to her as she stood in the open window, looked at her with his impenetrable,
melancholy eyes, smiling at her a little.

There was no tastelessness in his gaze, nothing that suggested a recollection of what he had
heard or seen last night; yet Karen was made vaguely aware from his look that she had acquired
some sort of significance for him.

"Yes, it's been nice," he said. "I'm very fond of motoring. I'd like to spend my days in a
motor--always going faster and faster; and then drop down in a blissful torpor at night. Madame
von Marwitz was so kind and made the chauffeur go very fast."

Karen was somewhat disturbed by this suggestion. "I am sure that she, too, would like going
very fast. I hope you will not tempt her."

"Oh, but I'm afraid I do," Mr. Drew confessed. "What is the good of a motor unless you go too
fast in it? A motor has no meaning unless it's a method of intoxication."

Karen received the remark with inattention. She looked out over the sea, preoccupied with the
thought of Tante's recklessness. "I do not think that going so fast can be good for her music,"
she said.

"Oh, but yes," Mr. Drew assured her, "nothing is so good for art as intoxication. Art is rooted
in intoxication. It's all a question of how to get it."

"But with motoring you only get torpor, you say," Karen remarked. And, going on with her own
train of thoughts, "So much shaking will be bad, perhaps, for the muscles. And there is always
the danger to consider. I hope she will not go too fast. She is too important a person to take
risks." There was no suggestion that Mr. Drew should not take them.

"Don't you like going fast? Don't you like taking risks? Don't you like intoxication?" Mr.
Drew inquired, and his eyes travelled from the blue bows on her breast to the blue bows on
her elbow-sleeves.

"I have never been intoxicated," said Karen calmly--she was quite accustomed to all manner
of fantastic visitors in the temple--"I do not think that I should like it. And I prefer walking
to any kind of driving. No, I do not like risks."

"Ah yes, I can see that. Yes, that's altogether in character," said Mr. Drew. He turned, then,
as Madame von Marwitz came in, but remained standing in the window while Karen went forward
to greet her guardian. Madame von Marwitz, as she took her hands and kissed her, looked over
Karen's shoulder at Mr. Drew.

"Why did you not come to my room, chérie?" she asked. "I had hoped to see you alone before
I came down."

"I thought you might be tired and perhaps resting, Tante," said Karen, who had, indeed, paused
before her guardian's door on her way down, and then passed on with a certain sense of shyness;
she did not want in any way to force herself on Tante.

"But you know that I like to have you with me when I am tired," Madame von Marwitz returned.
"And I am not tired: no: it has been a day of wings."

She walked down the long room, her arm around Karen, with a buoyancy of tread and demeanour
in which, however, Karen, so deep an adept in her moods discovered excitement rather than gaiety.
"Has it been a good day for my child?" she questioned; "a happy, peaceful day? Yes? You have
been much with Tallie? I told Tallie that she must postpone the trip to Helston so that she
might stay with you." Tante on the sofa encircled her and looked brightly at her; yet her eye
swerved to the window where Mr. Drew remained looking at a paper.

Karen said that she had been gardening and walking.

"Good; bravo!" said Tante, and then, in a lower voice: "No news, I suppose?"

"No; oh no. That could not be, Tante," said Karen, with a startled look, and Tante went on
quickly: "But no; I see. It could not be. And it has, then, been a happy day for my Karen.
What is it you read, Claude?"

Karen's sense of slight perplexity in regard to Tante's interest in Mr. Drew was deepened when
she called him Claude, and her tone now, half vexed, half light, was perplexing.

"Some silly things that are being said in the House," Mr. Drew returned, going on reading.

"What things?" said Tante sharply.

"Oh, you wouldn't expect me to read a stupid debate to you," said Mr. Drew, lifting his eyes
with a smile.

Dinner was announced and they went in, Tante keeping her arm around Karen's shoulders and sweeping
ahead with an effect of unawareness as to her other guest. She had, perhaps, a little lost
her temper with him; and his manner was, Karen reflected, by no means assiduous: At the table,
however, Tante showed herself suave and sweet.

One reason why things seemed a little strange, Karen further reflected, was that Mrs. Talcott
came no longer to dinner; and she was vaguely sorry for this.

CHAPTER XXXI

Karen's boxes arrived next day, neatly packed by Mrs. Barker. And not only her clothes were
in them. She had left behind her the jewel-box with the pearl necklace that Gregory had given
her, the pearl and sapphire ring, the old enamel brooch and clasp and chain, his presents all.
The box was kept locked, and in a cupboard of which Gregory had the key; so that he must have
given it to Mrs. Barker. The photographs, too, from their room, not those of him, but those
of Tante; of her father; and a half a dozen little porcelain and silver trinkets from the drawing-room,
presents and purchases particularly hers.

It was right, quite right, that he should send them. She knew it. It was right that he should
accept their parting as final. Yet that he should so accurately select and send to her everything
that could remind him of her seemed to roll the stone before the tomb.

She looked at the necklace, the ring, all the pretty things, and shut the box. Impossible that
she should keep them yet impossible to send them back as if in a bandying of rebuffs. She would
wait for some years to pass and then they should be returned without comment.

And the clothes, all these dear clothes of her married life; every dress and hat was associated
with Gregory. She could never wear them again. And it felt, not so much that she was locking
them away, as that Gregory had locked her out into darkness and loneliness. She took up the
round of the days. She practised; she gardened, she walked and read. Of Tante she saw little.

She was accustomed to seeing little of Tante, even when Tante was there; quite accustomed to
Tante's preoccupations. Yet, through the fog of her own unhappiness, it came to her, like an
object dimly perceived, that in this preoccupation of Tante's there was a difference. It showed,
itself in a high-pitched restlessness, verging now and again on irritation--not with her, Karen,
but with Mr. Drew. To Karen she was brightly, punctually tender, yet it was a tenderness that
held her away rather than drew her near.

Karen did not need to be put aside. She had always known how to efface herself; she needed
no atonement for the so apparent fact that Tante wanted to be left alone with Mr. Drew as much
as possible. The difficulty in leaving her came with perceiving that though Tante wanted her
to go she did not want to seem to want it.

She caressed Karen; she addressed her talk to her; she kept her; yet, under the smile of the
eyes, there was an intentness that Karen could interpret. It devolved upon her to find the
excuse, the necessity, for withdrawal. Mrs. Talcott, in the morning-room, was a solution. Karen
could go to her almost directly after dinner, as soon as coffee had been served; for on the
first occasion when she rose, saying that she would have her coffee with Mrs. Talcott, Tante
said with some sharpness--after a hesitation: "No; you will have your coffee here. Tallie does
not have coffee." Groping her way, Karen seemed to touch strange forms. Tante cared so much
about this young man; so much that it was almost as if she would be willing to abandon her
dignity for him. It was more than the indulgent, indolent interest, wholly Olympian, that she
had so often seen her bestow. She really cared. And the strangeness for Karen was in part made
up of pain for Tante; for it almost seemed that Tante cared more than Mr. Drew did. Karen had
seen so many men care for Tante; so many who were, obviously, in love with her; but she had
seen Tante always throned high above the prostrate adorers, idly kind; holding out a hand,
perhaps, for them to kiss; smiling, from time to time, if they, fortunately, pleased her; but
never, oh never, stepping down towards them.

It seemed to her now that she had seen Tante stepping down. It was only a step; she could never
become the suppliant, the pursuing goddess; and, as if with her hand still laid on the arm
of her throne, she kept all her air of high command.

But had she kept its power? Mr. Drew's demeanour reminded Karen sometimes of a cat's. Before
the glance and voice of authority he would, metaphorically, pace away; pausing to blink up
at some object that attracted his attention or to interest himself in the furbishing of flank
or chest. At a hint of anger or coercion, he would tranquilly disappear. Tante, controlling
indignation, was left to stare after him and to regain the throne as best she might, and at
these moments Karen felt that Tante's eye turned on her, gauging her power of interpretation,
ready, did she not feign the right degree of unconsciousness, to wreak on her something of
the controlled emotion. The fear that had come on the night of her arrival pressed closely
on Karen then, but, more closely still, the pain for Tante. Tante's clear dignity was blurred;
her image, in its rebuffed and ineffectual autocracy, became hovering, uncertain, piteous.
And, in seeing and feeling all these things, as if with a lacerated sensitiveness, Karen was
aware that, in this last week of her life, she had grown much older. She felt herself in some
ways older than her guardian.

It was on the morning of her seventh day at Les Solitudes that she met Mr. Drew walking early
in the garden.

The sea was glittering blue and gold; the air was melancholy in its sweetness; birds whistled.

Karen examined Mr. Drew as he approached her along the sunny upper terrace.

With his dense, dark eyes, delicate face and golden hair, his white clothes and loose black
tie, she was able to recognize in him an object that might charm and even subjugate. To Karen
he seemed but one among the many strange young men she had seen surrounding Tante; yet this
morning, clearly, and for the first time, she saw why he subjugated Tante and why she resented
her subjugation. There was more in him than mere pose and peculiarity; he had some power; the
power of the cat: he was sincerely indifferent to anything that did not attract him. And at
the same time he was unimportant; insignificant in all but his sincerity. He was not a great
writer; Tante could never make a great writer out of him. And he was, when all was said and
done, but one among many strange young men.

"Good morning," he said. He doffed his hat. He turned and walked beside her. They were in full
view of the house. "I hoped that I might find you. Let us go up to the flagged garden," he
suggested; "the sea is glittering like a million scimitars. One has a better view up there."

"But it is not so warm," said Karen. "I am walking here to be in the sun."

Mr. Drew had also been walking there to be in the sun; but they were in full view of the house
and he was aware of a hand at Madame von Marwitz's window-curtain. He continued, however, to
walk beside Karen up and down the terrace.

"I think of you," he said, "as a person always in the sun. You suggest glaciers and fields
of snow and meadows full of flowers--the sun pouring down on all of them. I always imagine
Apollo as a Norse God. Are you really a Norwegian?"

Karen was, as we have said, accustomed to young men who talked in a fantastic manner. She answered
placidly: "Yes. I am half Norwegian."

"Your name, then, is really yours?--your untamed, yet intimate, name. It is like a wild bird
that feeds out of one's hand."

"Yes; it is really mine. It is quite a common name in Norway."

"Wild birds are common," Mr. Drew observed, smiling softly.

He found her literalness charming. He was finding her altogether charming. From the moment
that she had appeared at the door in the dusk, with her white, blind, searching face, she had
begun to interest him. She was stupid and delightful; a limpid and indomitable young creature
who, in a clash of loyalties, had chosen, without a hesitation, to leave the obvious one. Also
she was married yet unawakened, and this, to Mr. Drew, was a pre-eminently charming combination.
The question of the awakened and the unawakened, of the human attitude to passion, preoccupied
him, practically, more than any other. His art dealt mainly in themes of emotion as an end
in itself.

The possibilities of passion in Madame von Marwitz, as artist and genius, had strongly attracted
him. He had genuinely been in love with Madame von Marwitz. But the mere woman, as she more
and more helplessly revealed herself, was beginning to oppress and bore him.

He had amused himself, of late, by imaging his relation to her in the fable of the sun and
the traveller. Her beams from their high, sublime solitudes had filled him with delight and
exhilaration. Then the radiance had concentrated itself, had begun to follow him--rather in
the manner of stage sunlight--very unflaggingly. He had wished for intervals of shade. He had
been aware, even during his long absence in America, of sultriness brooding over him, and now,
at these close quarters, he had begun to throw off his cloak of allegiance. She bored him.
It wasn't good enough. She pretended to be sublime and far; but she wasn't sublime and far;
she was near and watchful and exacting; as watchful and exacting as a mistress and as haughty
as a Diana. She was not, and had, evidently, no intention of being, his mistress, and for the
mere pleasure of adoring her Mr. Drew found the price too high to pay. He did not care to proffer,
indefinitely, a reverent passion, and he did not like people, when he showed his weariness,
to lose their tempers with him. Already Madame von Marwitz had lost hers. He did not forget
what she looked like nor what she said on these occasions. She had mentioned the large-mouthed
children at Wimbledon--facts that he preferred to forget as much as possible--and he did not
know that he forgave her. There was a tranquil malice in realizing that as Madame von Marwitz
became more and more displeasing to him, Mrs. Jardine, more and more, became pleasing. Circumstances
of various kinds, exaggerated or invented, have been circulated concerning the youth of a person
so remarkable. The following are given upon good authority.[6]

[6] They were many years since communicated to the author by Messrs. Joseph and Louis Law, brothers
of General Baron Lauriston, Bonaparte's favourite aid-de-camp.

These gentlemen, or at least Joseph, were educated at Brienne, but
at a later period than Napoleon.

Their distinguished brother was his contemporary.

The conduct of Napoleon among his companions was that of a studious
and reserved youth, addicting himself deeply to the means of improvement,
and rather avoiding than seeking the usual temptations to dissipation
of time.

He had few friends, and no intimates; yet at different times, when
he chose to exert it, he exhibited considerable influence over his
fellow-students, and when there was any joint plan to be carried into
effect, he was frequently chosen dictator of the little republic.

In the time of winter, Bonaparte, upon one occasion, engaged his companions
in constructing a fortress out of the snow, regularly defended by
ditches and bastions, according to the rules of fortification.

It was considered as displaying the great powers of the juvenile engineer in the way of his
profession, and was attacked and defended by the students, who divided
into parties for the purpose, until the battle became so keen that
their superiors thought it proper to proclaim a truce.

The young Bonaparte gave another instance of address and enterprise upon the following occasion. There
was a fair held annually in the neighbourhood of Brienne, where the
pupils of the Military School used to find a day's amusement; but
on account of a quarrel betwixt them and the country people upon a
former occasion, or for some such cause, the masters of the institution
had directed that the students should not on the fair-day be permitted
to go beyond their own precincts, which were surrounded with a wall.

Under the direction of the young Corsican, however, the scholars had already laid a plot for
securing their usual day's diversion. They had undermined the wall which encompassed their
exercising ground, with so much skill and secrecy, that their operations
remained entirely unknown till the morning of the fair, when a part
of the boundary unexpectedly fell, and gave a free passage to the
imprisoned students, of which they immediately took the advantage,
by hurrying to the prohibited scene of amusement.

 Tallie waits
for you, I think, in the garden, and would be glad of your help. Tallie grows old. It does
not do to forget her."

"Am I to go into the garden, too?" Mr. Drew inquired, as Madame von Marwitz seated herself
and ran her fingers over the keys. "I thought we were to motor this morning."

"We will motor when I have done my work. Go into the garden, by all means, if you wish to."

"May I come into the garden with you? May I help you there?" Mr. Drew serenely drawled, addressing
Karen, who, with a curious, concentrated look, stood gazing at her guardian.

She turned her eyes on him and her glance put him far, far away, like an object scarcely perceived.
"I am not going into the garden," she said. "Mrs. Talcott is working in the morning-room and
does not need me yet."

"Ah. She is in the morning-room," Madame von Marwitz murmured, still not raising her eyes,
and still running loud and soft scales up and down. Karen left the room.

As the door closed upon her, Madame von Marwitz, with a singular effect of control, began to
weave a spider's-web of intricate, nearly impalpable, sound. "Go, if you please," she said
to Mr. Drew.

He stood beside her, placid. "Why are you angry?" he asked.

"I am not pleased that my rules should be broken. Karen has many privileges. She must learn
not to take, always, the extra inch when the ell is so gladly granted."

He leaned on the piano. Her controlled face, bent with absorption above the lacey pattern of
sound that she evoked, interested him.

"When you are angry and harness your anger to your art like this, you become singularly beautiful,"
he remarked. He felt it; and, after all, if he were to remain at Les Solitudes and attempt
to scale those Alpine slopes he must keep on good terms with Madame von Marwitz.

"So," was her only reply. Yet her eyes softened.

He raised the lace wing of her sleeve and kissed it, keeping it in his hand.

"No foolishness if you please," said Madame von Marwitz. "Of what have you and Karen been talking?"

"I can't get her to talk," said Mr. Drew. "But I like to hear her play."

"She plays with right feeling," said Madame von Marwitz. "She is not a child to express herself
in speech. Her music reveals her more truly."

"Nur wo du bist sei alles, immer kindlich," Mr. Drew mused. "That is what she makes me think
of." With anybody of Madame von Marwitz's intelligence, frankness was far more likely to allay
suspicion than guile. And for very pride now she was forced to seem reassured. "Yes. That is
so," she said. And she continued to play.

CHAPTER XXXII

Karen meanwhile made her way to the cliff-path and, seating herself on a grassy slope, she
clasped her knees with her hands and gazed out over the sea. She was thinking hard of something,
and trying to think only of that. It was true, the permission had been that she was to play
on the grand-piano when it was left open. There had been no rule set; it had not been said
that she was not to play at other times and indeed, on many occasions, she had played unrebuked,
before Tante came down. But the thing to remember now, with all her power, was that, technically,
Tante had been right. To hold fast to that thought was to beat away a fear that hovered about
her, like a horrible bird of prey. She sat there for a long time, and she became aware at last
that though she held so tightly to her thought, it had, as it were, become something lifeless,
inefficacious, and that fear had invaded her. Tante had been unkind, unjust, unloving.

It was as though, in taking refuge with Tante, she had leaped from a great height, seeing security
beneath, and as though, alighting, she slipped and stumbled on a sloping surface with no foothold
anywhere. Since she came, there had been only this sliding, sliding, and now it seemed to be
down to unseen depths. For this was more and worse than the first fear of her coming. Tante
had been unkind, and she so loved Mr. Drew that she forgot herself when he bestowed his least
attention elsewhere.

Karen rose to her feet suddenly, aware that she was trembling.

She looked over the sea and the bright day was dreadful to her. Where was she and what was
she, and what was Tante, if this fear were true? Not even on that far day of childhood when
she had lost herself in the forest had such a horror of loneliness filled her. She was a lost,
an unwanted creature.

She turned from the unanswering immensities and ran down the cliff-path towards Les Solitudes.
She could not be alone. To think these things was to feel herself drowning in fear.

Emerging from the higher trees she caught sight below her of Mrs. Talcott's old straw hat moving
among the borders; and, in the midst of the emptiness, the sight was strength and hope. The
whole world seemed to narrow to Mrs. Talcott. She was secure and real. She was a spar to be
clung to. The nightmare would reveal itself as illusion if she kept near Mrs. Talcott. She
ran down to her.

Mrs. Talcott was slaying slugs. She had placed pieces of orange-peel around cherished young
plants to attract the depredators and she held a jar of soot; into the soot the slugs were
dropped as she discovered them.

The sight of her was like a draught of water to parching lips. Reality slowly grew round Karen
once more. Tante had been hasty, even unkind; but she was piteous, absorbed in this great devotion;
and Tante loved her.

She walked beside Mrs. Talcott and helped her with the slugs.

"Been out for a walk, Karen?" Mrs. Talcott inquired. They had reached the end of the border
and moved on to a higher one.

"Only to the cliff," said Karen.

"You look kind of tired," Mrs. Talcott remarked, and Karen owned that she felt tired. "It's
so warm to-day," she said.

"Yes; it's real hot. Let's walk under the trees." Mrs. Talcott took out her handkerchief and
wiped her large, saffron-coloured forehead.

They walked slowly in the thin shadow of the young foliage.

"You're staying on for a while, aren't you?" Mrs. Talcott inquired presently. She had as yet
asked Karen no question and Karen felt that something in her own demeanour had caused this one.

"For more than a while," she said. "I am not going away again." In the sound of the words she
found a curious reassurance. Was it not her home, Les Solitudes?

Mrs. Talcott said nothing for some moments, stooping to nip a drooping leaf from a plant they
passed. Then she questioned further: "Is Mr. Jardine coming down here?"

"I have left my husband," said Karen.

For some moments, Mrs. Talcott, again, said nothing, but she no longer had an eye for the plants.
Neither did she look at Karen; her gaze was fixed before her. "Is that so," was at last her
comment.

The phrase might have expressed amazement, commiseration or protest; its sound remained ambiguous.
They had come to a rustic bench. "Let's sit down for a while," she said; "I'm not as young
as I was."

They sat down, the old woman heavily, and she drew a sigh of relief. Looking at her Karen saw
that she, too, was very tired. And she, too--was it not strange that to-day she should see
it for the first time?--was very lonely. A sudden pity, profound and almost passionate, filled
her for Mrs. Talcott.

"You'll not mind having me here--for all the time now--again, will you?" she asked, smiling
a little, with determination, for she did not wish Mrs. Talcott to guess what she had seen.

"No," said Mrs. Talcott, continuing to gaze before her, and shaking her head. "No, I'll be
glad of that. We get on real well together, I think." And, after another moment of silence,
she went on in the same contemplative tone: "I used to quarrel pretty bad with my husband when
I was first married, Karen. He was the nicest, mildest kind of man, as loving as could be.
But I guess most young things find it hard to get used to each other all at once. It ain't
easy, married life; at least not at the beginning. You expect such a high standard of each
other and everything seems to hurt. After a while you get so discouraged, perhaps, finding
it isn't like what you expected, that you commence to think you don't care any more and it
was all a mistake. I guess every young wife thinks that in the first year, and it makes you
feel mighty sick. Why, if marriage didn't tie people up so tight, most of 'em would fly apart
in the first year and think they just hated each other, and that's why it's such a good thing
that they're tied so tight. Why I remember once the only thing that seemed to keep me back
was thinking how Homer--Homer was my husband's name, Homer G. Talcott--sort of snorted when
he laughed. I was awful mad with him and it seemed as if he'd behaved so mean and misunderstood
me so that I'd got to go; but when I thought of that sort of childish snort he'd give sometimes,
I felt I couldn't leave him. It's mighty queer, human nature, and the teeny things that seem
to decide your mind for you; I guess they're not as teeny as they seem. But those hurt feelings
are almost always a mistake--I'm pretty sure of it. Any two people find it hard to live together
and get used to each other; it don't make any difference how much in love they are."

There was no urgency in Mrs. Talcott's voice and no pathos of retrospect. Its contemplative
placidity might have been inviting another sad and wise old woman to recognize these facts
of life with her.

Karen's mood, while she listened to her, was hardening to the iron of her final realization,
the realization that had divided her and Gregory. "It isn't so with us, Mrs. Talcott," she
said. "He has shown himself a man I cannot live with. None of our feelings are the same. All
my sacred things he despises."

"Mercedes, you mean?" Mrs. Talcott suggested after a moment's silence.

"Yes. And more." Karen could not name her mother.

Mrs. Talcott sat silent.

"Has Tante not told you why I was here?" Karen presently asked.

"No," said Mrs. Talcott. "I haven't had a real talk with Mercedes since she got back. Her mind
is pretty well taken up with this young man."

To this Karen, glancing at Mrs. Talcott in a slight bewilderment, was able to say nothing,
and Mrs. Talcott pursued, resuming her former tone: "There's another upsetting thing about
marriage, Karen, and that is that you can't expect your families to feel about each other like
you feel. It isn't in nature that they should, and that's one of the things that young married
people can't make up their minds to. Now Mr. Jardine isn't the sort of young man to care about
many people; few and far between they are, I should infer, and Mercedes ain't one of them.
Mercedes wouldn't appeal to him one mite. I saw that as plain as could be from the first."

"He should have told me so," said Karen, with her rocky face and voice.

"Well, he didn't tell you he found her attractive, did he?"

"No. But though I saw that there was blindness, I thought it was because he did not know her.
I thought that when he knew her he would care for her. And I could forgive his not caring.
I could forgive so much. But it is worse, far worse than that. He accuses Tante of dreadful
things. It is hatred that he feels for her. He has confessed it." The colour had risen to Karen's
cheeks and burned there as she spoke.

"Well now!" Mrs. Talcott imperturbably ejaculated.

"You can see that I could not live with a man who hated Tante," said Karen.

"What sort of things for instance?" Mrs. Talcott took up her former statement.

"How can I tell you, Mrs. Talcott. It burns me to think of them. Hypocrisy in her feeling for
me; selfishness and tyranny and deceit. It is terrible. In his eyes she is a malignant woman."

"Tch! Tch!" Mrs. Talcott made an indeterminate cluck with her tongue.

"I struggled not to see," said Karen, and her voice took on a sombre energy, "and Tante struggled,
too, for me. She, too, saw from the very first what it might mean. She asked me, on the very
first day that they met, Mrs. Talcott, when she came back, she asked me to try and make him
like her. She was so sweet, so magnanimous," her voice trembled. Oh the deep relief, so deep
that it seemed to cut like a knife--of remembering, pressing to her, what Tante had done for
her, endured for her! "So sweet, so magnanimous, Mrs. Talcott. She did all that she could--and
so did I--to give him time. For it was not that I lacked love for my husband. No. I loved him.
More, even more, than I loved Tante. There was perhaps the wrong. I was perhaps cowardly, for
his sake. I would not see. And it was all useless. It grew worse and worse. He was not rude
to her. It was not that. It was worse. He was so careful--oh I see it now--not to put himself
in the wrong. He tried, instead, to put her in the wrong. He misread every word and look. He
sneered--oh, I saw it, and shut my eyes--at her little foibles and weaknesses; why should she
not have them as well as other people, Mrs. Talcott? And he was blind--blind--blind," Karen's
voice trembled more violently, "to all the rest. So that it had to end," she went on in broken
sentences. "Tante went because she could bear it no longer. And because she saw that I could
bear it no longer. She hoped, by leaving me, to save my happiness. But that could not be. Mrs.
Talcott, even then I might have tried to go on living with that chasm--between Tante and my
husband--in my life; but I learned the whole truth as even I hadn't seen it; as even she hadn't
seen it. Mrs. Forrester came to me, Mrs. Talcott, and told me what Gregory had said to her
of Tante. He believes her a malignant woman," said Karen, repeating her former words and rising
as she spoke. "And to me he did not deny it. Everything, then, was finished for us. We saw
that we did not love each other any longer."

She stood before Mrs. Talcott in the path, her hands hanging at her sides, her eyes fixed on
the wall above Mrs. Talcott's head.

Mrs. Talcott did not rise. She sat silent, looking up at Karen, and so for some moments they
said nothing, while in the spring sunshine about them the birds whistled and an early white
butterfly dipped and fluttered by.

"I feel mighty tired, Karen," Mrs. Talcott then said. Her eyelid with the white mole twitched
over her eye, the lines of her large, firm old mouth were relaxed. Karen's eyes went to her
and pity filled her.

"It is my miserable story," she said. "I am so sorry."

"Yes, I feel mighty tired," Mrs. Talcott repeated, looking away and out at the sea. "It's discouraging.
I thought you were fixed up all safe and happy for life."

"Dear Mrs. Talcott," said Karen, earnestly.

"I don't like to see things that ought to turn out right turning out wrong," Mrs. Talcott continued,
"and I've seen a sight too many of them in my life. Things turning out wrong that were meant
to go right. Things spoiled. People, nice, good people, like you and Mr. Jardine, all upset
and miserable. I've seen worse things, too," Mrs. Talcott slowly rose as she spoke. "Yes, I've
seen about as bad things happen as can happen, and it's always been when Mercedes is about."

She stood still beside Karen, her bleak, intense old gaze fixed on the sea.

Karen thought that she had misheard her last words. "When Tante is about?" she repeated. "You
mean that dreadful things happen to her? That is one of the worst parts of it now, Mrs. Talcott--only
that I am so selfish that I do not think of it enough--to know that I have added to Tante's
troubles."

"No." Mrs. Talcott now said, and with a curious mildness and firmness. "No, that ain't what
I mean. Mercedes has had a sight of trouble. I don't deny it, but that ain't what I mean. She
makes trouble. She makes it for herself and she makes it for other people. There's always trouble
going, of some sort or other, when Mercedes is about."

"I don't understand you, Mrs. Talcott," said Karen. An uncanny feeling had crept over her while
the old woman spoke. It was as if, helplessly, she were listening to a sleep-walker who, in
tranced unconsciousness, spoke forth mildly the hidden thought of his waking life.

"No, you don't understand, yet," said Mrs. Talcott. "Perhaps it's fair that you don't. Perhaps
she can't help it. She was born so, I guess." Mrs. Talcott turned and walked towards the house.

The panic of the cliff was rising in Karen again. Mrs. Talcott was worse than the cliff and
the unanswering immensities. She walked beside her, trying to control her terror.

"You mean, I think," she said, "that Tante is a tragic person and people who love her must
suffer because of all that she has had to suffer."

"Yes, she's tragic all right," said Mrs. Talcott. "She's had about as bad a time as they make
'em--off and on. But she spoils things. And it makes me tired to see it going on. I've had
too much of it," said Mrs. Talcott, "and if this can't come right--this between you and your
nice young husband--I don't feel like I could get over it somehow." Leaning on Karen's arm
with both hands she had paused and looked intently down at the path.

"But Mrs. Talcott," Karen's voice trembled; it was incredible, yet one was forced by Mrs. Talcott's
whole demeanour to ask the question without indignation--"you speak as if you were blaming
Tante for something. You do not blame her, do you?"

Mrs. Talcott still paused and still looked down, as if deeply pondering. "I've done a lot of
thinking about that very point, Karen," she said. "And I don't know as I've made up my mind
yet. It's a mighty intricate question. Perhaps we've all got only so much will-power and when
most of it is ladled out into one thing there's nothing left to ladle out into the others.
That's the way I try, sometimes, to figure it out to myself. Mercedes has got a powerful sight
of will-power; but look at all she's got to use up in her piano-playing. There she is, working
up to the last notch all the time, taking it out of herself, getting all wrought up. Well,
to live so as you won't be spoiling things for other people needs about as much will-power
as piano-playing, I guess, when you're as big a person as Mercedes and want as many things.
And if you ain't got any will-power left you just do the easiest thing; you just take what
you've a mind to; you just let yourself go in every other way to make up for the one way you
held yourself in. That's how it is, perhaps."

"But Mrs. Talcott," said Karen in a low voice, "all this--about me and my husband--has come
because Tante has thought too much of us and too little of herself. It would have been much
easier for her to let us alone and not try and make Gregory like her. I do not recognise her
in what you are saying. You are saying dreadful things."

"Well, dreadful things have happened, I guess," said Mrs. Talcott. "I want you to go back to
your nice husband, Karen."

"No; no. Never. I can never go back to him," said Karen, walking on.

"Because he hates Mercedes?"

"Not only that. No. He is not what I thought. Do not ask me, Mrs. Talcott. We do not love each
other any longer. It is over."

"Well, I won't say anything about it, then," said Mrs. Talcott, who, walking beside her, kept
her hand on her arm. "Only I liked Mr. Jardine. I took to him right off, and I don't take to
people so easy. And I take to you, Karen, more than you know, I guess. And I'll lay my bottom
dollar there's some mistake between you and him, and that Mercedes is the reason of it."

They had reached the house.

"But wait," said Karen, turning to her. She laid both her hands on the old woman's arm while
she steadied her voice to speak this last thought. "Wait. You are so kind to me, Mrs. Talcott;
but you have made everything strange--and dreadful. I must ask you--one question, Mrs. Talcott.
You have been with Tante all her life. No one knows her as you do. Tell me, Mrs. Talcott. You
love Tante?"

They faced each other at the top of the steps, on the verandah. And the young eyes plunged
deep into the old eyes, passionately searching.

For a moment Mrs. Talcott did not reply. When she did speak, it was decisively as if, while
recognising Karen's right to ask, Karen must recognise that the answer must suffice. "I'd be
pretty badly off if I didn't love Mercedes. She's all I've got in the world."

CHAPTER XXXIII

The sound of the motor, whirring skilfully among the lanes, was heard at six, and shortly after
Madame von Marwitz's return Mrs. Talcott knocked at her door.

Madame von Marwitz was lying on the sofa. Louise had removed her wraps and dress and was drawing
off her shoes. Her eyes were closed. She seemed weary.

"I'll see to Madame," said Mrs. Talcott with her air of composed and unassuming authority.
It was somewhat the air of an old nurse, sure of her prerogatives in the nursery.

Louise went and Mrs. Talcott took off the other shoe and fetched the white silk mules.

Madame von Marwitz had only opened her eye for a glimmer of recognition, but as Mrs. Talcott
adjusted a mule, she tipped it off and muttered gloomily: "Stockings, please. I want fresh
stockings."

There was oddity--as Mrs. Talcott found, and came back, with a pair of white silk stockings--in
the sight of the opulent, middle-aged figure on the sofa, childishly stretching out first one
large bare leg and then the other to be clothed; and it might have aroused in Mrs. Talcott
a vista of memories ending with the picture of a child in the same attitude, a child as idle
and as autocratic.

"Thank you, Tallie," Madame von Marwitz said, wearily but kindly, when the stockings were changed.

Mrs. Talcott drew a chair in front of the sofa, seated herself and clasped her hands at her
waist. "I've come for a talk, Mercedes," she said.

Madame von Marwitz now was sleepily observing her.

"A talk! Bon Dieu! But I have been talking all day long!"

She yawned, putting a folded arm under her head so that, slightly raising it, she could look
at Mrs. Talcott more comfortably. "What do you want to talk about?" she inquired.

Mrs. Talcott's eyes, with their melancholy, immovable gaze, rested upon her. "About Karen and
her husband," she said. "I gathered from some talk I had with Karen to-day that you let her
think you came away from London simply and solely because you'd had a quarrel with Mr. Jardine."

Madame von Marwitz lay as if arrested by these words for some moments of an almost lethargic
interchange, and then in an impatient voice she returned: "What business is it of Karen's,
pray, if I didn't leave London simply and solely on account of my quarrel with her husband?
I had found it intolerable to be under his roof and I took the first opportunity for leaving
it. The opportunity happened to coincide with my arrangements for coming here. What has that
to do with Karen?"

"It has to do with her, Mercedes, because the child believes you were thinking about her when,
as a matter of fact, you weren't thinking about her or about anyone but this young man you've
gotten so taken up with. Karen believes you care for her something in the same way she does
for you, and it's a sin and a shame, Mercedes," Mrs. Talcott spoke with no vehemence at all
of tone or look, but with decision, "a sin and a shame to let that child ruin her life because
of you."

Again Madame von Marwitz, now turning her eyes on the ceiling, seemed to reflect dispassionately.
"I never conceived it possible that she would leave him," she then said. "I found him insufferable
and I saw that unless I went Karen also would come to see him as insufferable. To spare the
poor child this I came away. And I was amazed when she appeared here. Amazed and distressed,"
said Madame von Marwitz. And after another moment she took up: "As for him, he has what he
deserves."

Mrs. Talcott eyed her. "And what do you deserve, I'd like to know, for going meddling with
those poor happy young things? Why couldn't you let them alone? Karen's been a bother to you
for years. Why couldn't you be satisfied at having her nicely fixed up and let her tend to
her own potato-patch while you tended to yours? You can't make me believe that it wasn't your
fault--the whole thing--right from the beginning. I know you too well, Mercedes."

Again Madame von Marwitz lay, surprisingly still and surprisingly unresentful. It was as if,
placidly, she were willing to be undressed, body or soul, by her old nurse and guardian. But
after a moment, and with sudden indignation, she took up one of Mrs. Talcott's sentences.

"A bother to me? I am very fond of Karen. I am devoted to Karen. I should much like to know
what right you have to intimate that my feeling for her isn't sincere. My life proves the contrary.
As for saying that it is my fault, that is merely your habit. Everything is always my fault
with you."

"It always has been, as far as I've been able to keep an eye on your tracks," Mrs. Talcott
remarked.

"Well, this is not. I deny it. I absolutely," said Madame von Marwitz, and now with some excitement,
"deny it. Did I not give her to him? Did I not go to them with tenderest solicitude and strive
to make possible between him and me some relation of bare good fellowship? Did I not curb my
spirit, and it is a proud and impatient one, as you know, to endure, lest she should see it,
his veiled insolence and hostility? Oh! when I think of what I have borne with from that young
man, I marvel at my own forbearance. I have nothing to reproach myself with, Tallie; nothing;
and if his life is ruined I can say, with my hand on my heart,"--Madame von Marwitz laid it
there--"that he alone is to blame for it. A more odious, arrogant, ignorant being," she added,
"I have never encountered. Karen is well rid of him."

Mrs. Talcott remained unmoved. "You don't like him because he don't like you and that's about
all you've got against him, I reckon, if the truth were known," she said. "You can make yourself
see it all like that if you've a mind to, but you can't make me; I know you too well, Mercedes.
You were mad at him because he didn't admire you like you're used to being admired, and you
went to work pinching and picking here and there, pretending it was all on Karen's account,
but really so as you could get even with him. You couldn't stand their being happy all off
by themselves without you. Why I can see it all as plain and clear as if I'd been there right
along. Just think of your telling that poor deluded child that you wanted her to make her husband
like you. That was a nice way, wasn't it, for setting her heart at rest about you and him.
If you didn't like him and saw he didn't like you, why didn't you keep your mouth shut? That's
all you had to do, and keep out of their way all you could. If you'd been a stupid woman there
might have been some excuse for you, but you ain't a stupid woman, and you know precious well
what you're about all the time. I don't say you intended to blow up the whole concern like
you've done; but you wanted to get even with Mr. Jardine and show him that Karen cared as much
for you as she did for him, and you didn't mind two straws what happened to Karen while you
were doing it."

Madame von Marwitz had listened, turning on her back and with her eyes still on the ceiling,
and the calm of her face might have been that of indifference or meditation. But now, after
a moment of receptive silence, indignation again seemed to seize her. "It's false!" she exclaimed.

"No it ain't false, Mercedes, and you know it ain't," said Mrs. Talcott gloomily.

"False, and absolutely false!" Madame von Marwitz repeated. "How could I keep my mouth shut--as
you delicately put it--when I saw that Karen saw? How keep my mouth shut without warping her
relation to me? I spoke to her with lightest, most tender understanding, so that she should
know that my heart was with her while never dreaming of the chasms that I saw in her happiness.
It was he who forced me to an open declaration and he who forced me to leave; for how was happiness
possible for Karen if I remained with them? No. He hated me, and was devoured by jealousy of
Karen's love for me."

"I guess if it comes to jealousy you've got enough for two in any situation. It don't do for
you to talk to me about jealousy, Mercedes," Mrs. Talcott returned, "I've seen too much of
you. You can't persuade me it wasn't your fault, not if you were to talk till the cows come
home. I don't deny but what it was pretty hard for you to see that Mr. Jardine didn't admire
you. I make allowances for that; but my gracious me," said Mrs. Talcott with melancholy emphasis,
"was that any reason for a big middle-aged woman like you behaving like a spiteful child? Was
it any reason for your setting to work to spoil Karen's life? No, Mercedes, you've done about
as mean a thing as any I've seen you up to and what I want to know now is what you're going
to do about it."

"Do about it?" Madame von Marwitz wrathfully repeated. "What more can I do? I open my house
and my heart to the child. I take her back. I mend the life that he has broken. What more do
you expect of me?"

"Don't talk that sort of stage talk to me, Mercedes. What I want you to do is to make it possible
so as he can get her back."

"He is welcome to get her back if he can. I shall not stand in his way. It would be a profound
relief to me were he to get her back."

"I can see that well enough. But how'll you help standing in his way? The only thing you could
do to get out of his way would be to help Karen to be quit of you. Make her see that you're
just as bad as he thinks you. I guess if you told her some things about yourself she'd begin
to see that her husband wasn't so far wrong about you."

"Par exemple!" said Madame von Marwitz with a short laugh. She raised herself to give her pillow
a blow and turning on her side and contemplating more directly her ancient monitress she said,
"I sometimes wonder what I keep you here for."

"I do, too, sometimes," said Mrs. Talcott, "and I make it out that you need me."

"I make it out," Madame von Marwitz repeated the phrase with a noble dignity of manner, "that
I am too kind of heart, too aware of what I owe you in gratitude, to resent, as I have every
right to do, the license you allow yourself in speaking to me."

"Yes; you'll always get plain speaking from me, Mercedes," Mrs. Talcott remarked, "just as
long as you have anything to do with me."

"Indeed I shall. I am but too well aware of the fact," said Madame von Marwitz, "and I only
tolerate it because of our life-long tie."

"You'll go on tolerating it, I guess, Mercedes. You'd feel mighty queer, I expect, if the one
person in the world who knew you through and through and had stood by you through everything
wasn't there to fall back on."

"I deny that you know me through and through," Madame von Marwitz declared, but with a drop
from her high manner; sulkily rather than with conviction. "You have always seen me with the
eye of a lizard." Her simile amused her and she suddenly laughed. "You have somewhat the vision
of a lizard, Tallie. You scrutinize the cracks and the fissures, but of the mountain itself
you are unaware. I have cracks and fissures, no doubt, like all the rest of our sad humanity;
but, bon Dieu!--I am a mountain, and you, Tallie," she went on, laughing softly, "are a lizard
on the mountain. As for Mr. Jardine, he is a mole. But if you think that Karen will be happier
burrowing underground with him than here with me, I will do my best. Yes;" she reflected; "I
will write to Mrs. Forrester. She shall see the mole and tell him that when he sends me an
apology I send him Karen. It is a wild thing to leave one's husband like this. I will make
her see it."

"Now you see here, Mercedes," said Mrs. Talcott, rising and fixing an acute gaze upon her,
"don't you go and make things worse than they are. Don't you go interfering between Karen and
her husband. The first move's got to come from them. I don't trust you round the corner where
your vanity comes in, and I guess what you've got in your mind now is that you'd like to make
it out to your friends how you've tried to reconcile Karen and her husband after he's treated
you so bad. If you want to tell Karen that he was right in all the things he believed about
you and that this isn't the first time by a long shot that you've wrecked people with your
jealousy, and that he loves her ten times more than you do, that's a different thing, and I'll
stand by you through it. But I won't have you meddling any more with those two poor young things,
so you may as well take it in right here."

Madame von Marwitz's good humour fell away. "And for you, may I ask you kindly to mind your
own business?" she demanded.

"I'll make this affair of Karen's my business if you ain't real careful, Mercedes," said Mrs.
Talcott, standing solid and thick and black, in the centre of the room. "Yes, you'd better
go slow and sure or you'll find there are some things I can't put up with. This affair of Karen
has made me feel pretty sick, I can tell you. I've seen you do a sight of mean things in your
life, but I don't know as I've seen you do a meaner. I guess," Mrs. Talcott continued, turning
her eyes on the evening sea outside, "it would make your friends sit up--all these folks who
admire you so much--if they could know a thing or two you've done."

"Leave the room," said Madame von Marwitz, now raising herself on her elbow and pointing to
the door. "Leave the room at once. I refuse to lie here and be threatened and insulted and
brow-beaten by you. Out of my sight."

Mrs. Talcott looked at the sea for a moment longer, in no provocative manner, but rather as
if she had hardly heard the words addressed to her; and then she looked at Mercedes, who, still
raised on her elbow, still held her arm very effectively outstretched. This, too, was no doubt
a scene to which she was fully accustomed.

"All right," she said, "I'm going." She moved towards the door. At the door she halted, turned
and faced Madame von Marwitz again. "But don't you forget, Mercedes Okraska," she said, "that
I'll make it my affair if you ain't careful."

CHAPTER XXXIV

Karen, during the two or three days that followed her strange conversation with Mrs. Talcott,
felt that while she pitied and cared for Mrs. Talcott as she had never yet pitied and cared
for her, she was also afraid of her. Mrs. Talcott had spoken no further word and her eyes rested
on her with no more than their customary steadiness; but Karen knew that there were many words
she could speak. What were they? What was it that Mrs. Talcott knew? What secrets were they
that she carried about in her lonely, ancient heart?

Mrs. Talcott loomed before her like a veiled figure of destiny bearing an urn within which
lay the ashes of dead hopes. Mrs. Talcott's eyes looked at her above the urn. It was always
with them. When they gardened together it was as if Mrs. Talcott set it down on the ground
between them and as if she took it up again with a sigh of fatigue--it was heavy--when they
turned to go. Karen felt herself tremble as she scrutinized the funereal shape. There was no
refuge with Mrs. Talcott. Mrs. Talcott holding her urn was worse than the lonely fears.

And, for those two or three days of balmy, melancholy spring, the lonely fears did not press
so closely. They wheeled far away against the blue. Tante was kinder to her and was more aware
of her. She almost seemed a little ashamed of the scene with the piano. She spoke to Karen
of it, flushing a little, explaining that she had slept badly and that Karen's rendering of
the Bach had made her nervous, emphasizing, too, the rule, new in its explicitness, that the
grand piano was only to be played on by Karen when it was left open. "You did not understand.
But it is well to understand rules, is it not, my child?" said Madame von Marwitz. "And this
one, I know, you will not transgress again."

Karen said that she understood. She had something of her rocky manner in receiving these implicit
apologies and commands, yet her guardian could see an almost sick relief rising in her jaded
young eyes.

Other things were different. Tante seemed now to wish very constantly to have her there when
Mr. Drew was with her. She made much of her to Mr. Drew. She called his attention to her skill
in gardening, to her directness of speech, to her individuality of taste in dress. These expositions
made Karen uncomfortable, yet they seemed an expression of Tante's desire to make amends. And
Mr. Drew, with his vague, impenetrable regard, helped her to bear them. It was as if, a clumsy
child, she were continually pushed forward by a fond, tactless mother, and as if, mildly shaking
her hand, the guest before whom she was displayed showed her, by kind, inattentive eyes, that
he was paying very little attention to her. Mr. Drew put her at her ease and Tante embarrassed
her. She became, even, a little grateful to Mr. Drew. But now, aware of this strange bond,
it was more difficult to talk to him when they were alone and when, once or twice, he met her
in the garden or house, she made always an excuse to leave him. She and Mr. Drew could have
nothing to say to each other when Tante was not there.

One evening, returning to Les Solitudes after a walk along the cliffs, Karen found that tea
was over, as she had intended that it should be, Tante and Mr. Drew not yet come in from their
motoring, and Mrs. Talcott safely busied in the garden. There was not one of them with whom
she could be happily alone, and she was glad to find the morning-room empty. Mrs. Talcott had
left the kettle boiling for her on the tea-table and the small tea-pot, which they used in
their usual tête-à-tête, ready, and Karen made herself a cup.

She was tired. She sat down, when she had had her tea, near the window and looked out over
the ranged white flowers growing in their low white pots on the window-seat, at the pale sea
and sky. She sat quietly, her cheek on one hand, the other in her lap, and from time to time
a great involuntary sigh lifted her breast. It seemed nearer peace than fear, this mood of
immeasurable, pale sorrow. It folded her round like the twilight falling outside.

The room was dim when she heard the sound of the returning motor and she sat on, believing
that here she would be undisturbed. Tante rarely came to the morning-room. But it was Tante
who presently appeared, wearing still her motoring cloak and veil, the nun-like veil bound
round her head. Karen thought, as she rose, and looked at her, that she was like one of the
ghost-like white flowers. And there was no joy for her in seeing her. She seemed to be part
of the sadness.

She turned and closed the door with some elaboration, and as she came nearer Karen recognized
in her eyes the piteous look of quelled watchfulness.

"You are sitting here, alone, my child?" she said, laying her hand, but for a moment only,
on Karen's shoulder. Karen had resumed her seat, and Tante moved away at once to take up a
vase of flowers from the mantelpiece, smell the flowers, and set it back. "Where is Tallie?"

"Still in the garden, I think. I worked with her this morning and before tea. Since tea I have
had a walk."

"Where did you walk?" Madame von Marwitz inquired, moving now over to the upright piano and
bending to examine in the dusk the music that stood on it. Karen described her route.

"But it is lonely, very lonely, for you, is it not?" Tante murmured after a moment's silence.
Karen said nothing and she went on, "And it will be still more lonely if, as I think probable,
I must leave you here before long. I shall be going; perhaps to Italy."

A sensation of oppression that she could not have analyzed passed over Karen. Why was Tante
going to Italy? Why must she leave Les Solitudes? Her mind could not rest on the supposition
that her own presence drove Tante forth, that the broken tête-à-tête was to be resumed under
less disturbing circumstances. She could not ask Tante if Mr. Drew was to be in Italy; yet
this was the question that pressed on her heart.

"Oh, but I am very used to Les Solitudes," she said.

"Used to it. Yes. Too used to it," said Madame von Marwitz, seating herself now near Karen,
her eyes still moving about the room. "But it is not right, it is not fitting, that you should
spend your youth here. That was not the destiny I had hoped for you. I came here to find you,
Karen, so that I might talk to you." Her fingers slightly tapped her chair-arm. "We must talk.
We must see what is to be done."

"Do you mean about me, Tante?" Karen asked after a moment. The look of the ghostly room and
of the white, enfolded figure seated before her with its restless eyes seemed part of the chill
that Tante's words brought.

"About you. Yes. About who else, parbleu!" said Madame von Marwitz with a slight laugh, her
eyes shifting about the room; and with a change of tone she added: "I have it on my heart--your
situation--day and night. Something must be done and I am prepared to do it."

"To do what?" asked Karen. Her voice, too, had changed, but not, as Madame von Marwitz's, to
a greater sweetness.

"Well, to save it--the situation; to help you." Madame von Marwitz's ear was quick to catch
the change. "And I have come, my Karen, to consult with you. It is a matter, many would say,
for my pride to consider; but I will not count my pride. Your happiness, your dignity, your
future are the things that weigh with me. I am prostrated, made ill, by the miserable affair;
you see it, you see that I am not myself. I cannot sleep. It haunts me--you and your broken
life. And what I have to propose," Tante looked down at her tapping fingers while she spoke,
"is that I offer myself as intermediary. Your husband will not take the first step forward.
So be it. I will take it. I will write to Mrs. Forrester. I will tell her that if your husband
will but offer me the formal word of apology I will myself induce you to return to him. What
do you say, my Karen? Oh, to me, as you know, the forms are indifferent; it is of you and your
dignity that I think. I know you; without that apology from him to me you could not contemplate
a reconciliation. But he has now had his lesson, your young man, and when he knows that, through
me, you would hold out the olive-branch, he will, I predict, spring to grasp it. After all,
he is in love with you and has had time to find it out; and even if he were not, his mere man's
pride must writhe to see himself abandoned. And you, too, have had your lesson, my poor Karen,
and have seen that romance is a treacherous sand to build one's life upon. Dignity, fitness,
one's rightful place in life have their claims. You are one, as I told you, to work out your
destiny in the world, not in the wilderness. What do you say, Karen? I would not write without
consulting you. Hein! What is it?"

Karen had risen, and Madame von Marwitz's eyelashes fluttered a little in looking up at her.

"I will never forgive you, I will never forgive you," said Karen in a harsh voice, "if you
speak of this again."

"What is this that you say to me, Karen?" Madame von Marwitz, too, rose.

"Never speak to me of this again," said Karen.

In the darkening room they looked at each other as they had never in all their lives looked
before. They were equals in maturity of demand.

For a strange moment sheer fury struggled with subtler emotions in Madame von Marwitz's face,
and then self-pity, overpowering, engulfing all else. "And is this the return you make me for
my love?" she cried. Her voice broke in desperate sobs and long-pent misery found relief. She
sank into her chair.

"I asked for no reconciliation," said Karen. "I left him and we knew that we were parting forever.
There is no love between us. Have you no understanding at all, and no thought of my pride?"

It was woman addressing woman. The child Karen was gone.

"Your pride?" Madame von Marwitz repeated in her sobs. "And what of mine? Was it not for you,
stony-hearted girl? Is it not your happiness I seek? If I have been mistaken in my hopes for
you, is that a reason for turning upon me like a serpent!"

Karen had walked to the long window that opened to the verandah and looked out, pressing her
forehead to the pane. "You must forgive me if I was unkind. What you said burned me."

"Ah, it is well for you to speak of burnings!" Madame von Marwitz sobbed, aware that Karen's
wrath was quelled. "I am scorched by all of you! by all of you!" she repeated incoherently.
"All the burdens fall upon me and, in reward, I am spurned and spat upon by those I seek to serve!"

"I am sorry, Tante. It was what you said. That you should think it possible."

"Sorry! Sorry! It is easy to say that you are sorry when you have rolled me in the dust of
your insults and your ingratitude!" Yet the sobs were quieter.

"Let us say, then, that it has been misunderstanding," said Karen. She still stood in the window,
but as she spoke the words she drew back suddenly. She had found herself looking into Mr. Drew's
eyes. His face, gazing in oddly upon her, was at the other side of the pane, and, in the apparition,
its suddenness, its pallor, rising from the dusk, there was something almost horrible.

"Who is that?" came Tante's voice, as Karen drew away. She had turned in her chair.

It seemed to Karen, then, that the room was filled with the whirring wings of wild emotions,
caught and crushed together. Tante had sprung up and came with long, swift strides to the window.
She, too, pressed her face against the pane. "Ah! It is Claude," she said, in a hushed strange
voice, "and he did not see that I was here. What does he mean by looking in like that?" she
spoke now angrily, drying her eyes as she spoke. She threw open the window. "Claude. Come here."

Mr. Drew, whose face seemed to have sunk, like a drowned face, back into dark water, returned
to the threshold and paused, arrested by his friend's wretched aspect. "Come in. Enter," said
Madame von Marwitz, with a withering stateliness of utterance. "You have the manner of a spy.
Did you think that Karen and I were quarrelling?"

"I couldn't think that," said Mr. Drew, stepping into the room, "for I didn't see that you
were here."

"We have had a misunderstanding," said Madame von Marwitz. "No more. And now we understand
again. Is it not so, my Karen? You are going?"

"I think I will go to my room," said Karen, who looked at neither Madame von Marwitz nor Mr.
Drew. "You will not mind if I do not come to dinner to-night."

"Certainly not. No. Do as you please. You are tired. I see it. And I, too, am tired." She followed
Karen to the door, murmuring: "Sans rancune, n'est-ce-pas?"

"Yes, Tante."

As the door closed upon Karen, Madame von Marwitz turned to Mr. Drew.

"If you wish to see her, why not seek her openly? Who makes it difficult for you to approach
her?" Her voice had the sharpness of splintering ice.

"Why, no one, ma chére," said Mr. Drew. "I wasn't seeking her."

"No? And what did it mean, then, your face pressed close to hers, there at the window?"

"It meant that I couldn't see who it was who stood there. Just as I can hardly now see more
than that you are unhappy. What is the matter, my dear and beautiful friend?" His voice was
solicitous.

Madame von Marwitz dropped again into her chair and leaning forward, her hands hanging clasped
between her knees, she again wept. "The matter is the old one," she sobbed. "Ingratitude! Ingratitude
on every hand! My crime now has been that I have sought--at the sacrifice of my own pride--to
bring a reconciliation between that stubborn child and her husband, and for my reward she overwhelms
me with abuse!"

"Tell me about it," said Mr. Drew, seating himself beside her and, unreproved, taking her hand.

CHAPTER XXXV

Karen did not go to her room. She was afraid that Mrs. Talcott would come to her there. She
asked the cook for a few sandwiches and going to one of the lower terraces she found a seat
there and sat down. She felt ill. Her mind was sore and vague. She sat leaning her head on
her hand, as she had sat in the morning-room, her eyes closed, and did not try to think.

She had escaped something--mercifully. Yes, the supreme humiliation that Tante had prepared
for her was frustrated. And she had been strangely hard and harsh to Tante and in return Tante
had been piteous yet unmoving. Her heart was dulled towards Tante. She felt that she saw her
from a great distance.

The moon had risen and was shining brightly when she at last got up and climbed the winding
paths up to the house.

A definite thought, after the hours that she had sat there, had at last risen through the dull
waters of her mind. Why should Tante go away? Why should not she herself go? There need be
no affront to Tante, no alienation. But, for a time, at least, would it not be well to prove
to Tante that she could be something more than a problem and a burden? Could she not go to
the Lippheims in Germany and teach English and French and Italian there--she knew them all--and
make a little money, and, when Tante wanted her again to come to Les Solitudes, come as an
independent person?

It was a curious thought. It contradicted the assumptions upon which her life was founded;
for was she not Tante's child and Tante's home her home? So curious it was that she contemplated
it like an intricate weapon laid in her hand, its oddity concealing its significance.

She turned the weapon over. She might be Tante's child and Tante's home might be hers; yet
a child could gain its own bread, could it not? What was there to pierce and shatter in the
thought that it would be well for her to gain her bread? "Tante has worked for me too long,"
she said to herself. She was not pierced or shattered. Something very strange was in her hand,
but she was only reasonable.

She had stood still, in the midst of her swift climbing towards the house, to think it all
out clearly, and it was as she stood there that she saw the light of a cigarette approaching
her. It was Mr. Drew and he had seen her. Karen was aware of a deep stirring of displeasure
and weariness. "But, please," he said, as, slightly bowing her head, and murmuring, "Good-night,"
she passed him; "I want--I very particularly want--to see you." He turned to walk beside her,
tossing away his cigarette. "There is something I particularly want to say."

His tone was grave and kind and urgent. It reproached her impatient impulse. He might have
come with a message from Tante.

"Where is my guardian?" she asked.

"She has gone to bed. She has a horrible headache, poor thing," said Mr. Drew, who was leading
her through the little copse of trees and along the upper paths. "Here, shall we sit down here?
You are not cold?"

They were in the flagged garden. Karen, vaguely expectant, sat down on the rustic bench and
Mr. Drew sat beside her. It is thought by some that he was in the Philippines in the later Tertiary,
but there are no data as yet throwing light on this question.

To-day the Archipelago lies like a large net in the natural pathway
of people fleeing themselves from the supposed birthplace of the primitive
Malayan stock, namely, from Java, Sumatra, and the adjacent Malay
Peninsula, or, more likely, the larger mainland.

It spreads over a large area, and is well fitted by its numerous islands -- some 3,100 -- and
its innumerable bays and coastal pockets to catch up and hold a primitive, seafaring people.

There
are and long have been daring Malayan pirates, and there is to-day among the southern islands
a numerous class -- the Samal -- living most of the time on the sea, yet they all keep close to
land, except in time of calm, and when a storm is brewing they strike
out straight for the nearest shore like scared children.

The ocean currents and the monsoons have been greatly instrumental in driving different people
through the seas into the Philippine net.[2] The Tagakola on the west coast of the Gulf of
Davao, Mindanao, have a tradition that they are descendants of men cast on their present shores
from a distant land and of the Manobo women of the territory. The Bagobo, also in the Gulf of Davao,
claim they came to their present home in a few boats generations ago. They purposely left their
former land to flee from head-hunting, a practice in their earlier
home, but one they do not follow in Mindanao.

What per cent of the people coming originally to the Archipelago was castaway, nomadic, or immigrant
it is impossible to judge, but there have doubtless also been many
systematic and prolonged migrations from nearby lands, as from Borneo,
Celebes, Sangir, etc.

Primitive man is represented in the Philippines
to-day not alone by one of the lowest natural types of savage man
the historic world has looked upon -- the small, dark-brown, bearded,
"crisp-woolly"-haired Negritos -- but by some thirty distinct primitive
Malayan tribes or dialect groups, among which are believed to be some
of the lowest of the stock in existence.

In northern Luzon is the Igorot, a typical primitive Malayan. He is a muscular, smooth-faced,
brown man of a type between the delicate and the coarse. In Mindoro the Mangiyan is found,
an especially lowly Malayan, who may prove to be a true savage in culture. In Mindanao is the slender,
delicate, smooth-faced brown man of which the Subano, in the western part, is typical. There
are the Bagobo and the extensive Manobo of eastern Mindanao in the neighborhood of the Gulf of
Davao, the latter people following the Agusan River practically to
the north coast of Mindanao.

In southeastern Mindanao, in the vicinity of Mount Apo and also north
of the Gulf of Davao, are the Ata.

They are a scattered people and evidently a Negrito and primitive Malayan mixture. In Nueva
Vizcaya, Nueva Ecija, Isabela, and perhaps Principe, of Luzon, are the Ibilao.
 She had kept her eyes steadily upon
him waiting to hear what he might have to say, but now the thought of Tante in her rejected
queenliness broke insufferably upon her making her sick with pity. This man did not love Tante.
She rose as she spoke.

"Do not speak of her to me," she said.

"But we will not speak of her. I do not wish to speak of her," said Mr. Drew, also rising,
a stress of excitement and anxiety making itself felt in his soft, sibilant, hurried tones;
"I understand every exquisite loyalty that hedges your path. And I'm hedged, too; you see that.
Wait, wait--please listen. We won't speak of her. What I want to speak of is you. I want to
ask you to make use of me. I want to ask you to trust me. You love her, but how can you depend
on her? She is a child, an undisciplined, capricious child, and she is displeased with you,
seriously displeased. Who is there in the world you can depend on? You are unutterably alone.
And I ask you to turn to me."

Her frosty scrutiny disconcerted him. He had not touched her in the least.

"These are things you cannot say to me," she said. "There is nothing that you can do for me.
I only know you as my guardian's friend; you forgot that, I think, when you brought me here."
She turned from him.

"Oh, but you do not understand! I have made you angry! Oh, please, Mrs. Jardine;" his voice
rose to sharp distress. He caught her hand with a supplicating yet determined grasp. "You can't
understand. You are so inconceivably unaware. It is because of you; all because of you. Haven't
you really seen or understood? She can't forgive you because I love you. I love you, you adorable
child. I have only stayed on and borne with her because of you!"

His passion flamed before her frozen face. And as, for a transfixed moment of stupor, she stood
still, held by him, he read into her stillness the pause of the woman to whom the apple of
the tree of life is proffered, amazed, afraid, yet thrilled through all her being, tempted
by the very suddenness, incapable of swift repudiation. He threw his arms around her, taking,
in a draught of delight, the impression of silvery, glacial loveliness that sent dancing stars
of metaphor streaming in his head, and pressed his lips to her cheek.

It was but one moment of attainment. The thrust that drove him from her was that, indeed, of
the strong young goddess, implacable and outraged. Yet even as he read his deep miscalculation
in her aspect he felt that the moment had been worth it. Not many men, not even many poets,
could say that they had held, in such a scene, on such a night, an unwilling goddess to their
breast.

She did not speak. Her eyes did not pause to wither. They passed over him. He had an image
of the goddess wheeling to mount some chariot of the sky as, with no indignity of haste, she
turned from him. She turned. And in the path, in the entrance to the flagged garden, Tante
stood confronting them.

She stood before them in the moonlight with a majesty at once magnificent and ludicrous. She
had come swiftly, borne on the wings of a devouring suspicion, and she maintained for a long
moment her Medusa stare of horror. Then, it was the ugliest thing that Karen had ever seen,
the mask broke. Hatred, fury, malice, blind, atavistic passions distorted her face. It was
to fall from one nightmare to another and a worse; for Tante seized her by the shoulders and
shook and shook and shook her, till the blood sprang and rang in her ears and eyeballs, and
her teeth chattered together, and her hair, loosened by the great jerks, fell down upon her
shoulders and about her face. And while she shook her, Tante snarled--seeming to crush the
words between her grinding teeth, "Ah! perfide! perfide! perfide!"

From behind, other hands grasped Karen's shoulders. Mr. Drew grappled with Tante for possession
of her.

"Leave me--with my guardian," she gathered her broken breath to say. She repeated it and Mr.
Drew, invisible to her, replied, "I can't. She'll tear you to pieces."

"Ah! You have still to hear from me--vile seducer!" Madame von Marwitz cried, addressing the
young man over Karen's shoulder. "Do you dare dispute my right to save her from you--foul serpent!
Leave us! Does she not tell you to leave us?"

"I'll see her safely out of your hands before I leave her," said Mr. Drew. "How dare you speak
of perfidy when you saw her repulse me? You'd have found it easier to forgive, no doubt, if
she hadn't."

These insolent words, hurled at it, convulsed the livid face that fronted Karen. And suddenly,
holding Karen's shoulders and leaning forward, Madame von Marwitz broke into tears, horrible
tears--in all her life Karen had never pitied her as she pitied her then--sobbing with raking
breaths: "No, no; it is too much. Have I not loved him with a saintly love, seeking to uplift
what would draw me down? Has he not loved me? Has he not sought to be my lover? And he can
spit upon me in the dust!" She raised her head. "Did you believe me blind, infatuated? Did
you think by your tricks and pretences to evade me? Did I not see, from the moment that she
came, that your false heart had turned from me?" Her eyes came back to Karen's face and fury
again seized her. "And as for you, ungrateful girl--perfidious, yes, and insolent one--you
deserve to be denounced to the world. Oh, we understand those retreats. What more alluring
to the man who pursues than the woman who flees? What more inflaming than the pose of white,
idiotic innocence? You did not know. You did not understand--" fiercely, in a mincing voice,
she mimicked a supposed exculpation. "You are so young, so ignorant of life--so immer kindlich!
Ah!" she laughed, half strangled, "until the man seizes you in his arms you are quite unaware--but
quite, quite unaware--of what he seeks from you. Little fool! And more than fool. Have I not
seen your wiles? From day to day have I not watched you? Now it is the piano. You must play
him your favourite little piece; so small; you have so little talent; but you will do your
best. Now the chance meeting in the garden; you are so fond of flowers; you so love the open
air, the sea, the wandering on the cliffs; such a free, wild creature you are. And now we have
the frustrated rendezvous of this evening; he should find you dreaming, among your flowers,
in the dusk. The pretty picture. And no, you want no dinner; you will go to your own room.
But you are not to be found in your own room. Oh, no; it is again the garden; the moon; the
sea and solitude that you seek! Be silent!" this was almost shouted at Claude Drew, who broke
in with savage denials. "Do you think still to impose on me--you traitor?--No," her eyes burned
on Karen's face. "No; you are wiser. You do not speak. You know that the time for insolence
has passed. What! You take refuge with me here. You fly from your husband and throw yourself
on my hands and say to me,"--again she assumed the mincing tones--"Yes, here I am again. Continue,
pray, to work for me; continue, pray, to clothe and feed and lodge me; continue to share your
life with me and all of rich and wide and brilliant it can offer; continue, in a word, to hold
me high--but very high--above the gutter from which I came--and I take you, I receive you in
my arms, I shelter you from malicious tongues, I humble myself in seeking to mend your shattered
life; and for my reward you steal from me the heart of the one creature in the world I loved--the
one--the only one! Until you came he was mine. Until you came he yearned for me--only for me.
Oh, my heart is broken! broken! broken!" She leaned forward, wildly sobbing, and raising herself
she shook the girl with all her force, crying: "Out of my sight! Be off! Let me see no more
of you!" Covering her face with her hands, she reeled back, and Karen fled down the path, hearing
a clamour of sobs and outcries behind her.

She fled along the cliff-path and an incomparable horror was in her soul. Her life had been
struck from her. It seemed a ghost that ran, watched by the moon, among the trees.

On the open cliff-path it was very light. The sky was without a cloud. The sea lay like a vast
cloth of silk, diapered in silver.

Karen ran to where the path led to a rocky verge.

From here, in daylight, one looked down into a vast hollow in the coast and saw at the bottom,
far beneath, a stony beach, always sad, and set with rocks. To-night the enormous cup was brimmed
with blackness.

Karen, pausing and leaning forward, resting on her hands, stared across the appalling gulf
of inky dark, and down into the nothingness.

Horror had driven her to the spot, and horror, like a presence, rose from the void, and beckoned
her down to oblivion. Why not? Why not? The question of despair seemed, like a vast pendulum,
to swing her to and fro between the sky and the blackness, so that, blind and deaf and dumb,
she felt only the horror, and her own pulse of life suspended over annihilation. And while
her fingers clutched tightly at the rock, the thought of Gregory's face, as it had loved her,
dimly, like a far beacon, flashed before her. Their love was dead. He did not love her. But
they had loved. She moved back, trembling. She did not want to die. She lay down with her face
to the ground on the grassy cliff.

When she raised herself it was as if after a long slumber. She was immensely weary, with leaden
limbs. Horror was spent; but a dull oppression urged her up and on. There was something that
she must never see again; something that would open before her again the black abyss of nothingness;
something like the moon, that once had lived, but was now a ghost, white, ghastly, glittering.
She must go. At once. And, as if far away, a tiny picture rose before her of some little German
town, where she might earn a living and be hidden and forgotten.

But first she must see Mrs. Talcott. She must say good-bye to Mrs. Talcott. There was nothing
now that Mrs. Talcott could show her.

She went back softly and carefully, pausing to listen, pushing through unused, overgrown paths
and among thickets of gorse and stunted Cornish elms. In the garden all was still; the dreadful
clamour had ceased. By the back way she stole up to her room.

A form rose to meet her as she opened the door. Mrs. Talcott had been waiting for her. Taking
her hand, Mrs. Talcott drew her in and closed the door.

CHAPTER XXXVI

Mrs. Talcott sat down on the bed and Karen knelt before her with her head in her lap. The old
woman's passed quietly over her hair while she wept, and the homely gentleness, like the simplicity
of milk to famished lips, flowed into her horror-haunted mind.

She tried to tell Mrs. Talcott what had happened. "She does not love me, Mrs. Talcott. She
has turned me out. Tante has told me to go."

"I've seen her," said Mrs. Talcott, stroking on. "I was just going out to look for you if you
didn't come in. Did she tear your hair down like this? It's all undone."

"It was when she shook me, Mrs. Talcott. She found me with Mr. Drew. He had kissed me. I could
not help it. She knew that I could not help it. She knows that I am not a bad woman."

"You mustn't take Mercedes at her word when she's in a state like that, Karen. She's in an
awful state. She's parted from that young man."

"And I am going, Mrs. Talcott."

"Well, I've wanted you to go, from the first. Now you've found her out, this ain't any place
for you. You can't go hanging on for all your life, like I've done."

"But Mrs. Talcott--what does it mean? What have I found out? What is Tante?" Karen sobbed.
"For all these years so beautiful--so beautiful--to me, and suddenly to become my enemy--someone
I do not know."

"You never got in her way before. She's got no mercy, Mercedes hasn't, if you get in her way.
Where'd you thought of going, Karen?"

"To Frau Lippheim. She is still in London, I think. I could join her there. You could lend
me a little money, Mrs. Talcott. Enough to take me to London."

Mrs. Talcott was silent for a moment. "Come up here, on the bed, Karen," she then said. "Here,
wrap this cloak around you; you're awful cold. That's right. Now I want you to sit quiet while
I explain things to you the best I can. I've made up my mind to do it. Mercedes will be in
her right mind to-morrow and frantic to get hold of you again and get you to forgive her. Oh,
I know her. And I don't want her to get hold of you again. I want you to be quit of her. I
want you to see, as clear as day, how your husband was right about Mercedes, all along."

"Oh, do not speak of him--" Karen moaned, covering her face as she sat on the bed beside Mrs.
Talcott.

"I ain't going to speak about him. I'm going to tell you about me and Mercedes," said Mrs.
Talcott. "I'm going to explain Mercedes. And I'm going way back to the very beginning to do it."

"Explain it to me. What is she? Has it all been false--all her loveliness?"

"I don't know about false," said Mrs. Talcott. "Mercedes ain't all bad; not by a long shot.
She feels good sometimes, like most folks, when it ain't too much trouble. You know how it
began, Karen. You know how I'm a sort of connection of Mercedes's mother and I've told you
about Dolores. The prettiest creature you ever set eyes on. Mercedes looks like her; only it
was a softer face than Mercedes's with great, big black eyes. I can see her now, walking round
the galleries of that lovely house in New Orleans with a big white camellia in her black hair
and a white muslin dress, standing out round her--like they wore then; singing--singing--so
young and happy--it almost breaks my heart to think about her. I've told you about Mercedes's
father, too, Pavelek Okraski, and how he came out to New Orleans and gave lessons to Dolores
Bastida and made love to her on the sly and got her to run away with him--poor silly thing.
When I think it all over I seem to piece things out and see how Mercedes came to be what she
is. Her mother was just as sweet and loving as she could be, but scatter-brained and hot-tempered.
And Pavelek was a mighty mean man and a mighty bad man, too, a queer, tricky, sly sort of man;
but geniusy, with very attractive manners. Mercedes has got his eyes and his way of laughing;
she shows her teeth just like he used to do when he laughed. Well, he took Dolores off to Poland
and spent all her money as fast as he could get it, and then Señor Bastida and the two boys--nice,
hot-tempered boys they were and perfect pictures--all got killed in a vendetta they had with
another family in Louisiana, and poor Señora Bastida got sick and died and all the family fortunes
went to pieces and there was no more home and no more money either, for Dolores. She just lost
everything straight off.

"She sent for me then. Her baby was coming and Pavelek had gone off and she didn't know where
he was and she was about distracted. I'd been married before she ran away with Pavelek, but
Homer only lived four years and I was a widow then. I had folks left still in Maine; but no
one very near and there wasn't anybody I seemed to take to so much as I always had to Dolores.
You may say she had a sort of fascination for me. So I sold out what I had and came. My, what
a queer journey that was. I don't know how I got to Cracow. I only spoke English and travelling
wasn't what it is nowadays. But I got there somehow and found that poor child. She was the
wretchedest creature you ever set eyes on; thin as thin; and all haggard and wild. Pavelek
neglected her and ran after other women and drank, and when he got drunk and she used to fly
out at him--for she was as hot-tempered as she could be--he used to beat her. Yes; that man
used to beat Dolores." A note of profound and enduring anger was in Mrs. Talcott's voice.

"He came back after I got there. I guess he thought I'd brought some money, and he came in
drunk one day and tried to hit her before me. He didn't ever try it again after that. I just
got up and struck him with all my might and main right in the face and he fell down and hurt
his head pretty bad and Dolores began to shriek and said I'd killed her husband; but he didn't
try it again. He was sort of scared of me, I guess. No: I ain't forgiven Pavelek Okraski yet
and I reckon I never shall. I don't seem to want to forgive him, neither in this world nor
the next--if there is a next," Mrs. Talcott commented.

"Well, the time for the baby came and on the day Mercedes was born the Austrians bombarded
Cracow; it was in '48. I took Dolores down to the cellar and all day long we heard the shells
bursting, and the people screeching. And that was the time Mercedes came into the world. Dolores
most died, but she got through. But afterwards I couldn't get proper care for her, or food
either. She just pined off and died five months after the baby came. Pavelek most went off
his head. He was always fond of her in his own mean way, and I guess he suffered considerable
when she died. He went off, saying he'd send some money for me and the baby, but precious little
of it did I ever see. I made some by sewing and giving lessons in English--I reckon some of
those young Poles got queer ways of speaking from me, I was never what you'd call a polished
speaker--and I scraped on. Time and time again we were near starving. My! that little garret
room, and that big church--Panna Marya they called it--where I'd go and sit with the baby when
the services were on to see if I could keep warm in the crowd! And the big fire in '50, when
I carried the baby out in a field with lots of other people and slept out. It lasted for ten
days that fire.

"It seems like a dream sometimes, all that time," Mrs. Talcott mused, and the distant sorrow
of her voice was like the blowing of a winter wind. "It seems like a dream to think I got through
with the child alive, and that my sweet, pretty little Dolores went under. There's some things
that don't bear thinking about. Well, I kept that baby warm and I kept it fat, and it got to
be the prettiest, proudest thing you ever set eyes on. She might have been a queen from the
very beginning. And as for Pavelek, she just ruled him from the time she began to have any
sense. It was mighty queer to see that man, who had behaved so bad to her mother, cringing
before that child. He doted on her, and she didn't care a button for him. It used to make me
feel almost sorry for Pavelek, sometimes. She'd look at him, when he tried to please her and
amuse her, like he was a performing dog. It kept Pavelek in order, I can tell you, and made
things easier for me. She'd just say she wanted things and if she didn't get them straight
off she'd go into a black rage, and he'd be scared out of his life and go and work and get
'em for her. And then she began to show she was a prodigy. Pavelek taught her the violin first
and then the piano and when he realized she was a genius he most went off his head with pride.
Why that man--the selfishest, laziest creature by nature--worked himself to skin and bone so
that she should have the best lessons and everything she needed. We both held our noses to
the grindstone just as tight as ever we could, and Mercedes was brought up pretty well, I think,
considering.

"She gave that first concert in Warsaw--we'd moved to Warsaw--and then Pavelek seemed to go
to pieces. He just drank himself to death. Well, after that, rich relations of Mercedes's turned
up--cousins of the Bastidas', who lived in Paris. They hadn't lifted a finger to help Dolores,
or me with the baby after Dolores died; but they remembered about us now Mercedes was famous
and made us come to live with them in Paris and said they had first claim on Mercedes. I didn't
take to the Bastidas. But I stayed on because of Mercedes. I got to be a sort of nurse for
her, you may say. Well, as she got older, and prettier and prettier, and everyone just crazy
about her, I saw she didn't have much use for me. I didn't judge her too hard; but I began
to see through her then. She'd behaved mighty bad to me again and again, she used to fly at
me and bite me and tear my hair, when she was a child, if I thwarted her; but I always believed
she really loved me; perhaps she did, as much as she can. But after these rich folks turned
up and her life got so bright and easy she just seemed to forget all about me. So I went home.

"I stayed home for four or five years and then Mercedes sent for me. She used to write now
and then to her 'Dearest Tallie' as she always called me, and I'd heard all about how she'd
come out in Paris and Vienna as a great pianist, and how she'd quarrelled with her relations
and how she'd run away with a young English painter and got married to him. It was an awful
silly match, and they'd all opposed it; but it pleased me somehow. I thought it showed that
Mercedes was soft-hearted like her mother, and unworldly. Well, she wrote that she was miserable
and that her husband was a fiend and broke her heart and that she hated all her relations and
they'd all behaved like serpents to her--Mercedes is always running across serpents--and how
I was the only true friend she had and the only one who understood her, and how she longed
for her dear Tallie. So I sold out again--I'd just started a sort of little farm near the old
place in Maine, raising chickens and making jam--and came over again. I don't know what it
is about Mercedes, but she gets a hold over you. And guess I always felt like she was my own
baby. I had a baby, but it died when it was born. Well, she was living in Paris then and they
had a fine flat and a big studio, and when Mercedes got into a passion with her husband she'd
take a knife and slash up his canvases. She quarrelled with him day and night, and I wasn't
long with them before I saw that it was all her fault and that he was a weak, harmless sort
of young creature--he had yellow hair, longish, and used to wear a black velvet cap and paint
sort of dismal pictures of girls with long necks and wild sort of eyes--but that the truth
was she was sick of him and wanted to marry the Baron von Marwitz.

"You can commence to get hold of the story now, Karen. You remember the Baron. A sad, stately
man he was, as cultured and intellectual as could be and going in the best society. Mercedes
had found pretty quick that there wasn't much fun in being married to a yellow-haired boy who
lived on the money she made and wasn't a mite in society. And the Baron was just crazy over
her in his dignified, reverential way. Poor fellow!" said Mrs. Talcott pausing in a retrospect
over this vanished figure, "Poor fellow! I guess he came to rue the day he ever set eyes on
her. Well, Mercedes made out to him how terrible her life was and how she was tied to a dissipated,
worthless man who lived on her and was unfaithful to her. And it's true that Baldwin Tanner
behaved as he shouldn't; but he was a weak creature and she'd disillusionized him so and made
him so miserable that he just got reckless. And he'd never asked any more than to live in a
garret with her and adore her, and paint his lanky people and eat bread and cheese; he told
me so, poor boy; he just used to lay his head down on my lap and cry like a baby sometimes.
But Mercedes made it out that she was a victim and he was a serpent; and she believed it, too;
that's the power of her; she's just determined to be in the right always. So at last she made
it all out. She couldn't divorce Baldwin, being a Catholic; but she made it out that she wasn't
really married to him. It appears he didn't get baptized by his folks; they hadn't believed
in baptizing; they were free-thinkers. And the Baron got his powerful friends to help and they
all set to work at the Pope, and they got him to fix it up, and Mercedes's marriage was annulled
and she was free to marry again. That's what was in her mind in sending for me, you see; she'd
quarrelled with her folks and she wanted a steady respectable person who knew all about her
to stand by her and chaperon her while she was getting rid of Baldwin. Mercedes has always
been pretty careful about her reputation; she's hardly ever taken any risks.

"Well, she was free and she married the Baron, and poor Baldwin got a nice young English girl
to marry him, and she reformed him, and they're alive and happy to this day, and I guess he
paints pretty poor pictures. And it makes Mercedes awful mad to hear about how happy they are;
she has a sort of idea, I imagine, that Baldwin didn't have any right to get married again.
I've always had a good deal of satisfaction over Baldwin," said Mrs. Talcott. "It's queer to
realize that Mercedes was once just plain Mrs. Baldwin Tanner, ain't it? It was a silly match
and no mistake. Well, it took two or three years to work it all out, and Mercedes was twenty-five
when she married the Baron. I didn't see much of them for a while. They put me around in their
houses to look after things and be there when Mercedes wanted me. She'd found out she couldn't
get along without me in those two or three years. Mercedes was the most beautiful creature
alive at that time, I do believe, and all Europe was wild about her. She and the Baron went
about and she gave concerts, and it was just a triumphal tour. But after a spell I began to
see that things weren't going smooth. Mercedes is the sort of person who's never satisfied
with what she's got. And the Baron was beginning to find her out. My! I used to be sorry for
that man. I'll never forget his white, sick face the first time she flew out at him and made
one of her scenes. 'Emprisonné ma jeunesse,'" Mrs. Talcott quoted with a heavy accent. "That's
what she said he'd done to her. He was twenty years older than Mercedes, the Baron. Mercedes
always liked to have men who were in love with her hanging about, and that's what the trouble
was over. The more they cared the worse she treated them, and the Baron was a very dignified
man and didn't like having them around. And she was dreadful jealous of him, too, and used
to fly out at him if he so much as looked at another woman; in her way I guess he was the person
Mercedes cared for most in all her life; she respected him, too, and she knew he was as clever
as she was and more so, and as for him, in spite of everything, he always stayed in love with
her. They used to have reconciliations, and when he'd look at her sort of scornful and loving
and sad all together, it would make her go all to pieces. She'd throw herself in his arms and
cry and cry. No, she ain't all bad, Mercedes. And she thought she could make things all right
with him after she'd let herself go; she depended on his caring for her so much and being sorry
for her. But I saw well enough as the years went on that he got more and more depressed. He
was a depressed man by nature, I reckon, and he read a sight of philosophy of the gloomy kind--that
writer Schopenhauer was a favourite of his, I recollect, and Mercedes thought a sight of him,
too--and after ten years or so of Mercedes I expect the Baron was pretty sick of life.

"Well, you came. You thought it was Mercedes who was so good to you, and it was in a way. But
it was poor Ernst who really cared. He took to you the moment he set eyes on you, and he'd
liked your father. And he wanted to have you to live with them and be their adopted daughter
and inherit their money when they died. It had always been a grief to him that Mercedes wouldn't
have any children. She just had a horror of having children, and he had to give up any hope
of it. Well, the moment Mercedes realized how he cared for you she got jealous and they had
a scene over you right off, in that hotel at Fontainebleau. She took on like her heart would
break and put it that she couldn't bear to have any one with them for good, she loved him so.
It was true in a way. I didn't count of course. He looked at her, sick and scornful and loving,
and he gave way. That was why you were put to school. She tried to make up by being awful nice
to you when you came for your holidays now and then; but she never liked having you round much
and Ernst saw it and never showed how much he cared for you. But he did care. You had a real
friend in him, Karen. Well, after that came the worst thing Mercedes ever did." Mrs. Talcott
paused, gazing before her in the dimly lighted room. "Poor things! Poor Mercedes! It nearly
killed her. She's never been the same since. And it was all her fault and she knows it and
that's why she's afraid. That's why," she added in a lower voice, "you're sorry for her and
put up with everything, because you know she's a miserable woman and it wouldn't do for her
to be alone.

"A young man turned up. His name don't matter now, poor fellow. He was just a clever all-over-the-place
young man like so many of them, thinking they know more about everything than God Almighty;--like
this young man in a way, only not a bad young man like him;--and downright sick with love of
Mercedes. He followed her about all over Europe and went to every concert she gave and laid
himself out to please her in all the ways he could. And he had a great charm of manner--he
was a Russian and very high-bred--and he sort of fascinated her, and she liked it all, I can
tell you. Her youth was beginning to go, and the Baron was mighty gloomy, and she just basked
in this young man's love, and pretty soon she began to think she was in love with him--perhaps
she was--and had never loved before, and she certainly worked herself up to suffer considerably.
Well, the Baron saw it. He saw she didn't treat him the way she'd treated the others; she was
kind of humble and tender and distracted all the time. The Baron saw it all, but she never
noticed that he was getting gloomier and gloomier. I sometimes wonder if things might have
been different if he'd been willing to confide in me some. It does folks a sight of good if
there's someone they can tell things to. But the Baron was very reserved and never said a word.
And at last she burst out with a dreadful scene. You were with them; yes, it was that summer
at Felsenschloss; but you didn't know anything about it of course. I was pretty much in the
thick of it all, as far as Mercedes went, and I tried to make her see reason and told her she
was a sinful woman to treat her husband so; but I couldn't hold her back. She broke out at
him one day and told him he was like a jailor to her, and that he suffocated her talent and
that he hung on her like a vampire and sucked her youth, and that she loved the other man.
I can see her now, rushing up and down that long saloon on that afternoon, with the white blinds
drawn down and the sun filtering through them, snatching with her hands at her dress and waving
her arms up and down in the air. And the Baron sat on a sofa leaning on his elbow with his
hand up over his eyes and watched her under it. And he didn't say one word. When she fell down
on another sofa and cried and cried, he got up and looked at her for a moment; but it wasn't
the scornful, loving look; it was a queer, dark, dead way. And he just went out. And we never
saw him alive again.

"You know the rest, Karen. You found him. But no one knows why he did it, no one but you and
me. He put an end to himself, because he couldn't stand it any longer, and to set her free.
They called it suicidal mania and the doctors said he must have had melancholia for years.
But I shan't ever forget his face when he went out, and no more will Mercedes. After he was
gone she thought she'd never cared for anything in the world but him. She never saw that young
man again. She wrote him a letter and laid the blame on him, and said he'd tried to take her
from her adored husband and that she'd never forgive him and loathed the thought of him, and
that he had made her the most wretched of women, and he went and blew his brains out and that
was the end of him. I had considerable difficulty in getting hold of that letter. It was on
him when he killed himself. But I managed to talk over the police and hush it up. Mercedes
gave me plenty of money to manage with. I don't know what she thinks about that poor fellow;
she's never named his name since that day. And she went on like a mad thing for two years or
more. You remember about that, Karen. She said she'd never play the piano again or see anybody
and wanted to go and be a nun. But she had a friend who was a prioress of a convent, and she
advised her not to. I guess poor Mercedes wouldn't have stayed long in a convent. And the reason
she was nice to you was because the Baron had been fond of you and she wanted to make up all
she could for that dreadful thing in her life. She had you to come and live with her. You didn't
interfere with anything any longer and it sort of soothed her to think it was what he'd have
liked. She's fond of you, too. She wouldn't have put up with you for so long if she hadn't
been. She'd have found some excuse for being quit of you. But as for loving you, Karen child,
like you thought she did, or like you love her, why it's pitiful. I used to wonder how long
it would be before you found her out."

Karen's face was hidden; she had rested it upon her hands, leaning forward, her elbows on her
knees, and she had not moved while Mrs. Talcott told her story. Now, as Mrs. Talcott sat silent,
she stirred slightly.

"Tante! Tante!" she muttered. "My beautiful!"

Mrs. Talcott did not reply to this for some moments; then she laid her hand on Karen's shoulder.
"That's it," she said. "She's beautiful and it most kills us to find out how cruel and bad
she can be. But I guess we can't judge people like Mercedes, Karen. When you go through life
like a mowing-machine and see everyone flatten out before you, you must get kind of exalted
ideas about yourself. If anything happens that makes a hitch, or if anybody don't flatten out,
why it must seem to you as if they were wrong in some way, doing you an injury. That's the
way it is with Mercedes. She don't mean to be cruel, she don't mean to be bad; but she's a
mowing-machine and if you get in her way she'll cut you up fine and leave you behind. And the
thing for you to do, Karen, is to get out of her way as quick as you can."

"Yes, I am going," said Karen.

Again Mrs. Talcott sat silent. "I'd like to talk to you about that, Karen," she then said.
"I want to ask you to give up going to Frau Lippheim. There ain't any sense in that. It's a
poor plan. What you ought to do, Karen, is to go right back to your nice young husband."

Karen, who sat on as if crushed beyond the point where anything could crush her further, shook
her head. "Do not ask me that, Mrs. Talcott," she said. "I can never go back to him."

"But, Karen, I guess you've got to own now that he was right and you were wrong in that quarrel
of yours. I guess you'll have to own that it must have made him pretty sick to see her putting
him in the wrong with you all the time and spoiling everything; and there's no one on earth
can do that better than Mercedes."

"I see it all," said Karen. "But that does not change what happened between Gregory and me.
He does not love me. I saw it plainly. If he had me back it would only be because he cares
for conventions. He said cruel things to me."

"I guess you said cruel things to him, Karen."

Karen shook her head slightly, with weariness rather than impatience.

"No, for he saw that it was my loyalty to her--my love of her--that he was wounding. And he
never understood. He never helped me. I can never go back to him, for he does not love me."

"Now, see here, Karen," said Mrs. Talcott, after a pause, "you just let me work it out. You'll
have a good sleep and to-morrow morning I'll see you off, before Mercedes is up, to a nice
little farm near here that I know about--just a little way by train--and there you'll stay,
nice and quiet, and I'll not let Mercedes know where you are. And I'll write to Mr. Jardine
and tell him just what's happened and what you meant to do, and that you want to go to Frau
Lippheim; and you mark my words, Karen, that nice young husband of yours'll be here quicker
than you can say Jack Robinson."

Karen had dropped her hands and was looking at her old friend intently. "Mrs. Talcott, you
do not understand," she said. "You cannot write to him. Have I not told you that he does not
love me?"

"Shucks!" said Mrs. Talcott. "He'll love you fast enough now that Mercedes is out of the way."

"But, Mrs. Talcott," said Karen, rising and looking down at the old woman, whose face, in the
dim light, had assumed to her reeling mind an aspect of dangerous infatuation--"I do not think
you know what you are saying. What do I want of a man who only loves me when I cease to love
my guardian?"

"Well, say you give up love, then," Mrs. Talcott persisted, and a panic seized Karen as she
heard the unmoved tones. "Say you don't love him and he don't love you. You can have conventions,
then--he wants that you say, and so can you--and a good home and a nice husband who won't treat
you bad in any way. That's better than batting about the world all by yourself, Karen; you
take my word for it. And you can take my word for it, too, that if you behave sensible and
do as I say, you'll find out that all this is just a miserable mistake and that he loves you
just as much as ever. Now, see here," Mrs. Talcott, also, had risen, and stood in her habitual
attitude, resting heavily on one hip, "you're not fit to talk and I'm not going to worry you
any more. You go to sleep and we'll see about what to do to-morrow. You go right to sleep,
Karen," she patted the girl's shoulder.

The panic was deepening in Karen. She saw guile on Mrs. Talcott's storm-beaten and immutable
face; and she heard specious reassurance in her voice. Mrs. Talcott was dangerous. She had
set her heart on this last desire of her passionless, impersonal life and had determined that
she and Gregory should come together again. It was this desire that had unsealed her lips:
she would never relinquish, it. She might write to Gregory; she might appeal to him and put
before him the desperate plight in which his wife was placed. And he might come. What were
a wife's powers if she was homeless and penniless, and a husband claimed her? Karen did not
know; but panic breathed upon her, and she felt that she must fly. She, too, could use guile.
"Yes," she said. "I will go to sleep. And to-morrow we will talk. But what you hope cannot
be. Good-night, Mrs. Talcott."

"Good-night, child," said Mrs. Talcott.

They had joined hands and the strangeness of this farewell, the knowledge that she might never
see Mrs. Talcott again, and that she was leaving her to a life empty of all that she had believed
it to contain, rose up in Karen so strongly that it blotted out for a moment her own terror.

"You have been so good to me," she said, in a trembling voice. "Never shall I forget what you
have done for me, Mrs. Talcott. May I kiss you good-night?"

They had never kissed.

Mrs. Talcott's eyes blinked rapidly, and a curious contortion puckered her mouth and chin.
Karen thought that she was going to cry and her own eyes filled with tears.

But Mrs. Talcott in another moment had mastered her emotion, or, more probably, it could find
no outlet. The silent, stoic years had sealed the fount of weeping. Only that dry contortion
of her face spoke of her deep feeling. Karen put her arms around her and they kissed each other.

"Good-night, child," Mrs. Talcott then said in a muffled voice, and disengaging herself she
went out quickly.

Karen stood listening to the sound of her footsteps passing down the corridor. They went down
the little flight of stairs that led to another side of the house and faded away. All was still.

She did not pause or hesitate. She did not seem to think. Swiftly and accurately she found
her walking-shoes and put them on, her hat and cloak; her purse with its half-crown, its sixpence
and its few coppers. Swiftly she laid together a change of underwear and took from her dressing-table
its few toilet appurtenances. She paused then, looking at the ornaments of her girlhood. She
must have money. She must sell something; yet all these her guardian had given her.

No; not all. Her little gold watch ticked peacefully, lying on the table beside her bed as
it had lain beside her for so many years; her beautiful little watch, treasured by her since
the distant birthday when Onkel Ernst had given it.

She clutched it tightly in her hand and it seemed to her, as she had once said to Gregory,
that the iron drove deep into her heart and turned up not only dark forgotten things but dark
and dreadful things never seen before.

She leaned against the table, putting the hand that held Onkel Ernst's watch to her eyes, and
his agony became part of her own. How he had suffered. And the other man, the young, forgotten
Russian. Mrs. Talcott's story became real to her as it had not yet been. It entered her; it
filled her past; it linked itself with everything that she had been and done and believed.
And the iron drove down deeper, until of her heart there seemed only to be left a deep black hole.

CHAPTER XXXVII

Mrs. Talcott had a broken night and it was like a continuation of some difficult and troubled
dream when she heard the voice of Mercedes saying to her: "Tallie, Tallie, wake up. Tallie,
will you wake! Bon Dieu! how she sleeps!"

The voice of Mercedes when she had heard it last had been the voice of passion and desperation,
but its tone was changed this morning; it was fretful, feverishly irritable, rather than frantic.

Mrs. Talcott opened her eyes and sat up in bed. She wore a Jaeger nightgown and her head, with
its white hair coiled at the top, was curiously unaltered by its informal setting.

"What do you mean by coming waking me up like this after the night you've given me," she demanded,
fully awakened now. "Go right straight away or I'll put you out."

"Don't be a fool, Tallie," said Madame von Marwitz, who, in a silken dressing-gown and with
her hair unbound, had an appearance at once childish and damaged. "Where is Karen? I've been
to her room and she is not there. The door downstairs is unbolted. Is she gone out to walk
so early?"

Mrs. Talcott sat still and upright in her bed. "What time is it?" she asked.

"It is seven. I have been awake since dawn. Do you imagine that I have had a pleasant night?"

Mrs. Talcott did not answer this query. She sprang out of bed.

"Perhaps she's gone to meet the bus at the cross-roads. But I told her I was going to take
her. Tell Burton to come round with the car as quick as he can. I'll go after her and see that
she's all right. Why, the child hasn't got any money," Mrs. Talcott muttered, deftly drawing
on her clothes beneath her nightgown which she held by the edge of the neck between her teeth.

Madame von Marwitz listened to her impeded utterance frowning.

"The bus? What do you mean? Why is she meeting the bus?"

"To take her to London where she's going to the Lippheims," said Mrs. Talcott, casting aside
the nightgown and revealing herself in chemise and petticoat. "You go and order that car, Mercedes,"
she added, as she buckled together her sturdy, widely-waisted stays. "This ain't no time for talk."

Madame von Marwitz looked at her for another moment and then rang the bell. She put her head
outside the door to await the housemaid and, as this person made some delay, shouted in a loud
voice: "Handcock! Jane! Louise! Where are you? Fainéantes!" she stamped her foot, and, as the
housemaid appeared, running; "Burton," she commanded. "The car. At once. And tell Louise to
bring me my tea-gown, my shoes and stockings, my fur cloak, at once; but at once; make haste!"

"What are you up to, Mercedes?" Mrs. Talcott inquired, as Madame von Marwitz thrust her aside
from the dressing-table and began to wind up her hair before the mirror.

"I am getting ready to go with you, parbleu!" Madame von Marwitz replied. "Is that you, Louise?
Come in. You have the things? Put on my shoes and stockings; quickly; mais dépêchez-vous donc!
The tea-gown--yes, over this--over it I say! So. Now bring me a motor-veil and gloves. I shall
do thus."

Mrs. Talcott, while Louise with an air of profoundest gloom arrayed her mistress, kept silence,
but when Louise had gone in search of the motor-veil she remarked in a low but imperative voice:
"You'll get out at the roadside and wait for me, that's what you'll do. I won't have you along
when I meet Karen. She couldn't bear the sight of you."

"Peace!" Madame von Marwitz commanded, adjusting the sash of her tea-gown. "I shall see Karen.
The deplorable misunderstanding of last night shall be set right. Her behaviour has been undignified
and underhanded; but I misunderstood her, and, pierced to the heart by the treachery of a man
I trusted, I spoke wildly, without thought. Karen will understand. I know my Karen."

It was not the moment for dispute. Louise had re-entered with the veil and Madame von Marwitz
bound it about her head, standing before the mirror, and gazing at herself, fixedly and unseeingly,
with dark eyes set in purpled orbits. She turned then and swept from the room, and Mrs. Talcott,
pinning on her hat as she went, followed her.

Not until they were speeding through the fresh, chill air, did Mrs. Talcott speak. Madame von
Marwitz, leaning to one side of the open car, scanned the stretch of road before them, melancholy
and monotonous under the pale morning sky, and Mrs. Talcott, moving round determinedly in her
corner, faced her.

"I want to tell you, right now, Mercedes," said Mrs. Talcott, "that Karen's done with you.
There's no use in your coming, for you'll never get her back. I've told her all about you,
Mercedes;--yes, I ain't afraid of you and you know it;--I told her. I made up my mind to it
last night after I'd seen you and heard all your shameful story and how you'd treated her.
I made up my mind that you shouldn't get hold of her again, not if I could help it. The time
had come to tell that child that her husband was right all along and that you ain't a woman
to be trusted. She'd seen for herself what you could do, and I made a sure thing of it. I've
held my tongue for all my life, but I spoke out last night. I want her to be quit of you for
good. I want her to go back to her husband. Yes, Mercedes; I've burst up the whole concern."

Madame von Marwitz, her hand holding tightly the side of the car and her eyes like large, dark
stones in her white face, was sitting upright and was staring at her. She could not speak and
Mrs. Talcott went on.

"She knows all about you now; about you and Baldwin Tanner and you and Ernst, and about that
pitiful young Russian. She knows how you treated them. She knows how it wasn't you but Ernst
who was her real friend, and how you didn't want her to live with you. She knows that you're
a mighty unfortunate creature and a mighty dangerous one; and what I advise you to do, Mercedes,
is to get out here and go right home. Karen won't ever come back to you again, I'm as sure
of it as I'm sure my name's Hannah Talcott."

They sped, with softly singing speed, through the chill morning air. The hard, tight, dark
eyeballs still fixed themselves on the old woman almost lifelessly, and still she sat grasping
the side of the car. She had the look of a creature shot through the heart and maintaining
the poise and pride of its startled and arrested life. Mechanical forces rather than volition
seemed to sustain her.

"Say, Mercedes, will you get out?" Mrs. Talcott repeated. And the rigid figure then moved its
head slightly in negation.

They reached the cross-roads where a few carts and an ancient fly stood waiting for the arrival
of the omnibus that plied between the Lizard and Helston. Karen was nowhere to be seen.

"Perhaps she went across the fields and got into the bus at the Lizard," said Mrs. Talcott.
"We'll wait and see, and if she isn't in the bus we'll go on to Helston. Perhaps she's walking."

Madame von Marwitz continued to say nothing, and in a moment they heard behind them the clashing
and creaking of the omnibus. It drew up at the halt and Karen was not in it.

"To Helston," said Mrs. Talcott, standing up to speak to the chauffeur.

They sped on before the omnibus had resumed its journey.

Tints of azure and purple crept over the moors; the whitening sky showed rifts of blue; it
was a beautiful morning. Mrs. Talcott, keeping a keen eye on the surrounding country, became
aware presently that Mercedes had turned her gaze upon her and was examining her.

She looked round.

There was no anger, no resentment, even, on the pallid face. It seemed engaged, rather, in
a deep perplexity--that of a child struck down by the hand that, till then, had cherished it.
It brooded in sick wonder on Mrs. Talcott, and Mrs. Talcott looked back with her ancient, weary
eyes. Madame von Marwitz broke the silence. She spoke in a toneless voice. "Tallie--how could
you?" she said. "Oh, Tallie--how could you have told her?"

"Mercedes," said Mrs. Talcott, gently but implacably, "I had to. It was right to make sure
you shouldn't get hold of her again. She had to go, and she had to go for good. If you want
me to go, too, I will, but it's only fair to tell you that I never felt much sorrier for you
than I do at this minute."

"There have been tragedies in my life," Madame von Marwitz went on in the low, dulled voice.
"I have been a passion-tossed woman. Yes, I have not been guiltless. But how could you cut
out my heart with all its scars and show it to my child?"

"It was right to do it, Mercedes, so as you shouldn't ruin her life. She's not your child,
and you've shown her she's not. A mother don't behave so to her child, however off her head
she goes."

"I was mad last night." The tears ran slowly down Madame von Marwitz's cheeks. "I can tell
that to Karen. I can explain. I can throw myself on her mercy. I loved him and my heart was
broken. One is not responsible. It is the animal, wounded to death, that shrieks and tears
at the spear it feels entering its flesh."

"I'm awful sorry for you, Mercedes," said Mrs. Talcott.

And now, hiding her face in her hands and leaning back in her cushions, Madame von Marwitz
began to weep with the soft reiterated sobbing of a miserable child. "I have no one left. I
am alone," she sobbed. "Even you have turned against me."

"No, I haven't turned against you," said Mrs. Talcott. "I'm here." And presently, while Mercedes
wept, Mrs. Talcott took her hand and held it.

They reached Helston and climbed the steep, stony road to the station. There was no sign of
Karen. Mrs. Talcott got out and made inquiries. She might have gone to London by the train
that left at dawn; but no one had noticed such a young lady. Mrs. Talcott came back to the
car with her fruitless story.

Mercedes, by this time, had dried her eyes and was regaining, apparently, her more normal energies.
"Not here? Not seen? Not heard of?" she repeated. "But where is she then?"

Mrs. Talcott stood at the door of the car and looked at her charge. "Well, I'm afraid she made
off in the night, straight away, after I'd talked to her."

"Made off in the night?" A dark colour suddenly suffused Madame von Marwitz's face.

"Yes, that's it, I reckon. I must have said something to scare her about her going back to
her husband. Perhaps she thought I'd bring him down without her knowing, and perhaps she wasn't
far wrong. I'm afraid I've played the fool. She thought I'd round on her in some way and so
she just lit out."

Madame von Marwitz stared at her. The expression of her face had entirely altered; there was
no trace of the dazed and wretched child. Dark forces lit her eyes and the relaxed lines of
her lips tightened.

"Get in," she commanded. "Tell him to drive back, and get in." And when Mrs. Talcott had taken
her place beside her she went on in a low, concentrated voice: "Is it not possible that she
has joined that vile seducer?"

Mrs. Talcott eyed her with the fixity of a lion-tamer. Their moment of instinctive closeness
had passed. "Now see here, Mercedes," she said; "I advise you to be careful what you say."

"Careful! I am half mad! Between you all you will drive me mad!" said Madame von Marwitz with
intensity of fury. "You fill Karen's mind with lies about my past--oh, there are two sides
to every story! she shall hear my side!--you drive her forth with your threats to hand her
over to the man she loathes, and she takes refuge--where else?--with that miscreant. Why not?
Where else had she to go? You say that she had no money. We call now at the hotel. If he is
gone, and if within the day we do not hear that she is with Lise, we will send at once for
detectives."

"You'd better control yourself, Mercedes," said Mrs. Talcott. "If Karen ain't found it'll be
a mighty ugly story for you to face up to, and if she's found it won't be all plain sailing
for you either; you've got to pay the price for what you've done. But if it gets round that
you drove her out and then spread scandal about her, you'll do for yourself--just keep your
mind on that if you can."

"Scandal! What scandal shall I spread? If he disappears and she with him, will the facts not
shriek aloud? If she is found she will be found by me. I will wire at once to Lise."

"We'll wire to Lise and we'll wire to Mr. Jardine, that's what we'll do. Karen may have changed
her mind. She may have felt shy of telling me she had. She may have come to see that he's the
thing she's got to hang on to. What I hope for is that if she ain't in London already with
him, she's hiding somewhere about here and has sent for him herself."

"Ah, I understand your hope; it is of a piece with all your treachery," said Madame von Marwitz
in a voice suffocated by conflicting angers. "If she is with her husband he, too, will hear
the story--the false, garbled story of my crimes. He is my enemy, you know it; my malignant
enemy; you know that he will spread this affair broadcast. And you can rejoice in this! You
are glad for my disgrace and ruin!" Tears again streamed from her eyes.

"Don't take on so, Mercedes," said Mrs. Talcott. "If Karen's with her husband all they're likely
to be thinking about is that he was right and has got her back again. Karen's bound to tell
him something about what happened, and you can depend upon Karen for saying as little as she
can. But if you imagine that you're going to be let off from being found out by that young
man, you're letting yourself in for a big disappointment, and you can take my word for it.
It's because he's right about you that Karen'll go back to him."

Madame von Marwitz turned her head away and fixed her eyes on the landscape.

They reached the little village near Les Solitudes, and at the little hotel, with its drowsy,
out-of-season air, Mrs. Talcott descended, leaving Mercedes proudly seated in the car, indifferent
to the possible gaze from above of her faithless devotee. Mrs. Talcott returned with the information
that Mr. Drew was upstairs and not yet awake. "Go up. Go up to him," said the tormented woman,
after a moment of realized relief or disappointment--who can say? "He may have seen her. He
may have given her money for her journey. They may have arranged to meet later."

Mrs. Talcott again disappeared and she only returned after some ten minutes. "Home," she then
said to Burton, climbing heavily into the car. "Yes, there he was, sleeping as peaceful as
a dormouse in his silk pyjamas," she remarked. "I startled him some, I reckon, when I waked
him up. No, he don't know anything about her. Wanted to jump up and look for her when I told
him she was missing. Keep still, Mercedes--what do you mean by bouncing about like that--folks
can see you. I talked to him pretty short and sharp, that young man, and I told him the best
thing he could do now was to pack his grip-sack and clear out. He's going right away and he
promised to send me a telegram from London to-night. He can catch the second train."

Madame von Marwitz leaned back. She closed her eyes. The car had climbed to the entrance of
Les Solitudes and the fuchsia hedge was passing on each side. Mrs. Talcott, looking at her
companion, saw that she had either actually fainted or was simulating a very realistic fainting-fit.
Mercedes often had fainting-fits at moments of crisis; but she was a robust woman, and Mrs.
Talcott had no reason to believe that any of them had been genuine. She did not believe that
this one was genuine, yet she had to own, looking at the leaden eyelids and ashen face, that
Mercedes had been through enough in the last twelve hours to break down a stronger person.
And it was appropriate that she should return to her desolate home in a prostrate condition.

Mrs. Talcott, as often before, played her part. The maids were summoned; they supported Madame
von Marwitz's body; Burton took her shoulders and Mrs. Talcott her feet. So the afflicted woman
was carried into the house and upstairs and laid upon her bed.

Mrs. Talcott then went and sent telegrams to Frau Lippheim and to Gregory Jardine. She asked
them to let her know if Karen arrived in London during the day. She had her answers that evening.
That from Gregory ran--"Not seen or heard of Karen. What has happened? Write by return. Or
shall I come to you?" The other was from the Lippheims' landlady and said that the Lippheims
had returned to Germany four days before and that no one had arrived to see them.

The evening post had gone. Mrs. Talcott went out and answered Gregory by wire: "Writing to-morrow
morning. We think Karen is in London. Stay where you are."

CHAPTER XXXVIII

Mrs. Talcott went early to Madame von Marwitz's room next morning, as soon, in fact, as she
had seen her breakfast-tray carried away. She had shown Mercedes her telegrams the evening
before, and Mercedes, lying on her bed where she had passed the day in heavy slumbers, had
muttered, "Let me sleep. The post is gone. We can do nothing more till to-morrow." Like a wounded
creature she was regaining strength and wholeness in oblivion. When Mrs. Talcott had gone softly
into her room at bedtime, she had found her soundly sleeping.

But the fumes and torpors of grief and pain were this morning dispersed. Mercedes sat at the
desk in her bedroom attired in a robe-de-chambre, and rapidly and feverishly wrote.

"I'm glad to see you're feeling better, Mercedes," said Mrs. Talcott, closing the door and
coming to her side. "We've got a lot to talk over this morning. I guess we'll have to send
for those detectives. What are you writing there?"

Madame von Marwitz, whose face had the sodden, slumbrous look that follows long repose, drew
the paper quickly to one side and replied: "You may mind your affairs and leave me to mind
my own. I write to my friend. I write to Mrs. Forrester."

"You hand me that letter, Mercedes," said Mrs. Talcott, in a mild but singularly determined
tone, and after a moment Madame von Marwitz did hand it to her.

Mrs. Talcott perused the first page. Then she lifted her eyes to her companion, who, averting
hers with a sullen look, fixed them on the sea outside. It was raining and the sea was leaden.

"Now just you listen to me, Mercedes Okraska," said Mrs. Talcott, heavily emphasizing her words
and leaning the hand that held the letter on the writing-table, "I'll go straight up to London
and tell the whole story to Mr. Jardine and Mrs. Forrester--the same as I told it to Karen
with all that's happened here besides--I will as sure as my name's Hannah Talcott--if you write
one word of that shameful idea to your friends. Lay down that pen."

Madame von Marwitz did not lay it down, but she turned in her chair and confronted her accuser,
though with averted eyes. "You say 'shameful.' I say, yes; shameful, and true. She has not
gone to her husband. She has not gone to the Lippheims. I believe that he has joined her. I
believe that it was arranged. I believe that she is with him now."

"You can't look me in the eye and say you believe it, Mercedes," said Mrs. Talcott.

Madame von Marwitz looked her in the eye, sombrely, and she then varied her former statement.
"He has pursued her. He has found her. He will try to keep her. He is a depraved and dangerous
man."

"We'll let him alone. We're done with him for good and all, I guess. My point is this: don't
you write any lies to your friends thinking that you're going to whiten yourself by blackening
Karen. I'm speaking the sober truth when I say I'll go straight off to London and tell Mr.
Jardine and Mrs. Forrester the whole story, unless you write a letter, right now, as you sit
here, that I can pass."

Again averting her eyes, Madame von Marwitz clutched her pen in rigid fingers and sat silent.

"It is blackmail! Tyranny!" she ejaculated presently.

"All right. Call it any name you like. But my advice to you, Mercedes, is to pull yourself
together and see this thing straight for your own sake. I know what's the matter with you,
you pitiful, silly thing; it's this young man; it makes you behave like a distracted creature.
But don't you see as plain as can be that what Karen's probably done is to go to London and
that Mr. Jardine'll find her in a day or two. Now when those two young people come together
again, what kind of a story will Karen tell her husband about you--what'll he think of you--what'll
your friends think of you--if they all find out that in addition to behaving like a wild-cat
to that poor child because you were fairly daft with jealousy, and driving her away--oh, yes
you did, Mercedes, it don't do any good to deny it now--if in addition to all that they find
out that you've been trying to save your face by blackening her character? Why, they'll think
you're the meanest skunk that ever walked on two legs; and they'll be about right. Whereas,
Mercedes," Mrs. Talcott had been standing square and erect for some time in front of her companion,
and now, as her tone became more argumentative and persuasive, she allowed her tired old body
to sag and rest heavily on one hip--"whereas if you write a nice, kind, loving, self-reproachful
letter, all full of your dreadful anxiety and affection--why, if Karen ever sees it it'll soften
her towards you perhaps; and it'll make all your friends sorry for you, too, and inclined to
hush things up if Mr. Drew spreads the story around--won't it, Mercedes?"--Madame von Marwitz
had turned in her chair and was staring before her with a deeply thoughtful eye.--"Why, it's
as plain as can be, Mercedes, that that's your line."

"True," Madame von Marwitz now said. "True." Her voice was deep and almost solemn. "You are
right. Yes; you are right, Tallie."

She leaned her forehead on her hand, shading her eyes as she pondered. "A letter of noble admission;
of sorrow; of love. Ah! you recall me to my better self. It will touch her, Tallie; it is bound
to touch her, is it not? She cannot feel the bitterness she now feels if she reads such a letter;
is not that so, Tallie?"

"That's so. You've got it," said Mrs. Talcott.

Madame von Marwitz, however, continued to lean on her desk and to shade her eyes, and some
moments of silence passed thus. Then, as she leaned, the abjectness of her own position seemed
suddenly borne in upon her. She pushed back her chair and clutching the edge of the desk with
both hands, gave a low cry.

Mrs. Talcott looked at her, inquiring, but unmoved.

"Oh--it is easy for you--standing there--watching my humiliation--making your terms!" Madame
von Marwitz exclaimed in bitter, trembling tones. "You see me in the dust,--and it is you who
strike me there. I am to drag myself--with precautions--apologies--to that child's feet--that
waif!--that bastard!--that thing I picked up and made! I am to be glad because I may hope to
move her to mercy! Ah!--it is too much! too much! I curse the day that I saw her! I had a presentiment--I
remember it now--as I saw her standing there in the forest with her foolish face. I felt in
my inmost soul that she was to bring me sorrow. She takes him from me! She puts me to shame
before the world! And I am to implore her to take pity on me!"

