I pity from the bottom of my heart any nation or body of people that is so unfortunate as to
get entangled in the net of slavery. I have long since ceased to cherish any spirit of bitterness
against the Southern white people on account of the enslavement of my race. No one section
of our country was wholly responsible for its introduction, and, besides, it was recognized
and protected for years by the General Government. Having once got its tentacles fastened on
to the economic and social life of the Republic, it was no easy matter for the country to relieve
itself of the institution. Then, when we rid ourselves of prejudice, or racial feeling, and
look facts in the face, we must acknowledge that, notwithstanding the cruelty and moral wrong
of slavery, the ten million Negroes inhabiting this country, who themselves or whose ancestors
went through the school of American slavery, are in a stronger and more hopeful condition,
materially, intellectually, morally, and religiously, than is true of an equal number of black
people in any other portion of the globe. This is so to such an extent that Negroes in this
country, who themselves or whose forefathers went through the school of slavery, are constantly
returning to Africa as missionaries to enlighten those who remained in the fatherland. This
I say, not to justify slavery--on the other hand, I condemn it as an institution, as we all
know that in America it was established for selfish and financial reasons, and not from a missionary
motive--but to call attention to a fact, and to show how Providence so often uses men and institutions
to accomplish a purpose. When persons ask me in these days how, in the midst of what sometimes
seem hopelessly discouraging conditions, I can have such faith in the future of my race in
this country, I remind them of the wilderness through which and out of which, a good Providence
has already led us.

Ever since I have been old enough to think for myself, I have entertained the idea that, notwithstanding
the cruel wrongs inflicted upon us, the black man got nearly as much out of slavery as the
white man did. The hurtful influences of the institution were not by any means confined to
the Negro. This was fully illustrated by the life upon our own plantation. The whole machinery
of slavery was so constructed as to cause labour, as a rule, to be looked upon as a badge of
degradation, of inferiority. Hence labour was something that both races on the slave plantation
sought to escape. The slave system on our place, in a large measure, took the spirit of self-reliance
and self-help out of the white people. My old master had many boys and girls, but not one,
so far as I know, ever mastered a single trade or special line of productive industry. The
girls were not taught to cook, sew, or to take care of the house. All of this was left to the
slaves. The slaves, of course, had little personal interest in the life of the plantation,
and their ignorance prevented them from learning how to do things in the most improved and
thorough manner. As a result of the system, fences were out of repair, gates were hanging half
off the hinges, doors creaked, window-panes were out, plastering had fallen but was not replaced,
weeds grew in the yard. As a rule, there was food for whites and blacks, but inside the house,
and on the dining-room table, there was wanting that delicacy and refinement of touch and finish
which can make a home the most convenient, comfortable, and attractive place in the world.
Withal there was a waste of food and other materials which was sad. When freedom came, the
slaves were almost as well fitted to begin life anew as the master, except in the matter of
book-learning and ownership of property. The slave owner and his sons had mastered no special
industry. They unconsciously had imbibed the feeling that manual labour was not the proper
thing for them. On the other hand, the slaves, in many cases, had mastered some handicraft,
and none were ashamed, and few unwilling, to labour.

Finally the war closed, and the day of freedom came. It was a momentous and eventful day to
all upon our plantation. We had been expecting it. Freedom was in the air, and had been for
months. Deserting soldiers returning to their homes were to be seen every day. Others who had
been discharged, or whose regiments had been paroled, were constantly passing near our place.
The "grape-vine telegraph" was kept busy night and day. The news and mutterings of great events
were swiftly carried from one plantation to another. In the fear of "Yankee" invasions, the
silverware and other valuables were taken from the "big house," buried in the woods, and guarded
by trusted slaves. Woe be to any one who would have attempted to disturb the buried treasure.
The slaves would give the Yankee soldiers food, drink, clothing--anything but that which had
been specifically intrusted to their care and honour. As the great day drew nearer, there was
more singing in the slave quarters than usual. It was bolder, had more ring, and lasted later
into the night. Most of the verses of the plantation songs had some reference to freedom. True,
they had sung those same verses before, but they had been careful to explain that the "freedom"
in these songs referred to the next world, and had no connection with life in this world. Now
they gradually threw off the mask, and were not afraid to let it be known that the "freedom"
in their songs meant freedom of the body in this world. The night before the eventful day,
word was sent to the slave quarters to the effect that something unusual was going to take
place at the "big house" the next morning. There was little, if any, sleep that night. All
as excitement and expectancy. Early the next morning word was sent to all the slaves, old and
young, to gather at the house. In company with my mother, brother, and sister, and a large
number of other slaves, I went to the master's house. All of our master's family were either
standing or seated on the veranda of the house, where they could see what was to take place
and hear what was said. There was a feeling of deep interest, or perhaps sadness, on their
faces, but not bitterness. As I now recall the impression they made upon me, they did not at
the moment seem to be sad because of the loss of property, but rather because of parting with
those whom they had reared and who were in many ways very close to them. The most distinct
thing that I now recall in connection with the scene was that some man who seemed to be a stranger
(a United States officer, I presume) made a little speech and then read a rather long paper--the
Emancipation Proclamation, I think. After the reading we were told that we were all free, and
could go when and where we pleased. My mother, who was standing by my side, leaned over and
kissed her children, while tears of joy ran down her cheeks. She explained to us what it all
meant, that this was the day for which she had been so long praying, but fearing that she would
never live to see.

For some minutes there was great rejoicing, and thanksgiving, and wild scenes of ecstasy. But
there was no feeling of bitterness. In fact, there was pity among the slaves for our former
owners. The wild rejoicing on the part of the emancipated coloured people lasted but for a
brief period, for I noticed that by the time they returned to their cabins there was a change
in their feelings. The great responsibility of being free, of having charge of themselves,
of having to think and plan for themselves and their children, seemed to take possession of
them. It was very much like suddenly turning a youth of ten or twelve years out into the world
to provide for himself. In a few hours the great questions with which the Anglo-Saxon race
had been grappling for centuries had been thrown upon these people to be solved. These were
the questions of a home, a living, the rearing of children, education, citizenship, and the
establishment and support of churches. Was it any wonder that within a few hours the wild rejoicing
ceased and a feeling of deep gloom seemed to pervade the slave quarters? To some it seemed
that, now that they were in actual possession of it, freedom was a more serious thing than
they had expected to find it. Some of the slaves were seventy or eighty years old; their best
days were gone. They had no strength with which to earn a living in a strange place and among
strange people, even if they had been sure where to find a new place of abode. To this class
the problem seemed especially hard. Besides, deep down in their hearts there was a strange
and peculiar attachment to "old Marster" and "old Missus," and to their children, which they
found it hard to think of breaking off. With these they had spent in some cases nearly a half-century,
and it was no light thing to think of parting. Gradually, one by one, stealthily at first,
the older slaves began to wander from the slave quarters back to the "big house" to have a
whispered conversation with their former owners as to the future.

Chapter II. Boyhood Days

After the coming of freedom there were two points upon which practically all the people on
our place were agreed, and I found that this was generally true throughout the South: that
they must change their names, and that they must leave the old plantation for at least a few
days or weeks in order that they might really feel sure that they were free.

In some way a feeling got among the coloured people that it was far from proper for them to
bear the surname of their former owners, and a great many of them took other surnames. This
was one of the first signs of freedom. When they were slaves, a coloured person was simply
called "John" or "Susan." There was seldom occasion for more than the use of the one name.
If "John" or "Susan" belonged to a white man by the name of "Hatcher," sometimes he was called
"John Hatcher," or as often "Hatcher's John." But there was a feeling that "John Hatcher" or
"Hatcher's John" was not the proper title by which to denote a freeman; and so in many cases
"John Hatcher" was changed to "John S. Lincoln" or "John S. Sherman," the initial "S" standing
for no name, it being simply a part of what the coloured man proudly called his "entitles."

As I have stated, most of the coloured people left the old plantation for a short while at
least, so as to be sure, it seemed, that they could leave and try their freedom on to see how
it felt. After they had remained away for a while, many of the older slaves, especially, returned
to their old homes and made some kind of contract with their former owners by which they remained
on the estate.

My mother's husband, who was the stepfather of my brother John and myself, did not belong to
the same owners as did my mother. In fact, he seldom came to our plantation. I remember seeing
his there perhaps once a year, that being about Christmas time. In some way, during the war,
by running away and following the Federal soldiers, it seems, he found his way into the new
state of West Virginia. As soon as freedom was declared, he sent for my mother to come to the
Kanawha Valley, in West Virginia. At that time a journey from Virginia over the mountains to
West Virginia was rather a tedious and in some cases a painful undertaking. What little clothing
and few household goods we had were placed in a cart, but the children walked the greater portion
of the distance, which was several hundred miles.

I do not think any of us ever had been very far from the plantation, and the taking of a long
journey into another state was quite an event. The parting from our former owners and the members
of our own race on the plantation was a serious occasion. From the time of our parting till
their death we kept up a correspondence with the older members of the family, and in later
years we have kept in touch with those who were the younger members. We were several weeks
making the trip, and most of the time we slept in the open air and did our cooking over a log
fire out-of-doors. One night I recall that we camped near an abandoned log cabin, and my mother
decided to build a fire in that for cooking, and afterward to make a "pallet" on the floor
for our sleeping. Just as the fire had gotten well started a large black snake fully a yard
and a half long dropped down the chimney and ran out on the floor. Of course we at once abandoned
that cabin. Finally we reached our destination--a little town called Malden, which is about
five miles from Charleston, the present capital of the state.

At that time salt-mining was the great industry in that part of West Virginia, and the little
town of Malden was right in the midst of the salt-furnaces. My stepfather had already secured
a job at a salt-furnace, and he had also secured a little cabin for us to live in. Our new
house was no better than the one we had left on the old plantation in Virginia. In fact, in
one respect it was worse. Notwithstanding the poor condition of our plantation cabin, we were
at all times sure of pure air. Our new home was in the midst of a cluster of cabins crowded
closely together, and as there were no sanitary regulations, the filth about the cabins was
often intolerable. Some of our neighbours were coloured people, and some were the poorest and
most ignorant and degraded white people. It was a motley mixture. Drinking, gambling, quarrels,
fights, and shockingly immoral practices were frequent. All who lived in the little town were
in one way or another connected with the salt business. Though I was a mere child, my stepfather
put me and my brother at work in one of the furnaces. Often I began work as early as four o'clock
in the morning.

The first thing I ever learned in the way of book knowledge was while working in this salt-furnace.
Each salt-packer had his barrels marked with a certain number. The number allotted to my stepfather
was "18." At the close of the day's work the boss of the packers would come around and put
"18" on each of our barrels, and I soon learned to recognize that figure wherever I saw it,
and after a while got to the point where I could make that figure, though I knew nothing about
any other figures or letters.

From the time that I can remember having any thoughts about anything, I recall that I had an
intense longing to learn to read. I determined, when quite a small child, that, if I accomplished
nothing else in life, I would in some way get enough education to enable me to read common
books and newspapers. Soon after we got settled in some manner in our new cabin in West Virginia,
I induced my mother to get hold of a book for me. How or where she got it I do not know, but
in some way she procured an old copy of Webster's "blue-back" spelling-book, which contained
the alphabet, followed by such meaningless words as "ab," "ba," "ca," "da." I began at once
to devour this book, and I think that it was the first one I ever had in my hands. I had learned
from somebody that the way to begin to read was to learn the alphabet, so I tried in all the
ways I could think of to learn it,--all of course without a teacher, for I could find no one
to teach me. At that time there was not a single member of my race anywhere near us who could
read, and I was too timid to approach any of the white people. In some way, within a few weeks,
I mastered the greater portion of the alphabet. In all my efforts to learn to read my mother
shared fully my ambition, and sympathized with me and aided me in every way that she could.
Though she was totally ignorant, she had high ambitions for her children, and a large fund
of good, hard, common sense, which seemed to enable her to meet and master every situation.
If I have done anything in life worth attention, I feel sure that I inherited the disposition
from my mother.

In the midst of my struggles and longing for an education, a young coloured boy who had learned
to read in the state of Ohio came to Malden. As soon as the coloured people found out that
he could read, a newspaper was secured, and at the close of nearly every day's work this young
man would be surrounded by a group of men and women who were anxious to hear him read the news
contained in the papers. How I used to envy this man! He seemed to me to be the one young man
in all the world who ought to be satisfied with his attainments.

About this time the question of having some kind of a school opened for the coloured children
in the village began to be discussed by members of the race. As it would be the first school
for Negro children that had ever been opened in that part of Virginia, it was, of course, to
be a great event, and the discussion excited the wildest interest. The most perplexing question
was where to find a teacher. The young man from Ohio who had learned to read the papers was
considered, but his age was against him. In the midst of the discussion about a teacher, another
young coloured man from Ohio, who had been a soldier, in some way found his way into town.
It was soon learned that he possessed considerable education, and he was engaged by the coloured
people to teach their first school. As yet no free schools had been started for coloured people
in that section, hence each family agreed to pay a certain amount per month, with the understanding
that the teacher was to "board 'round"--that is, spend a day with each family. This was not
bad for the teacher, for each family tried to provide the very best on the day the teacher
was to be its guest. I recall that I looked forward with an anxious appetite to the "teacher's
day" at our little cabin.

This experience of a whole race beginning to go to school for the first time, presents one
of the most interesting studies that has ever occurred in connection with the development of
any race. Few people who were not right in the midst of the scenes can form any exact idea
of the intense desire which the people of my race showed for an education. As I have stated,
it was a whole race trying to go to school. Few were too young, and none too old, to make the
attempt to learn. As fast as any kind of teachers could be secured, not only were day-schools
filled, but night-schools as well. The great ambition of the older people was to try to learn
to read the Bible before they died. With this end in view men and women who were fifty or seventy-five
years old would often be found in the night-school. Some day-schools were formed soon after
freedom, but the principal book studied in the Sunday-school was the spelling-book. Day-school,
night-school, Sunday-school, were always crowded, and often many had to be turned away for
want of room.

The opening of the school in the Kanawha Valley, however, brought to me one of the keenest
disappointments that I ever experienced. I had been working in a salt-furnace for several months,
and my stepfather had discovered that I had a financial value, and so, when the school opened,
he decided that he could not spare me from my work. This decision seemed to cloud my every
ambition. The disappointment was made all the more severe by reason of the fact that my place
of work was where I could see the happy children passing to and from school mornings and afternoons.
Despite this disappointment, however, I determined that I would learn something, anyway. I
applied myself with greater earnestness than ever to the mastering of what was in the "blue-back"
speller.

My mother sympathized with me in my disappointment, and sought to comfort me in all the ways
she could, and to help me find a way to learn. After a while I succeeded in making arrangements
with the teacher to give me some lessons at night, after the day's work was done. These night
lessons were so welcome that I think I learned more at night than the other children did during
the day. My own experiences in the night-school gave me faith in the night-school idea, with
which, in after years, I had to do both at Hampton and Tuskegee. But my boyish heart was still
set upon going to the day-school, and I let no opportunity slip to push my case. Finally I
won, and was permitted to go to the school in the day for a few months, with the understanding
that I was to rise early in the morning and work in the furnace till nine o'clock, and return
immediately after school closed in the afternoon for at least two more hours of work.

The schoolhouse was some distance from the furnace, and as I had to work till nine o'clock,
and the school opened at nine, I found myself in a difficulty. School would always be begun
before I reached it, and sometimes my class had recited. To get around this difficulty I yielded
to a temptation for which most people, I suppose, will condemn me; but since it is a fact,
I might as well state it. I have great faith in the power and influence of facts. It is seldom
that anything is permanently gained by holding back a fact. There was a large clock in a little
office in the furnace. This clock, of course, all the hundred or more workmen depended upon
to regulate their hours of beginning and ending the day's work. I got the idea that the way
for me to reach school on time was to move the clock hands from half-past eight up to the nine
o'clock mark. This I found myself doing morning after morning, till the furnace "boss" discovered
that something was wrong, and locked the clock in a case. I did not mean to inconvenience anybody.
I simply meant to reach that schoolhouse in time.

When, however, I found myself at the school for the first time, I also found myself confronted
with two other difficulties. In the first place, I found that all the other children wore hats
or caps on their heads, and I had neither hat nor cap. In fact, I do not remember that up to
the time of going to school I had ever worn any kind of covering upon my head, nor do I recall
that either I or anybody else had even thought anything about the need of covering for my head.
But, of course, when I saw how all the other boys were dressed, I began to feel quite uncomfortable.
As usual, I put the case before my mother, and she explained to me that she had no money with
which to buy a "store hat," which was a rather new institution at that time among the members
of my race and was considered quite the thing for young and old to own, but that she would
find a way to help me out of the difficulty. She accordingly got two pieces of "homespun" (jeans)
and sewed them together, and I was soon the proud possessor of my first cap.

The lesson that my mother taught me in this has always remained with me, and I have tried as
best as I could to teach it to others. I have always felt proud, whenever I think of the incident,
that my mother had strength of character enough not to be led into the temptation of seeming
to be that which she was not--of trying to impress my schoolmates and others with the fact
that she was able to buy me a "store hat" when she was not. I have always felt proud that she
refused to go into debt for that which she did not have the money to pay for. Since that time
I have owned many kinds of caps and hats, but never one of which I have felt so proud as of
the cap made of the two pieces of cloth sewed together by my mother. I have noted the fact,
but without satisfaction, I need not add, that several of the boys who began their careers
with "store hats" and who were my schoolmates and used to join in the sport that was made of
me because I had only a "homespun" cap, have ended their careers in the penitentiary, while
others are not able now to buy any kind of hat.

My second difficulty was with regard to my name, or rather A name. From the time when I could
remember anything, I had been called simply "Booker." Before going to school it had never occurred
to me that it was needful or appropriate to have an additional name. When I heard the schoolroll
called, I noticed that all of the children had at least two names, and some of them indulged
in what seemed to me the extravagance of having three. I was in deep perplexity, because I
knew that the teacher would demand of me at least two names, and I had only one. By the time
the occasion came for the enrolling of my name, an idea occurred to me which I thought would
make me equal to the situation; and so, when the teacher asked me what my full name was, I
calmly told him "Booker Washington," as if I had been called by that name all my life; and
by that name I have since been known. Later in my life I found that my mother had given me
the name of "Booker Taliaferro" soon after I was born, but in some way that part of my name
seemed to disappear and for a long while was forgotten, but as soon as I found out about it
I revived it, and made my full name "Booker Taliaferro Washington." I think there are not many
men in our country who have had the privilege of naming themselves in the way that I have.

More than once I have tried to picture myself in the position of a boy or man with an honoured
and distinguished ancestry which I could trace back through a period of hundreds of years,
and who had not only inherited a name, but fortune and a proud family homestead; and yet I
have sometimes had the feeling that if I had inherited these, and had been a member of a more
popular race, I should have been inclined to yield to the temptation of depending upon my ancestry
and my colour to do that for me which I should do for myself. Years ago I resolved that because
I had no ancestry myself I would leave a record of which my children would be proud, and which
might encourage them to still higher effort.

The world should not pass judgment upon the Negro, and especially the Negro youth, too quickly
or too harshly. The Negro boy has obstacles, discouragements, and temptations to battle with
that are little known to those not situated as he is. When a white boy undertakes a task, it
is taken for granted that he will succeed. On the other hand, people are usually surprised
if the Negro boy does not fail. In a word, the Negro youth starts out with the presumption
against him.

The influence of ancestry, however, is important in helping forward any individual or race,
if too much reliance is not placed upon it. Those who constantly direct attention to the Negro
youth's moral weaknesses, and compare his advancement with that of white youths, do not consider
the influence of the memories which cling about the old family homesteads. I have no idea,
as I have stated elsewhere, who my grandmother was. I have, or have had, uncles and aunts and
cousins, but I have no knowledge as to where most of them are. My case will illustrate that
of hundreds of thousands of black people in every part of our country. The very fact that the
white boy is conscious that, if he fails in life, he will disgrace the whole family record,
extending back through many generations, is of tremendous value in helping him to resist temptations.
The fact that the individual has behind and surrounding him proud family history and connection
serves as a stimulus to help him to overcome obstacles when striving for success.

The time that I was permitted to attend school during the day was short, and my attendance
was irregular. It was not long before I had to stop attending day-school altogether, and devote
all of my time again to work. I resorted to the night-school again. In fact, the greater part
of the education I secured in my boyhood was gathered through the night-school after my day's
work was done. I had difficulty often in securing a satisfactory teacher. Sometimes, after
I had secured some one to teach me at night, I would find, much to my disappointment, that
the teacher knew but little more than I did. Often I would have to walk several miles at night
in order to recite my night-school lessons. There was never a time in my youth, no matter how
dark and discouraging the days might be, when one resolve did not continually remain with me,
and that was a determination to secure an education at any cost.

Soon after we moved to West Virginia, my mother adopted into our family, notwithstanding our
poverty, an orphan boy, to whom afterward we gave the name of James B. Washington. He has ever
since remained a member of the family.

After I had worked in the salt-furnace for some time, work was secured for me in a coal-mine
which was operated mainly for the purpose of securing fuel for the salt-furnace. Work in the
coal-mine I always dreaded. One reason for this was that any one who worked in a coal-mine
was always unclean, at least while at work, and it was a very hard job to get one's skin clean
after the day's work was over. Then it was fully a mile from the opening of the coal-mine to
the face of the coal, and all, of course, was in the blackest darkness. I do not believe that
one ever experiences anywhere else such darkness as he does in a coal-mine. The mine was divided
into a large number of different "rooms" or departments, and, as I never was able to learn
the location of all these "rooms," I many times found myself lost in the mine. To add to the
horror of being lost, sometimes my light would go out, and then, if I did not happen to have
a match, I would wander about in the darkness until by chance I found some one to give me a
light. The work was not only hard, but it was dangerous. There was always the danger of being
blown to pieces by a premature explosion of powder, or of being crushed by falling slate. Accidents
from one or the other of these causes were frequently occurring, and this kept me in constant
fear. Many children of the tenderest years were compelled then, as is now true I fear, in most
coal-mining districts, to spend a large part of their lives in these coal-mines, with little
opportunity to get an education; and, what is worse, I have often noted that, as a rule, young
boys who begin life in a coal-mine are often physically and mentally dwarfed. They soon lose
ambition to do anything else than to continue as a coal-miner.

In those days, and later as a young man, I used to try to picture in my imagination the feelings
and ambitions of a white boy with absolutely no limit placed upon his aspirations and activities.
I used to envy the white boy who had no obstacles placed in the way of his becoming a Congressman,
Governor, Bishop, or President by reason of the accident of his birth or race. I used to picture
the way that I would act under such circumstances; how I would begin at the bottom and keep
rising until I reached the highest round of success.

In later years, I confess that I do not envy the white boy as I once did. I have learned that
success is to be measured not so much by the position that one has reached in life as by the
obstacles which he has overcome while trying to succeed. Looked at from this standpoint, I
almost reached the conclusion that often the Negro boy's birth and connection with an unpopular
race is an advantage, so far as real life is concerned. With few exceptions, the Negro youth
must work harder and must perform his tasks even better than a white youth in order to secure
recognition. But out of the hard and unusual struggle through which he is compelled to pass,
he gets a strength, a confidence, that one misses whose pathway is comparatively smooth by
reason of birth and race.

From any point of view, I had rather be what I am, a member of the Negro race, than be able
to claim membership with the most favoured of any other race. I have always been made sad when
I have heard members of any race claiming rights or privileges, or certain badges of distinction,
on the ground simply that they were members of this or that race, regardless of their own individual
worth or attainments. I have been made to feel sad for such persons because I am conscious
of the fact that mere connection with what is known as a superior race will not permanently
carry an individual forward unless he has individual worth, and mere connection with what is
regarded as an inferior race will not finally hold an individual back if he possesses intrinsic,
individual merit. Every persecuted individual and race should get much consolation out of the
great human law, which is universal and eternal, that merit, no matter under what skin found,
is, in the long run, recognized and rewarded. This I have said here, not to call attention
to myself as an individual, but to the race to which I am proud to belong.

Chapter III. The Struggle For An Education

One day, while at work in the coal-mine, I happened to overhear two miners talking about a
great school for coloured people somewhere in Virginia. This was the first time that I had
ever heard anything about any kind of school or college that was more pretentious than the
little coloured school in our town.

In the darkness of the mine I noiselessly crept as close as I could to the two men who were
talking. I heard one tell the other that not only was the school established for the members
of any race, but the opportunities that it provided by which poor but worthy students could
work out all or a part of the cost of a board, and at the same time be taught some trade or
industry.

As they went on describing the school, it seemed to me that it must be the greatest place on
earth, and not even Heaven presented more attractions for me at that time than did the Hampton
Normal and Agricultural Institute in Virginia, about which these men were talking. I resolved
at once to go to that school, although I had no idea where it was, or how many miles away,
or how I was going to reach it; I remembered only that I was on fire constantly with one ambition,
and that was to go to Hampton. This thought was with me day and night.

After hearing of the Hampton Institute, I continued to work for a few months longer in the
coal-mine. While at work there, I heard of a vacant position in the household of General Lewis
Ruffner, the owner of the salt-furnace and coal-mine. Mrs. Viola Ruffner, the wife of General
Ruffner, was a "Yankee" woman from Vermont. Mrs. Ruffner had a reputation all through the vicinity
for being very strict with her servants, and especially with the boys who tried to serve her.
Few of them remained with her more than two or three weeks. They all left with the same excuse:
she was too strict. I decided, however, that I would rather try Mrs. Ruffner's house than remain
in the coal-mine, and so my mother applied to her for the vacant position. I was hired at a
salary of $5 per month.

I had heard so much about Mrs. Ruffner's severity that I was almost afraid to see her, and
trembled when I went into her presence. I had not lived with her many weeks, however, before
I began to understand her. I soon began to learn that, first of all, she wanted everything
kept clean about her, that she wanted things done promptly and systematically, and that at
the bottom of everything she wanted absolute honesty and frankness. Nothing must be sloven
or slipshod; every door, every fence, must be kept in repair.

I cannot now recall how long I lived with Mrs. Ruffner before going to Hampton, but I think
it must have been a year and a half. At any rate, I here repeat what I have said more than
once before, that the lessons that I learned in the home of Mrs. Ruffner were as valuable to
me as any education I have ever gotten anywhere else. Even to this day I never see bits of
paper scattered around a house or in the street that I do not want to pick them up at once.
I never see a filthy yard that I do not want to clean it, a paling off of a fence that I do
not want to put it on, an unpainted or unwhitewashed house that I do not want to paint or whitewash
it, or a button off one's clothes, or a grease-spot on them or on a floor, that I do not want
to call attention to it.

From fearing Mrs. Ruffner I soon learned to look upon her as one of my best friends. When she
found that she could trust me she did so implicitly. During the one or two winters that I was
with her she gave me an opportunity to go to school for an hour in the day during a portion
of the winter months, but most of my studying was done at night, sometimes alone, sometimes
under some one whom I could hire to teach me. Mrs. Ruffner always encouraged and sympathized
with me in all my efforts to get an education. It was while living with her that I began to
get together my first library. I secured a dry-goods box, knocked out one side of it, put some
shelves in it, and began putting into it every kind of book that I could get my hands upon,
and called it my "library."

Notwithstanding my success at Mrs. Ruffner's I did not give up the idea of going to the Hampton
Institute. In the fall of 1872 I determined to make an effort to get there, although, as I
have stated, I had no definite idea of the direction in which Hampton was, or of what it would
cost to go there. I do not think that any one thoroughly sympathized with me in my ambition
to go to Hampton unless it was my mother, and she was troubled with a grave fear that I was
starting out on a "wild-goose chase." At any rate, I got only a half-hearted consent from her
that I might start. The small amount of money that I had earned had been consumed by my stepfather
and the remainder of the family, with the exception of a very few dollars, and so I had very
little with which to buy clothes and pay my travelling expenses. My brother John helped me
all that he could, but of course that was not a great deal, for his work was in the coal-mine,
where he did not earn much, and most of what he did earn went in the direction of paying the
household expenses.

Perhaps the thing that touched and pleased me most in connection with my starting for Hampton
was the interest that many of the older coloured people took in the matter. They had spent
the best days of their lives in slavery, and hardly expected to live to see the time when they
would see a member of their race leave home to attend a boarding-school. Some of these older
people would give me a nickel, others a quarter, or a handkerchief.

Finally the great day came, and I started for Hampton. I had only a small, cheap satchel that
contained a few articles of clothing I could get. My mother at the time was rather weak and
broken in health. I hardly expected to see her again, and thus our parting was all the more
sad. She, however, was very brave through it all. At that time there were no through trains
connecting that part of West Virginia with eastern Virginia. Trains ran only a portion of the
way, and the remainder of the distance was travelled by stage-coaches.

The distance from Malden to Hampton is about five hundred miles. I had not been away from home
many hours before it began to grow painfully evident that I did not have enough money to pay
my fare to Hampton. One experience I shall long remember. I had been travelling over the mountains
most of the afternoon in an old-fashion stage-coach, when, late in the evening, the coach stopped
for the night at a common, unpainted house called a hotel. All the other passengers except
myself were whites. In my ignorance I supposed that the little hotel existed for the purpose
of accommodating the passengers who travelled on the stage-coach. The difference that the colour
of one's skin would make I had not thought anything about. After all the other passengers had
been shown rooms and were getting ready for supper, I shyly presented myself before the man
at the desk. It is true I had practically no money in my pocket with which to pay for bed or
food, but I had hoped in some way to beg my way into the good graces of the landlord, for at
that season in the mountains of Virginia the weather was cold, and I wanted to get indoors
for the night. Without asking as to whether I had any money, the man at the desk firmly refused
to even consider the matter of providing me with food or lodging. This was my first experience
in finding out what the colour of my skin meant. In some way I managed to keep warm by walking
about, and so got through the night. My whole soul was so bent upon reaching Hampton that I
did not have time to cherish any bitterness toward the hotel-keeper.

By walking, begging rides both in wagons and in the cars, in some way, after a number of days,
I reached the city of Richmond, Virginia, about eighty-two miles from Hampton. When I reached
there, tired, hungry, and dirty, it was late in the night. I had never been in a large city,
and this rather added to my misery. When I reached Richmond, I was completely out of money.
I had not a single acquaintance in the place, and, being unused to city ways, I did not know
where to go. I applied at several places for lodging, but they all wanted money, and that was
what I did not have. Knowing nothing else better to do, I walked the streets. In doing this
I passed by many food-stands where fried chicken and half-moon apple pies were piled high and
made to present a most tempting appearance. At that time it seemed to me that I would have
promised all that I expected to possess in the future to have gotten hold of one of those chicken
legs or one of those pies. But I could not get either of these, nor anything else to eat.

I must have walked the streets till after midnight. At last I became so exhausted that I could
walk no longer. I was tired, I was hungry, I was everything but discouraged. Just about the
time when I reached extreme physical exhaustion, I came upon a portion of a street where the
board sidewalk was considerably elevated. I waited for a few minutes, till I was sure that
no passers-by could see me, and then crept under the sidewalk and lay for the night upon the
ground, with my satchel of clothing for a pillow. Nearly all night I could hear the tramp of
feet over my head. The next morning I found myself somewhat refreshed, but I was extremely
hungry, because it had been a long time since I had had sufficient food. As soon as it became
light enough for me to see my surroundings I noticed that I was near a large ship, and that
this ship seemed to be unloading a cargo of pig iron. I went at once to the vessel and asked
the captain to permit me to help unload the vessel in order to get money for food. The captain,
a white man, who seemed to be kind-hearted, consented. I worked long enough to earn money for
my breakfast, and it seems to me, as I remember it now, to have been about the best breakfast
that I have ever eaten.

My work pleased the captain so well that he told me if I desired I could continue working for
a small amount per day. This I was very glad to do. I continued working on this vessel for
a number of days. After buying food with the small wages I received there was not much left
to add on the amount I must get to pay my way to Hampton. In order to economize in every way
possible, so as to be sure to reach Hampton in a reasonable time, I continued to sleep under
the same sidewalk that gave me shelter the first night I was in Richmond. Many years after
that the coloured citizens of Richmond very kindly tendered me a reception at which there must
have been two thousand people present. This reception was held not far from the spot where
I slept the first night I spent in the city, and I must confess that my mind was more upon
the sidewalk that first gave me shelter than upon the recognition, agreeable and cordial as it was.

When I had saved what I considered enough money with which to reach Hampton, I thanked the
captain of the vessel for his kindness, and started again. Without any unusual occurrence I
reached Hampton, with a surplus of exactly fifty cents with which to begin my education. To
me it had been a long, eventful journey; but the first sight of the large, three-story, brick
school building seemed to have rewarded me for all that I had undergone in order to reach the
place. If the people who gave the money to provide that building could appreciate the influence
the sight of it had upon me, as well as upon thousands of other youths, they would feel all
the more encouraged to make such gifts. It seemed to me to be the largest and most beautiful
building I had ever seen. The sight of it seemed to give me new life. I felt that a new kind
of existence had now begun--that life would now have a new meaning. I felt that I had reached
the promised land, and I resolved to let no obstacle prevent me from putting forth the highest
effort to fit myself to accomplish the most good in the world.

As soon as possible after reaching the grounds of the Hampton Institute, I presented myself
before the head teacher for an assignment to a class. Having been so long without proper food,
a bath, and a change of clothing, I did not, of course, make a very favourable impression upon
her, and I could see at once that there were doubts in her mind about the wisdom of admitting
me as a student. I felt that I could hardly blame her if she got the idea that I was a worthless
loafer or tramp. For some time she did not refuse to admit me, neither did she decide in my
favour, and I continued to linger about her, and to impress her in all the ways I could with
my worthiness. In the meantime I saw her admitting other students, and that added greatly to
my discomfort, for I felt, deep down in my heart, that I could do as well as they, if I could
only get a chance to show what was in me.

After some hours had passed, the head teacher said to me: "The adjoining recitation-room needs
sweeping. Take the broom and sweep it."

It occurred to me at once that here was my chance. Never did I receive an order with more delight.
I knew that I could sweep, for Mrs. Ruffner had thoroughly taught me how to do that when I
lived with her.

I swept the recitation-room three times. Then I got a dusting-cloth and dusted it four times.
All the woodwork around the walls, every bench, table, and desk, I went over four times with
my dusting-cloth. Besides, every piece of furniture had been moved and every closet and corner
in the room had been thoroughly cleaned. I had the feeling that in a large measure my future
depended upon the impression I made upon the teacher in the cleaning of that room. When I was
through, I reported to the head teacher. She was a "Yankee" woman who knew just where to look
for dirt. She went into the room and inspected the floor and closets; then she took her handkerchief
and rubbed it on the woodwork about the walls, and over the table and benches. When she was
unable to find one bit of dirt on the floor, or a particle of dust on any of the furniture,
she quietly remarked, "I guess you will do to enter this institution."

I was one of the happiest souls on Earth. The sweeping of that room was my college examination,
and never did any youth pass an examination for entrance into Harvard or Yale that gave him
more genuine satisfaction. I have passed several examinations since then, but I have always
felt that this was the best one I ever passed.

I have spoken of my own experience in entering the Hampton Institute. Perhaps few, if any,
had anything like the same experience that I had, but about the same period there were hundreds
who found their way to Hampton and other institutions after experiencing something of the same
difficulties that I went through. The young men and women were determined to secure an education
at any cost.

The sweeping of the recitation-room in the manner that I did it seems to have paved the way
for me to get through Hampton. Miss Mary F. Mackie, the head teacher, offered me a position
as janitor. This, of course, I gladly accepted, because it was a place where I could work out
nearly all the cost of my board. The work was hard and taxing but I stuck to it. I had a large
number of rooms to care for, and had to work late into the night, while at the same time I
had to rise by four o'clock in the morning, in order to build the fires and have a little time
in which to prepare my lessons. In all my career at Hampton, and ever since I have been out
in the world, Miss Mary F. Mackie, the head teacher to whom I have referred, proved one of
my strongest and most helpful friends. Her advice and encouragement were always helpful in
strengthening to me in the darkest hour.

I have spoken of the impression that was made upon me by the buildings and general appearance
of the Hampton Institute, but I have not spoken of that which made the greatest and most lasting
impression on me, and that was a great man--the noblest, rarest human being that it has ever
been my privilege to meet. I refer to the late General Samuel C. Armstrong.

It has been my fortune to meet personally many of what are called great characters, both in
Europe and America, but I do not hesitate to say that I never met any man who, in my estimation,
was the equal of General Armstrong. Fresh from the degrading influences of the slave plantation
and the coal-mines, it was a rare privilege for me to be permitted to come into direct contact
with such a character as General Armstrong. I shall always remember that the first time I went
into his presence he made the impression upon me of being a perfect man: I was made to feel
that there was something about him that was superhuman. It was my privilege to know the General
personally from the time I entered Hampton till he died, and the more I saw of him the greater
he grew in my estimation. One might have removed from Hampton all the buildings, class-rooms,
teachers, and industries, and given the men and women there the opportunity of coming into
daily contact with General Armstrong, and that alone would have been a liberal education. The
older I grow, the more I am convinced that there is no education which one can get from books
and costly apparatus that is equal to that which can be gotten from contact with great men
and women. Instead of studying books so constantly, how I wish that our schools and colleges
might learn to study men and things!

General Armstrong spent two of the last six months of his life in my home at Tuskegee. At that
time he was paralyzed to the extent that he had lost control of his body and voice in a very
large degree. Notwithstanding his affliction, he worked almost constantly night and day for
the cause to which he had given his life. I never saw a man who so completely lost sight of
himself. I do not believe he ever had a selfish thought. He was just as happy in trying to
assist some other institution in the South as he was when working for Hampton. Although he
fought the Southern white man in the Civil War, I never heard him utter a bitter word against
him afterward. On the other hand, he was constantly seeking to find ways by which he could
be of service to the Southern whites.

It would be difficult to describe the hold that he had upon the students at Hampton, or the
faith they had in him. In fact, he was worshipped by his students. It never occurred to me
that General Armstrong could fail in anything that he undertook. There is almost no request
that he could have made that would not have been complied with. When he was a guest at my home
in Alabama, and was so badly paralyzed that he had to be wheeled about in an invalid's chair,
I recall that one of the General's former students had occasion to push his chair up a long,
steep hill that taxed his strength to the utmost. When the top of the hill was reached, the
former pupil, with a glow of happiness on his face, exclaimed, "I am so glad that I have been
permitted to do something that was real hard for the General before he dies!" While I was a
student at Hampton, the dormitories became so crowded that it was impossible to find room for
all who wanted to be admitted. In order to help remedy the difficulty, the General conceived
the plan of putting up tents to be used as rooms. As soon as it became known that General Armstrong
would be pleased if some of the older students would live in the tents during the winter, nearly
every student in school volunteered to go.

I was one of the volunteers. The winter that we spent in those tents was an intensely cold
one, and we suffered severely--how much I am sure General Armstrong never knew, because we
made no complaints. It was enough for us to know that we were pleasing General Armstrong, and
that we were making it possible for an additional number of students to secure an education.
More than once, during a cold night, when a stiff gale would be blowing, our tend was lifted
bodily, and we would find ourselves in the open air. The General would usually pay a visit
to the tents early in the morning, and his earnest, cheerful, encouraging voice would dispel
any feeling of despondency.

I have spoken of my admiration for General Armstrong, and yet he was but a type of that Christlike
body of men and women who went into the Negro schools at the close of the war by the hundreds
to assist in lifting up my race. The history of the world fails to show a higher, purer, and
more unselfish class of men and women than those who found their way into those Negro schools.

Life at Hampton was a constant revelation to me; was constantly taking me into a new world.
The matter of having meals at regular hours, of eating on a tablecloth, using a napkin, the
use of the bath-tub and of the tooth-brush, as well as the use of sheets upon the bed, were
all new to me.

I sometimes feel that almost the most valuable lesson I got at the Hampton Institute was in
the use and value of the bath. I learned there for the first time some of its value, not only
in keeping the body healthy, but in inspiring self-respect and promoting virtue. In all my
travels in the South and elsewhere since leaving Hampton I have always in some way sought my
daily bath. To get it sometimes when I have been the guest of my own people in a single-roomed
cabin has not always been easy to do, except by slipping away to some stream in the woods.
I have always tried to teach my people that some provision for bathing should be a part of
every house.

For some time, while a student at Hampton, I possessed but a single pair of socks, but when
I had worn these till they became soiled, I would wash them at night and hang them by the fire
to dry, so that I might wear them again the next morning.

The charge for my board at Hampton was ten dollars per month. I was expected to pay a part
of this in cash and to work out the remainder. To meet this cash payment, as I have stated,
I had just fifty cents when I reached the institution. Aside from a very few dollars that my
brother John was able to send me once in a while, I had no money with which to pay my board.
I was determined from the first to make my work as janitor so valuable that my services would
be indispensable. This I succeeded in doing to such an extent that I was soon informed that
I would be allowed the full cost of my board in return for my work. The cost of tuition was
seventy dollars a year. This, of course, was wholly beyond my ability to provide. If I had
been compelled to pay the seventy dollars for tuition, in addition to providing for my board,
I would have been compelled to leave the Hampton school. General Armstrong, however, very kindly
got Mr. S. Griffitts Morgan, of New Bedford, Mass., to defray the cost of my tuition during
the whole time that I was at Hampton. After I finished the course at Hampton and had entered
upon my lifework at Tuskegee, I had the pleasure of visiting Mr. Morgan several times.

After having been for a while at Hampton, I found myself in difficulty because I did not have
books and clothing. Usually, however, I got around the trouble about books by borrowing from
those who were more fortunate than myself. As to clothes, when I reached Hampton I had practically
nothing. Everything that I possessed was in a small hand satchel. My anxiety about clothing
was increased because of the fact that General Armstrong made a personal inspection of the
young men in ranks, to see that their clothes were clean. Shoes had to be polished, there must
be no buttons off the clothing, and no grease-spots. To wear one suit of clothes continually,
while at work and in the schoolroom, and at the same time keep it clean, was rather a hard
problem for me to solve. In some way I managed to get on till the teachers learned that I was
in earnest and meant to succeed, and then some of them were kind enough to see that I was partly
supplied with second-hand clothing that had been sent in barrels from the North. These barrels
proved a blessing to hundreds of poor but deserving students. Without them I question whether
I should ever have gotten through Hampton.

When I first went to Hampton I do not recall that I had ever slept in a bed that had two sheets
on it. In those days there were not many buildings there, and room was very precious. There
were seven other boys in the same room with me; most of them, however, students who had been
there for some time. The sheets were quite a puzzle to me. The first night I slept under both
of them, and the second night I slept on top of them; but by watching the other boys I learned
my lesson in this, and have been trying to follow it ever since and to teach it to others.

I was among the youngest of the students who were in Hampton at the time. Most of the students
were men and women--some as old as forty years of age. As I now recall the scene of my first
year, I do not believe that one often has the opportunity of coming into contact with three
or four hundred men and women who were so tremendously in earnest as these men and women were.
Every hour was occupied in study or work. Nearly all had had enough actual contact with the
world to teach them the need of education. Many of the older ones were, of course, too old
to master the text-books very thoroughly, and it was often sad to watch their struggles; but
they made up in earnest much of what they lacked in books. Many of them were as poor as I was,
and, besides having to wrestle with their books, they had to struggle with a poverty which
prevented their having the necessities of life. Many of them had aged parents who were dependent
upon them, and some of them were men who had wives whose support in some way they had to provide
for.

The great and prevailing idea that seemed to take possession of every one was to prepare himself
to lift up the people at his home. No one seemed to think of himself. And the officers and
teachers, what a rare set of human beings they were! They worked for the students night and
day, in seasons and out of season. They seemed happy only when they were helping the students
in some manner. Whenever it is written--and I hope it will be--the part that the Yankee teachers
played in the education of the Negroes immediately after the war will make one of the most
thrilling parts of the history off this country. The time is not far distant when the whole
South will appreciate this service in a way that it has not yet been able to do.

Chapter IV. Helping Others

At the end of my first year at Hampton I was confronted with another difficulty. Most of the
students went home to spend their vacation. I had no money with which to go home, but I had
to go somewhere. In those days very few students were permitted to remain at the school during
vacation. It made me feel very sad and homesick to see the other students preparing to leave
and starting for home. I not only had no money with which to go home, but I had none with which
to go anywhere.

In some way, however, I had gotten hold of an extra, second-hand coat which I thought was a
pretty valuable coat. This I decided to sell, in order to get a little money for travelling
expenses. I had a good deal of boyish pride, and I tried to hide, as far as I could, from the
other students the fact that I had no money and nowhere to go. I made it known to a few people
in the town of Hampton that I had this coat to sell, and, after a good deal of persuading,
one coloured man promised to come to my room to look the coat over and consider the matter
of buying it. This cheered my drooping spirits considerably. Early the next morning my prospective
customer appeared. After looking the garment over carefully, he asked me how much I wanted
for it. I told him I thought it was worth three dollars. He seemed to agree with me as to price,
but remarked in the most matter-of-fact way: "I tell you what I will do; I will take the coat,
and will pay you five cents, cash down, and pay you the rest of the money just as soon as I
can get it." It is not hard to imagine what my feelings were at the time.

With this disappointment I gave up all hope of getting out of the town of Hampton for my vacation
work. I wanted very much to go where I might secure work that would at least pay me enough
to purchase some much-needed clothing and other necessities. In a few days practically all
the students and teachers had left for their homes, and this served to depress my spirits even
more.

After trying for several days in and near the town of Hampton, I finally secured work in a
restaurant at Fortress Monroe. The wages, however, were very little more than my board. At
night, and between meals, I found considerable time for study and reading; and in this direction
I improved myself very much during the summer.

When I left school at the end of my first year, I owed the institution sixteen dollars that
I had not been able to work out. It was my greatest ambition during the summer to save money
enough with which to pay this debt. I felt that this was a debt of honour, and that I could
hardly bring myself to the point of even trying to enter school again till it was paid. I economized
in every way that I could think of--did my own washing, and went without necessary garments--but
still I found my summer vacation ending and I did not have the sixteen dollars.

One day, during the last week of my stay in the restaurant, I found under one of the tables
a crisp, new ten-dollar bill. I could hardly contain myself, I was so happy. As it was not
my place of business I felt it to be the proper thing to show the money to the proprietor.
This I did. He seemed as glad as I was, but he coolly explained to me that, as it was his place
of business, he had a right to keep the money, and he proceeded to do so. This, I confess,
was another pretty hard blow to me. I will not say that I became discouraged, for as I now
look back over my life I do not recall that I ever became discouraged over anything that I
set out to accomplish. I have begun everything with the idea that I could succeed, and I never
had much patience with the multitudes of people who are always ready to explain why one cannot
succeed. I determined to face the situation just as it was. At the end of the week I went to
the treasurer of the Hampton Institute, General J.F.B. Marshall, and told him frankly my condition.
To my gratification he told me that I could reenter the institution, and that he would trust
me to pay the debt when I could. During the second year I continued to work as a janitor.

The education that I received at Hampton out of the text-books was but a small part of what
I learned there. One of the things that impressed itself upon me deeply, the second year, was
the unselfishness of the teachers. It was hard for me to understand how any individuals could
bring themselves to the point where they could be so happy in working for others. Before the
end of the year, I think I began learning that those who are happiest are those who do the
most for others. This lesson I have tried to carry with me ever since.

I also learned a valuable lesson at Hampton by coming into contact with the best breeds of
live stock and fowls. No student, I think, who has had the opportunity of doing this could
go out into the world and content himself with the poorest grades.

Perhaps the most valuable thing that I got out of my second year was an understanding of the
use and value of the Bible. Miss Nathalie Lord, one of the teachers, from Portland, Me., taught
me how to use and love the Bible. Before this I had never cared a great deal about it, but
now I learned to love to read the Bible, not only for the spiritual help which it gives, but
on account of it as literature. The lessons taught me in this respect took such a hold upon
me that at the present time, when I am at home, no matter how busy I am, I always make it a
rule to read a chapter or a portion of a chapter in the morning, before beginning the work
of the day.

Whatever ability I may have as a public speaker I owe in a measure to Miss Lord. When she found
out that I had some inclination in this direction, she gave me private lessons in the matter
of breathing, emphasis, and articulation. Simply to be able to talk in public for the sake
of talking has never had the least attraction to me. In fact, I consider that there is nothing
so empty and unsatisfactory as mere abstract public speaking; but from my early childhood I
have had a desire to do something to make the world better, and then to be able to speak to
the world about that thing.

The debating societies at Hampton were a constant source of delight to me. These were held
on Saturday evening; and during my whole life at Hampton I do not recall that I missed a single
meeting. I not only attended the weekly debating society, but was instrumental in organizing
an additional society. I noticed that between the time when supper was over and the time to
begin evening study there were about twenty minutes which the young men usually spent in idle
gossip. About twenty of us formed a society for the purpose of utilizing this time in debate
or in practice in public speaking. Few persons ever derived more happiness or benefit from
the use of twenty minutes of time than we did in this way.

At the end of my second year at Hampton, by the help of some money sent me by my mother and
brother John, supplemented by a small gift from one of the teachers at Hampton, I was enabled
to return to my home in Malden, West Virginia, to spend my vacation. When I reached home I
found that the salt-furnaces were not running, and that the coal-mine was not being operated
on account of the miners being out on "strike." This was something which, it seemed, usually
occurred whenever the men got two or three months ahead in their savings. During the strike,
of course, they spent all that they had saved, and would often return to work in debt at the
same wages, or would move to another mine at considerable expense. In either case, my observations
convinced me that the miners were worse off at the end of the strike. Before the days of strikes
in that section of the country, I knew miners who had considerable money in the bank, but as
soon as the professional labour agitators got control, the savings of even the more thrifty
ones began disappearing.

My mother and the other members of my family were, of course, much rejoiced to see me and to
note the improvement that I had made during my two years' absence. The rejoicing on the part
of all classes of the coloured people, and especially the older ones, over my return, was almost
pathetic. I had to pay a visit to each family and take a meal with each, and at each place
tell the story of my experiences at Hampton. In addition to this I had to speak before the
church and Sunday-school, and at various other places. The thing that I was most in search
of, though, work, I could not find. There was no work on account of the strike. I spent nearly
the whole of the first month of my vacation in an effort to find something to do by which I
could earn money to pay my way back to Hampton and save a little money to use after reaching there.

Toward the end of the first month, I went to a place a considerable distance from my home,
to try to find employment. I did not succeed, and it was night before I got started on my return.
When I had gotten within a mile or so of my home I was so completely tired out that I could
not walk any farther, and I went into an old, abandoned house to spend the remainder of the
night. About three o'clock in the morning my brother John found me asleep in this house, and
broke to me, as gently as he could, the sad news that our dear mother had died during the night.

This seemed to me the saddest and blankest moment in my life. For several years my mother had
not been in good health, but I had no idea, when I parted from her the previous day, that I
should never see her alive again. Besides that, I had always had an intense desire to be with
her when she did pass away. One of the chief ambitions which spurred me on at Hampton was that
I might be able to get to be in a position in which I could better make my mother comfortable
and happy. She had so often expressed the wish that she might be permitted to live to see her
children educated and started out in the world.

In a very short time after the death of my mother our little home was in confusion. My sister
Amanda, although she tried to do the best she could, was too young to know anything about keeping
house, and my stepfather was not able to hire a housekeeper. Sometimes we had food cooked for
us, and sometimes we did not. I remember that more than once a can of tomatoes and some crackers
constituted a meal. Our clothing went uncared for, and everything about our home was soon in
a tumble-down condition. It seems to me that this was the most dismal period of my life.

My good friend, Mrs. Ruffner, to whom I have already referred, always made me welcome at her
home, and assisted me in many ways during this trying period. Before the end of the vacation
she gave me some work, and this, together with work in a coal-mine at some distance from my
home, enabled me to earn a little money.

At one time it looked as if I would have to give up the idea of returning to Hampton, but my
heart was so set on returning that I determined not to give up going back without a struggle.
I was very anxious to secure some clothes for the winter, but in this I was disappointed, except
for a few garments which my brother John secured for me. Notwithstanding my need of money and
clothing, I was very happy in the fact that I had secured enough money to pay my travelling
expenses back to Hampton. Once there, I knew that I could make myself so useful as a janitor
that I could in some way get through the school year.

Three weeks before the time for the opening of the term at Hampton, I was pleasantly surprised
to receive a letter from my good friend Miss Mary F. Mackie, the lady principal, asking me
to return to Hampton two weeks before the opening of the school, in order that I might assist
her in cleaning the buildings and getting things in order for the new school year. This was
just the opportunity I wanted. It gave me a chance to secure a credit in the treasurer's office.
I started for Hampton at once.

During these two weeks I was taught a lesson which I shall never forget. Miss Mackie was a
member of one of the oldest and most cultured families of the North, and yet for two weeks
she worked by my side cleaning windows, dusting rooms, putting beds in order, and what not.
She felt that things would not be in condition for the opening of school unless every window-pane
was perfectly clean, and she took the greatest satisfaction in helping to clean them herself.
The work which I have described she did every year that I was at Hampton.

It was hard for me at this time to understand how a woman of her education and social standing
could take such delight in performing such service, in order to assist in the elevation of
an unfortunate race. Ever since then I have had no patience with any school for my race in
the South which did not teach its students the dignity of labour.

During my last year at Hampton every minute of my time that was not occupied with my duties
as janitor was devoted to hard study. I was determined, if possible, to make such a record
in my class as would cause me to be placed on the "honour roll" of Commencement speakers. This
I was successful in doing. It was June of 1875 when I finished the regular course of study
at Hampton. The greatest benefits that I got out of my my life at the Hampton Institute, perhaps,
may be classified under two heads:--

First was contact with a great man, General S.C. Armstrong, who, I repeat, was, in my opinion,
the rarest, strongest, and most beautiful character that it has ever been my privilege to meet.

Second, at Hampton, for the first time, I learned what education was expected to do for an
individual. Before going there I had a good deal of the then rather prevalent idea among our
people that to secure an education meant to have a good, easy time, free from all necessity
for manual labour. At Hampton I not only learned that it was not a disgrace to labour, but
learned to love labour, not alone for its financial value, but for labour's own sake and for
the independence and self-reliance which the ability to do something which the world wants
done brings. At that institution I got my first taste of what it meant to live a life of unselfishness,
my first knowledge of the fact that the happiest individuals are those who do the most to make
others useful and happy.

I was completely out of money when I graduated. In company with other Hampton students, I secured
a place as a table waiter in a summer hotel in Connecticut, and managed to borrow enough money
with which to get there. I had not been in this hotel long before I found out that I knew practically
nothing about waiting on a hotel table. The head waiter, however, supposed that I was an accomplished
waiter. He soon gave me charge of the table at which their sat four or five wealthy and rather
aristocratic people. My ignorance of how to wait upon them was so apparent that they scolded
me in such a severe manner that I became frightened and left their table, leaving them sitting
there without food. As a result of this I was reduced from the position of waiter to that of
a dish-carrier.

But I determined to learn the business of waiting, and did so within a few weeks and was restored
to my former position. I have had the satisfaction of being a guest in this hotel several times
since I was a waiter there.

At the close of the hotel season I returned to my former home in Malden, and was elected to
teach the coloured school at that place. This was the beginning of one of the happiest periods
of my life. I now felt that I had the opportunity to help the people of my home town to a higher
life. I felt from the first that mere book education was not all that the young people of that
town needed. I began my work at eight o'clock in the morning, and, as a rule, it did not end
until ten o'clock at night. In addition to the usual routine of teaching, I taught the pupils
to comb their hair, and to keep their hands and faces clean, as well as their clothing. I gave
special attention to teaching them the proper use of the tooth-brush and the bath. In all my
teaching I have watched carefully the influence of the tooth-brush, and I am convinced that
there are few single agencies of civilization that are more far-reaching.

There were so many of the older boys and girls in the town, as well as men and women, who had
to work in the daytime and still were craving an opportunity for an education, that I soon
opened a night-school. From the first, this was crowded every night, being about as large as
the school that I taught in the day. The efforts of some of the men and women, who in many
cases were over fifty years of age, to learn, were in some cases very pathetic.

My day and night school work was not all that I undertook. I established a small reading-room
and a debating society. On Sundays I taught two Sunday-schools, one in the town of Malden in
the afternoon, and the other in the morning at a place three miles distant from Malden. In
addition to this, I gave private lessons to several young men whom I was fitting to send to
the Hampton Institute. Without regard to pay and with little thought of it, I taught any one
who wanted to learn anything that I could teach him. I was supremely happy in the opportunity
of being able to assist somebody else. I did receive, however, a small salary from the public
fund, for my work as a public-school teacher.

During the time that I was a student at Hampton my older brother, John, not only assisted me
all that he could, but worked all of the time in the coal-mines in order to support the family.
He willingly neglected his own education that he might help me. It was my earnest wish to help
him to prepare to enter Hampton, and to save money to assist him in his expenses there. Both
of these objects I was successful in accomplishing. In three years my brother finished the
course at Hampton, and he is now holding the important position of Superintendent of Industries
at Tuskegee. When he returned from Hampton, we both combined our efforts and savings to send
our adopted brother, James, through the Hampton Institute. This we succeeded in doing, and
he is now the postmaster at the Tuskegee Institute. The year 1877, which was my second year
of teaching in Malden, I spent very much as I did the first.

It was while my home was at Malden that what was known as the "Ku Klux Klan" was in the height
of its activity. The "Ku Klux" were bands of men who had joined themselves together for the
purpose of regulating the conduct of the coloured people, especially with the object of preventing
the members of the race from exercising any influence in politics. They corresponded somewhat
to the "patrollers" of whom I used to hear a great deal during the days of slavery, when I
was a small boy. The "patrollers" were bands of white men--usually young men--who were organized
largely for the purpose of regulating the conduct of the slaves at night in such matters as
preventing the slaves from going from one plantation to another without passes, and for preventing
them from holding any kind of meetings without permission and without the presence at these
meetings of at least one white man.

Like the "patrollers" the "Ku Klux" operated almost wholly at night. They were, however, more
cruel than the "patrollers." Their objects, in the main, were to crush out the political aspirations
of the Negroes, but they did not confine themselves to this, because schoolhouses as well as
churches were burned by them, and many innocent persons were made to suffer. During this period
not a few coloured people lost their lives.

As a young man, the acts of these lawless bands made a great impression upon me. I saw one
open battle take place at Malden between some of the coloured and white people. There must
have been not far from a hundred persons engaged on each side; many on both sides were seriously
injured, among them General Lewis Ruffner, the husband of my friend Mrs. Viola Ruffner. General
Ruffner tried to defend the coloured people, and for this he was knocked down and so seriously
wounded that he never completely recovered. It seemed to me as I watched this struggle between
members of the two races, that there was no hope for our people in this country. The "Ku Klux"
period was, I think, the darkest part of the Reconstruction days.

I have referred to this unpleasant part of the history of the South simply for the purpose
of calling attention to the great change that has taken place since the days of the "Ku Klux."
To-day there are no such organizations in the South, and the fact that such ever existed is
almost forgotten by both races. There are few places in the South now where public sentiment
would permit such organizations to exist.

Chapter V. The Reconstruction Period

The years from 1867 to 1878 I think may be called the period of Reconstruction. This included
the time that I spent as a student at Hampton and as a teacher in West Virginia. During the
whole of the Reconstruction period two ideas were constantly agitating in the minds of the
coloured people, or, at least, in the minds of a large part of the race. One of these was the
craze for Greek and Latin learning, and the other was a desire to hold office.

It could not have been expected that a people who had spent generations in slavery, and before
that generations in the darkest heathenism, could at first form any proper conception of what
an education meant. In every part of the South, during the Reconstruction period, schools,
both day and night, were filled to overflowing with people of all ages and conditions, some
being as far along in age as sixty and seventy years. The ambition to secure an education was
most praiseworthy and encouraging. The idea, however, was too prevalent that, as soon as one
secured a little education, in some unexplainable way he would be free from most of the hardships
of the world, and, at any rate, could live without manual labour. There was a further feeling
that a knowledge, however little, of the Greek and Latin languages would make one a very superior
human being, something bordering almost on the supernatural. I remember that the first coloured
man whom I saw who knew something about foreign languages impressed me at the time as being
a man of all others to be envied.

Naturally, most of our people who received some little education became teachers or preachers.
While among those two classes there were many capable, earnest, godly men and women, still
a large proportion took up teaching or preaching as an easy way to make a living. Many became
teachers who could do little more than write their names. I remember there came into our neighbourhood
one of this class, who was in search of a school to teach, and the question arose while he
was there as to the shape of the earth and how he could teach the children concerning the subject.
He explained his position in the matter by saying that he was prepared to teach that the earth
was either flat or round, according to the preference of a majority of his patrons.

The ministry was the profession that suffered most--and still suffers, though there has been
great improvement--on account of not only ignorant but in many cases immoral men who claimed
that they were "called to preach." In the earlier days of freedom almost every coloured man
who learned to read would receive "a call to preach" within a few days after he began reading.
At my home in West Virginia the process of being called to the ministry was a very interesting
one. Usually the "call" came when the individual was sitting in church. Without warning the
one called would fall upon the floor as if struck by a bullet, and would lie there for hours,
speechless and motionless. Then the news would spread all through the neighborhood that this
individual had received a "call." If he were inclined to resist the summons, he would fall
or be made to fall a second or third time. In the end he always yielded to the call. While
I wanted an education badly, I confess that in my youth I had a fear that when I had learned
to read and write very well I would receive one of these "calls"; but, for some reason, my
call never came.

When we add the number of wholly ignorant men who preached or "exhorted" to that of those who
possessed something of an education, it can be seen at a glance that the supply of ministers
was large. In fact, some time ago I knew a certain church that had a total membership of about
two hundred, and eighteen of that number were ministers. But, I repeat, in many communities
in the South the character of the ministry is being improved, and I believe that within the
next two or three decades a very large proportion of the unworthy ones will have disappeared.
The "calls" to preach, I am glad to say, are not nearly so numerous now as they were formerly,
and the calls to some industrial occupation are growing more numerous. The improvement that
has taken place in the character of the teachers is even more marked than in the case of the
ministers.

During the whole of the Reconstruction period our people throughout the South looked to the
Federal Government for everything, very much as a child looks to its mother. This was not unnatural.
The central government gave them freedom, and the whole Nation had been enriched for more than
two centuries by the labour of the Negro. Even as a youth, and later in manhood, I had the
feeling that it was cruelly wrong in the central government, at the beginning of our freedom,
to fail to make some provision for the general education of our people in addition to what
the states might do, so that the people would be the better prepared for the duties of citizenship.

It is easy to find fault, to remark what might have been done, and perhaps, after all, and
under all the circumstances, those in charge of the conduct of affairs did the only thing that
could be done at the time. Still, as I look back now over the entire period of our freedom,
I cannot help feeling that it would have been wiser if some plan could have been put in operation
which would have made the possession of a certain amount of education or property, or both,
a test for the exercise of the franchise, and a way provided by which this test should be made
to apply honestly and squarely to both the white and black races.

Though I was but little more than a youth during the period of Reconstruction, I had the feeling
that mistakes were being made, and that things could not remain in the condition that they
were in then very long. I felt that the Reconstruction policy, so far as it related to my race,
was in a large measure on a false foundation, was artificial and forced. In many cases it seemed
to me that the ignorance of my race was being used as a tool with which to help white men into
office, and that there was an element in the North which wanted to punish the Southern white
men by forcing the Negro into positions over the heads of the Southern whites. I felt that
the Negro would be the one to suffer for this in the end. Besides, the general political agitation
drew the attention of our people away from the more fundamental matters of perfecting themselves
in the industries at their doors and in securing property.

The temptations to enter political life were so alluring that I came very near yielding to
them at one time, but I was kept from doing so by the feeling that I would be helping in a
more substantial way by assisting in the laying of the foundation of the race through a generous
education of the hand, head, and heart. I saw coloured men who were members of the state legislatures,
and county officers, who, in some cases, could not read or write, and whose morals were as
weak as their education. Not long ago, when passing through the streets of a certain city in
the South, I heard some brick-masons calling out, from the top of a two-story brick building
on which they were working, for the "Governor" to "hurry up and bring up some more bricks."
Several times I heard the command, "Hurry up, Governor!" "Hurry up, Governor!" My curiosity
was aroused to such an extent that I made inquiry as to who the "Governor" was, and soon found
that he was a coloured man who at one time had held the position of Lieutenant-Governor of
his state.

But not all the coloured people who were in office during Reconstruction were unworthy of their
positions, by any means. Some of them, like the late Senator B.K. Bruce, Governor Pinchback,
and many others, were strong, upright, useful men. Neither were all the class designated as
carpetbaggers dishonourable men. Some of them, like ex-Governor Bullock, of Georgia, were men
of high character and usefulness.

Of course the coloured people, so largely without education, and wholly without experience
in government, made tremendous mistakes, just as many people similarly situated would have
done. Many of the Southern whites have a feeling that, if the Negro is permitted to exercise
his political rights now to any degree, the mistakes of the Reconstruction period will repeat
themselves. I do not think this would be true, because the Negro is a much stronger and wiser
man than he was thirty-five years ago, and he is fast learning the lesson that he cannot afford
to act in a manner that will alienate his Southern white neighbours from him. More and more
I am convinced that the final solution of the political end of our race problem will be for
each state that finds it necessary to change the law bearing upon the franchise to make the
law apply with absolute honesty, and without opportunity for double dealing or evasion, to
both races alike. Any other course my daily observation in the South convinces me, will be
unjust to the Negro, unjust to the white man, and unfair to the rest of the state in the Union,
and will be, like slavery, a sin that at some time we shall have to pay for.

In the fall of 1878, after having taught school in Malden for two years, and after I had succeeded
in preparing several of the young men and women, besides my two brothers, to enter the Hampton
Institute, I decided to spend some months in study at Washington, D.C. I remained there for
eight months. I derived a great deal of benefit from the studies which I pursued, and I came
into contact with some strong men and women. At the institution I attended there was no industrial
training given to the students, and I had an opportunity of comparing the influence of an institution
with no industrial training with that of one like the Hampton Institute, that emphasizes the
industries. At this school I found the students, in most cases, had more money, were better
dressed, wore the latest style of all manner of clothing, and in some cases were more brilliant
mentally. At Hampton it was a standing rule that, while the institution would be responsible
for securing some one to pay the tuition for the students, the men and women themselves must
provide for their own board, books, clothing, and room wholly by work, or partly by work and
partly in cash. At the institution at which I now was, I found that a large portion of the
students by some means had their personal expenses paid for them. At Hampton the student was
constantly making the effort through the industries to help himself, and that very effort was
of immense value in character-building. The students at the other school seemed to be less
self-dependent. They seemed to give more attention to mere outward appearances. In a word,
they did not appear to me to be beginning at the bottom, on a real, solid foundation, to the
extent that they were at Hampton. They knew more about Latin and Greek when they left school,
but they seemed to know less about life and its conditions as they would meet it at their homes.
Having lived for a number of years in the midst of comfortable surroundings, they were not
as much inclined as the Hampton students to go into the country districts of the South, where
there was little of comfort, to take up work for our people, and they were more inclined to
yield to the temptation to become hotel waiters and Pullman-car porters as their life-work.

During the time I was a student at Washington the city was crowded with coloured people, many
of whom had recently come from the South. A large proportion of these people had been drawn
to Washington because they felt that they could lead a life of ease there. Others had secured
minor government positions, and still another large class was there in the hope of securing
Federal positions. A number of coloured men--some of them very strong and brilliant--were in
the House of Representatives at that time, and one, the Hon. B.K. Bruce, was in the Senate.
All this tended to make Washington an attractive place for members of the coloured race. Then,
too, they knew that at all times they could have the protection of the law in the District
of Columbia. The public schools in Washington for coloured people were better then than they
were elsewhere. I took great interest in studying the life of our people there closely at that
time. I found that while among them there was a large element of substantial, worthy citizens,
there was also a superficiality about the life of a large class that greatly alarmed me. I
saw young coloured men who were not earning more than four dollars a week spend two dollars
or more for a buggy on Sunday to ride up and down Pennsylvania Avenue in, in order that they
might try to convince the world that they were worth thousands. I saw other young men who received
seventy-five or one hundred dollars per month from the Government, who were in debt at the
end of every month. I saw men who but a few months previous were members of Congress, then
without employment and in poverty. Among a large class there seemed to be a dependence upon
the Government for every conceivable thing. The members of this class had little ambition to
create a position for themselves, but wanted the Federal officials to create one for them.
How many times I wished then, and have often wished since, that by some power of magic I might
remove the great bulk of these people into the county districts and plant them upon the soil,
upon the solid and never deceptive foundation of Mother Nature, where all nations and races
that have ever succeeded have gotten their start,--a start that at first may be slow and toilsome,
but one that nevertheless is real.

In Washington I saw girls whose mothers were earning their living by laundrying. These girls
were taught by their mothers, in rather a crude way it is true, the industry of laundrying.
Later, these girls entered the public schools and remained there perhaps six or eight years.
When the public school course was finally finished, they wanted more costly dresses, more costly
hats and shoes. In a word, while their wants have been increased, their ability to supply their
wants had not been increased in the same degree. On the other hand, their six or eight years
of book education had weaned them away from the occupation of their mothers. The result of
this was in too many cases that the girls went to the bad. I often thought how much wiser it
would have been to give these girls the same amount of maternal training--and I favour any
kind of training, whether in the languages or mathematics, that gives strength and culture
to the mind--but at the same time to give them the most thorough training in the latest and
best methods of laundrying and other kindred occupations.

Chapter VI. Black Race And Red Race

During the year that I spent in Washington, and for some little time before this, there had
been considerable agitation in the state of West Virginia over the question of moving the capital
of the state from Wheeling to some other central point. As a result of this, the Legislature
designated three cities to be voted upon by the citizens of the state as the permanent seat
of government. Among these cities was Charleston, only five miles from Malden, my home. At
the close of my school year in Washington I was very pleasantly surprised to receive, from
a committee of three white people in Charleston, an invitation to canvass the state in the
interests of that city. This invitation I accepted, and spent nearly three months in speaking
in various parts of the state. Charleston was successful in winning the prize, and is now the
permanent seat of government.

The reputation that I made as a speaker during this campaign induced a number of persons to
make an earnest effort to get me to enter political life, but I refused, still believing that
I could find other service which would prove of more permanent value to my race. Even then
I had a strong feeling that what our people most needed was to get a foundation in education,
industry, and property, and for this I felt that they could better afford to strive than for
political preferment. As for my individual self, it appeared to me to be reasonably certain
that I could succeed in political life, but I had a feeling that it would be a rather selfish
kind of success--individual success at the cost of failing to do my duty in assisting in laying
a foundation for the masses.

At this period in the progress of our race a very large proportion of the young men who went
to school or to college did so with the expressed determination to prepare themselves to be
great lawyers, or Congressmen, and many of the women planned to become music teachers; but
I had a reasonably fixed idea, even at that early period in my life, that there was a need
for something to be done to prepare the way for successful lawyers, Congressmen, and music
teachers.

I felt that the conditions were a good deal like those of an old coloured man, during the days
of slavery, who wanted to learn how to play on the guitar. In his desire to take guitar lessons
he applied to one of his young masters to teach him, but the young man, not having much faith
in the ability of the slave to master the guitar at his age, sought to discourage him by telling
him: "Uncle Jake, I will give you guitar lessons; but, Jake, I will have to charge you three
dollars for the first lesson, two dollars for the second lesson, and one dollar for the third
lesson. But I will charge you only twenty-five cents for the last lesson."

Uncle Jake answered: "All right, boss, I hires you on dem terms. But, boss! I wants yer to
be sure an' give me dat las' lesson first."

Soon after my work in connection with the removal of the capital was finished, I received an
invitation which gave me great joy and which at the same time was a very pleasant surprise.
This was a letter from General Armstrong, inviting me to return to Hampton at the next Commencement
to deliver what was called the "post-graduate address." This was an honour which I had not
dreamed of receiving. With much care I prepared the best address that I was capable of. I chose
for my subject "The Force That Wins."

As I returned to Hampton for the purpose of delivering this address, I went over much of the
same ground--now, however, covered entirely by railroad--that I had traversed nearly six years
before, when I first sought entrance into Hampton Institute as a student. Now I was able to
ride the whole distance in the train. I was constantly contrasting this with my first journey
to Hampton. I think I may say, without seeming egotism, that it is seldom that five years have
wrought such a change in the life and aspirations of an individual.

At Hampton I received a warm welcome from teachers and students. I found that during my absence
from Hampton the institute each year had been getting closer to the real needs and conditions
of our people; that the industrial reaching, as well as that of the academic department, had
greatly improved. The plan of the school was not modelled after that of any other institution
then in existence, but every improvement was made under the magnificent leadership of General
Armstrong solely with the view of meeting and helping the needs of our people as they presented
themselves at the time. Too often, it seems to me, in missionary and educational work among
underdeveloped races, people yield to the temptation of doing that which was done a hundred
years before, or is being done in other communities a thousand miles away. The temptation often
is to run each individual through a certain educational mould, regardless of the condition
of the subject or the end to be accomplished. This was not so at Hampton Institute.

The address which I delivered on Commencement Day seems to have pleased every one, and many
kind and encouraging words were spoken to me regarding it. Soon after my return to my home
in West Virginia, where I had planned to continue teaching, I was again surprised to receive
a letter from General Armstrong, asking me to return to Hampton partly as a teacher and partly
to pursue some supplementary studies. This was in the summer of 1879. Soon after I began my
first teaching in West Virginia I had picked out four of the brightest and most promising of
my pupils, in addition to my two brothers, to whom I have already referred, and had given them
special attention, with the view of having them go to Hampton. They had gone there, and in
each case the teachers had found them so well prepared that they entered advanced classes.
This fact, it seems, led to my being called back to Hampton as a teacher. One of the young
men that I sent to Hampton in this way is now Dr. Samuel E. Courtney, a successful physician
in Boston, and a member of the School Board of that city.

About this time the experiment was being tried for the first time, by General Armstrong, of
educating Indians at Hampton. Few people then had any confidence in the ability of the Indians
to receive education and to profit by it. General Armstrong was anxious to try the experiment
systematically on a large scale. He secured from the reservations in the Western states over
one hundred wild and for the most part perfectly ignorant Indians, the greater proportion of
whom were young men. The special work which the General desired me to do was to be a sort of
"house father" to the Indian young men--that is, I was to live in the building with them and
have the charge of their discipline, clothing, rooms, and so on. This was a very tempting offer,
but I had become so much absorbed in my work in West Virginia that I dreaded to give it up.
However, I tore myself away from it. I did not know how to refuse to perform any service that
General Armstrong desired of me.

On going to Hampton, I took up my residence in a building with about seventy-five Indian youths.
I was the only person in the building who was not a member of their race. At first I had a
good deal of doubt about my ability to succeed. I knew that the average Indian felt himself
above the white man, and, of course, he felt himself far above the Negro, largely on account
of the fact of the Negro having submitted to slavery--a thing which the Indian would never
do. The Indians, in the Indian Territory, owned a large number of slaves during the days of
slavery. Aside from this, there was a general feeling that the attempt to educate and civilize
the red men at Hampton would be a failure. All this made me proceed very cautiously, for I
felt keenly the great responsibility. But I was determined to succeed. It was not long before
I had the complete confidence of the Indians, and not only this, but I think I am safe in saying
that I had their love and respect. I found that they were about like any other human beings;
that they responded to kind treatment and resented ill-treatment. They were continually planning
to do something that would add to my happiness and comfort. The things that they disliked most,
I think, were to have their long hair cut, to give up wearing their blankets, and to cease
smoking; but no white American ever thinks that any other race is wholly civilized until he
wears the white man's clothes, eats the white man's food, speaks the white man's language,
and professes the white man's religion.

When the difficulty of learning the English language was subtracted, I found that in the matter
of learning trades and in mastering academic studies there was little difference between the
coloured and Indian students. It was a constant delight to me to note the interest which the
coloured students took in trying to help the Indians in every way possible. There were a few
of the coloured students who felt that the Indians ought not to be admitted to Hampton, but
these were in the minority. Whenever they were asked to do so, the Negro students gladly took
the Indians as room-mates, in order that they might teach them to speak English and to acquire
civilized habits.

I have often wondered if there was a white institution in this country whose students would
have welcomed the incoming of more than a hundred companions of another race in the cordial
way that these black students at Hampton welcomed the red ones. How often I have wanted to
say to white students that they lift themselves up in proportion as they help to lift others,
and the more unfortunate the race, and the lower in the scale of civilization, the more does
one raise one's self by giving the assistance.

This reminds me of a conversation which I once had with the Hon. Frederick Douglass. At one
time Mr. Douglass was travelling in the state of Pennsylvania, and was forced, on account of
his colour, to ride in the baggage-car, in spite of the fact that he had paid the same price
for his passage that the other passengers had paid. When some of the white passengers went
into the baggage-car to console Mr. Douglass, and one of them said to him: "I am sorry, Mr.
Douglass, that you have been degraded in this manner," Mr. Douglass straightened himself up
on the box upon which he was sitting, and replied: "They cannot degrade Frederick Douglass.
The soul that is within me no man can degrade. I am not the one that is being degraded on account
of this treatment, but those who are inflicting it upon me."

In one part of the country, where the law demands the separation of the races on the railroad
trains, I saw at one time a rather amusing instance which showed how difficult it sometimes
is to know where the black begins and the white ends.

There was a man who was well known in his community as a Negro, but who was so white that even
an expert would have hard work to classify him as a black man. This man was riding in the part
of the train set aside for the coloured passengers. When the train conductor reached him, he
showed at once that he was perplexed. If the man was a Negro, the conductor did not want to
send him to the white people's coach; at the same time, if he was a white man, the conductor
did not want to insult him by asking him if he was a Negro. The official looked him over carefully,
examining his hair, eyes, nose, and hands, but still seemed puzzled. Finally, to solve the
difficulty, he stooped over and peeped at the man's feet. When I saw the conductor examining
the feet of the man in question, I said to myself, "That will settle it;" and so it did, for
the trainman promptly decided that the passenger was a Negro, and let him remain where he was.
I congratulated myself that my race was fortunate in not losing one of its members.

My experience has been that the time to test a true gentleman is to observe him when he is
in contact with individuals of a race that is less fortunate than his own. This is illustrated
in no better way than by observing the conduct of the old-school type of Southern gentleman
when he is in contact with his former slaves or their descendants.

An example of what I mean is shown in a story told of George Washington, who, meeting a coloured
man in the road once, who politely lifted his hat, lifted his own in return. Some of his white
friends who saw the incident criticised Washington for his action. In reply to their criticism
George Washington said: "Do you suppose that I am going to permit a poor, ignorant, coloured
man to be more polite than I am?"

While I was in charge of the Indian boys at Hampton, I had one or two experiences which illustrate
the curious workings of caste in America. One of the Indian boys was taken ill, and it became
my duty to take him to Washington, deliver him over to the Secretary of the Interior, and get
a receipt for him, in order that he might be returned to his Western reservation. At that time
I was rather ignorant of the ways of the world. During my journey to Washington, on a steamboat,
when the bell rang for dinner, I was careful to wait and not enter the dining room until after
the greater part of the passengers had finished their meal. Then, with my charge, I went to
the dining saloon. The man in charge politely informed me that the Indian could be served,
but that I could not. I never could understand how he knew just where to draw the colour line,
since the Indian and I were of about the same complexion. The steward, however, seemed to be
an expert in this manner. I had been directed by the authorities at Hampton to stop at a certain
hotel in Washington with my charge, but when I went to this hotel the clerk stated that he
would be glad to receive the Indian into the house, but said that he could not accommodate me.

An illustration of something of this same feeling came under my observation afterward. I happened
to find myself in a town in which so much excitement and indignation were being expressed that
it seemed likely for a time that there would be a lynching. The occasion of the trouble was
that a dark-skinned man had stopped at the local hotel. Investigation, however, developed the
fact that this individual was a citizen of Morocco, and that while travelling in this country
he spoke the English language. As soon as it was learned that he was not an American Negro,
all the signs of indignation disappeared. The man who was the innocent cause of the excitement,
though, found it prudent after that not to speak English.

At the end of my first year with the Indians there came another opening for me at Hampton,
which, as I look back over my life now, seems to have come providentially, to help to prepare
me for my work at Tuskegee later. General Armstrong had found out that there was quite a number
of young coloured men and women who were intensely in earnest in wishing to get an education,
but who were prevented from entering Hampton Institute because they were too poor to be able
to pay any portion of the cost of their board, or even to supply themselves with books. He
conceived the idea of starting a night-school in connection with the Institute, into which
a limited number of the most promising of these young men and women would be received, on condition
that they were to work for ten hours during the day, and attend school for two hours at night.
They were to be paid something above the cost of their board for their work. The greater part
of their earnings was to be reserved in the school's treasury as a fund to be drawn on to pay
their board when they had become students in the day-school, after they had spent one or two
years in the night-school. In this way they would obtain a start in their books and a knowledge
of some trade or industry, in addition to the other far-reaching benefits of the institution.

General Armstrong asked me to take charge of the night-school, and I did so. At the beginning
of this school there were about twelve strong, earnest men and women who entered the class.
During the day the greater part of the young men worked in the school's sawmill, and the young
women worked in the laundry. The work was not easy in either place, but in all my teaching
I never taught pupils who gave me much genuine satisfaction as these did. They were good students,
and mastered their work thoroughly. They were so much in earnest that only the ringing of the
retiring-bell would make them stop studying, and often they would urge me to continue the lessons
after the usual hour for going to bed had come.

These students showed so much earnestness, both in their hard work during the day, as well
as in their application to their studies at night, that I gave them the name of "The Plucky
Class"--a name which soon grew popular and spread throughout the institution. After a student
had been in the night-school long enough to prove what was in him, I gave him a printed certificate
which read something like this:--

"This is to certify that James Smith is a member of The Plucky Class of the Hampton Institute,
and is in good and regular standing."

The students prized these certificates highly, and they added greatly to the popularity of
the night-school. Within a few weeks this department had grown to such an extent that there
were about twenty-five students in attendance. I have followed the course of many of these
twenty-five men and women ever since then, and they are now holding important and useful positions
in nearly every part of the South. The night-school at Hampton, which started with only twelve
students, now numbers between three and four hundred, and is one of the permanent and most
important features of the institution.

Chapter VII. Early Days At Tuskegee

During the time that I had charge of the Indians and the night-school at Hampton, I pursued
some studies myself, under the direction of the instructors there. One of these instructors
was the Rev. Dr. H.B. Frissell, the present Principal of the Hampton Institute, General Armstrong's
successor.

In May, 1881, near the close of my first year in teaching the night-school, in a way that I
had not dared expect, the opportunity opened for me to begin my life-work. One night in the
chapel, after the usual chapel exercises were over, General Armstrong referred to the fact
that he had received a letter from some gentlemen in Alabama asking him to recommend some one
to take charge of what was to be a normal school for the coloured people in the little town
of Tuskegee in that state. These gentlemen seemed to take it for granted that no coloured man
suitable for the position could be secured, and they were expecting the General to recommend
a white man for the place. The next day General Armstrong sent for me to come to his office,
and, much to my surprise, asked me if I thought I could fill the position in Alabama. I told
him that I would be willing to try. Accordingly, he wrote to the people who had applied to
him for the information, that he did not know of any white man to suggest, but if they would
be willing to take a coloured man, he had one whom he could recommend. In this letter he gave
them my name.

Several days passed before anything more was heard about the matter. Some time afterward, one
Sunday evening during the chapel exercises, a messenger came in and handed the general a telegram.
At the end of the exercises he read the telegram to the school. In substance, these were its
words: "Booker T. Washington will suit us. Send him at once."

There was a great deal of joy expressed among the students and teachers, and I received very
hearty congratulations. I began to get ready at once to go to Tuskegee. I went by way of my
old home in West Virginia, where I remained for several days, after which I proceeded to Tuskegee.
I found Tuskegee to be a town of about two thousand inhabitants, nearly one-half of whom were
coloured. It was in what was known as the Black Belt of the South. In the county in which Tuskegee
is situated the coloured people outnumbered the whites by about three to one. In some of the
adjoining and near-by counties the proportion was not far from six coloured persons to one white.

I have often been asked to define the term "Black Belt." So far as I can learn, the term was
first used to designate a part of the country which was distinguished by the colour of the
soil. The part of the country possessing this thick, dark, and naturally rich soil was, of
course, the part of the South where the slaves were most profitable, and consequently they
were taken there in the largest numbers. Later, and especially since the war, the term seems
to be used wholly in a political sense--that is, to designate the counties where the black
people outnumber the white.

Before going to Tuskegee I had expected to find there a building and all the necessary apparatus
ready for me to begin teaching. To my disappointment, I found nothing of the kind. I did find,
though, that which no costly building and apparatus can supply,--hundreds of hungry, earnest
souls who wanted to secure knowledge.

Tuskegee seemed an ideal place for the school. It was in the midst of the great bulk of the
Negro population, and was rather secluded, being five miles from the main line of railroad,
with which it was connected by a short line. During the days of slavery, and since, the town
had been a centre for the education of the white people. This was an added advantage, for the
reason that I found the white people possessing a degree of culture and education that is not
surpassed by many localities. While the coloured people were ignorant, they had not, as a rule,
degraded and weakened their bodies by vices such as are common to the lower class of people
in the large cities. In general, I found the relations between the two races pleasant. For
example, the largest, and I think at that time the only hardware store in the town was owned
and operated jointly by a coloured man and a white man. This copartnership continued until
the death of the white partner.

I found that about a year previous to my going to Tuskegee some of the coloured people who
had heard something of the work of education being done at Hampton had applied to the state
Legislature, through their representatives, for a small appropriation to be used in starting
a normal school in Tuskegee. This request the Legislature had complied with to the extent of
granting an annual appropriation of two thousand dollars. I soon learned, however, that this
money could be used only for the payment of the salaries of the instructors, and that there
was no provision for securing land, buildings, or apparatus. The task before me did not seem
a very encouraging one. It seemed much like making bricks without straw. The coloured people
were overjoyed, and were constantly offering their services in any way in which they could
be of assistance in getting the school started.

My first task was to find a place in which to open the school. After looking the town over
with some care, the most suitable place that could be secured seemed to be a rather dilapidated
shanty near the coloured Methodist church, together with the church itself as a sort of assembly-room.
Both the church and the shanty were in about as bad condition as was possible. I recall that
during the first months of school that I taught in this building it was in such poor repair
that, whenever it rained, one of the older students would very kindly leave his lessons and
hold an umbrella over me while I heard the recitations of the others. I remember, also, that
on more than one occasion my landlady held an umbrella over me while I ate breakfast.

At the time I went to Alabama the coloured people were taking considerable interest in politics,
and they were very anxious that I should become one of them politically, in every respect.
They seemed to have a little distrust of strangers in this regard. I recall that one man, who
seemed to have been designated by the others to look after my political destiny, came to me
on several occasions and said, with a good deal of earnestness: "We wants you to be sure to
vote jes' like we votes. We can't read de newspapers very much, but we knows how to vote, an'
we wants you to vote jes' like we votes." He added: "We watches de white man, and we keeps
watching de white man till we finds out which way de white man's gwine to vote; an' when we
finds out which way de white man's gwine to vote, den we votes 'xactly de other way. Den we
knows we's right."

I am glad to add, however, that at the present time the disposition to vote against the white
man merely because he is white is largely disappearing, and the race is learning to vote from
principle, for what the voter considers to be for the best interests of both races.

I reached Tuskegee, as I have said, early in June, 1881. The first month I spent in finding
accommodations for the school, and in travelling through Alabama, examining into the actual
life of the people, especially in the court districts, and in getting the school advertised
among the class of people that I wanted to have attend it. The most of my travelling was done
over the country roads, with a mule and a cart or a mule and a buggy wagon for conveyance.
I ate and slept with the people, in their little cabins. I saw their farms, their schools,
their churches. Since, in the case of the most of these visits, there had been no notice given
in advance that a stranger was expected, I had the advantage of seeing the real, everyday life
of the people.

In the plantation districts I found that, as a rule, the whole family slept in one room, and
that in addition to the immediate family there sometimes were relatives, or others not related
to the family, who slept in the same room. On more than one occasion I went outside the house
to get ready for bed, or to wait until the family had gone to bed. They usually contrived some
kind of a place for me to sleep, either on the floor or in a special part of another's bed.
Rarely was there any place provided in the cabin where one could bathe even the face and hands,
but usually some provision was made for this outside the house, in the yard.

The common diet of the people was fat pork and corn bread. At times I have eaten in cabins
where they had only corn bread and "black-eye peas" cooked in plain water. The people seemed
to have no other idea than to live on this fat meat and corn bread,--the meat, and the meal
of which the bread was made, having been bought at a high price at a store in town, notwithstanding
the face that the land all about the cabin homes could easily have been made to produce nearly
every kind of garden vegetable that is raised anywhere in the country. Their one object seemed
to be to plant nothing but cotton; and in many cases cotton was planted up to the very door
of the cabin.

In these cabin homes I often found sewing-machines which had been bought, or were being bought,
on instalments, frequently at a cost of as much as sixty dollars, or showy clocks for which
the occupants of the cabins had paid twelve or fourteen dollars. I remember that on one occasion
when I went into one of these cabins for dinner, when I sat down to the table for a meal with
the four members of the family, I noticed that, while there were five of us at the table, there
was but one fork for the five of us to use. Naturally there was an awkward pause on my part.
In the opposite corner of that same cabin was an organ for which the people told me they were
paying sixty dollars in monthly instalments. One fork, and a sixty-dollar organ!

In most cases the sewing-machine was not used, the clocks were so worthless that they did not
keep correct time--and if they had, in nine cases out of ten there would have been no one in
the family who could have told the time of day--while the organ, of course, was rarely used
for want of a person who could play upon it.

In the case to which I have referred, where the family sat down to the table for the meal at
which I was their guest, I could see plainly that this was an awkward and unusual proceeding,
and was done in my honour. In most cases, when the family got up in the morning, for example,
the wife would put a piece of meat in a frying-pan and put a lump of dough in a "skillet,"
as they called it. These utensils would be placed on the fire, and in ten or fifteen minutes
breakfast would be ready. Frequently the husband would take his bread and meat in his hand
and start for the field, eating as he walked. The mother would sit down in a corner and eat
her breakfast, perhaps from a plate and perhaps directly from the "skillet" or frying-pan,
while the children would eat their portion of the bread and meat while running about the yard.
At certain seasons of the year, when meat was scarce, it was rarely that the children who were
not old enough or strong enough to work in the fields would have the luxury of meat.

The breakfast over, and with practically no attention given to the house, the whole family
would, as a general thing, proceed to the cotton-field. Every child that was large enough to
carry a hoe was put to work, and the baby--for usually there was at least one baby--would be
laid down at the end of the cotton row, so that its mother could give it a certain amount of
attention when she had finished chopping her row. The noon meal and the supper were taken in
much the same way as the breakfast.

All the days of the family would be spent after much this same routine, except Saturday and
Sunday. On Saturday the whole family would spent at least half a day, and often a whole day,
in town. The idea in going to town was, I suppose, to do shopping, but all the shopping that
the whole family had money for could have been attended to in ten minutes by one person. Still,
the whole family remained in town for most of the day, spending the greater part of the time
in standing on the streets, the women, too often, sitting about somewhere smoking or dipping
snuff. Sunday was usually spent in going to some big meeting. With few exceptions, I found
that the crops were mortgaged in the counties where I went, and that the most of the coloured
farmers were in debt. The state had not been able to build schoolhouses in the country districts,
and, as a rule, the schools were taught in churches or in log cabins. More than once, while
on my journeys, I found that there was no provision made in the house used for school purposes
for heating the building during the winter, and consequently a fire had to be built in the
yard, and teacher and pupils passed in and out of the house as they got cold or warm. With
few exceptions, I found the teachers in these country schools to be miserably poor in preparation
for their work, and poor in moral character. The schools were in session from three to five
months. There was practically no apparatus in the schoolhouses, except that occasionally there
was a rough blackboard. I recall that one day I went into a schoolhouse--or rather into an
abandoned log cabin that was being used as a schoolhouse--and found five pupils who were studying
a lesson from one book. Two of these, on the front seat, were using the book between them;
behind these were two others peeping over the shoulders of the first two, and behind the four
was a fifth little fellow who was peeping over the shoulders of all four.

What I have said concerning the character of the schoolhouses and teachers will also apply
quite accurately as a description of the church buildings and the ministers.

I met some very interesting characters during my travels. As illustrating the peculiar mental
processes of the country people, I remember that I asked one coloured man, who was about sixty
years old, to tell me something of his history. He said that he had been born in Virginia,
and sold into Alabama in 1845. I asked him how many were sold at the same time. He said, "There
were five of us; myself and brother and three mules."

In giving all these descriptions of what I saw during my mouth of travel in the country around
Tuskegee, I wish my readers to keep in mind the fact that there were many encouraging exceptions
to the conditions which I have described. I have stated in such plain words what I saw, mainly
for the reason that later I want to emphasize the encouraging changes that have taken place
in the community, not wholly by the work of the Tuskegee school, but by that of other institutions
as well.

Chapter VIII. Teaching School In A Stable And A Hen-House

I confess that what I saw during my month of travel and investigation left me with a very heavy
heart. The work to be done in order to lift these people up seemed almost beyond accomplishing.
I was only one person, and it seemed to me that the little effort which I could put forth could
go such a short distance toward bringing about results. I wondered if I could accomplish anything,
and if it were worth while for me to try.

Of one thing I felt more strongly convinced than ever, after spending this month in seeing
the actual life of the coloured people, and that was that, in order to lift them up, something
must be done more than merely to imitate New England education as it then existed. I saw more
clearly than ever the wisdom of the system which General Armstrong had inaugurated at Hampton.
To take the children of such people as I had been among for a month, and each day give them
a few hours of mere book education, I felt would be almost a waste of time.

After consultation with the citizens of Tuskegee, I set July 4, 1881, as the day for the opening
of the school in the little shanty and church which had been secured for its accommodation.
The white people, as well as the coloured, were greatly interested in the starting of the new
school, and the opening day was looked forward to with much earnest discussion. There were
not a few white people in the vicinity of Tuskegee who looked with some disfavour upon the
project. They questioned its value to the coloured people, and had a fear that it might result
in bringing about trouble between the races. Some had the feeling that in proportion as the
Negro received education, in the same proportion would his value decrease as an economic factor
in the state. These people feared the result of education would be that the Negroes would leave
the farms, and that it would be difficult to secure them for domestic service.

The white people who questioned the wisdom of starting this new school had in their minds pictures
of what was called an educated Negro, with a high hat, imitation gold eye-glasses, a showy
walking-stick, kid gloves, fancy boots, and what not--in a word, a man who was determined to
live by his wits. It was difficult for these people to see how education would produce any
other kind of a coloured man.

In the midst of all the difficulties which I encountered in getting the little school started,
and since then through a period of nineteen years, there are two men among all the many friends
of the school in Tuskegee upon whom I have depended constantly for advice and guidance; and
the success of the undertaking is largely due to these men, from whom I have never sought anything
in vain. I mention them simply as types. One is a white man and an ex-slaveholder, Mr. George
W. Campbell; the other is a black man and an ex-slave, Mr. Lewis Adams. These were the men
who wrote to General Armstrong for a teacher.

Mr. Campbell is a merchant and banker, and had had little experience in dealing with matters
pertaining to education. Mr. Adams was a mechanic, and had learned the trades of shoemaking,
harness-making, and tinsmithing during the days of slavery. He had never been to school a day
in his life, but in some way he had learned to read and write while a slave. From the first,
these two men saw clearly what my plan of education was, sympathized with me, and supported
me in every effort. In the days which were darkest financially for the school, Mr. Campbell
was never appealed to when he was not willing to extend all the aid in his power. I do not
know two men, one an ex-slaveholder, one an ex-slave, whose advice and judgment I would feel
more like following in everything which concerns the life and development of the school at
Tuskegee than those of these two men.

I have always felt that Mr. Adams, in a large degree, derived his unusual power of mind from
the training given his hands in the process of mastering well three trades during the days
of slavery. If one goes to-day into any Southern town, and asks for the leading and most reliable
coloured man in the community, I believe that in five cases out of ten he will be directed
to a Negro who learned a trade during the days of slavery.

On the morning that the school opened, thirty students reported for admission. I was the only
teacher. The students were about equally divided between the sexes. Most of them lived in Macon
County, the county in which Tuskegee is situated, and of which it is the county-seat. A great
many more students wanted to enter the school, but it had been decided to receive only those
who were above fifteen years of age, and who had previously received some education. The greater
part of the thirty were public-school teachers, and some of them were nearly forty years of
age. With the teachers came some of their former pupils, and when they were examined it was
amusing to note that in several cases the pupil entered a higher class than did his former
teacher. It was also interesting to note how many big books some of them had studied, and how
many high-sounding subjects some of them claimed to have mastered. The bigger the book and
the longer the name of the subject, the prouder they felt of their accomplishment. Some had
studied Latin, and one or two Greek. This they thought entitled them to special distinction.

In fact, one of the saddest things I saw during the month of travel which I have described
was a young man, who had attended some high school, sitting down in a one-room cabin, with
grease on his clothing, filth all around him, and weeds in the yard and garden, engaged in
studying a French grammar.

The students who came first seemed to be fond of memorizing long and complicated "rules" in
grammar and mathematics, but had little thought or knowledge of applying these rules to their
everyday affairs of their life. One subject which they liked to talk about, and tell me that
they had mastered, in arithmetic, was "banking and discount," but I soon found out that neither
they nor almost any one in the neighbourhood in which they had lived had ever had a bank account.
In registering the names of the students, I found that almost every one of them had one or
more middle initials. When I asked what the "J" stood for, in the name of John J. Jones, it
was explained to me that this was a part of his "entitles." Most of the students wanted to
get an education because they thought it would enable them to earn more money as school-teachers.

Notwithstanding what I have said about them in these respects, I have never seen a more earnest
and willing company of young men and women than these students were. They were all willing
to learn the right thing as soon as it was shown them what was right. I was determined to start
them off on a solid and thorough foundation, so far as their books were concerned. I soon learned
that most of them had the merest smattering of the high-sounding things that they had studied.
While they could locate the Desert of Sahara or the capital of China on an artificial globe,
I found out that the girls could not locate the proper places for the knives and forks on an
actual dinner-table, or the places on which the bread and meat should be set.

I had to summon a good deal of courage to take a student who had been studying cube root and
"banking and discount," and explain to him that the wisest thing for him to do first was thoroughly
master the multiplication table.

The number of pupils increased each week, until by the end of the first month there were nearly
fifty. Many of them, however, said that, as they could remain only for two or three months,
they wanted to enter a high class and get a diploma the first year if possible.

At the end of the first six weeks a new and rare face entered the school as a co-teacher. This
was Miss Olivia A. Davidson, who later became my wife. Miss Davidson was born in Ohio, and
received her preparatory education in the public schools of that state. When little more than
a girl, she heard of the need of teachers in the South. She went to the state of Mississippi
and began teaching there. Later she taught in the city of Memphis. While teaching in Mississippi,
one of her pupils became ill with smallpox. Every one in the community was so frightened that
no one would nurse the boy. Miss Davidson closed her school and remained by the bedside of
the boy night and day until he recovered. While she was at her Ohio home on her vacation, the
worst epidemic of yellow fever broke out in Memphis, Tenn., that perhaps has ever occurred
in the South. When she heard of this, she at once telegraphed the Mayor of Memphis, offering
her services as a yellow-fever nurse, although she had never had the disease.

Miss Davidon's experience in the South showed her that the people needed something more than
mere book-learning. She heard of the Hampton system of education, and decided that this was
what she wanted in order to prepare herself for better work in the South. The attention of
Mrs. Mary Hemenway, of Boston, was attracted to her rare ability. Through Mrs. Hemenway's kindness
and generosity, Miss Davidson, after graduating at Hampton, received an opportunity to complete
a two years' course of training at the Massachusetts State Normal School at Framingham.

Before she went to Framingham, some one suggested to Miss Davidson that, since she was so very
light in colour, she might find it more comfortable not to be known as a coloured women in
this school in Massachusetts. She at once replied that under no circumstances and for no considerations
would she consent to deceive any one in regard to her racial identity.

Soon after her graduation from the Framingham institution, Miss Davidson came to Tuskegee,
bringing into the school many valuable and fresh ideas as to the best methods of teaching,
as well as a rare moral character and a life of unselfishness that I think has seldom been
equalled. No single individual did more toward laying the foundations of the Tuskegee Institute
so as to insure the successful work that has been done there than Olivia A. Davidson.

Miss Davidson and I began consulting as to the future of the school from the first. The students
were making progress in learning books and in development their minds; but it became apparent
at once that, if we were to make any permanent impression upon those who had come to us for
training we must do something besides teach them mere books. The students had come from homes
where they had had no opportunities for lessons which would teach them how to care for their
bodies. With few exceptions, the homes in Tuskegee in which the students boarded were but little
improvement upon those from which they had come. We wanted to teach the students how to bathe;
how to care for their teeth and clothing. We wanted to teach them what to eat, and how to eat
it properly, and how to care for their rooms. Aside from this, we wanted to give them such
a practical knowledge of some one industry, together with the spirit of industry, thrift, and
economy, that they would be sure of knowing how to make a living after they had left us. We
wanted to teach them to study actual things instead of mere books alone.

We found that the most of our students came from the country districts, where agriculture in
some form or other was the main dependence of the people. We learned that about eighty-five
per cent of the coloured people in the Gulf states depended upon agriculture for their living.
Since this was true, we wanted to be careful not to educate our students out of sympathy with
agricultural life, so that they would be attracted from the country to the cities, and yield
to the temptation of trying to live by their wits. We wanted to give them such an education
as would fit a large proportion of them to be teachers, and at the same time cause them to
return to the plantation districts and show the people there how to put new energy and new
ideas into farming, as well as into the intellectual and moral and religious life of the people.

All these ideas and needs crowded themselves upon us with a seriousness that seemed well-nigh
overwhelming. What were we to do? We had only the little old shanty and the abandoned church
which the good coloured people of the town of Tuskegee had kindly loaned us for the accommodation
of the classes. The number of students was increasing daily. The more we saw of them, and the
more we travelled through the country districts, the more we saw that our efforts were reaching,
to only a partial degree, the actual needs of the people whom we wanted to lift up through
the medium of the students whom we should education and send out as leaders.

The more we talked with the students, who were then coming to us from several parts of the
state, the more we found that the chief ambition among a large proportion of them was to get
an education so that they would not have to work any longer with their hands.

This is illustrated by a story told of a coloured man in Alabama, who, one hot day in July,
while he was at work in a cotton-field, suddenly stopped, and, looking toward the skies, said:
"O Lawd, de cotton am so grassy, de work am so hard, and the sun am so hot dat I b'lieve dis
darky am called to preach!"

About three months after the opening of the school, and at the time when we were in the greatest
anxiety about our work, there came into market for sale an old and abandoned plantation which
was situated about a mile from the town of Tuskegee. The mansion house--or "big house," as
it would have been called--which had been occupied by the owners during slavery, had been burned.
After making a careful examination of the place, it seemed to be just the location that we
wanted in order to make our work effective and permanent.

But how were we to get it? The price asked for it was very little--only five hundred dollars--but
we had no money, and we were strangers in the town and had no credit. The owner of the land
agreed to let us occupy the place if we could make a payment of two hundred and fifty dollars
down, with the understanding that the remaining two hundred and fifty dollars must be paid
within a year. Although five hundred dollars was cheap for the land, it was a large sum when
one did not have any part of it.

In the midst of the difficulty I summoned a great deal of courage and wrote to my friend General
J.F.B. Marshall, the Treasurer of the Hampton Institute, putting the situation before him and
beseeching him to lend me the two hundred and fifty dollars on my own personal responsibility.
Within a few days a reply came to the effect that he had no authority to lend me the money
belonging to the Hampton Institute, but that he would gladly lend me the amount needed from
his own personal funds.

I confess that the securing of this money in this way was a great surprise to me, as well as
a source of gratification. Up to that time I never had had in my possession so much money as
one hundred dollars at a time, and the loan which I had asked General Marshall for seemed a
tremendously large sum to me. The fact of my being responsible for the repaying of such a large
amount of money weighed very heavily upon me.

I lost no time in getting ready to move the school on to the new farm. At the time we occupied
the place there were standing upon it a cabin, formerly used as a dining room, an old kitchen,
a stable, and an old hen-house. Within a few weeks we had all of these structures in use. The
stable was repaired and used as a recitation-room, and very presently the hen-house was utilized
for the same purpose.

I recall that one morning, when I told an old coloured man who lived near, and who sometimes
helped me, that our school had grown so large that it would be necessary for us to use the
hen-house for school purposes, and that I wanted him to help me give it a thorough cleaning
out the next day, he replied, in the most earnest manner: "What you mean, boss? You sholy ain't
gwine clean out de hen-house in de day-time?"

Nearly all the work of getting the new location ready for school purposes was done by the students
after school was over in the afternoon. As soon as we got the cabins in condition to be used,
I determined to clear up some land so that we could plant a crop. When I explained my plan
to the young men, I noticed that they did not seem to take to it very kindly. It was hard for
them to see the connection between clearing land and an education. Besides, many of them had
been school-teachers, and they questioned whether or not clearing land would be in keeping
with their dignity. In order to relieve them from any embarrassment, each afternoon after school
I took my axe and led the way to the woods. When they saw that I was not afraid or ashamed
to work, they began to assist with more enthusiasm. We kept at the work each afternoon, until
we had cleared about twenty acres and had planted a crop.

In the meantime Miss Davidson was devising plans to repay the loan. Her first effort was made
by holding festivals, or "suppers." She made a personal canvass among the white and coloured
families in the town of Tuskegee, and got them to agree to give something, like a cake, a chicken,
bread, or pies, that could be sold at the festival. Of course the coloured people were glad
to give anything that they could spare, but I want to add that Miss Davidson did not apply
to a single white family, so far as I now remember, that failed to donate something; and in
many ways the white families showed their interest in the school.

Several of these festivals were held, and quite a little sum of money was raised. A canvass
was also made among the people of both races for direct gifts of money, and most of those applied
to gave small sums. It was often pathetic to note the gifts of the older coloured people, most
of whom had spent their best days in slavery. Sometimes they would give five cents, sometimes
twenty-five cents. Sometimes the contribution was a quilt, or a quantity of sugarcane. I recall
one old coloured women who was about seventy years of age, who came to see me when we were
raising money to pay for the farm. She hobbled into the room where I was, leaning on a cane.
She was clad in rags; but they were clean. She said: "Mr. Washin'ton, God knows I spent de
bes' days of my life in slavery. God knows I's ignorant an' poor; but," she added, "I knows
what you an' Miss Davidson is tryin' to do. I knows you is tryin' to make better men an' better
women for de coloured race. I ain't got no money, but I wants you to take dese six eggs, what
I's been savin' up, an' I wants you to put dese six eggs into the eddication of dese boys an'
gals."

Since the work at Tuskegee started, it has been my privilege to receive many gifts for the
benefit of the institution, but never any, I think, that touched me so deeply as this one.

Chapter IX. Anxious Days And Sleepless Nights

The coming of Christmas, that first year of our residence in Alabama, gave us an opportunity
to get a farther insight into the real life of the people. The first thing that reminded us
that Christmas had arrived was the "foreday" visits of scores of children rapping at our doors,
asking for "Chris'mus gifts! Chris'mus gifts!" Between the hours of two o'clock and five o'clock
in the morning I presume that we must have had a half-hundred such calls. This custom prevails
throughout this portion of the South to-day.

During the days of slavery it was a custom quite generally observed throughout all the Southern
states to give the coloured people a week of holiday at Christmas, or to allow the holiday
to continue as long as the "yule log" lasted. The male members of the race, and often the female
members, were expected to get drunk. We found that for a whole week the coloured people in
and around Tuskegee dropped work the day before Christmas, and that it was difficult for any
one to perform any service from the time they stopped work until after the New Year. Persons
who at other times did not use strong drink thought it quite the proper thing to indulge in
it rather freely during the Christmas week. There was a widespread hilarity, and a free use
of guns, pistols, and gunpowder generally. The sacredness of the season seemed to have been
almost wholly lost sight of.

During this first Christmas vacation I went some distance from the town to visit the people
on one of the large plantations. In their poverty and ignorance it was pathetic to see their
attempts to get joy out of the season that in most parts of the country is so sacred and so
dear to the heart. In one cabin I notice that all that the five children had to remind them
of the coming of Christ was a single bunch of firecrackers, which they had divided among them.
In another cabin, where there were at least a half-dozen persons, they had only ten cents'
worth of ginger-cakes, which had been bought in the store the day before. In another family
they had only a few pieces of sugarcane. In still another cabin I found nothing but a new jug
of cheap, mean whiskey, which the husband and wife were making free use of, notwithstanding
the fact that the husband was one of the local ministers. In a few instances I found that the
people had gotten hold of some bright-coloured cards that had been designed for advertising
purposes, and were making the most of these. In other homes some member of the family had bought
a new pistol. In the majority of cases there was nothing to be seen in the cabin to remind
one of the coming of the Saviour, except that the people had ceased work in the fields and
were lounging about their homes. At night, during Christmas week, they usually had what they
called a "frolic," in some cabin on the plantation. That meant a kind of rough dance, where
there was likely to be a good deal of whiskey used, and where there might be some shooting
or cutting with razors.

While I was making this Christmas visit I met an old coloured man who was one of the numerous
local preachers, who tried to convince me, from the experience Adam had in the Garden of Eden,
that God had cursed all labour, and that, therefore, it was a sin for any man to work. For
that reason this man sought to do as little work as possible. He seemed at that time to be
supremely happy, because he was living, as he expressed it, through one week that was free
from sin.

In the school we made a special effort to teach our students the meaning of Christmas, and
to give them lessons in its proper observance. In this we have been successful to a degree
that makes me feel safe in saying that the season now has a new meaning, not only through all
that immediate region, but, in a measure, wherever our graduates have gone.

At the present time one of the most satisfactory features of the Christmas and Thanksgiving
season at Tuskegee is the unselfish and beautiful way in which our graduates and students spend
their time in administering to the comfort and happiness of others, especially the unfortunate.
Not long ago some of our young men spent a holiday in rebuilding a cabin for a helpless coloured
women who was about seventy-five years old. At another time I remember that I made it known
in chapel, one night, that a very poor student was suffering from cold, because he needed a
coat. The next morning two coats were sent to my office for him.

I have referred to the disposition on the part of the white people in the town of Tuskegee
and vicinity to help the school. From the first, I resolved to make the school a real part
of the community in which it was located. I was determined that no one should have the feeling
that it was a foreign institution, dropped down in the midst of the people, for which they
had no responsibility and in which they had no interest. I noticed that the very fact that
they had been asking to contribute toward the purchase of the land made them begin to feel
as if it was going to be their school, to a large degree. I noted that just in proportion as
we made the white people feel that the institution was a part of the life of the community,
and that, while we wanted to make friends in Boston, for example, we also wanted to make white
friends in Tuskegee, and that we wanted to make the school of real service to all the people,
their attitude toward the school became favourable.

Perhaps I might add right here, what I hope to demonstrate later, that, so far as I know, the
Tuskegee school at the present time has no warmer and more enthusiastic friends anywhere than
it has among the white citizens of Tuskegee and throughout the state of Alabama and the entire
South. From the first, I have advised our people in the South to make friends in every straightforward,
manly way with their next-door neighbour, whether he be a black man or a white man. I have
also advised them, where no principle is at stake, to consult the interests of their local
communities, and to advise with their friends in regard to their voting.

For several months the work of securing the money with which to pay for the farm went on without
ceasing. At the end of three months enough was secured to repay the loan of two hundred and
fifty dollars to General Marshall, and within two months more we had secured the entire five
hundred dollars and had received a deed of the one hundred acres of land. This gave us a great
deal of satisfaction. It was not only a source of satisfaction to secure a permanent location
for the school, but it was equally satisfactory to know that the greater part of the money
with which it was paid for had been gotten from the white and coloured people in the town of
Tuskegee. The most of this money was obtained by holding festivals and concerts, and from small
individual donations.

Our next effort was in the direction of increasing the cultivation of the land, so as to secure
some return from it, and at the same time give the students training in agriculture. All the
industries at Tuskegee have been started in natural and logical order, growing out of the needs
of a community settlement. We began with farming, because we wanted something to eat.

Many of the students, also, were able to remain in school but a few weeks at a time, because
they had so little money with which to pay their board. Thus another object which made it desirable
to get an industrial system started was in order to make it available as a means of helping
the students to earn money enough so that they might be able to remain in school during the
nine months' session of the school year.

The first animal that the school came into possession of was an old blind horse given us by
one of the white citizens of Tuskegee. Perhaps I may add here that at the present time the
school owns over two hundred horses, colts, mules, cows, calves, and oxen, and about seven
hundred hogs and pigs, as well as a large number of sheep and goats.

The school was constantly growing in numbers, so much so that, after we had got the farm paid
for, the cultivation of the land begun, and the old cabins which we had found on the place
somewhat repaired, we turned our attention toward providing a large, substantial building.
After having given a good deal of thought to the subject, we finally had the plans drawn for
a building that was estimated to cost about six thousand dollars. This seemed to us a tremendous
sum, but we knew that the school must go backward or forward, and that our work would mean
little unless we could get hold of the students in their home life.

One incident which occurred about this time gave me a great deal of satisfaction as well as
surprise. When it became known in the town that we were discussing the plans for a new, large
building, a Southern white man who was operating a sawmill not far from Tuskegee came to me
and said that he would gladly put all the lumber necessary to erect the building on the grounds,
with no other guarantee for payment than my word that it would be paid for when we secured
some money. I told the man frankly that at the time we did not have in our hands one dollar
of the money needed. Notwithstanding this, he insisted on being allowed to put the lumber on
the grounds. After we had secured some portion of the money we permitted him to do this.

Miss Davidson again began the work of securing in various ways small contributions for the
new building from the white and coloured people in and near Tuskegee. I think I never saw a
community of people so happy over anything as were the coloured people over the prospect of
this new building. One day, when we were holding a meeting to secure funds for its erection,
an old, ante-bellum coloured man came a distance of twelve miles and brought in his ox-cart
a large hog. When the meeting was in progress, he rose in the midst of the company and said
that he had no money which he could give, but he had raised two fine hogs, and that he had
brought one of them as a contribution toward the expenses of the building. He closed his announcement
by saying: "Any nigger that's got any love for his race, or any respect for himself, will bring
a hog to the next meeting." Quite a number of men in the community also volunteered to give
several days' work, each, toward the erection of the building.

After we had secured all the help that we could in Tuskegee, Miss Davidson decided to go North
for the purpose of securing additional funds. For weeks she visited individuals and spoke in
churches and before Sunday schools and other organizations. She found this work quite trying,
and often embarrassing. The school was not known, but she was not long in winning her way into
the confidence of the best people in the North.

The first gift from any Northern person was received from a New York lady whom Miss Davidson
met on the boat that was bringing her North. They fell into a conversation, and the Northern
lady became so much interested in the effort being made at Tuskegee that before they parted
Miss Davidson was handed a check for fifty dollars. For some time before our marriage, and
also after it, Miss Davidson kept up the work of securing money in the North and in the South
by interesting people by personal visits and through correspondence. At the same time she kept
in close touch with the work at Tuskegee, as lady principal and classroom teacher. In addition
to this, she worked among the older people in and near Tuskegee, and taught a Sunday school
class in the town. She was never very strong, but never seemed happy unless she was giving
all of her strength to the cause which she loved. Often, at night, after spending the day in
going from door to door trying to interest persons in the work at Tuskegee, she would be so
exhausted that she could not undress herself. A lady upon whom she called, in Boston, afterward
told me that at one time when Miss Davidson called her to see and send up her card the lady
was detained a little before she could see Miss Davidson, and when she entered the parlour
she found Miss Davidson so exhausted that she had fallen asleep.

While putting up our first building, which was named Porter Hall, after Mr. A.H. Porter, of
Brooklyn, N.Y., who gave a generous sum toward its erection, the need for money became acute.
I had given one of our creditors a promise that upon a certain day he should be paid four hundred
dollars. On the morning of that day we did not have a dollar. The mail arrived at the school
at ten o'clock, and in this mail there was a check sent by Miss Davidson for exactly four hundred
dollars. I could relate many instances of almost the same character. This four hundred dollars
was given by two ladies in Boston. Two years later, when the work at Tuskegee had grown considerably,
and when we were in the midst of a season when we were so much in need of money that the future
looked doubtful and gloomy, the same two Boston ladies sent us six thousand dollars. Words
cannot describe our surprise, or the encouragement that the gift brought to us. Perhaps I might
add here that for fourteen years these same friends have sent us six thousand dollars a year.

As soon as the plans were drawn for the new building, the students began digging out the earth
where the foundations were to be laid, working after the regular classes were over. They had
not fully outgrown the idea that it was hardly the proper thing for them to use their hands,
since they had come there, as one of them expressed it, "to be educated, and not to work."
Gradually, though, I noted with satisfaction that a sentiment in favour of work was gaining
ground. After a few weeks of hard work the foundations were ready, and a day was appointed
for the laying of the corner-stone.

When it is considered that the laying of this corner-stone took place in the heart of the South,
in the "Black Belt," in the centre of that part of our country that was most devoted to slavery;
that at that time slavery had been abolished only about sixteen years; that only sixteen years
before no Negro could be taught from books without the teacher receiving the condemnation of
the law or of public sentiment--when all this is considered, the scene that was witnessed on
that spring day at Tuskegee was a remarkable one. I believe there are few places in the world
where it could have taken place.

The principal address was delivered by the Hon. Waddy Thompson, the Superintendent of Education
for the county. About the corner-stone were gathered the teachers, the students, their parents
and friends, the county officials--who were white--and all the leading white men in that vicinity,
together with many of the black men and women whom the same white people but a few years before
had held a title to as property. The members of both races were anxious to exercise the privilege
of placing under the corner-stone some momento.

Before the building was completed we passed through some very trying seasons. More than once
our hearts were made to bleed, as it were, because bills were falling due that we did not have
the money to meet. Perhaps no one who has not gone through the experience, month after month,
of trying to erect buildings and provide equipment for a school when no one knew where the
money was to come from, can properly appreciate the difficulties under which we laboured. During
the first years at Tuskegee I recall that night after night I would roll and toss on my bed,
without sleep, because of the anxiety and uncertainty which we were in regarding money. I knew
that, in a large degree, we were trying an experiment--that of testing whether or not it was
possible for Negroes to build up and control the affairs of a large education institution.
I knew that if we failed it would injure the whole race. I knew that the presumption was against
us. I knew that in the case of white people beginning such an enterprise it would be taken
for granted that they were going to succeed, but in our case I felt that people would be surprised
if we succeeded. All this made a burden which pressed down on us, sometimes, it seemed, at
the rate of a thousand pounds to the square inch.

In all our difficulties and anxieties, however, I never went to a white or a black person in
the town of Tuskegee for any assistance that was in their power to render, without being helped
according to their means. More than a dozen times, when bills figuring up into the hundreds
of dollars were falling due, I applied to the white men of Tuskegee for small loans, often
borrowing small amounts from as many as a half-dozen persons, to meet our obligations. One
thing I was determined to do from the first, and that was to keep the credit of the school
high; and this, I think I can say without boasting, we have done all through these years.

I shall always remember a bit of advice given me by Mr. George W. Campbell, the white man to
whom I have referred to as the one who induced General Armstrong to send me to Tuskegee. Soon
after I entered upon the work Mr. Campbell said to me, in his fatherly way: "Washington, always
remember that credit is capital."

At one time when we were in the greatest distress for money that we ever experienced, I placed
the situation frankly before General Armstrong. Without hesitation he gave me his personal
check for all the money which he had saved for his own use. This was not the only time that
General Armstrong helped Tuskegee in this way. I do not think I have ever made this fact public
before.

During the summer of 1882, at the end of the first year's work of the school, I was married
to Miss Fannie N. Smith, of Malden, W. Va. We began keeping house in Tuskegee early in the
fall. This made a home for our teachers, who now had been increase to four in number. My wife
was also a graduate of the Hampton Institute. After earnest and constant work in the interests
of the school, together with her housekeeping duties, my wife passed away in May, 1884. One
child, Portia M. Washington, was born during our marriage.

From the first, my wife most earnestly devoted her thoughts and time to the work of the school,
and was completely one with me in every interest and ambition. She passed away, however, before
she had an opportunity of seeing what the school was designed to be.

Chapter X. A Harder Task Than Making Bricks Without Straw

From the very beginning, at Tuskegee, I was determined to have the students do not only the
agricultural and domestic work, but to have them erect their own buildings. My plan was to
have them, while performing this service, taught the latest and best methods of labour, so
that the school would not only get the benefit of their efforts, but the students themselves
would be taught to see not only utility in labour, but beauty and dignity; would be taught,
in fact, how to lift labour up from mere drudgery and toil, and would learn to love work for
its own sake. My plan was not to teach them to work in the old way, but to show them how to
make the forces of nature--air, water, steam, electricity, horse-power--assist them in their
labour.

At first many advised against the experiment of having the buildings erected by the labour
of the students, but I was determined to stick to it. I told those who doubted the wisdom of
the plan that I knew that our first buildings would not be so comfortable or so complete in
their finish as buildings erected by the experienced hands of outside workmen, but that in
the teaching of civilization, self-help, and self-reliance, the erection of buildings by the
students themselves would more than compensate for any lack of comfort or fine finish.

I further told those who doubted the wisdom of this plan, that the majority of our students
came to us in poverty, from the cabins of the cotton, sugar, and rice plantations of the South,
and that while I knew it would please the students very much to place them at once in finely
constructed buildings, I felt that it would be following out a more natural process of development
to teach them how to construct their own buildings. Mistakes I knew would be made, but these
mistakes would teach us valuable lessons for the future.

During the now nineteen years' existence of the Tuskegee school, the plan of having the buildings
erected by student labour has been adhered to. In this time forty buildings, counting small
and large, have been built, and all except four are almost wholly the product of student labour.
As an additional result, hundreds of men are now scattered throughout the South who received
their knowledge of mechanics while being taught how to erect these buildings. Skill and knowledge
are now handed down from one set of students to another in this way, until at the present time
a building of any description or size can be constructed wholly by our instructors and students,
from the drawing of the plans to the putting in of the electric fixtures, without going off
the grounds for a single workman.

Not a few times, when a new student has been led into the temptation of marring the looks of
some building by leadpencil marks or by the cuts of a jack-knife, I have heard an old student
remind him: "Don't do that. That is our building. I helped put it up."

In the early days of the school I think my most trying experience was in the matter of brickmaking.
As soon as we got the farm work reasonably well started, we directed our next efforts toward
the industry of making bricks. We needed these for use in connection with the erection of our
own buildings; but there was also another reason for establishing this industry. There was
no brickyard in the town, and in addition to our own needs there was a demand for bricks in
the general market.

I had always sympathized with the "Children of Israel," in their task of "making bricks without
straw," but ours was the task of making bricks with no money and no experience.

In the first place, the work was hard and dirty, and it was difficult to get the students to
help. When it came to brickmaking, their distaste for manual labour in connection with book
education became especially manifest. It was not a pleasant task for one to stand in the mud-pit
for hours, with the mud up to his knees. More than one man became disgusted and left the school.

We tried several locations before we opened up a pit that furnished brick clay. I had always
supposed that brickmaking was very simple, but I soon found out by bitter experience that it
required special skill and knowledge, particularly in the burning of the bricks. After a good
deal of effort we moulded about twenty-five thousand bricks, and put them into a kiln to be
burned. This kiln turned out to be a failure, because it was not properly constructed or properly
burned. We began at once, however, on a second kiln. This, for some reason, also proved a failure.
The failure of this kiln made it still more difficult to get the students to take part in the
work. Several of the teachers, however, who had been trained in the industries at Hampton,
volunteered their services, and in some way we succeeded in getting a third kiln ready for
burning. The burning of a kiln required about a week. Toward the latter part of the week, when
it seemed as if we were going to have a good many thousand bricks in a few hours, in the middle
of the night the kiln fell. For the third time we had failed.

The failure of this last kiln left me without a single dollar with which to make another experiment.
Most of the teachers advised the abandoning of the effort to make bricks. In the midst of my
troubles I thought of a watch which had come into my possession years before. I took the watch
to the city of Montgomery, which was not far distant, and placed it in a pawn-shop. I secured
cash upon it to the amount of fifteen dollars, with which to renew the brickmaking experiment.
I returned to Tuskegee, and, with the help of the fifteen dollars, rallied our rather demoralized
and discouraged forces and began a fourth attempt to make bricks. This time, I am glad to say,
we were successful. Before I got hold of any money, the time-limit on my watch had expired,
and I have never seen it since; but I have never regretted the loss of it.

Brickmaking has now become such an important industry at the school that last season our students
manufactured twelve hundred thousand of first-class bricks, of a quality stable to be sold
in any market. Aside from this, scores of young men have mastered the brickmaking trade--both
the making of bricks by hand and by machinery--and are now engaged in this industry in many
parts of the South.

The making of these bricks taught me an important lesson in regard to the relations of the
two races in the South. Many white people who had had no contact with the school, and perhaps
no sympathy with it, came to us to buy bricks because they found out that ours were good bricks.
They discovered that we were supplying a real want in the community. The making of these bricks
caused many of the white residents of the neighbourhood to begin to feel that the education
of the Negro was not making him worthless, but that in educating our students we were adding
something to the wealth and comfort of the community. As the people of the neighbourhood came
to us to buy bricks, we got acquainted with them; they traded with us and we with them. Our
business interests became intermingled. We had something which they wanted; they had something
which we wanted. This, in a large measure, helped to lay the foundation for the pleasant relations
that have continued to exist between us and the white people in that section, and which now
extend throughout the South.

Wherever one of our brickmakers has gone in the South, we find that he has something to contribute
to the well-being of the community into which he has gone; something that has made the community
feel that, in a degree, it is indebted to him, and perhaps, to a certain extent, dependent
upon him. In this way pleasant relations between the races have been simulated.

My experience is that there is something in human nature which always makes an individual recognize
and reward merit, no matter under what colour of skin merit is found. I have found, too, that
it is the visible, the tangible, that goes a long ways in softening prejudices. The actual
sight of a first-class house that a Negro has built is ten times more potent than pages of
discussion about a house that he ought to build, or perhaps could build.

The same principle of industrial education has been carried out in the building of our own
wagons, carts, and buggies, from the first. We now own and use on our farm and about the school
dozens of these vehicles, and every one of them has been built by the hands of the students.
Aside from this, we help supply the local market with these vehicles. The supplying of them
to the people in the community has had the same effect as the supplying of bricks, and the
man who learns at Tuskegee to build and repair wagons and carts is regarded as a benefactor
by both races in the community where he goes. The people with whom he lives and works are going
to think twice before they part with such a man.

The individual who can do something that the world wants done will, in the end, make his way
regardless of race. One man may go into a community prepared to supply the people there with
an analysis of Greek sentences. The community may not at the time be prepared for, or feel
the need of, Greek analysis, but it may feel its need of bricks and houses and wagons. If the
man can supply the need for those, then, it will lead eventually to a demand for the first
product, and with the demand will come the ability to appreciate it and to profit by it.

About the time that we succeeded in burning our first kiln of bricks we began facing in an
emphasized form the objection of the students to being taught to work. By this time it had
gotten to be pretty well advertised throughout the state that every student who came to Tuskegee,
no matter what his financial ability might be, must learn some industry. Quite a number of
letters came from parents protesting against their children engaging in labour while they were
in the school. Other parents came to the school to protest in person. Most of the new students
brought a written or a verbal request from their parents to the effect that they wanted their
children taught nothing but books. The more books, the larger they were, and the longer the
titles printed upon them, the better pleased the students and their parents seemed to be.

I gave little heed to these protests, except that I lost no opportunity to go into as many
parts of the state as I could, for the purpose of speaking to the parents, and showing them
the value of industrial education. Besides, I talked to the students constantly on the subject.
Notwithstanding the unpopularity of industrial work, the school continued to increase in numbers
to such an extent that by the middle of the second year there was an attendance of about one
hundred and fifty, representing almost all parts of the state of Alabama, and including a few
from other states.

In the summer of 1882 Miss Davidson and I both went North and engaged in the work of raising
funds for the completion of our new building. On my way North I stopped in New York to try
to get a letter of recommendation from an officer of a missionary organization who had become
somewhat acquainted with me a few years previous. This man not only refused to give me the
letter, but advised me most earnestly to go back home at once, and not make any attempt to
get money, for he was quite sure that I would never get more than enough to pay my travelling
expenses. I thanked him for his advice, and proceeded on my journey.

The first place I went to in the North, was Northampton, Mass., where I spent nearly a half-day
in looking for a coloured family with whom I could board, never dreaming that any hotel would
admit me. I was greatly surprised when I found that I would have no trouble in being accommodated
at a hotel.

We were successful in getting money enough so that on Thanksgiving Day of that year we held
our first service in the chapel of Porter Hall, although the building was not completed.

In looking about for some one to preach the Thanksgiving sermon, I found one of the rarest
men that it has ever been my privilege to know. This was the Rev. Robert C. Bedford, a white
man from Wisconsin, who was then pastor of a little coloured Congregational church in Montgomery,
Ala. Before going to Montgomery to look for some one to preach this sermon I had never heard
of Mr. Bedford. He had never heard of me. He gladly consented to come to Tuskegee and hold
the Thanksgiving service. It was the first service of the kind that the coloured people there
had ever observed, and what a deep interest they manifested in it! The sight of the new building
made it a day of Thanksgiving for them never to be forgotten.

Mr. Bedford consented to become one of the trustees of the school, and in that capacity, and
as a worker for it, he has been connected with it for eighteen years. During this time he has
borne the school upon his heart night and day, and is never so happy as when he is performing
some service, no matter how humble, for it. He completely obliterates himself in everything,
and looks only for permission to serve where service is most disagreeable, and where others
would not be attracted. In all my relations with him he has seemed to me to approach as nearly
to the spirit of the Master as almost any man I ever met.

A little later there came into the service of the school another man, quite young at the time,
and fresh from Hampton, without whose service the school never could have become what it is.
This was Mr. Warren Logan, who now for seventeen years has been the treasurer of the Institute,
and the acting principal during my absence. He has always shown a degree of unselfishness and
an amount of business tact, coupled with a clear judgment, that has kept the school in good
condition no matter how long I have been absent from it. During all the financial stress through
which the school has passed, his patience and faith in our ultimate success have not left him.

As soon as our first building was near enough to completion so that we could occupy a portion
of it--which was near the middle of the second year of the school--we opened a boarding department.
Students had begun coming from quite a distance, and in such increasing numbers that we felt
more and more that we were merely skimming over the surface, in that we were not getting hold
of the students in their home life.

We had nothing but the students and their appetites with which to begin a boarding department.
No provision had been made in the new building for a kitchen and dining room; but we discovered
that by digging out a large amount of earth from under the building we could make a partially
lighted basement room that could be used for a kitchen and dining room. Again I called on the
students to volunteer for work, this time to assist in digging out the basement. This they
did, and in a few weeks we had a place to cook and eat in, although it was very rough and uncomfortable.
Any one seeing the place now would never believe that it was once used for a dining room.

The most serious problem, though, was to get the boarding department started off in running
order, with nothing to do with in the way of furniture, and with no money with which to buy
anything. The merchants in the town would let us have what food we wanted on credit. In fact,
in those earlier years I was constantly embarrassed because people seemed to have more faith
in me than I had in myself. It was pretty hard to cook, however, without stoves, and awkward
to eat without dishes. At first the cooking was done out-of-doors, in the old-fashioned, primitive
style, in pots and skillets placed over a fire. Some of the carpenters' benches that had been
used in the construction of the building were utilized for tables. As for dishes, there were
too few to make it worth while to spend time in describing them.

No one connected with the boarding department seemed to have any idea that meals must be served
at certain fixed and regular hours, and this was a source of great worry. Everything was so
out of joint and so inconvenient that I feel safe in saying that for the first two weeks something
was wrong at every meal. Either the meat was not done or had been burnt, or the salt had been
left out of the bread, or the tea had been forgotten.

Early one morning I was standing near the dining-room door listening to the complaints of the
students. The complaints that morning were especially emphatic and numerous, because the whole
breakfast had been a failure. One of the girls who had failed to get any breakfast came out
and went to the well to draw some water to drink and take the place of the breakfast which
she had not been able to get. When she reached the well, she found that the rope was broken
and that she could get no water. She turned from the well and said, in the most discouraged
tone, not knowing that I was where I could hear her, "We can't even get water to drink at this
school." I think no one remark ever came so near discouraging me as that one.

At another time, when Mr. Bedford--whom I have already spoken of as one of our trustees, and
a devoted friend of the institution--was visiting the school, he was given a bedroom immediately
over the dining room. Early in the morning he was awakened by a rather animated discussion
between two boys in the dining room below. The discussion was over the question as to whose
turn it was to use the coffee-cup that morning. One boy won the case by proving that for three
mornings he had not had an opportunity to use the cup at all.

But gradually, with patience and hard work, we brought order out of chaos, just as will be
true of any problem if we stick to it with patience and wisdom and earnest effort.

As I look back now over that part of our struggle, I am glad to see that we had it. I am glad
that we endured all those discomforts and inconveniences. I am glad that our students had to
dig out the place for their kitchen and dining room. I am glad that our first boarding-place
was in the dismal, ill-lighted, and damp basement. Had we started in a fine, attractive, convenient
room, I fear we would have "lost our heads" and become "stuck up." It means a great deal, I
think, to start off on a foundation which one has made for one's self.

When our old students return to Tuskegee now, as they often do, and go into our large, beautiful,
well-ventilated, and well-lighted dining room, and see tempting, well-cooked food--largely
grown by the students themselves--and see tables, neat tablecloths and napkins, and vases of
flowers upon the tables, and hear singing birds, and note that each meal is served exactly
upon the minute, with no disorder, and with almost no complaint coming from the hundreds that
now fill our dining room, they, too, often say to me that they are glad that we started as
we did, and built ourselves up year by year, by a slow and natural process of growth.

Chapter XI. Making Their Beds Before They Could Lie On Them

A little later in the history of the school we had a visit from General J.F.B. Marshall, the
Treasurer of the Hampton Institute, who had had faith enough to lend us the first two hundred
and fifty dollars with which to make a payment down on the farm. He remained with us a week,
and made a careful inspection of everything. He seemed well pleased with our progress, and
wrote back interesting and encouraging reports to Hampton. A little later Miss Mary F. Mackie,
the teacher who had given me the "sweeping" examination when I entered Hampton, came to see
us, and still later General Armstrong himself came.

At the time of the visits of these Hampton friends the number of teachers at Tuskegee had increased
considerably, and the most of the new teachers were graduates of the Hampton Institute. We
gave our Hampton friends, especially General Armstrong, a cordial welcome. They were all surprised
and pleased at the rapid progress that the school had made within so short a time. The coloured
people from miles around came to the school to get a look at General Armstrong, about whom
they had heard so much. The General was not only welcomed by the members of my own race, but
by the Southern white people as well.

This first visit which General Armstrong made to Tuskegee gave me an opportunity to get an
insight into his character such as I had not before had. I refer to his interest in the Southern
white people. Before this I had had the thought that General Armstrong, having fought the Southern
white man, rather cherished a feeling of bitterness toward the white South, and was interested
in helping only the coloured man there. But this visit convinced me that I did not know the
greatness and the generosity of the man. I soon learned, by his visits to the Southern white
people, and from his conversations with them, that he was as anxious about the prosperity and
the happiness of the white race as the black. He cherished no bitterness against the South,
and was happy when an opportunity offered for manifesting his sympathy. In all my acquaintance
with General Armstrong I never heard him speak, in public or in private, a single bitter word
against the white man in the South. From his example in this respect I learned the lesson that
great men cultivate love, and that only little men cherish a spirit of hatred. I learned that
assistance given to the weak makes the one who gives it strong; and that oppression of the
unfortunate makes one weak.

It is now long ago that I learned this lesson from General Armstrong, and resolved that I would
permit no man, no matter what his colour might be, to narrow and degrade my soul by making
me hate him. With God's help, I believe that I have completely rid myself of any ill feeling
toward the Southern white man for any wrong that he may have inflicted upon my race. I am made
to feel just as happy now when I am rendering service to Southern white men as when the service
is rendered to a member of my own race. I pity from the bottom of my heart any individual who
is so unfortunate as to get into the habit of holding race prejudice.

The more I consider the subject, the more strongly I am convinced that the most harmful effect
of the practice to which the people in certain sections of the South have felt themselves compelled
to resort, in order to get rid of the force of the Negroes' ballot, is not wholly in the wrong
done to the Negro, but in the permanent injury to the morals of the white man. The wrong to
the Negro is temporary, but to the morals of the white man the injury is permanent. I have
noted time and time again that when an individual perjures himself in order to break the force
of the black man's ballot, he soon learns to practise dishonesty in other relations of life,
not only where the Negro is concerned, but equally so where a white man is concerned. The white
man who begins by cheating a Negro usually ends by cheating a white man. The white man who
begins to break the law by lynching a Negro soon yields to the temptation to lynch a white
man. All this, it seems to me, makes it important that the whole Nation lend a hand in trying
to lift the burden of ignorance from the South.

Another thing that is becoming more apparent each year in the development of education in the
South is the influence of General Armstrong's idea of education; and this not upon the blacks
alone, but upon the whites also. At the present time there is almost no Southern state that
is not putting forth efforts in the direction of securing industrial education for its white
boys and girls, and in most cases it is easy to trace the history of these efforts back to
General Armstrong.

Soon after the opening of our humble boarding department students began coming to us in still
larger numbers. For weeks we not only had to contend with the difficulty of providing board,
with no money, but also with that of providing sleeping accommodations. For this purpose we
rented a number of cabins near the school. These cabins were in a dilapidated condition, and
during the winter months the students who occupied them necessarily suffered from the cold.
We charge the students eight dollars a month--all they were able to pay--for their board. This
included, besides board, room, fuel, and washing. We also gave the students credit on their
board bills for all the work which they did for the school which was of any value to the institution.
The cost of tuition, which was fifty dollars a year for each student, we had to secure then,
as now, wherever we could.

This small charge in cash gave us no capital with which to start a boarding department. The
weather during the second winter of our work was very cold. We were not able to provide enough
bed-clothes to keep the students warm. In fact, for some time we were not able to provide,
except in a few cases, bedsteads and mattresses of any kind. During the coldest nights I was
so troubled about the discomfort of the students that I could not sleep myself. I recall that
on several occasions I went in the middle of the night to the shanties occupied by the young
men, for the purpose of confronting them. Often I found some of them sitting huddled around
a fire, with the one blanket which we had been able to provide wrapped around them, trying
in this way to keep warm. During the whole night some of them did not attempt to lie down.
One morning, when the night previous had been unusually cold, I asked those of the students
in the chapel who thought that they had been frostbitten during the night to raise their hands.
Three hands went up. Notwithstanding these experiences, there was almost no complaining on
the part of the students. They knew that we were doing the best that we could for them. They
were happy in the privilege of being permitted to enjoy any kind of opportunity that would
enable them to improve their condition. They were constantly asking what they might do to lighten
the burdens of the teachers.

I have heard it stated more than once, both in the North and in the South, that coloured people
would not obey and respect each other when one member of the race is placed in a position of
authority over others. In regard to this general belief and these statements, I can say that
during the nineteen years of my experience at Tuskegee I never, either by word or act, have
been treated with disrespect by any student or officer connected with the institution. On the
other hand, I am constantly embarrassed by the many acts of thoughtful kindness. The students
do not seem to want to see me carry a large book or a satchel or any kind of a burden through
the grounds. In such cases more than one always offers to relieve me. I almost never go out
of my office when the rain is falling that some student does not come to my side with an umbrella
and ask to be allowed to hold it over me.

While writing upon this subject, it is a pleasure for me to add that in all my contact with
the white people of the South I have never received a single personal insult. The white people
in and near Tuskegee, to an especial degree, seem to count it as a privilege to show me all
the respect within their power, and often go out of their way to do this.

Not very long ago I was making a journey between Dallas (Texas) and Houston. In some way it
became known in advance that I was on the train. At nearly every station at which the train
stopped, numbers of white people, including in most cases of the officials of the town, came
aboard and introduced themselves and thanked me heartily for the work that I was trying to
do for the South.

On another occasion, when I was making a trip from Augusta, Georgia, to Atlanta, being rather
tired from much travel, I rode in a Pullman sleeper. When I went into the car, I found there
two ladies from Boston whom I knew well. These good ladies were perfectly ignorant, it seems,
of the customs of the South, and in the goodness of their hearts insisted that I take a seat
with them in their section. After some hesitation I consented. I had been there but a few minutes
when one of them, without my knowledge, ordered supper to be served for the three of us. This
embarrassed me still further. The car was full of Southern white men, most of whom had their
eyes on our party. When I found that supper had been ordered, I tried to contrive some excuse
that would permit me to leave the section, but the ladies insisted that I must eat with them.
I finally settled back in my seat with a sigh, and said to myself, "I am in for it now, sure."

To add further to the embarrassment of the situation, soon after the supper was placed on the
table one of the ladies remembered that she had in her satchel a special kind of tea which
she wished served, and as she said she felt quite sure the porter did not know how to brew
it properly, she insisted upon getting up and preparing and serving it herself. At last the
meal was over; and it seemed the longest one that I had ever eaten. When we were through, I
decided to get myself out of the embarrassing situation and go to the smoking-room, where most
of the men were by that time, to see how the land lay. In the meantime, however, it had become
known in some way throughout the car who I was. When I went into the smoking-room I was never
more surprised in my life than when each man, nearly every one of them a citizen of Georgia,
came up and introduced himself to me and thanked me earnestly for the work that I was trying
to do for the whole South. This was not flattery, because each one of these individuals knew
that he had nothing to gain by trying to flatter me.

From the first I have sought to impress the students with the idea that Tuskegee is not my
institution, or that of the officers, but that it is their institution, and that they have
as much interest in it as any of the trustees or instructors. I have further sought to have
them feel that I am at the institution as their friend and adviser, and not as their overseer.
It has been my aim to have them speak with directness and frankness about anything that concerns
the life of the school. Two or three times a year I ask the students to write me a letter criticising
or making complaints or suggestions about anything connected with the institution. When this
is not done, I have them meet me in the chapel for a heart-to-heart talk about the conduct
of the school. There are no meetings with our students that I enjoy more than these, and none
are more helpful to me in planning for the future. These meetings, it seems to me, enable me
to get at the very heart of all that concerns the school. Few things help an individual more
than to place responsibility upon him, and to let him know that you trust him. When I have
read of labour troubles between employers and employees, I have often thought that many strikes
and similar disturbances might be avoided if the employers would cultivate the habit of getting
nearer to their employees, of consulting and advising with them, and letting them feel that
the interests of the two are the same. Every individual responds to confidence, and this is
not more true of any race than of the Negroes. Let them once understand that you are unselfishly
interested in them, and you can lead them to any extent.

It was my aim from the first at Tuskegee to not only have the buildings erected by the students
themselves, but to have them make their own furniture as far as was possible. I now marvel
at the patience of the students while sleeping upon the floor while waiting for some kind of
a bedstead to be constructed, or at their sleeping without any kind of a mattress while waiting
for something that looked like a mattress to be made.

In the early days we had very few students who had been used to handling carpenters' tools,
and the bedsteads made by the students then were very rough and very weak. Not unfrequently
when I went into the students' rooms in the morning I would find at least two bedsteads lying
about on the floor. The problem of providing mattresses was a difficult one to solve. We finally
mastered this, however, by getting some cheap cloth and sewing pieces of this together as to
make large bags. These bags we filled with the pine straw--or, as it is sometimes called, pine
needles--which we secured from the forests near by. I am glad to say that the industry of mattress-making
has grown steadily since then, and has been improved to such an extent that at the present
time it is an important branch of the work which is taught systematically to a number of our
girls, and that the mattresses that now come out of the mattress-shop at Tuskegee are about
as good as those bought in the average store. For some time after the opening of the boarding
department we had no chairs in the students' bedrooms or in the dining rooms. Instead of chairs
we used stools which the students constructed by nailing together three pieces of rough board.
As a rule, the furniture in the students' rooms during the early days of the school consisted
of a bed, some stools, and sometimes a rough table made by the students. The plan of having
the students make the furniture is still followed, but the number of pieces in a room has been
increased, and the workmanship has so improved that little fault can be found with the articles
now. One thing that I have always insisted upon at Tuskegee is that everywhere there should
be absolute cleanliness. Over and over again the students were reminded in those first years--and
are reminded now--that people would excuse us for our poverty, for our lack of comforts and
conveniences, but that they would not excuse us for dirt.

Another thing that has been insisted upon at the school is the use of the tooth-brush. "The
gospel of the tooth-brush," as General Armstrong used to call it, is part of our creed at Tuskegee.
No student is permitted to retain who does not keep and use a tooth-brush. Several times, in
recent years, students have come to us who brought with them almost no other article except
a tooth-brush. They had heard from the lips of other students about our insisting upon the
use of this, and so, to make a good impression, they brought at least a tooth-brush with them.
I remember that one morning, not long ago, I went with the lady principal on her usual morning
tour of inspection of the girls' rooms. We found one room that contained three girls who had
recently arrived at the school. When I asked them if they had tooth-brushes, one of the girls
replied, pointing to a brush: "Yes, sir. That is our brush. We bought it together, yesterday."
It did not take them long to learn a different lesson.

It has been interesting to note the effect that the use of the tooth-brush has had in bringing
about a higher degree of civilization among the students. With few exceptions, I have noticed
that, if we can get a student to the point where, when the first or second tooth-brush disappears,
he of his own motion buys another, I have not been disappointed in the future of that individual.
Absolute cleanliness of the body has been insisted upon from the first. The students have been
taught to bathe as regularly as to take their meals. This lesson we began teaching before we
had anything in the shape of a bath-house. Most of the students came from plantation districts,
and often we had to teach them how to sleep at night; that is, whether between the two sheets--after
we got to the point where we could provide them two sheets--or under both of them. Naturally
I found it difficult to teach them to sleep between two sheets when we were able to supply
but one. The importance of the use of the night-gown received the same attention.

For a long time one of the most difficult tasks was to teach the students that all the buttons
were to be kept on their clothes, and that there must be no torn places or grease-spots. This
lesson, I am pleased to be able to say, has been so thoroughly learned and so faithfully handed
down from year to year by one set of students to another that often at the present time, when
the students march out of the chapel in the evening and their dress is inspected, as it is
every night, not one button is found to be missing.

Chapter XII. Raising Money

When we opened our boarding department, we provided rooms in the attic of Porter Hall, our
first building, for a number of girls. But the number of students, of both sexes, continued
to increase. We could find rooms outside the school grounds for many of the young men, but
the girls we did not care to expose in this way. Very soon the problem of providing more rooms
for the girls, as well as a larger boarding department for all the students, grew serious.
As a result, we finally decided to undertake the construction of a still larger building--a
building that would contain rooms for the girls and boarding accommodations for all.

After having had a preliminary sketch of the needed building made, we found that it would cost
about ten thousand dollars. We had no money whatever with which to begin; still we decided
to give the needed building a name. We knew we could name it, even though we were in doubt
about our ability to secure the means for its construction. We decided to call the proposed
building Alabama Hall, in honour of the state in which we were labouring. Again Miss Davidson
began making efforts to enlist the interest and help of the coloured and white people in and
near Tuskegee. They responded willingly, in proportion to their means. The students, as in
the case of our first building, Porter Hall, began digging out the dirt in order to allow the
laying of the foundations.

When we seemed at the end of our resources, so far as securing money was concerned, something
occurred which showed the greatness of General Armstrong--something which proved how far he
was above the ordinary individual. When we were in the midst of great anxiety as to where and
how we were to get funds for the new building, I received a telegram from General Armstrong
asking me if I could spend a month travelling with him through the North, and asking me, if
I could do so, to come to Hampton at once. Of course I accepted General Armstrong's invitation,
and went to Hampton immediately. On arriving there I found that the General had decided to
take a quartette of singers through the North, and hold meetings for a month in important cities,
at which meetings he and I were to speak. Imagine my surprise when the General told me, further,
that these meetings were to be held, not in the interests of Hampton, but in the interests
of Tuskegee, and that the Hampton Institute was to be responsible for all the expenses.

Although he never told me so in so many words, I found that General Armstrong took this method
of introducing me to the people of the North, as well as for the sake of securing some immediate
funds to be used in the erection of Alabama Hall. A weak and narrow man would have reasoned
that all the money which came to Tuskegee in this way would be just so much taken from the
Hampton Institute; but none of these selfish or short-sighted feelings ever entered the breast
of General Armstrong. He was too big to be little, too good to be mean. He knew that the people
in the North who gave money gave it for the purpose of helping the whole cause of Negro civilization,
and not merely for the advancement of any one school. The General knew, too, that the way to
strengthen Hampton was to make it a centre of unselfish power in the working out of the whole
Southern problem.

In regard to the addresses which I was to make in the North, I recall just one piece of advice
which the General gave me. He said: "Give them an idea for every word." I think it would be
hard to improve upon this advice; and it might be made to apply to all public speaking. From
that time to the present I have always tried to keep his advice in mind.

Meetings were held in New York, Brooklyn, Boston, Philadelphia, and other large cities, and
at all of these meetings General Armstrong pleased, together with myself, for help, not for
Hampton, but for Tuskegee. At these meetings an especial effort was made to secure help for
the building of Alabama Hall, as well as to introduce the school to the attention of the general
public. In both these respects the meetings proved successful.

After that kindly introduction I began going North alone to secure funds. During the last fifteen
years I have been compelled to spend a large proportion of my time away from the school, in
an effort to secure money to provide for the growing needs of the institution. In my efforts
to get funds I have had some experiences that may be of interest to my readers. Time and time
again I have been asked, by people who are trying to secure money for philanthropic purposes,
what rule or rules I followed to secure the interest and help of people who were able to contribute
money to worthy objects. As far as the science of what is called begging can be reduced to
rules, I would say that I have had but two rules. First, always to do my whole duty regarding
making our work known to individuals and organizations; and, second, not to worry about the
results. This second rule has been the hardest for me to live up to. When bills are on the
eve of falling due, with not a dollar in hand with which to meet them, it is pretty difficult
to learn not to worry, although I think I am learning more and more each year that all worry
simply consumes, and to no purpose, just so much physical and mental strength that might otherwise
be given to effective work. After considerable experience in coming into contact with wealthy
and noted men, I have observed that those who have accomplished the greatest results are those
who "keep under the body"; are those who never grow excited or lose self-control, but are always
calm, self-possessed, patient, and polite. I think that President William McKinley is the best
example of a man of this class that I have ever seen.

In order to be successful in any kind of undertaking, I think the main thing is for one to
grow to the point where he completely forgets himself; that is, to lose himself in a great
cause. In proportion as one loses himself in the way, in the same degree does he get the highest
happiness out of his work.

My experience in getting money for Tuskegee has taught me to have no patience with those people
who are always condemning the rich because they are rich, and because they do not give more
to objects of charity. In the first place, those who are guilty of such sweeping criticisms
do not know how many people would be made poor, and how much suffering would result, if wealthy
people were to part all at once with any large proportion of their wealth in a way to disorganize
and cripple great business enterprises. Then very few persons have any idea of the large number
of applications for help that rich people are constantly being flooded with. I know wealthy
people who receive as much as twenty calls a day for help. More than once when I have gone
into the offices of rich men, I have found half a dozen persons waiting to see them, and all
come for the same purpose, that of securing money. And all these calls in person, to say nothing
of the applications received through the mails. Very few people have any idea of the amount
of money given away by persons who never permit their names to be known. I have often heard
persons condemned for not giving away money, who, to my own knowledge, were giving away thousands
of dollars every year so quietly that the world knew nothing about it.

As an example of this, there are two ladies in New York, whose names rarely appear in print,
but who, in a quiet way, have given us the means with which to erect three large and important
buildings during the last eight years. Besides the gift of these buildings, they have made
other generous donations to the school. And they not only help Tuskegee, but they are constantly
seeking opportunities to help other worthy causes.

Although it has been my privilege to be the medium through which a good many hundred thousand
dollars have been received for the work at Tuskegee, I have always avoided what the world calls
"begging." I often tell people that I have never "begged" any money, and that I am not a "beggar."
My experience and observation have convinced me that persistent asking outright for money from
the rich does not, as a rule, secure help. I have usually proceeded on the principle that persons
who possess sense enough to earn money have sense enough to know how to give it away, and that
the mere making known of the facts regarding Tuskegee, and especially the facts regarding the
work of the graduates, has been more effective than outright begging. I think that the presentation
of facts, on a high, dignified plane, is all the begging that most rich people care for.

While the work of going from door to door and from office to office is hard, disagreeable,
and costly in bodily strength, yet it has some compensations. Such work gives one a rare opportunity
to study human nature. It also has its compensations in giving one an opportunity to meet some
of the best people in the world--to be more correct, I think I should say the best people in
the world. When one takes a broad survey of the country, he will find that the most useful
and influential people in it are those who take the deepest interest in institutions that exist
for the purpose of making the world better.

At one time, when I was in Boston, I called at the door of a rather wealthy lady, and was admitted
to the vestibule and sent up my card. While I was waiting for an answer, her husband came in,
and asked me in the most abrupt manner what I wanted. When I tried to explain the object of
my call, he became still more ungentlemanly in his words and manner, and finally grew so excited
that I left the house without waiting for a reply from the lady. A few blocks from that house
I called to see a gentleman who received me in the most cordial manner. He wrote me his check
for a generous sum, and then, before I had had an opportunity to thank him, said: "I am so
grateful to you, Mr. Washington, for giving me the opportunity to help a good cause. It is
a privilege to have a share in it. We in Boston are constantly indebted to you for doing our
work." My experience in securing money convinces me that the first type of man is growing more
rare all the time, and that the latter type is increasing; that is, that, more and more, rich
people are coming to regard men and women who apply to them for help for worthy objects, not
as beggars, but as agents for doing their work.

In the city of Boston I have rarely called upon an individual for funds that I have not been
thanked for calling, usually before I could get an opportunity to thank the donor for the money.
In that city the donors seem to feel, in a large degree, that an honour is being conferred
upon them in their being permitted to give. Nowhere else have I met with, in so large a measure,
this fine and Christlike spirit as in the city of Boston, although there are many notable instances
of it outside that city. I repeat my belief that the world is growing in the direction of giving.
I repeat that the main rule by which I have been guided in collecting money is to do my full
duty in regard to giving people who have money an opportunity for help.

In the early years of the Tuskegee school I walked the streets or travelled country roads in
the North for days and days without receiving a dollar. Often as it happened, when during the
week I had been disappointed in not getting a cent from the very individuals from whom I most
expected help, and when I was almost broken down and discouraged, that generous help has come
from some one who I had had little idea would give at all.

I recall that on one occasion I obtained information that led me to believe that a gentleman
who lived about two miles out in the country from Stamford, Conn., might become interest in
our efforts at Tuskegee if our conditions and needs were presented to him. On an unusually
cold and stormy day I walked the two miles to see him. After some difficulty I succeeded in
securing an interview with him. He listened with some degree of interest to what I had to say,
but did not give me anything. I could not help having the feeling that, in a measure, the three
hours that I had spent in seeing him had been thrown away. Still, I had followed my usual rule
of doing my duty. If I had not seen him, I should have felt unhappy over neglect of duty.

Two years after this visit a letter came to Tuskegee from this man, which read like this: "Enclosed
I send you a New York draft for ten thousand dollars, to be used in furtherance of your work.
I had placed this sum in my will for your school, but deem it wiser to give it to you while
I live. I recall with pleasure your visit to me two years ago."

I can hardly imagine any occurrence which could have given me more genuine satisfaction than
the receipt of this draft. It was by far the largest single donation which up to that time
the school had ever received. It came at a time when an unusually long period had passed since
we had received any money. We were in great distress because of lack of funds, and the nervous
strain was tremendous. It is difficult for me to think of any situation that is more trying
on the nerves than that of conducting a large institution, with heavy obligations to meet,
without knowing where the money is to come from to meet these obligations from month to month.

In our case I felt a double responsibility, and this made the anxiety all the more intense.
If the institution had been officered by white persons, and had failed, it would have injured
the cause of Negro education; but I knew that the failure of our institution, officered by
Negroes, would not only mean the loss of a school, but would cause people, in a large degree,
to lose faith in the ability of the entire race. The receipt of this draft for ten thousand
dollars, under all these circumstances, partially lifted a burden that had been pressing down
upon me for days.

From the beginning of our work to the present I have always had the feeling, and lose no opportunity
to impress our teachers with the same idea, that the school will always be supported in proportion
as the inside of the institution is kept clean and pure and wholesome.

The first time I ever saw the late Collis P. Huntington, the great railroad man, he gave me
two dollars for our school. The last time I saw him, which was a few months before he died,
he gave me fifty thousand dollars toward our endowment fund. Between these two gifts there
were others of generous proportions which came every year from both Mr. and Mrs. Huntington.

Some people may say that it was Tuskegee's good luck that brought to us this gift of fifty
thousand dollars. No, it was not luck. It was hard work. Nothing ever comes to me, that is
worth having, except as the result of hard work. When Mr. Huntington gave me the first two
dollars, I did not blame him for not giving me more, but made up my mind that I was going to
convince him by tangible results that we were worthy of larger gifts. For a dozen years I made
a strong effort to convince Mr. Huntington of the value of our work. I noted that just in proportion
as the usefulness of the school grew, his donations increased. Never did I meet an individual
who took a more kindly and sympathetic interest in our school than did Mr. Huntington. He not
only gave money to us, but took time in which to advise me, as a father would a son, about
the general conduct of the school.

More than once I have found myself in some pretty tight places while collecting money in the
North. The following incident I have never related but once before, for the reason that I feared
that people would not believe it. One morning I found myself in Providence, Rhode Island, without
a cent of money with which to buy breakfast. In crossing the street to see a lady from whom
I hoped to get some money, I found a bright new twenty-five-cent piece in the middle of the
street track. I not only had this twenty-five cents for my breakfast, but within a few minutes
I had a donation from the lady on whom I had started to call.

At one of our Commencements I was bold enough to invite the Rev. E. Winchester Donald, D.D.,
rector of Trinity Church, Boston, to preach the Commencement sermon. As we then had no room
large enough to accommodate all who would be present, the place of meeting was under a large
improvised arbour, built partly of brush and partly of rough boards. Soon after Dr. Donald
had begun speaking, the rain came down in torrents, and he had to stop, while someone held
an umbrella over him.

The boldness of what I had done never dawned upon me until I saw the picture made by the rector
of Trinity Church standing before that large audience under an old umbrella, waiting for the
rain to cease so that he could go on with his address.

It was not very long before the rain ceased and Dr. Donald finished his sermon; and an excellent
sermon it was, too, in spite of the weather. After he had gone to his room, and had gotten
the wet threads of his clothes dry, Dr. Donald ventured the remark that a large chapel at Tuskegee
would not be out of place. The next day a letter came from two ladies who were then travelling
in Italy, saying that they had decided to give us the money for such a chapel as we needed.

A short time ago we received twenty thousand dollars from Mr. Andrew Carnegie, to be used for
the purpose of erecting a new library building. Our first library and reading-room were in
a corner of a shanty, and the whole thing occupied a space about five by twelve feet. It required
ten years of work before I was able to secure Mr. Carnegie's interest and help. The first time
I saw him, ten years ago, he seemed to take but little interest in our school, but I was determined
to show him that we were worthy of his help. After ten years of hard work I wrote him a letter
reading as follows:

December 15, 1900.

Mr. Andrew Carnegie, 5 W. Fifty-first St., New York.

Dear Sir: Complying with the request which you made of me when I saw you at your residence
a few days ago, I now submit in writing an appeal for a library building for our institution.

We have 1100 students, 86 officers and instructors, together with their families, and about
200 coloured people living near the school, all of whom would make use of the library building.

We have over 12,000 books, periodicals, etc., gifts from our friends, but we have no suitable
place for them, and we have no suitable reading-room.

Our graduates go to work in every section of the South, and whatever knowledge might be obtained
in the library would serve to assist in the elevation of the whole Negro race.

Such a building as we need could be erected for about $20,000. All of the work for the building,
such as brickmaking, brick-masonry, carpentry, blacksmithing, etc., would be done by the students.
The money which you would give would not only supply the building, but the erection of the
building would give a large number of students an opportunity to learn the building trades,
and the students would use the money paid to them to keep themselves in school. I do not believe
that a similar amount of money often could be made go so far in uplifting a whole race.

If you wish further information, I shall be glad to furnish it.

Yours truly,

Booker T. Washington, Principal.

The next mail brought back the following reply: "I will be very glad to pay the bills for the
library building as they are incurred, to the extent of twenty thousand dollars, and I am glad
of this opportunity to show the interest I have in your noble work."

I have found that strict business methods go a long way in securing the interest of rich people.
It has been my constant aim at Tuskegee to carry out, in our financial and other operations,
such business methods as would be approved of by any New York banking house.

I have spoken of several large gifts to the school; but by far the greater proportion of the
money that has built up the institution has come in the form of small donations from persons
of moderate means. It is upon these small gifts, which carry with them the interest of hundreds
of donors, that any philanthropic work must depend largely for its support. In my efforts to
get money I have often been surprised at the patience and deep interest of the ministers, who
are besieged on every hand and at all hours of the day for help. If no other consideration
had convinced me of the value of the Christian life, the Christlike work which the Church of
all denominations in America has done during the last thirty-five years for the elevation of
the black man would have made me a Christian. In a large degree it has been the pennies, the
nickels, and the dimes which have come from the Sunday-schools, the Christian Endeavour societies,
and the missionary societies, as well as from the church proper, that have helped to elevate
the Negro at so rapid a rate.

This speaking of small gifts reminds me to say that very few Tuskegee graduates fail to send
us an annual contribution. These contributions range from twenty-five cents up to ten dollars.

Soon after beginning our third year's work we were surprised to receive money from three special
sources, and up to the present time we have continued to receive help from them. First, the
State Legislature of Alabama increased its annual appropriation from two thousand dollars to
three thousand dollars; I might add that still later it increased this sum to four thousand
five hundred dollars a year. The effort to secure this increase was led by the Hon. M.F. Foster,
the member of the Legislature from Tuskegee. Second, we received one thousand dollars from
the John F. Slater Fund. Our work seemed to please the trustees of this fund, as they soon
began increasing their annual grant. This has been added to from time to time until at present
we receive eleven thousand dollars annually from the Fund. The other help to which I have referred
came in the shape of an allowance from the Peabody Fund. This was at first five hundred dollars,
but it has since been increased to fifteen hundred dollars.

The effort to secure help from the Slater and Peabody Funds brought me into contact with two
rare men--men who have had much to do in shaping the policy for the education of the Negro.
I refer to the Hon. J.L.M. Curry, of Washington, who is the general agent for these two funds,
and Mr. Morris K. Jessup, of New York. Dr. Curry is a native of the South, an ex-Confederate
soldier, yet I do not believe there is any man in the country who is more deeply interested
in the highest welfare of the Negro than Dr. Curry, or one who is more free from race prejudice.
He enjoys the unique distinction of possessing to an equal degree of confidence of the black
man and the Southern white man. I shall never forget the first time I met him. It was in Richmond,
Va., where he was then living. I had heard much about him. When I first went into his presence,
trembling because of my youth and inexperience, he took me by the hand so cordially, and spoke
such encouraging words, and gave me such helpful advice regarding the proper course to pursue,
that I came to know him then, as I have known him ever since, as a high example of one who
is constantly and unselfishly at work for the betterment of humanity.

Mr. Morris K. Jessup, the treasurer of the Slater Fund, I refer to because I know of no man
of wealth and large and complicated business responsibilities who gives not only money but
his time and thought to the subject of the proper method of elevating the Negro to the extent
that is true of Mr. Jessup. It is very largely through this effort and influence that during
the last few years the subject of industrial education has assumed the importance that it has,
and been placed on its present footing.

Chapter XIII. Two Thousand Miles For A Five-Minute Speech

Soon after the opening of our boarding department, quite a number of students who evidently
were worthy, but who were so poor that they did not have any money to pay even the small charges
at the school, began applying for admission. This class was composed of both men and women.
It was a great trial to refuse admission to these applicants, and in 1884 we established a
night-school to accommodate a few of them.

The night-school was organized on a plan similar to the one which I had helped to establish
at Hampton. At first it was composed of about a dozen students. They were admitted to the night-school
only when they had no money with which to pay any part of their board in the regular day-school.
It was further required that they must work for ten hours during the day at some trade or industry,
and study academic branches for two hours during the evening. This was the requirement for
the first one or two years of their stay. They were to be paid something above the cost of
their board, with the understanding that all of their earnings, except a very small part, were
to be reserved in the school's treasury, to be used for paying their board in the regular day-school
after they had entered that department. The night-school, started in this manner, has grown
until there are at present four hundred and fifty-seven students enrolled in it alone.

There could hardly be a more severe test of a student's worth than this branch of the Institute's
work. It is largely because it furnishes such a good opportunity to test the backbone of a
student that I place such high value upon our night-school. Any one who is willing to work
ten hours a day at the brick-yard, or in the laundry, through one or two years, in order that
he or she may have the privilege of studying academic branches for two hours in the evening,
has enough bottom to warrant being further educated.

After the student has left the night-school he enters the day-school, where he takes academic
branches four days in a week, and works at his trade two days. Besides this he usually works
at his trade during the three summer months. As a rule, after a student has succeeded in going
through the night-school test, he finds a way to finish the regular course in industrial and
academic training. No student, no matter how much money he may be able to command, is permitted
to go through school without doing manual labour. In fact, the industrial work is now as popular
as the academic branches. Some of the most successful men and women who have graduated from
the institution obtained their start in the night-school.

While a great deal of stress is laid upon the industrial side of the work at Tuskegee, we do
not neglect or overlook in any degree the religious and spiritual side. The school is strictly
undenominational, but it is thoroughly Christian, and the spiritual training of the students
is not neglected. Our preaching service, prayer-meetings, Sunday-school, Christian Endeavour
Society, Young Men's Christian Association, and various missionary organizations, testify to this.

In 1885, Miss Olivia Davidson, to whom I have already referred as being largely responsible
for the success of the school during its early history, and I were married. During our married
life she continued to divide her time and strength between our home and the work for the school.
She not only continued to work in the school at Tuskegee, but also kept up her habit of going
North to secure funds. In 1889 she died, after four years of happy married life and eight years
of hard and happy work for the school. She literally wore herself out in her never ceasing
efforts in behalf of the work that she so dearly loved. During our married life there were
born to us two bright, beautiful boys, Booker Taliaferro and Ernest Davidson. The older of
these, Booker, has already mastered the brick-maker's trade at Tuskegee.

I have often been asked how I began the practice of public speaking. In answer I would say
that I never planned to give any large part of my life to speaking in public. I have always
had more of an ambition to DO things than merely to talk ABOUT doing them. It seems that when
I went North with General Armstrong to speak at the series of public meetings to which I have
referred, the President of the National Educational Association, the Hon. Thomas W. Bicknell,
was present at one of those meetings and heard me speak. A few days afterward he sent me an
invitation to deliver an address at the next meeting of the Educational Association. This meeting
was to be held in Madison, Wis. I accepted the invitation. This was, in a sense, the beginning
of my public-speaking career.

On the evening that I spoke before the Association there must have been not far from four thousand
persons present. Without my knowing it, there were a large number of people present from Alabama,
and some from the town of Tuskegee. These white people afterward frankly told me that they
went to this meeting expecting to hear the South roundly abused, but were pleasantly surprised
to find that there was no word of abuse in my address. On the contrary, the South was given
credit for all the praiseworthy things that it had done. A white lady who was teacher in a
college in Tuskegee wrote back to the local paper that she was gratified, as well as surprised,
to note the credit which I gave the white people of Tuskegee for their help in getting the
school started. This address at Madison was the first that I had delivered that in any large
measure dealt with the general problem of the races. Those who heard it seemed to be pleased
with what I said and with the general position that I took.

When I first came to Tuskegee, I determined that I would make it my home, that I would take
as much pride in the right actions of the people of the town as any white man could do, and
that I would, at the same time, deplore the wrong-doing of the people as much as any white
man. I determined never to say anything in a public address in the North that I would not be
willing to say in the South. I early learned that it is a hard matter to convert an individual
by abusing him, and that this is more often accomplished by giving credit for all the praiseworthy
actions performed than by calling attention alone to all the evil done.

While pursuing this policy I have not failed, at the proper time and in the proper manner,
to call attention, in no uncertain terms, to the wrongs which any part of the South has been
guilty of. I have found that there is a large element in the South that is quick to respond
to straightforward, honest criticism of any wrong policy. As a rule, the place to criticise
the South, when criticism is necessary, is in the South--not in Boston. A Boston man who came
to Alabama to criticise Boston would not effect so much good, I think, as one who had his word
of criticism to say in Boston.

In this address at Madison I took the ground that the policy to be pursued with references
to the races was, by every honourable means, to bring them together and to encourage the cultivation
of friendly relations, instead of doing that which would embitter. I further contended that,
in relation to his vote, the Negro should more and more consider the interests of the community
in which he lived, rather than seek alone to please some one who lived a thousand miles away
from him and from his interests.

In this address I said that the whole future of the Negro rested largely upon the question
as to whether or not he should make himself, through his skill, intelligence, and character,
of such undeniable value to the community in which he lived that the community could not dispense
with his presence. I said that any individual who learned to do something better than anybody
else--learned to do a common thing in an uncommon manner--had solved his problem, regardless
of the colour of his skin, and that in proportion as the Negro learned to produce what other
people wanted and must have, in the same proportion would he be respected.

I spoke of an instance where one of our graduates had produced two hundred and sixty-six bushels
of sweet potatoes from an acre of ground, in a community where the average production had been
only forty-nine bushels to the acre. He had been able to do this by reason of his knowledge
of the chemistry of the soil and by his knowledge of improved methods of agriculture. The white
farmers in the neighbourhood respected him, and came to him for ideas regarding the raising
of sweet potatoes. These white farmers honoured and respected him because he, by his skill
and knowledge, had added something to the wealth and the comfort of the community in which
he lived. I explained that my theory of education for the Negro would not, for example, confine
him for all time to farm life--to the production of the best and the most sweet potatoes--but
that, if he succeeded in this line of industry, he could lay the foundations upon which his
children and grand-children could grow to higher and more important things in life.

Such, in brief, were some of the views I advocated in this first address dealing with the broad
question of the relations of the two races, and since that time I have not found any reason
for changing my views on any important point.

In my early life I used to cherish a feeling of ill will toward any one who spoke in bitter
terms against the Negro, or who advocated measures that tended to oppress the black man or
take from him opportunities for growth in the most complete manner. Now, whenever I hear any
one advocating measures that are meant to curtail the development of another, I pity the individual
who would do this. I know that the one who makes this mistake does so because of his own lack
of opportunity for the highest kind of growth. I pity him because I know that he is trying
to stop the progress of the world, and because I know that in time the development and the
ceaseless advance of humanity will make him ashamed of his weak and narrow position. One might
as well try to stop the progress of a mighty railroad train by throwing his body across the
track, as to try to stop the growth of the world in the direction of giving mankind more intelligence,
more culture, more skill, more liberty, and in the direction of extending more sympathy and
more brotherly kindness.

The address which I delivered at Madison, before the National Educational Association, gave
me a rather wide introduction in the North, and soon after that opportunities began offering
themselves for me to address audiences there.

I was anxious, however, that the way might also be opened for me to speak directly to a representative
Southern white audience. A partial opportunity of this kind, one that seemed to me might serve
as an entering wedge, presented itself in 1893, when the international meeting of Christian
Workers was held at Atlanta, Ga. When this invitation came to me, I had engagements in Boston
that seemed to make it impossible for me to speak in Atlanta. Still, after looking over my
list of dates and places carefully, I found that I could take a train from Boston that would
get me into Atlanta about thirty minutes before my address was to be delivered, and that I
could remain in that city before taking another train for Boston. My invitation to speak in
Atlanta stipulated that I was to confine my address to five minutes. The question, then, was
whether or not I could put enough into a five-minute address to make it worth while for me
to make such a trip.

I knew that the audience would be largely composed of the most influential class of white men
and women, and that it would be a rare opportunity for me to let them know what we were trying
to do at Tuskegee, as well as to speak to them about the relations of the races. So I decided
to make the trip. I spoke for five minutes to an audience of two thousand people, composed
mostly of Southern and Northern whites. What I said seemed to be received with favour and enthusiasm.
The Atlanta papers of the next day commented in friendly terms on my address, and a good deal
was said about it in different parts of the country. I felt that I had in some degree accomplished
my object--that of getting a hearing from the dominant class of the South.

The demands made upon me for public addresses continued to increase, coming in about equal
numbers from my own people and from Northern whites. I gave as much time to these addresses
as I could spare from the immediate work at Tuskegee. Most of the addresses in the North were
made for the direct purpose of getting funds with which to support the school. Those delivered
before the coloured people had for their main object the impressing upon them the importance
of industrial and technical education in addition to academic and religious training.

I now come to that one of the incidents in my life which seems to have excited the greatest
amount of interest, and which perhaps went further than anything else in giving me a reputation
that in a sense might be called National. I refer to the address which I delivered at the opening
of the Atlanta Cotton states and International Exposition, at Atlanta, Ga., September 18, 1895.

So much has been said and written about this incident, and so many questions have been asked
me concerning the address, that perhaps I may be excused for taking up the matter with some
detail. The five-minute address in Atlanta, which I came from Boston to deliver, was possibly
the prime cause for an opportunity being given me to make the second address there. In the
spring of 1895 I received a telegram from prominent citizens in Atlanta asking me to accompany
a committee from that city to Washington for the purpose of appearing before a committee of
Congress in the interest of securing Government help for the Exposition. The committee was
composed of about twenty-five of the most prominent and most influential white men of Georgia.
All the members of this committee were white men except Bishop Grant, Bishop Gaines, and myself.
The Mayor and several other city and state officials spoke before the committee. They were
followed by the two coloured bishops. My name was the last on the list of speakers. I had never
before appeared before such a committee, nor had I ever delivered any address in the capital
of the Nation. I had many misgivings as to what I ought to say, and as to the impression that
my address would make. While I cannot recall in detail what I said, I remember that I tried
to impress upon the committee, with all the earnestness and plainness of any language that
I could command, that if Congress wanted to do something which would assist in ridding the
South of the race question and making friends between the two races, it should, in every proper
way, encourage the material and intellectual growth of both races. I said that the Atlanta
Exposition would present an opportunity for both races to show what advance they had made since
freedom, and would at the same time afford encouragement to them to make still greater progress.

I tried to emphasize the fact that while the Negro should not be deprived by unfair means of
the franchise, political agitation alone would not save him, and that back of the ballot he
must have property, industry, skill, economy, intelligence, and character, and that no race
without these elements could permanently succeed. I said that in granting the appropriation
Congress could do something that would prove to be of real and lasting value to both races,
and that it was the first great opportunity of the kind that had been presented since the close
of the Civil War.

I spoke for fifteen or twenty minutes, and was surprised at the close of my address to receive
the hearty congratulations of the Georgia committee and of the members of Congress who were
present. The Committee was unanimous in making a favourable report, and in a few days the bill
passed Congress. With the passing of this bill the success of the Atlanta Exposition was assured.

Soon after this trip to Washington the directors of the Exposition decided that it would be
a fitting recognition of the coloured race to erect a large and attractive building which should
be devoted wholly to showing the progress of the Negro since freedom. It was further decided
to have the building designed and erected wholly by Negro mechanics. This plan was carried
out. In design, beauty, and general finish the Negro Building was equal to the others on the
grounds.

After it was decided to have a separate Negro exhibit, the question arose as to who should
take care of it. The officials of the Exposition were anxious that I should assume this responsibility,
but I declined to do so, on the plea that the work at Tuskegee at that time demanded my time
and strength. Largely at my suggestion, Mr. I. Garland Penn, of Lynchburg, Va., was selected
to be at the head of the Negro department. I gave him all the aid that I could. The Negro exhibit,
as a whole, was large and creditable. The two exhibits in this department which attracted the
greatest amount of attention were those from the Hampton Institute and the Tuskegee Institute.
The people who seemed to be the most surprised, as well as pleased, at what they saw in the
Negro Building were the Southern white people.

As the day for the opening of the Exposition drew near, the Board of Directors began preparing
the programme for the opening exercises. In the discussion from day to day of the various features
of this programme, the question came up as to the advisability of putting a member of the Negro
race on for one of the opening addresses, since the Negroes had been asked to take such a prominent
part in the Exposition. It was argued, further, that such recognition would mark the good feeling
prevailing between the two races. Of course there were those who were opposed to any such recognition
of the rights of the Negro, but the Board of Directors, composed of men who represented the
best and most progressive element in the South, had their way, and voted to invite a black
man to speak on the opening day. The next thing was to decide upon the person who was thus
to represent the Negro race. After the question had been canvassed for several days, the directors
voted unanimously to ask me to deliver one of the opening-day addresses, and in a few days
after that I received the official invitation.

The receiving of this invitation brought to me a sense of responsibility that it would be hard
for any one not placed in my position to appreciate. What were my feelings when this invitation
came to me? I remembered that I had been a slave; that my early years had been spent in the
lowest depths of poverty and ignorance, and that I had had little opportunity to prepare me
for such a responsibility as this. It was only a few years before that time that any white
man in the audience might have claimed me as his slave; and it was easily possible that some
of my former owners might be present to hear me speak.

I knew, too, that this was the first time in the entire history of the Negro that a member
of my race had been asked to speak from the same platform with white Southern men and women
on any important National occasion. I was asked now to speak to an audience composed of the
wealth and culture of the white South, the representatives of my former masters. I knew, too,
that while the greater part of my audience would be composed of Southern people, yet there
would be present a large number of Northern whites, as well as a great many men and women of
my own race.

