Then came the last night before their departure; the evening before the day on which they were
to go from Pollington to London, and from London to Plymouth. All the heavy packages, and all
the clothes had, of course, been put on board the Goldfinder in the London docks. The pleasant
task of preparation was at an end, and they were now to go forth upon their hard labours. From this moment
new life dawned on our Mirza, and for six weeks he basked in the sunshine of felicity ere threatening
clouds loomed up in his horizon. Then Ibrahim Chan returned from the war, and with him came
his daughter's suitor. They had dined early, and at ten o'clock
there was what Mrs. Shand called a little bit of supper. They were all of them high in heart,
and very happy,--testifying their affection to the departing ones by helping them to the nicest
bits, and by filling their tumblers the fullest. How it happened, no one could have said, but
it did happen that, before the evening was over, Maria and Caldigate were together in a little
room behind the front parlour. What still remained of their luggage was collected there, and
this last visit had probably been made in order that the packages might be once more counted.

'It does seem so odd that you should be going,' she said.

'It is so odd to me that I should ever have come.'

'We had always heard of you since Dick went to Cambridge.'

'I knew that there were so many of you, and that was all. Brothers never talk of their sisters,
I suppose. But I seem to know you now so well! You have been so kind to me!'

'Because you are Dick's friend.'

'I didn't suppose that it was anything else.'

'That's not nice of you, Mr. Caldigate. You know that we are all very fond of you. We shall
be so anxious to hear. You will be good to him, won't you?'

'And he to me, I hope.'

'I think you are steadier than he is, and can do more for him than he can for you. I wonder,
shall we ever see each other again, Mr. Caldigate?'

'Why not?'

'New South Wales is so far, and you will both marry there, and then you will not want to come
back. I hope I may live to see dear Dick again some day.'

'But only Dick?'

'And you too, if you would care about it.'

'Of course I should care about it,' he said. And as he said so, of course he put his arm round
her waist and kissed her. It did not mean much. She did not think it meant much. But it gave
a little colouring of romance to that special moment of her life. He, when he went up to his
bed, declared to himself that it meant nothing at all. He still had those large eyes clear
before him, and was still fixed in his resolution to come back for them when some undefined
point of his life should have passed by.

'Now,' said Dick Shand, as they were seated together in a third-class railway carriage on the
following morning, 'now I feel that I am beginning life.'

'With proper resolutions, I hope, as to honesty, sobriety, and industry.'

'With a fixed determination to make a fortune, and come back, and be facile princeps among
all the Shands. I have already made up my mind as to the sum I will give each of the girls,
and the way I will start the two younger boys in business. In the meantime let us light a pipe.'

Chapter V

The Goldfinder

There is no peculiar life more thoroughly apart from life in general, more unlike our usual
life, more completely a life of itself, governed by its own rules and having its own roughnesses
and amenities, than life on board ship. What tender friendship it produces, and what bitter
enmities! How completely the society has formed itself into separate sets after the three or
four first days! How thoroughly it is acknowledged that this is the aristocratic set, and that
the plebeian! How determined are the aristocrats to admit no intrusion, and how anxious are
the plebeians to intrude! Then there arises the great demagogue, who heads a party, having
probably been disappointed in early life,--that is, in his first endeavours on board the ship.
And the women have to acknowledge all their weaknesses, and to exercise all their strength.
It is a bad time for them on board ship if they cannot secure the attention of the men,--as
it is in the other world; but in order that they may secure it, they assume indifference. They
assume indifference, but are hard at work with their usual weapons. The men can do very well
by themselves. For them there is drinking, smoking, cards, and various games; but the potency
of female spells soon works upon them, and all who are worth anything are more or less in love
by the end of the first week. Of course it must all come to an end when the port is reached.
That is understood, though there may sometimes be mistakes. Most pathetic secrets are told
with the consciousness that they will be forgotten as soon as the ship is left. And there is
the whole day for these occupations. No work is required from any one. The lawyer does not
go to his court, nor the merchant to his desk. Pater-familias receives no bills; mater-familias
orders no dinners. The daughter has no household linen to disturb her. The son is never recalled
to his books. There is no parliament, no municipality, no vestry. There are neither rates nor
taxes nor rents to be paid. The government is the softest despotism under which subjects were
ever allowed to do almost just as they please. That the captain has a power is known, but hardly
felt. He smiles on all, is responsible for everything, really rules the world submitted to
him, from the setting of the sails down to the frying of the chops, and makes one fancy that
there must be something wrong with men on shore because first-class nations cannot be governed
like first-class ships.

The Goldfinder had on board her over a hundred first-class passengers, and nearly as many of
the second class. The life among them was much of the same kind, though in the second class
there was less of idleness, less of pleasure, and something more of an attempt to continue
the ordinary industry of life. The women worked more and the men read more than their richer
neighbours. But the love-making, and the fashion, and the mutiny against the fashion, were
the same in one set as in the other. Our friends were at first subjected to an inconvenience
which is always felt in such a position. They were known to have had saloon rather than second-class
antecedents. Everybody had heard that they had been at Cambridge, and therefore they were at
first avoided. And as they themselves were determined not to seek associates among their more
aristocratic neighbours, they were left to themselves and solitary for some few days. Kingsley spoke
of Brooks's death--of the suddenness of it seeming almost a judgment. I said Brooks, as I happened
to know, was thought a good fellow before the assault--that he really
had good qualities, and was liked even by Northern men.

'Have you observed that woman in the brown straw hat?' Dick said to Caldigate, one morning,
as they were leaning together on the forepart of the vessel against one of the pens in which
the fowls were kept. They were both dressed according to the parts they were acting, and which
they intended to act, as second-class passengers and future working miners. Any one knowing
in such matters would have seen that they were over-dressed; for the real miner, when he is
away from his work, puts on his best clothes, and endeavours to look as little rough as possible.
And all this had no doubt been seen and felt, and discounted among our friends' fellow-passengers.

'I have seen her every day, of course,' said Caldigate, 'and have been looking at her for the
last half hour.'

'She is looking at us now.'

'She seems to me to be very attentive to the stocking she is mending.'

