While this discussion had been going on, the satellite, or whatever it might be, had been rising
steadily above the horizon, and had reached a position favorable for observation. Telescopes
were brought, and it was very soon ascertained, beyond a question, that the new luminary was
not the well-known Phoebe of terrestrial nights; it had no feature in common with the moon.
Although it was apparently much nearer to Gallia than the moon to the earth, its superficies
was hardly one-tenth as large, and so feebly did it reflect the light of the remote sun, that
it scarcely emitted radiance enough to extinguish the dim luster of stars of the eighth magnitude.
Like the sun, it had risen in the west, and was now at its full. To mistake its identity with
the moon was absolutely impossible; not even Servadac could discover a trace of the seas, chasms,
craters, and mountains which have been so minutely delineated in lunar charts, and it could
not be denied that any transient hope that had been excited as to their once again being about
to enjoy the peaceful smiles of "the queen of night" must all be resigned.

Count Timascheff finally suggested, though somewhat doubtfully, the question of the probability
that Gallia, in her course across the zone of the minor planets, had carried off one of them;
but whether it was one of the 169 asteroids already included in the astronomical catalogues,
or one previously unknown, he did not presume to determine. The idea to a certain extent was
plausible, inasmuch as it has been ascertained that several of the telescopic planets are of
such small dimensions that a good walker might make a circuit of them in four and twenty hours;
consequently Gallia, being of superior volume, might be supposed capable of exercising a power
of attraction upon any of these miniature microcosms.

The first night in Nina's Hive passed without special incident; and next morning a regular
scheme of life was definitely laid down. "My lord governor," as Ben Zoof until he was peremptorily
forbidden delighted to call Servadac, had a wholesome dread of idleness and its consequences,
and insisted upon each member of the party undertaking some special duty to fulfill. There
was plenty to do. The domestic animals required a great deal of attention; a supply of food
had to be secured and preserved; fishing had to be carried on while the condition of the sea
would allow it; and in several places the galleries had to be further excavated to render them
more available for use. Occupation, then, need never be wanting, and the daily round of labor
could go on in orderly routine.

A perfect concord ruled the little colony. The Russians and Spaniards amalgamated well, and
both did their best to pick up various scraps of French, which was considered the official
language of the place. Servadac himself undertook the tuition of Pablo and Nina, Ben Zoof being
their companion in play-hours, when he entertained them with enchanting stories in the best
Parisian French, about "a lovely city at the foot of a mountain," where he always promised
one day to take them.

The end of March came, but the cold was not intense to such a degree as to confine any of the
party to the interior of their resort; several excursions were made along the shore, and for
a radius of three or four miles the adjacent district was carefully explored. Investigation,
however, always ended in the same result; turn their course in whatever direction they would,
they found that the country retained everywhere its desert character, rocky, barren, and without
a trace of vegetation. Here and there a slight layer of snow, or a thin coating of ice arising
from atmospheric condensation indicated the existence of superficial moisture, but it would
require a period indefinitely long, exceeding human reckoning, before that moisture could collect
into a stream and roll downwards over the stony strata to the sea. It seemed at present out
of their power to determine whether the land upon which they were so happily settled was an
island or a continent, and till the cold was abated they feared to undertake any lengthened
expedition to ascertain the actual extent of the strange concrete of metallic crystallization.

By ascending one day to the summit of the volcano, Captain Servadac and the count succeeded
in getting a general idea of the aspect of the country. The mountain itself was an enormous
block rising symmetrically to a height of nearly 3,000 feet above the level of the sea, in
the form of a truncated cone, of which the topmost section was crowned by a wreath of smoke
issuing continuously from the mouth of a narrow crater.

Under the old condition of terrestrial things, the ascent of this steep acclivity would have
been attended with much fatigue, but as the effect of the altered condition of the law of gravity,
the travelers performed perpetual prodigies in the way of agility, and in little over an hour
reached the edge of the crater, without more sense of exertion than if they had traversed a
couple of miles on level ground. Gallia had its drawbacks, but it had some compensating advantages.

Telescopes in hand, the explorers from the summit scanned the surrounding view. Their anticipations
had already realized what they saw. Just as they expected, on the north, east, and west lay
the Gallian Sea, smooth and motionless as a sheet of glass, the cold having, as it were, congealed
the atmosphere so that there was not a breath of wind. Towards the south there seemed no limit
to the land, and the volcano formed the apex of a triangle, of which the base was beyond the
reach of vision. Viewed even from this height, whence distance would do much to soften the
general asperity, the surface nevertheless seemed to be bristling with its myriads of hexagonal
lamellae, and to present difficulties which, to an ordinary pedestrian, would be insurmountable.

"Oh for some wings, or else a balloon!" cried Servadac, as he gazed around him; and then, looking
down to the rock upon which they were standing, he added, "We seem to have been transplanted
to a soil strange enough in its chemical character to bewilder the savants at a museum."

"And do you observe, captain," asked the count, "how the convexity of our little world curtails
our view? See, how circumscribed is the horizon!"

Servadac replied that he had noticed the same circumstance from the top of the cliffs of Gourbi
Island.

"Yes," said the count; "it becomes more and more obvious that ours is a very tiny world, and
that Gourbi Island is the sole productive spot upon its surface. We have had a short summer,
and who knows whether we are not entering upon a winter that may last for years, perhaps for
centuries?"

"But we must not mind, count," said Servadac, smiling. "We have agreed, you know, that, come
what may, we are to be philosophers."

"Ay, true, my friend," rejoined the count; "we must be philosophers and something more; we
must be grateful to the good Protector who has hitherto befriended us, and we must trust His
mercy to the end."

For a few moments they both stood in silence, and contemplated land and sea; then, having given
a last glance over the dreary panorama, they prepared to wend their way down the mountain.
Before, however, they commenced their descent, they resolved to make a closer examination of
the crater. They were particularly struck by what seemed to them almost the mysterious calmness
with which the eruption was effected. There was none of the wild disorder and deafening tumult
that usually accompany the discharge of volcanic matter, but the heated lava, rising with a
uniform gentleness, quietly overran the limits of the crater, like the flow of water from the
bosom of a peaceful lake. Instead of a boiler exposed to the action of an angry fire, the crater
rather resembled a brimming basin, of which the contents were noiselessly escaping. Nor were
there any igneous stones or red-hot cinders mingled with the smoke that crowned the summit;
a circumstance that quite accorded with the absence of the pumice-stones, obsidians, and other
minerals of volcanic origin with which the base of a burning mountain is generally strewn.

Captain Servadac was of opinion that this peculiarity augured favorably for the continuance
of the eruption. Extreme violence in physical, as well as in moral nature, is never of long
duration. The most terrible storms, like the most violent fits of passion, are not lasting;
but here the calm flow of the liquid fire appeared to be supplied from a source that was inexhaustible,
in the same way as the waters of Niagara, gliding on steadily to their final plunge, would
defy all effort to arrest their course.

Before the evening of this day closed in, a most important change was effected in the condition
of the Gallian Sea by the intervention of human agency. Notwithstanding the increasing cold,
the sea, unruffled as it was by a breath of wind, still retained its liquid state. It is an
established fact that water, under this condition of absolute stillness, will remain uncongealed
at a temperature several degrees below zero, whilst experiment, at the same time, shows that
a very slight shock will often be sufficient to convert it into solid ice. It had occurred
to Servadac that if some communication could be opened with Gourbi Island, there would be a
fine scope for hunting expeditions. Having this ultimate object in view, he assembled his little
colony upon a projecting rock at the extremity of the promontory, and having called Nina and
Pablo out to him in front, he said: "Now, Nina, do you think you could throw something into
the sea?"

"I think I could," replied the child, "but I am sure that Pablo would throw it a great deal
further than I can."

"Never mind, you shall try first."

Putting a fragment of ice into Nina's hand, he addressed himself to Pablo:

"Look out, Pablo; you shall see what a nice little fairy Nina is! Throw, Nina, throw, as hard
as you can."

Nina balanced the piece of ice two or three times in her hand, and threw it forward with all
her strength.

A sudden thrill seemed to vibrate across the motionless waters to the distant horizon, and
the Gallian Sea had become a solid sheet of ice!

CHAPTER XXIII. A CARRIER-PIGEON

When, three hours after sunset, on the 23d of March, the Gallian moon rose upon the western
horizon, it was observed that she had entered upon her last quarter. She had taken only four
days to pass from syzygy to quadrature, and it was consequently evident that she would be visible
for little more than a week at a time, and that her lunation would be accomplished within sixteen
days. The lunar months, like the solar days, had been diminished by one-half. Three days later
the moon was in conjunction with the sun, and was consequently lost to view; Ben Zoof, as the
first observer of the satellite, was extremely interested in its movements, and wondered whether
it would ever reappear.

On the 26th, under an atmosphere perfectly clear and dry, the thermometer fell to 12 degrees
F. below zero. Of the present distance of Gallia from the sun, and the number of leagues she
had traversed since the receipt of the last mysterious document, there were no means of judging;
the extent of diminution in the apparent disc of the sun did not afford sufficient basis even
for an approximate calculation; and Captain Servadac was perpetually regretting that they could
receive no further tidings from the anonymous correspondent, whom he persisted in regarding
as a fellow-countryman.

The solidity of the ice was perfect; the utter stillness of the air at the time when the final
congelation of the waters had taken place had resulted in the formation of a surface that for
smoothness would rival a skating-rink; without a crack or flaw it extended far beyond the range
of vision.

The contrast to the ordinary aspect of polar seas was very remarkable. There, the ice-fields
are an agglomeration of hummocks and icebergs, massed in wild confusion, often towering higher
than the masts of the largest whalers, and from the instability of their foundations liable
to an instantaneous loss of equilibrium; a breath of wind, a slight modification of the temperature,
not unfrequently serving to bring about a series of changes outrivaling the most elaborate
transformation scenes of a pantomime. Here, on the contrary, the vast white plain was level
as the desert of Sahara or the Russian steppes; the waters of the Gallian Sea were imprisoned
beneath the solid sheet, which became continually stouter in the increasing cold.

Accustomed to the uneven crystallizations of their own frozen seas, the Russians could not
be otherwise than delighted with the polished surface that afforded them such excellent opportunity
for enjoying their favorite pastime of skating. A supply of skates, found hidden away amongst
the Dobryna's stores, was speedily brought into use. The Russians undertook the instruction
of the Spaniards, and at the end of a few days, during which the temperature was only endurable
through the absence of wind, there was not a Gallian who could not skate tolerably well, while
many of them could describe figures involving the most complicated curves. Nina and Pablo earned
loud applause by their rapid proficiency; Captain Servadac, an adept in athletics, almost outvied
his instructor, the count; and Ben Zoof, who had upon some rare occasions skated upon the Lake
of Montmartre (in his eyes, of course, a sea), performed prodigies in the art.

This exercise was not only healthful in itself, but it was acknowledged that, in case of necessity,
it might become a very useful means of locomotion. As Captain Servadac remarked, it was almost
a substitute for railways, and as if to illustrate this proposition, Lieutenant Procope, perhaps
the greatest expert in the party, accomplished the twenty miles to Gourbi Island and back in
considerably less than four hours.

The temperature, meanwhile, continued to decrease, and the average reading of the thermometer
was about 16 degrees F. below zero; the light also diminished in proportion, and all objects
appeared to be enveloped in a half-defined shadow, as though the sun were undergoing a perpetual
eclipse. It was not surprising that the effect of this continuously overhanging gloom should
be to induce a frequent depression of spirits amongst the majority of the little population,
exiles as they were from their mother earth, and not unlikely, as it seemed, to be swept far
away into the regions of another planetary sphere. Probably Count Timascheff, Captain Servadac,
and Lieutenant Procope were the only members of the community who could bring any scientific
judgment to bear upon the uncertainty that was before them, but a general sense of the strangeness
of their situation could not fail at times to weigh heavily upon the minds of all. Under these
circumstances it was very necessary to counteract the tendency to despond by continual diversion;
and the recreation of skating thus opportunely provided, seemed just the thing to arouse the
flagging spirits, and to restore a wholesome excitement.

