Ere our stout son of Vulcan had fixed his worship on the Fair Maid of Perth, a certain natural
wildness of disposition had placed him under the influence of Venus, as well as that of Mars;
and it was only the effect of a sincere attachment which had withdrawn him entirely from such
licentious pleasures. He was therefore justly jealous of his newly acquired reputation for
constancy, which his conduct to this poor wanderer must expose to suspicion; a little doubtful,
perhaps, of exposing himself too venturously to temptation; and moreover in despair to lose
so much of St. Valentine's Day, which custom not only permitted, but enjoined him to pass beside
his mate for the season. The journey to Kinfauns, and the various transactions which followed,
had consumed the day, and it was now nearly evensong time.

As if to make up by a speedy pace for the time he was compelled to waste upon a subject so
foreign to that which he had most at heart, he strode on through the Dominicans' gardens, entered
the town, and casting his cloak around the lower part of his face, and pulling down his bonnet
to conceal the upper, he continued the same celerity of movement through bye streets and lanes,
hoping to reach his own house in the Wynd without being observed. But when he had continued
his rate of walking for ten minutes, he began to be sensible it might be too rapid for the
young woman to keep up with him. He accordingly looked behind him with a degree of angry impatience,
which soon turned into compunction, when he saw that she was almost utterly exhausted by the
speed which she had exerted.

"Now, marry, hang me up for a brute," said Henry to himself. "Was my own haste ever so great,
could it give that poor creature wings? And she loaded with baggage too! I am an ill nurtured
beast, that is certain, wherever women are in question; and always sure to do wrong when I
have the best will to act right.

"Hark thee, damsel; let me carry these things for thee. We shall make better speed that I do so."

Poor Louise would have objected, but her breath was too much exhausted to express herself;
and she permitted her good natured guardian to take her little basket, which, when the dog
beheld, he came straight before Henry, stood up, and shook his fore paws, whining gently, as
if he too wanted to be carried.

"Nay, then, I must needs lend thee a lift too," said the smith, who saw the creature was tired:

"Fie, Charlot!" said Louise; "thou knowest I will carry thee myself."

She endeavoured to take up the little spaniel, but it escaped from her; and going to the other
side of the smith, renewed its supplication that he would take it up.

"Charlot's right," said the smith: "he knows best who is ablest to bear him. This lets me know,
my pretty one, that you have not been always the bearer of your own mail: Charlot can tell tales."

So deadly a hue came across the poor glee maiden's countenance as Henry spoke, that he was
obliged to support her, lest she should have dropped to the ground. She recovered again, however,
in an instant or two, and with a feeble voice requested her guide would go on.

"Nay--nay," said Henry, as they began to move, "keep hold of my cloak, or my arm, if it helps
you forward better. A fair sight we are; and had I but a rebeck or a guitar at my back, and
a jackanapes on my shoulder, we should seem as joyous a brace of strollers as ever touched
string at a castle gate.

"Snails!" he ejaculated internally, "were any neighbour to meet me with this little harlotry's
basket at my back, her dog under my arm, and herself hanging on my cloak, what could they think
but that I had turned mumper in good earnest? I would not for the best harness I ever laid
hammer on, that any of our long tongued neighbours met me in this guise; it were a jest would
last from St. Valentine's Day to next Candlemas."

Stirred by these thoughts, the smith, although at the risk of making much longer a route which
he wished to traverse as swiftly as possible, took the most indirect and private course which
he could find, in order to avoid the main streets, still crowded with people, owing to the
late scene of tumult and agitation. But unhappily his policy availed him nothing; for, in turning
into an alley, he met a man with his cloak muffled around his face, from a desire like his
own to pass unobserved, though the slight insignificant figure, the spindle shanks, which showed
themselves beneath the mantle, and the small dull eye that blinked over its upper folds, announced
the pottingar as distinctly as if he had carried his sign in front of his bonnet. His unexpected
and most unwelcome presence overwhelmed the smith with confusion. Ready evasion was not the
property of his bold, blunt temper; and knowing this man to be a curious observer, a malignant
tale bearer, and by no means well disposed to himself in particular, no better hope occurred
to him than that the worshipful apothecary would give him some pretext to silence his testimony
and secure his discretion by twisting his neck round.

But, far from doing or saying anything which could warrant such extremities, the pottingar,
seeing himself so close upon his stalwart townsman that recognition was inevitable, seemed
determined it should be as slight as possible; and without appearing to notice anything particular
in the company or circumstances in which they met, he barely slid out these words as he passed
him, without even a glance towards his companion after the first instant of their meeting:
"A merry holiday to you once more, stout smith. What! thou art bringing thy cousin, pretty
Mistress Joan Letham, with her mail, from the waterside--fresh from Dundee, I warrant? I heard
she was expected at the old cordwainer's."

As he spoke thus, he looked neither right nor left, and exchanging a "Save you!" with a salute
of the same kind which the smith rather muttered than uttered distinctly, he glided forward
on his way like a shadow.

"The foul fiend catch me, if I can swallow that pill," said Henry Smith, "how well soever it
may be gilded. The knave has a shrewd eye for a kirtle, and knows a wild duck from a tame as
well as e'er a man in Perth. He were the last in the Fair City to take sour plums for pears,
or my roundabout cousin Joan for this piece of fantastic vanity. I fancy his bearing was as
much as to say, 'I will not see what you might wish me blind to'; and he is right to do so,
as he might easily purchase himself a broken pate by meddling with my matters, and so he will
be silent for his own sake. But whom have we next? By St. Dunstan, the chattering, bragging,
cowardly knave, Oliver Proudfute!"

It was, indeed, the bold bonnet maker whom they next encountered, who, with his cap on one
side, and trolling the ditty of--

     "Thou art over long at the pot, Tom, Tom,"
--gave plain intimation that he had made no dry meal.

"Ha! my jolly smith," he said, "have I caught thee in the manner? What, can the true steel
bend? Can Vulcan, as the minstrel says, pay Venus back in her own coin? Faith, thou wilt be
a gay Valentine before the year's out, that begins with the holiday so jollily."

"Hark ye, Oliver," said the displeased smith, "shut your eyes and pass on, crony. And hark
ye again, stir not your tongue about what concerns you not, as you value having an entire tooth
in your head."

"I betray counsel? I bear tales, and that against my brother martialist? I would not tell it
even to my timber soldan! Why, I can be a wild galliard in a corner as well as thou, man. And
now I think on't, I will go with thee somewhere, and we will have a rouse together, and thy
Dalilah shall give us a song. Ha! said I not well?"

"Excellently," said Henry, longing the whole time to knock his brother martialist down, but
wisely taking a more peaceful way to rid himself of the incumbrance of his presence--"excellently
well! I may want thy help, too, for here are five or six of the Douglasses before us: they
will not fail to try to take the wench from a poor burgher like myself, so I will be glad of
the assistance of a tearer such as thou art."

"I thank ye--I thank ye," answered the bonnet maker; "but were I not better run and cause ring
the common bell, and get my great sword?"

"Ay, ay, run home as fast as you can, and say nothing of what you have seen."

"Who, I? Nay, fear me not. Pah! I scorn a tale bearer."

"Away with you, then. I hear the clash of armour."

This put life and mettle into the heels of the bonnet maker, who, turning his back on the supposed
danger, set off at a pace which the smith never doubted would speedily bring him to his own house.

"Here is another chattering jay to deal with," thought the smith; "but I have a hank over him
too. The minstrels have a fabliau of a daw with borrowed feathers--why, this Oliver is The
very bird, and, by St. Dunstan, if he lets his chattering tongue run on at my expense, I will
so pluck him as never hawk plumed a partridge. And this he knows."

As these reflections thronged on his mind, he had nearly reached the end of his journey, and,
with the glee maiden still hanging on his cloak, exhausted, partly with fear, partly with fatigue,
he at length arrived at the middle of the wynd, which was honoured with his own habitation,
and from which, in the uncertainty that then attended the application of surnames, he derived
one of his own appellatives. Here, on ordinary days, his furnace was seen to blaze, and four
half stripped knaves stunned the neighbourhood with the clang of hammer and stithy. But St.
Valentine's holiday was an excuse for these men of steel having shut the shop, and for the
present being absent on their own errands of devotion or pleasure. The house which adjoined
to the smithy called Henry its owner; and though it was small, and situated in a narrow street,
yet, as there was a large garden with fruit trees behind it, it constituted upon the whole
a pleasant dwelling. The smith, instead of knocking or calling, which would have drawn neighbours
to doors and windows, drew out a pass key of his own fabrication, then a great and envied curiosity,
and opening the door of his house, introduced his companion into his habitation.

The apartment which received Henry and the glee maiden was the kitchen, which served amongst
those of the smith's station for the family sitting room, although one or two individuals,
like Simon Glover, had an eating room apart from that in which their victuals were prepared.
In the corner of this apartment, which was arranged with an unusual attention to cleanliness,
sat an old woman, whose neatness of attire, and the precision with which her scarlet plaid
was drawn over her head, so as to descend to her shoulders on each side, might have indicated
a higher rank than that of Luckie Shoolbred, the smith's housekeeper. Yet such and no other
was her designation; and not having attended mass in the morning, she was quietly reposing
herself by the side of the fire, her beads, half told, hanging over her left arm; her prayers,
half said, loitering upon her tongue; her eyes, half closed, resigning themselves to slumber,
while she expected the return of her foster son, without being able to guess at what hour it
was likely to happen. She started up at the sound of his entrance, and bent her eye upon his
companion, at first with a look of the utmost surprise, which gradually was exchanged for one
expressive of great displeasure.

"Now the saints bless mine eyesight, Henry Smith!" she exclaimed, very devoutly.

"Amen, with all my heart. Get some food ready presently, good nurse, for I fear me this traveller
hath dined but lightly."

"And again I pray that Our Lady would preserve my eyesight from the wicked delusions of Satan!"

"So be it, I tell you, good woman. But what is the use of all this pattering and prayering?
Do you not hear me? or will you not do as I bid you?"

"It must be himself, then, whatever is of it! But, oh! it is more like the foul fiend in his
likeness, to have such a baggage hanging upon his cloak. Oh, Harry Smith, men called you a
wild lad for less things; but who would ever have thought that Harry would have brought a light
leman under the roof that sheltered his worthy mother, and where his own nurse has dwelt for
thirty years?"

"Hold your peace, old woman, and be reasonable," said the smith. "This glee woman is no leman
of mine, nor of any other person that I know of; but she is going off for Dundee tomorrow by
the boats, and we must give her quarters till then."

"Quarters!" said the old woman. "You may give quarters to such cattle if you like it yourself,
Harry Wynd; but the same house shall not quarter that trumpery quean and me, and of that you
may assure yourself."

"Your mother is angry with me," said Louise, misconstruing the connexion of the parties. "I
will not remain to give her any offence. If there is a stable or a cowhouse, an empty stall
will be bed enough for Charlot and me."

"Ay--ay, I am thinking it is the quarters you are best used to," said Dame Shoolbred.

"Harkye, Nurse Shoolbred," said the smith. "You know I love you for your own sake and for my
mother's; but by St. Dunstan, who was a saint of my own craft, I will have the command of my
own house; and if you leave me without any better reason but your own nonsensical suspicions,
you must think how you will have the door open to you when you return; for you shall have no
help of mine, I promise you."

"Aweel, my bairn, and that will never make me risk the honest name I have kept for sixty years.
It was never your mother's custom, and it shall never be mine, to take up with ranters, and
jugglers, and singing women; and I am not so far to seek for a dwelling, that the same roof
should cover me and a tramping princess like that."

With this the refractory gouvernante began in great hurry to adjust her tartan mantle for going
abroad, by pulling it so forwards as to conceal the white linen cap, the edges of which bordered
her shrivelled but still fresh and healthful countenance. This done, she seized upon a staff,
the trusty companion of her journeys, and was fairly trudging towards the door, when the smith
stepped between her and the passage.

"Wait at least, old woman, till we have cleared scores. I owe you for fee and bountith."

"An' that's e'en a dream of your own fool's head. What fee or bountith am I to take from the
son of your mother, that fed, clad, and bielded me as if I had been a sister?"

"And well you repay it, nurse, leaving her only child at his utmost need."

This seemed to strike the obstinate old woman with compunction. She stopped and looked at her
master and the minstrel alternately; then shook her head, and seemed about to resume her motion
towards the door.

"I only receive this poor wanderer under my roof," urged the smith, "to save her from the prison
and the scourge."

"And why should you save her?" said the inexorable Dame Shoolbred. "I dare say she has deserved
them both as well as ever thief deserved a hempen collar."

"For aught I know she may or she may not. But she cannot deserve to be scourged to death, or
imprisoned till she is starved to death; and that is the lot of them that the Black Douglas
bears mal-talent against."

"And you are going to thraw the Black Douglas for the cake of a glee woman? This will be the
worst of your feuds yet. Oh, Henry Gow, there is as much iron in your head as in your anvil!"

"I have sometimes thought this myself; Mistress Shoolbred; but if I do get a cut or two on
this new argument, I wonder who is to cure them, if you run away from me like a scared wild
goose? Ay, and, moreover, who is to receive my bonny bride, that I hope to bring up the wynd
one of these days?"

"Ah, Harry--Harry," said the old woman, shaking her head, "this is not the way to prepare an
honest man's house for a young bride: you should be guided by modesty and discretion, and not
by chambering and wantonness."

"I tell you again, this poor creature is nothing to me. I wish her only to be safely taken
care of; and I think the boldest Borderman in Perth will respect the bar of my door as much
as the gate of Carlisle Castle. I am going down to Sim Glover's; I may stay there all night,
for the Highland cub is run back to the hills, like a wolf whelp as he is, and so there is
a bed to spare, and father Simon will make me welcome to the use of it. You will remain with
this poor creature, feed her, and protect her during the night, and I will call on her before
day; and thou mayst go with her to the boat thyself an thou wilt, and so thou wilt set the
last eyes on her at the same time I shall."

"There is some reason in that," said Dame Shoolbred; "though why you should put your reputation
in risk for a creature that would find a lodging for a silver twopence and less matter is a
mystery to me."

"Trust me with that, old woman, and be kind to the girl."

"Kinder than she deserves, I warrant you; and truly, though I little like the company of such
cattle, yet I think I am less like to take harm from her than you--unless she be a witch, indeed,
which may well come to be the case, as the devil is very powerful with all this wayfaring clanjamfray."

"No more a witch than I am a warlock," said the honest smith: "a poor, broken hearted thing,
that, if she hath done evil, has dreed a sore weird for it. Be kind to her. And you, my musical
damsel, I will call on you tomorrow morning, and carry you to the waterside. This old woman
will treat you kindly if you say nothing to her but what becomes honest ears."

The poor minstrel had listened to this dialogue without understanding more than its general
tendency; for, though she spoke English well, she had acquired the language in England itself;
and the Northern dialect was then, as now, of a broader and harsher character. She saw, however,
that she was to remain with the old lady, and meekly folding her arms on her bosom, bent her
head with humility. She next looked towards the smith with a strong expression of thankfulness,
then, raising her eyes to heaven, took his passive hand, and seemed about to kiss the sinewy
fingers in token of deep and affectionate gratitude.

But Dame Shoolbred did not give license to the stranger's mode of expressing her feelings.
She thrust in between them, and pushing poor Louise aside, said, "No--no, I'll have none of
that work. Go into the chimney nook, mistress, and when Harry Smith's gone, if you must have
hands to kiss, you shall kiss mine as long as you like. And you, Harry, away down to Sim Glover's,
for if pretty Mistress Catharine hears of the company you have brought home, she may chance
to like them as little as I do. What's the matter now? is the man demented? are you going out
without your buckler, and the whole town in misrule?"

"You are right, dame," said the armourer; and, throwing the buckler over his broad shoulders,
he departed from his house without abiding farther question.

CHAPTER XIII.

     BYRON.

We must now leave the lower parties in our historical drama, to attend to the incidents which
took place among those of a higher rank and greater importance.

We pass from the hut of an armourer to the council room of a monarch, and resume our story
just when, the tumult beneath being settled, the angry chieftains were summoned to the royal
presence. They entered, displeased with and lowering upon each other, each so exclusively filled
with his own fancied injuries as to be equally unwilling and unable to attend to reason or
argument. Albany alone, calm and crafty, seemed prepared to use their dissatisfaction for his
own purposes, and turn each incident as it should occur to the furtherance of his own indirect
ends.

The King's irresolution, although it amounted even to timidity, did not prevent his assuming
the exterior bearing becoming his situation. It was only when hard pressed, as in the preceding
scene, that he lost his apparent composure. In general, he might be driven from his purpose,
but seldom from his dignity of manner. He received Albany, Douglas, March, and the prior, those
ill assorted members of his motley council, with a mixture of courtesy and loftiness, which
reminded each haughty peer that he stood in the presence of his sovereign, and compelled him
to do the beseeming reverence.

Having received their salutations, the King motioned them to be seated; and they were obeying
his commands when Rothsay entered. He walked gracefully up to his father, and, kneeling at
his footstool, requested his blessing. To give some Satisfaction to the just Expectations of
very many Persons, as well of this Realm as of foreign Countries, who fearing the dismal Effects
of the Contagion, have done us the Honour to request of us some Account of the Nature of the Distemper
that has depopulated Marseilles, and of the Success of such Remedies
as we have employed against it; we have thought fit to draw up the
following Relation, containing in short what is most essential in
this Affair, and which may be sufficient to intelligent Persons of
the Faculty, to direct their Conduct, and help them in framing a Judgment
in the like Case, till we have better Means and a more convenient
Leisure to present to the Publick more exact Particulars of all that
we have observed on this Subject.

All the Diseased that we have seen or attended, in this terrible Distemper, commonly called
the Plague, may be reduced to five principal Classes; which will
take in generally all the Cases that we have observed, except a few
particular ones, which cannot be brought under any general Rule.

FIRST CLASS.

The First Class, observed especially in the first Period, and in the greatest Fury of the Distemper,
contains such as were afflicted with the Symptoms that we shall here set down, constantly followed
by a speedy Death.

These Symptoms were for the most part irregular Shiverings, the Pulse low, soft, slow, quick, unequal,
concentrated; a Heaviness in the Head so considerable, that the sick Person could scarce support
it, appearing to be seized with a Stupidity and Confusion, like that of a drunken Person; the
Sight fixed, dull, wandering, expressing Fearfulness and Despair;
the Voice slow, interrupted, complaining; the Tongue almost always
white, towards the end dry, reddish, black, rough; the Face pale,
Lead-coloured, languishing, cadaverous; a frequent Sickness at the
Stomach; mortal Inquietudes; a general sinking and Faintness; Distraction
of the Mind; dosing, an Inclination to vomit, Vomiting, &c.

The Persons
thus seized, perished commonly in the Space of some Hours, of a Night,
of a Day, or of two or three at farthest, as by Faintness or Extinction;
sometimes, but more rarely, in convulsive Motions, and a Sort of Trembling;
no Eruption, Tumour or Spot appearing without.

It is easy to judge by these Accidents, that the Sick of this kind were not in a Condition to
bear Bleeding; and even such, on whom it was tried, died a little
while after.

Emeticks and Catharticks were equally here useless, and often hurtful,
in exhausting the Patient's Strength, by their fatal over-working.

The Cordials and Sudorificks were the only Remedies to which we had recourse, which nevertheless
could be of no Service, or at the most prolong the last Moments but for a few Hours.

SECOND CLASS.

The second Class of the Diseased that we attended during the Course of this fatal Sickness,
contains such as at first had the Shiverings, as the preceding, and the same sort of Stupidity,
and heavy Pain in the Head; but the Shiverings were followed by a Pulse quick, open, and bold,
which nevertheless was lost upon pressing the Artery ever so little. These Sick felt inwardly
a burning Heat, whilst the Heat without was moderate and temperate;
the Thirst was great and inextinguishable; the Tongue white, or of
an obscure red; the Voice hasty, stammering, impetuous; the Eyes reddish,
fixed, sparkling; the Colour of the Face was of a red sufficiently
fresh, and sometimes inclining to livid; the Sickness at the Stomach
was frequent, tho' much less than in those of the preceding Class;
the Respiration was frequent, laborious, or great and rare, without
Coughing or Pain; Loathings; Vomitings, bilious, greenish, blackish,
bloody; the Courses of the Belly of the same Sort, but without any
Tension or Pain; Ravings, or phrenetick Deliria; the Urine frequently
natural, sometimes troubled, blackish, whitish, or bloody; the Sweat,
which seldom smelt badly, and which was far from giving Ease to the
Sick, that it always weakned them; in certain Cases Hemorrhages, which,
however moderate, have been always fatal; a great Decay in the Strength,
and above all, an Apprehension so strong of dying, that these poor
Creatures, were incapable of any Comfort, and looked on themselves,
from the first Moment of their being attacked, as destined to certain
Death.

But that which deserves to be well observed, and which has always seemed to characterise and
distinguish this Disease from all others, is, that almost all had
at the Beginning, or in the Progress of this Distemper, very painful
Buboes, situated commonly below the Groin, sometimes in the Groin
or Arm-pits, or in the Parotide, Maxillar, or jugular Glands; as likewise
Carbuncles, especially on the Arms, Legs or Thighs, small, white,
livid, black Pustles, dispersed over all the Surface of the Body.

 And if any
one of knightly degree shall say that this our act is wrongfully done, I, Patrick Charteris
of Kinfauns, knight, will justify this cartel in knightly weapons, within the barrace; or,
if any one of meaner birth shall deny what is here said, he shall be met with by a citizen
of the Fair City of Perth, according to his degree. And so God and St. John protect the Fair City!"

"You will not wonder, my lord," resumed Douglas, "that, when my almoner had read to me the
contents of so insolent a scroll, I caused one of my squires to pluck down a trophy so disgraceful
to the chivalry and nobility of Scotland. Where upon, it seems some of these saucy burghers
took license to hoot and insult the hindmost of my train, who wheeled their horses on them,
and would soon have settled the feud, but for my positive command that they should follow me
in as much peace as the rascally vulgar would permit. And thus they arrived here in the guise
of flying men, when, with my command to repel force by force, they might have set fire to the
four corners of this wretched borough, and stifled the insolent churls, like malicious fox
cubs in a burning brake of furze."

There was a silence when Douglas had done speaking, until the Duke of Rothsay answered, addressing
his father:

"Since the Earl of Douglas possesses the power of burning the town where your Grace holds your
court, so soon as the provost and he differ about a night riot, or the terms of a cartel, I
am sure we ought all to be thankful that he has not the will to do so."

"The Duke of Rothsay," said Douglas, who seemed resolved to maintain command of his temper,
"may have reason to thank Heaven in a more serious tone than he now uses that the Douglas is
as true as he is powerful. This is a time when the subjects in all countries rise against the
law: we have heard of the insurgents of the Jacquerie in France; and of Jack Straw, and Hob
Miller, and Parson Ball, among the Southron; and we may be sure there is fuel enough to catch
such a flame, were it spreading to our frontiers. When I see peasants challenging noblemen,
and nailing the hands of the gentry to their city cross, I will not say I fear mutiny--for
that would be false--but I foresee, and will stand well prepared for, it."

"And why does my Lord Douglas say," answered the Earl of March, "that this cartel has been
done by churls? I see Sir Patrick Charteris's name there, and he, I ween, is of no churl's
blood. The Douglas himself, since he takes the matter so warmly, might lift Sir Patrick's gauntlet
without soiling of his honour."

"My Lord of March," replied Douglas, "should speak but of what he understands. I do no injustice
to the descendant of the Red Rover, when I say he is too slight to be weighed with the Douglas.
The heir of Thomas Randolph might have a better claim to his answer."

"And, by my honour, it shall not miss for want of my asking the grace," said the Earl of March,
pulling his glove off.

"Stay, my lord," said the King. "Do us not so gross an injury as to bring your feud to mortal
defiance here; but rather offer your ungloved hand in kindness to the noble earl, and embrace
in token of your mutual fealty to the crown of Scotland."

"Not so, my liege," answered March; "your Majesty may command me to return my gauntlet, for
that and all the armour it belongs to are at your command, while I continue to hold my earldom
of the crown of Scotland; but when I clasp Douglas, it must be with a mailed hand. Farewell,
my liege. My counsels here avail not, nay, are so unfavourably received, that perhaps farther
stay were unwholesome for my safety. May God keep your Highness from open enemies and treacherous
friends! I am for my castle of Dunbar, from whence I think you will soon hear news. Farewell
to you, my Lords of Albany and Douglas; you are playing a high game, look you play it fairly.
Farewell, poor thoughtless prince, who art sporting like a fawn within spring of a tiger! Farewell,
all--George of Dunbar sees the evil he cannot remedy. Adieu, all."

The King would have spoken, but the accents died on his tongue, as he received from Albany
a look cautioning him to forbear. The Earl of March left the apartment, receiving the mute
salutations of the members of the council whom he had severally addressed, excepting from Douglas
alone, who returned to his farewell speech a glance of contemptuous defiance.

"The recreant goes to betray us to the Southron," he said; "his pride rests on his possessing
that sea worn hold which can admit the English into Lothian [the castle of Dunbar]. Nay, look
not alarmed, my liege, I will hold good what I say. Nevertheless, it is yet time. Speak but
the word, my liege--say but 'Arrest him,' and March shall not yet cross the Earn on his traitorous
journey."

"Nay, gallant earl," said Albany, who wished rather that the two powerful lords should counterbalance
each other than that one should obtain a decisive superiority, "that were too hasty counsel.
The Earl of March came hither on the King's warrant of safe conduct, and it may not consist
with my royal brother's honour to break it. Yet, if your lordship can bring any detailed proof--"

Here they were interrupted by a flourish of trumpets.

"His Grace of Albany is unwontedly scrupulous today," said Douglas; "but it skills not wasting
words--the time is past--these are March's trumpets, and I warrant me he rides at flight speed
so soon as he passes the South Port. We shall hear of him in time; and if it be as I have conjectured,
he shall be met with though all England backed his treachery."

"Nay, let us hope better of the noble earl," said the King, no way displeased that the quarrel
betwixt March and Douglas had seemed to obliterate the traces of the disagreement betwixt Rothsay
and his father in law; "he hath a fiery, but not a sullen, temper. In some things he has been--I
will not say wronged, but disappointed--and something is to be allowed to the resentment of
high blood armed with great power. But thank Heaven, all of us who remain are of one sentiment,
and, I may say, of one house; so that, at least, our councils cannot now be thwarted with disunion.
Father prior, I pray you take your writing materials, for you must as usual be our clerk of
council. And now to business, my lords; and our first object of consideration must be this
Highland cumber."

"Between the Clan Chattan and the Clan Quhele," said the prior, "which, as our last advices
from our brethren at Dunkeld inform us, is ready to break out into a more formidable warfare
than has yet taken place between these sons of Belial, who speak of nothing else than of utterly
destroying one another. Their forces are assembling on each side, and not a man claiming in
the tenth degree of kindred but must repair to the brattach of his tribe, or stand to the punishment
of fire and sword. The fiery cross hath flitted about like a meteor in every direction, and
awakened strange and unknown tribes beyond the distant Moray Firth--may Heaven and St. Dominic
be our protection! But if your lordships cannot find remedy for evil, it will spread broad
and wide, and the patrimony of the church must in every direction be exposed to the fury of
these Amalekites, with whom there is as little devotion to Heaven as there is pity or love
to their neighbour--may Our Lady be our guard! We hear some of them are yet utter heathens,
and worship Mahound and Termagaunt."

"My lords and kinsmen," said Robert, "ye have heard the urgency of this case, and may desire
to know my sentiments before you deliver what your own wisdom shall suggest. And, in sooth,
no better remedy occurs to me than to send two commissioners, with full power from us to settle
such debates as be among them, and at the same time to charge them, as they shall be answerable
to the law, to lay down their arms, and forbear all practices of violence against each other."

"I approve of your Grace's proposal," said Rothsay; "and I trust the good prior will not refuse
the venerable station of envoy upon this peacemaking errand. And his reverend brother, the
abbot of the Carthusian convent, must contend for an honour which will certainly add two most
eminent recruits to the large army of martyrs, since the Highlanders little regard the distinction
betwixt clerk and layman in the ambassadors whom you send to them."

"My royal Lord of Rothsay," said the prior, "if I am destined to the blessed crown of martyrdom,
I shall be doubtless directed to the path by which I am to attain it. Meantime, if you speak
in jest, may Heaven pardon you, and give you light to perceive that it were better buckle on
your arms to guard the possessions of the church, so perilously endangered, than to employ
your wit in taunting her ministers and servants."

"I taunt no one, father prior," said the youth, yawning; "Nor have I much objection to taking
arms, excepting that they are a somewhat cumbrous garb, and in February a furred mantle is
more suiting to the weather than a steel corselet. And it irks me the more to put on cold harness
in this nipping weather, that, would but the church send a detachment of their saints--and
they have some Highland ones well known in this district, and doubtless used to the climate--they
might fight their own battles, like merry St. George of England. But I know not how it is,
we hear of their miracles when they are propitiated, and of their vengeance if any one trespasses
on their patrimonies, and these are urged as reasons for extending their lands by large largesses;
and yet, if there come down but a band of twenty Highlanders, bell, book, and candle make no
speed, and the belted baron must be fain to maintain the church in possession of the lands
which he has given to her, as much as if he himself still enjoyed the fruits of them."

"Son David," said the King, "you give an undue license to your tongue."

"Nay, Sir, I am mute," replied the Prince. "I had no purpose to disturb your Highness, or displease
the father prior, who, with so many miracles at his disposal, will not face, as it seems, a
handful of Highland caterans."

"We know," said the prior, with suppressed indignation, "from what source these vile doctrines
are derived, which we hear with horror from the tongue that now utters them. When princes converse
with heretics, their minds and manners are alike corrupted. They show themselves in the streets
as the companions of maskers and harlots, and in the council as the scorners of the church
and of holy things."

"Peace, good father!" said the King. "Rothsay shall make amends for what he has idly spoken.
Alas! let us take counsel in friendly fashion, rather than resemble a mutinous crew of mariners
in a sinking vessel, when each is more intent on quarrelling with his neighbours than in assisting
the exertions of the forlorn master for the safety of the ship. My Lord of Douglas, your house
has been seldom to lack when the crown of Scotland desired either wise counsel or manly achievement;
I trust you will help us in this strait."

"I can only wonder that the strait should exist, my lord," answered the haughty Douglas. "When
I was entrusted with the lieutenancy of the kingdom, there were some of these wild clans came
down from the Grampians. I troubled not the council about the matter, but made the sheriff,
Lord Ruthven, get to horse with the forces of the Carse--the Hays, the Lindsays, the Ogilvies,
and other gentlemen. By St. Bride! When it was steel coat to frieze mantle, the thieves knew
what lances were good for, and whether swords had edges or no. There were some three hundred
of their best bonnets, besides that of their chief, Donald Cormac, left on the moor of Thorn
and in Rochinroy Wood; and as many were gibbeted at Houghmanstares, which has still the name
from the hangman work that was done there. This is the way men deal with thieves in my country;
and if gentler methods will succeed better with these Earish knaves, do not blame Douglas for
speaking his mind. You smile, my Lord of Rothsay. May I ask how I have a second time become
your jest, before I have replied to the first which you passed on me?"

"Nay, be not wrathful, my good Lord of Douglas," answered the Prince; "I did but smile to think
how your princely retinue would dwindle if every thief were dealt with as the poor Highlanders
at Houghmanstares."

The King again interfered, to prevent the Earl from giving an angry reply.

"Your lordship," said he to Douglas, "advises wisely that we should trust to arms when these
men come out against our subjects on the fair and level plan; but the difficulty is to put
a stop to their disorders while they continue to lurk within their mountains. I need not tell
you that the Clan Chattan and the Clan Quhele are great confederacies, consisting each of various
tribes, who are banded together, each to support their own separate league, and who of late
have had dissensions which have drawn blood wherever they have met, whether individually or
in bands. The whole country is torn to pieces by their restless feuds."

"I cannot see the evil of this," said the Douglas: "the ruffians will destroy each other, and
the deer of the Highlands will increase as the men diminish. We shall gain as hunters the exercise
we lose as warriors."

"Rather say that the wolves will increase as the men diminish," replied the King.

"I am content," said Douglas: "better wild wolves than wild caterans. Let there be strong forces
maintained along the Earish frontier, to separate the quiet from the disturbed country. Confine
the fire of civil war within the Highlands; let it spend its uncontrolled fury, and it will
be soon burnt out for want of fuel. The survivors will be humbled, and will be more obedient
to a whisper of your Grace's pleasure than their fathers, or the knaves that now exist, have,
been to your strictest commands."

"This is wise but ungodly counsel," said the prior, shaking his head; "I cannot take it upon
my conscience to recommend it. It is wisdom, but it is the wisdom of Achitophel, crafty at
once and cruel."

"My heart tells me so," said the King, laying his hand on his breast--"my heart tells me that
it will be asked of me at the awful day, 'Robert Stuart, where are the subjects I have given
thee?' It tells me that I must account for them all, Saxon and Gael, Lowland, Highland, and
Border man; that I will not be required to answer for those alone who have wealth and knowledge,
but for those also who were robbers because they were poor, and rebels because they were ignorant."

"Your Highness speaks like a Christian king," said the prior; "but you bear the sword as well
as the sceptre, and this present evil is of a kind which the sword must cure."

"Hark ye, my lords," said the Prince, looking up as if a gay thought had suddenly struck him.
"Suppose we teach these savage mountaineers a strain of chivalry? It were no hard matter to
bring these two great commanders, the captain of the Clan Chattan and the chief of the no less
doughty race of the Clan Quhele, to defy each other to mortal combat. They might fight here
in Perth--we would lend them horse and armour; thus their feud would be stanched by the death
of one, or probably both, of the villains, for I think both would break their necks in the
first charge; my father's godly desire of saving blood would be attained; and we should have
the pleasure of seeing such a combat between two savage knights, for the first time in their
lives wearing breeches and mounted on horses, as has not been heard of since the days of King
Arthur."

"Shame upon you, David!" said the King. "Do you make the distress of your native country, and
the perplexity of our councils, a subject for buffoonery?"

"If you will pardon me, royal brother," said Albany, "I think that, though my princely nephew
hath started this thought in a jocular manner, there may be something wrought out of it, which
might greatly remedy this pressing evil."

"Good brother," replied the King, "it is unkind to expose Rothsay's folly by pressing further
his ill timed jest. We know the Highland clans have not our customs of chivalry, nor the habit
or mode of doing battle which these require."

"True, your Grace," answered Albany; "yet I speak not in scorn, but in serious earnest. True,
the mountaineers have not our forms and mode of doing battle in the lists, but they have those
which are as effectual to the destruction of human life, and so that the mortal game is played,
and the stake won and lost, what signifies it whether these Gael fight with sword and lance,
as becomes belted knights, or with sandbags, like the crestless churls of England, or butcher
each other with knives and skenes, in their own barbarous fashion? Their habits, like our own,
refer all disputed rights and claims to the decision of battle. They are as vain, too, as they
are fierce; and the idea that these two clans would be admitted to combat in presence of your
Grace and of your court will readily induce them to refer their difference to the fate of battle,
even were such rough arbitrement less familiar to their customs, and that in any such numbers
as shall be thought most convenient. We must take care that they approach not the court, save
in such a fashion and number that they shall not be able to surprise us; and that point being
provided against, the more that shall be admitted to combat upon either side, the greater will
be the slaughter among their bravest and most stirring men, and the more the chance of the
Highlands being quiet for some time to come."

"This were a bloody policy, brother," said the King; "and again I say, that I cannot bring
my conscience to countenance the slaughter of these rude men, that are so little better than
so many benighted heathens."

"And are their lives more precious," asked Albany, "than those of nobles and gentlemen who
by your Grace's license are so frequently admitted to fight in barrace, either for the satisfying
of disputes at law or simply to acquire honour?"

The King, thus hard pressed, had little to say against a custom so engrafted upon the laws
of the realm and the usages of chivalry as the trial by combat; and he only replied: "God knows,
I have never granted such license as you urge me with unless with the greatest repugnance;
and that I never saw men have strife together to the effusion of blood, but I could have wished
to appease it with the shedding of my own."

"But, my gracious lord," said the prior, "it seems that, if we follow not some such policy
as this of my Lord of Albany, we must have recourse to that of the Douglas; and, at the risk
of the dubious event of battle, and with the certainty of losing many excellent subjects, do,
by means of the Lowland swords, that which these wild mountaineers will otherwise perform with
their own hand. What says my Lord of Douglas to the policy of his Grace of Albany?"

"Douglas," said the haughty lord, "never counselled that to be done by policy which might be
attained by open force. He remains by his opinion, and is willing to march at the head of his
own followers, with those of the barons of Perth shire and the Carse, and either bring these
Highlanders to reason or subjection, or leave the body of a Douglas among their savage wildernesses."

"It is nobly spoken, my Lord of Douglas," said Albany; "and well might the King rely upon thy
undaunted heart and the courage of thy resolute followers. But see you not how soon you may
be called elsewhere, where your presence and services are altogether indispensable to Scotland
and her monarch? Marked you not the gloomy tone in which the fiery March limited his allegiance
and faith to our sovereign here present to that space for which he was to remain King Robert's
vassal? And did not you yourself suspect that he was plotting a transference of his allegiance
to England? Other chiefs, of subordinate power and inferior fame, may do battle with the Highlanders;
but if Dunbar admit the Percies and their Englishmen into our frontiers, who will drive them
back if the Douglas be elsewhere?"

"My sword," answered Douglas, "is equally at the service of his Majesty on the frontier or
in the deepest recesses of the Highlands. I have seen the backs of the proud Percy and George
of Dunbar ere now, and I may see them again. And, if it is the King's pleasure I should take
measures against this probable conjunction of stranger and traitor, I admit that, rather than
trust to an inferior or feebler hand the important task of settling the Highlands, I would
be disposed to give my opinion in favour of the policy of my Lord of Albany, and suffer those
savages to carve each other's limbs, without giving barons and knights the trouble of hunting
them down."

"My Lord of Douglas," said the Prince, who seemed determined to omit no opportunity to gall
his haughty father in law, "does not choose to leave to us Lowlanders even the poor crumbs
of honour which might be gathered at the expense of the Highland kerne, while he, with his
Border chivalry, reaps the full harvest of victory over the English. But Percy hath seen men's
backs as well as Douglas; and I have known as great wonders as that he who goes forth to seek
such wool should come back shorn."

"A phrase," said Douglas, "well becoming a prince who speaks of honour with a wandering harlot's
scrip in his bonnet, by way of favor."

"Excuse it, my lord," said Rothsay: "men who have matched unfittingly become careless in the
choice of those whom they love par amours. The chained dog must snatch at the nearest bone."

"Rothsay, my unhappy son!" exclaimed the King, "art thou mad? or wouldst thou draw down on
thee the full storm of a king and father's displeasure?"

"I am dumb," returned the Prince, "at your Grace's command."

"Well, then, my Lord of Albany," said the King, "since such is your advice, and since Scottish
blood must flow, how, I pray you, are we to prevail on these fierce men to refer their quarrel
to such a combat as you propose?"

"That, my liege," said Albany, "must be the result of more mature deliberation. But the task
will not be difficult. Gold will be needful to bribe some of the bards and principal counsellors
and spokesmen. The chiefs, moreover, of both these leagues must be made to understand that,
unless they agree to this amicable settlement--"

"Amicable, brother!" said the King, with emphasis.

"Ay, amicable, my liege," replied his brother, "since it is better the country were placed
in peace, at the expense of losing a score or two of Highland kernes, than remain at war till
as many thousands are destroyed by sword, fire, famine, and all the extremities of mountain
battle. AN ABSTRACT OF THE

Different Methods that have been used towards the Infected, as they are included in the FIVE
CLASSES mentioned above.

Having finish'd the preceding Relation the Tenth of November, and
applying to the Magistrates to procure Writers to copy a sufficient
Number, to satisfie the Desires of all the Persons who have done us
the Honour to consult us on this Subject, those Gentlemen replied,
that by reason they could not get Transcribers enow, they would willingly
take upon themselves the Care of having it printed; so that we have
accepted their Offer, being persuaded that it is the shortest and
most commodious Expedient to answer to all the Consultations that
we receive from all Quarters on this Subject; but having reflected
that this same Relation would be of no Use but to Persons of the Faculty
who are instructed and experienced in the Knowledge and Cure of Diseases,
we have thought proper to add here an Abstract of the different Methods
which we have made use of in treating the different Kinds of diseased
Persons contained in the five Classes mentioned above; presuming that
they may be of Service to the young Physicians and Surgeons that are
actually engaged in looking after infected Persons in divers Places
of this Province.

And we are the more readily determined to give this small Instruction to the Publick; since Mons.
LEBRET, first President of the Parliament, and Intendant of this Province, a Gentleman zealous
for its Preservation, and very active in his Assistance in this time of Calamity, has done
us the Honour frequently to ask of us an exact Account of the Treatment of this Malady.

The Method used in treating the Sick of the First Class.

If we afford but the least Attention to the Nature of the Symptoms related in the first Class,
that is to say, to the small, unequal, and concentrated Pulse; to the Shiverings; to the universal
Chilliness, especially in the extreme Parts, and to the almost continual Sickness at the Stomach;
to those Lead-coloured, dismal and cadaverous Faces; it will be very easy to judge, that we have
nothing to do in this Case, but to prescribe the most active and generous Cordials; such as
are Venice Treacle, Diascordium, the Extract of Juniper Berries,
the Lilium; the Confection of Hyacinth, of Alkermes; the Elixirs drawn
from Substances that abound the most in a volatile Salt; the Treacle
Waters, those of Juniper Berries of Carmes; the volatile Salts of
Vipers, of Armoniack, of Hartshorn; the Balms the most spirituous;
in one Word, all that is capable to animate, excite and strengthen;
augmenting, doubling, and even tripling their ordinary Dose, according
as the Case shall be more or less pressing.

 I am well aware that the abbot of Aberbrothock hath made some
ill advised complaints, that I suffered not his beeves to become too many for his pastures,
or his stock of grain to burst the girnels of the monastery, while my followers lacked beef
and their horses corn. But bethink you, the pastures and cornfields which produced that plenty
were bestowed by my ancestors on the house of Aberbrothock, surely not with the purpose that
their descendant should starve in the midst of it; and neither will he, by St. Bride! But for
heresy and false doctrine," he added, striking his large hand heavily on the council table,
"who is it that dare tax the Douglas? I would not have poor men burned for silly thoughts;
but my hand and sword are ever ready to maintain the Christian faith."

"My lord, I doubt it not," said the prior; "so hath it ever been with your most noble house.
For the abbot's complaints, they may pass to a second day. But what we now desire is a commission
to some noble lord of state, joined to others of Holy Church, to support by strength of hand,
if necessary, the inquiries which the reverend official of the bounds, and other grave prelates,
my unworthy self being one, are about to make into the cause of the new doctrines, which are
now deluding the simple, and depraving the pure and precious faith, approved by the Holy Father
and his reverend predecessors."

"Let the Earl of Douglas have a royal commission to this effect," said Albany; "and let there
be no exception whatever from his jurisdiction, saving the royal person. For my own part, although
conscious that I have neither in act nor thought received or encouraged a doctrine which Holy
Church hath not sanctioned, yet I should blush to claim an immunity under the blood royal of
Scotland, lest I should seem to be seeking refuge against a crime so horrible."

"I will have nought to do with it," said Douglas: "to march against the English, and the Southron
traitor March, is task enough for me. Moreover, I am a true Scotsman, and will not give way
to aught that may put the Church of Scotland's head farther into the Roman yoke, or make the
baron's coronet stoop to the mitre and cowl. Do you, therefore, most noble Duke of Albany,
place your own name in the commission; and I pray your Grace so to mitigate the zeal of the
men of Holy Church who may be associated with you, that there be no over zealous dealings;
for the smell of a fagot on the Tay would bring back the Douglas from the walls of York."

The Duke hastened to give the Earl assurance that the commission should be exercised with lenity
and moderation.

"Without a question," said King Robert, "the commission must be ample; and did it consist with
the dignity of our crown, we would not ourselves decline its jurisdiction. But we trust that,
while the thunders of the church are directed against the vile authors of these detestable
heresies, there shall be measures of mildness and compassion taken with the unfortunate victims
of their delusions."

"Such is ever the course of Holy Church, my lord," said the prior of St. Dominic's.

"Why, then, let the commission be expedited with due care, in name of our brother Albany, and
such others as shall be deemed convenient," said the King. "And now once again let us break
up our council; and, Rothsay, come thou with me, and lend me thine arm; I have matter for thy
private ear."

"Ho, la!" here exclaimed the Prince, in the tone in which he would have addressed a managed horse.

"What means this rudeness, boy?" said the King; "wilt thou never learn reason and courtesy?"

"Let me not be thought to offend, my liege," said the Prince; "but we are parting without learning
what is to be done in the passing strange adventure of the dead hand, which the Douglas hath
so gallantly taken up. We shall sit but uncomfortably here at Perth, if we are at variance
with the citizens."

"Leave that to me," said Albany. "With some little grant of lands and money, and plenty of
fair words, the burghers may be satisfied for this time; but it were well that the barons and
their followers, who are in attendance on the court, were warned to respect the peace within
burgh."

"Surely, we would have it so," said the King; "let strict orders be given accordingly."

"It is doing the churls but too much grace," said the Douglas; "but be it at your Highness's
pleasure. I take leave to retire."

"Not before you taste a flagon of Gascon wine, my lord?" said the King.

"Pardon," replied the Earl, "I am not athirst, and I drink not for fashion, but either for
need or for friendship." So saying, he departed.

The King, as if relieved by his absence, turned to Albany, and said: "And now, my lord, we
should chide this truant Rothsay of ours; yet he hath served us so well at council, that we
must receive his merits as some atonement for his follies."

"I am happy to hear it," answered Albany, with a countenance of pity and incredulity, as if
he knew nothing of the supposed services.

"Nay, brother, you are dull," said the King, "for I will not think you envious. Did you not
note that Rothsay was the first to suggest the mode of settling the Highlands, which your experience
brought indeed into better shape, and which was generally approved of; and even now we had
broken up, leaving a main matter unconsidered, but that he put us in mind of the affray with
the citizens?"

"I nothing doubt, my liege," said the Duke of Albany, with the acquiescence which he saw was
expected, "that my royal nephew will soon emulate his father's wisdom."

"Or," said the Duke of Rothsay, "I may find it easier to borrow from another member of my family
that happy and comfortable cloak of hypocrisy which covers all vices, and then it signifies
little whether they exist or not."

"My lord prior," said the Duke, addressing the Dominican, "we will for a moment pray your reverence's
absence. The King and I have that to say to the Prince which must have no further audience,
not even yours."

The Dominican bowed and withdrew.

When the two royal brothers and the Prince were left together, the King seemed in the highest
degree embarrassed and distressed, Albany sullen and thoughtful, while Rothsay himself endeavoured
to cover some anxiety under his usual appearance of levity. There was a silence of a minute.
At length Albany spoke.

"Royal brother," he said, "my princely nephew entertains with so much suspicion any admonition
coming from my mouth, that I must pray your Grace yourself to take the trouble of telling him
what it is most fitting he should know."

"It must be some unpleasing communication indeed, which my Lord of Albany cannot wrap up in
honied words," said the Prince.

"Peace with thine effrontery, boy," answered the King, passionately. "You asked but now of
the quarrel with the citizens. Who caused that quarrel, David? What men were those who scaled
the window of a peaceful citizen and liege man, alarmed the night with torch and outcry, and
subjected our subjects to danger and affright?"

"More fear than danger, I fancy," answered the Prince; "but how can I of all men tell who made
this nocturnal disturbance?"

"There was a follower of thine own there," continued the King--"a man of Belial, whom I will
have brought to condign punishment."

"I have no follower, to my knowledge, capable of deserving your Highness's displeasure," answered
the Prince.

"I will have no evasions, boy. Where wert thou on St. Valentine's Eve?"

"It is to be hoped that I was serving the good saint, as a man of mould might," answered the
young man, carelessly. 

"I'll get to sleep," he said, interrupting the train of my thoughts. "I'll be fresh when my
turn comes for guard."

"Tell me," I said, for the matter had been puzzling me all night,
"where did you learn to light your pipe with red-hot coals?"

"Oh, that," he said with a laugh. "I saw you doing it earlier in the
evening, and I made up my mind that what you did I could do."

"Then
it must have burnt you."

"Horribly," he said with a grimace. "Good-night."

CHAPTER
III.

THE PROMISED LAND. I will take care he shall be so no more. Call MacLouis,
with a guard."

"Do not injure an innocent man," interposed the Prince, desirous at every sacrifice to preserve
his favourite from the menaced danger: "I pledge my word that Ramorny was employed in business
of mine, therefore could not be engaged in this brawl."

"False equivocator that thou art!" said the King, presenting to the Prince a ring, "behold
the signet of Ramorny, lost in the infamous affray! It fell into the hands of a follower of
the Douglas, and was given by the Earl to my brother. Speak not for Ramorny, for he dies; and
go thou from my presence, and repent the flagitious counsels which could make thee stand before
me with a falsehood in thy mouth. Oh, shame, David--shame! as a son thou hast lied to thy father,
as a knight to the head of thy order."

The Prince stood mute, conscience struck, and self convicted. He then gave way to the honourable
feelings which at bottom he really possessed, and threw himself at his father's feet.

"The false knight," he said, "deserves degradation, the disloyal subject death; but, oh! let
the son crave from the father pardon for the servant who did not lead him into guilt, but who
reluctantly plunged himself into it at his command. Let me bear the weight of my own folly,
but spare those who have been my tools rather than my accomplices. Remember, Ramorny was preferred
to my service by my sainted mother."

"Name her not, David, I charge thee," said the King; "she is happy that she never saw the child
of her love stand before her doubly dishonoured by guilt and by falsehood."

"I am indeed unworthy to name her," said the Prince; "and yet, my dear father, in her name
I must petition for Ramorny's life." 

Such as we prescribed in the Form of a laxative Ptisan, as well as plentiful Draughts, that
were diluting, nitrous, cooling, and gently alexiterial, gave some Relief, but did not hinder
the Return of the Symptoms.

All Cordials and Sudorificks, if they were not soft, gentle and benign,
did nothing but promote the Progress of the inward Inflammations.

In short, if any one escaped, which was very rare, he seem'd to owe
his Cure to the external Eruptions, when they were very much raised;
either solely by the Force of Nature, or by the Assistance of Remedies,
as well internal as external, that determined the Blood to discharge
on the Surface of the Body, the noxious Ferment wherewith it was infected.

THIRD

CLASS.
 "I would
I could fulfil all your wishes as easily, my royal father," he added, again throwing himself
at the King's feet, who raised him up and fondly folded him in his arms.

Albany scowled, but was silent; and it was not till after the space of a minute or two that
he said: "This matter being so happily accommodated, let me ask if your Majesty is pleased
to attend the evensong service in the chapel?"

"Surely," said the King. "Have I not thanks to pay to God, who has restored union to my family?
You will go with us, brother?"

"So please your Grace to give me leave of absence--no," said the Duke. "I must concert with
the Douglas and others the manner in which we may bring these Highland vultures to our lure."

Albany retired to think over his ambitious projects, while the father and son attended divine
service, to thank God for their happy reconciliation.

CHAPTER XIV.

     Will you go to the Hielands, Lizzy Lyndesay,
     Will you go the Hielands wi' me?
     Will you go to the Hielands, Lizzy Lyndesay,
     My bride and my darling to be?

     Old Ballad.

A former chapter opened in the royal confessional; we are now to introduce our readers to a
situation somewhat similar, though the scene and persons were very different. Instead of a
Gothic and darkened apartment in a monastery, one of the most beautiful prospects in Scotland
lay extended beneath the hill of Kinnoul, and at the foot of a rock which commanded the view
in every direction sat the Fair Maid of Perth, listening in an attitude of devout attention
to the instructions of a Carthusian monk, in his white gown and scapular, who concluded his
discourse with prayer, in which his proselyte devoutly joined.

When they had finished their devotions, the priest sat for some time with his eyes fixed on
the glorious prospect, of which even the early and chilly season could not conceal the beauties,
and it was some time ere he addressed his attentive companion.

"When I behold," he said at length, "this rich and varied land, with its castles, churches,
convents, stately palaces, and fertile fields, these extensive woods, and that noble river,
I know not, my daughter, whether most to admire the bounty of God or the ingratitude of man.
He hath given us the beauty and fertility of the earth, and we have made the scene of his bounty
a charnel house and a battlefield. He hath given us power over the elements, and skill to erect
houses for comfort and defence, and we have converted them into dens for robbers and ruffians."

"Yet, surely, my father, there is room for comfort," replied Catharine, "even in the very prospect
we look upon. Yonder four goodly convents, with their churches, and their towers, which tell
the citizens with brazen voice that they should think on their religious duties; their inhabitants,
who have separated themselves from the world, its pursuits and its pleasures, to dedicate themselves
to the service of Heaven--all bear witness that, if Scotland be a bloody and a sinful land,
she is yet alive and sensible to the claims which religion demands of the human race."

"Verily, daughter," answered the priest, "what you say seems truth; and yet, nearly viewed,
too much of the comfort you describe will be found delusive. It is true, there was a period
in the Christian world when good men, maintaining themselves by the work of their hands, assembled
together, not that they might live easily or sleep softly, but that they might strengthen each
other in the Christian faith, and qualify themselves to be teachers of the Word to the people.
Doubtless there are still such to be found in the holy edifices on which we now look. But it
is to be feared that the love of many has waxed cold. Our churchmen have become wealthy, as
well by the gifts of pious persons as by the bribes which wicked men have given in their ignorance,
imagining that they can purchase that pardon by endowments to the church which Heaven has only
offered to sincere penitents. And thus, as the church waxeth rich, her doctrines have unhappily
become dim and obscure, as a light is less seen if placed in a lamp of chased gold than beheld
through a screen of glass. God knows, if I see these things and mark them, it is from no wish
of singularity or desire to make myself a teacher in Israel; but because the fire burns in
my bosom, and will not permit me to be silent. I obey the rules of my order, and withdraw not
myself from its austerities. Be they essential to our salvation, or be they mere formalities,
adopted to supply the want of real penitence and sincere devotion, I have promised, nay, vowed,
to observe them; and they shall be respected by me the more, that otherwise I might be charged
with regarding my bodily ease, when Heaven is my witness how lightly I value what I may be
called on to act or suffer, if the purity of the church could be restored, or the discipline
of the priesthood replaced in its primitive simplicity."

"But, my father," said Catharine, "even for these opinions men term you a Lollard and a Wickliffite,
and say it is your desire to destroy churches and cloisters, and restore the religion of heathenesse."

"Even so, my daughter, am I driven to seek refuge in hills and rocks, and must be presently
contented to take my flight amongst the rude Highlanders, who are thus far in a more gracious
state than those I leave behind me, that theirs are crimes of ignorance, not of presumption.
I will not omit to take such means of safety and escape from their cruelty as Heaven may open
to me; for, while such appear, I shall account it a sign that I have still a service to accomplish.
But when it is my Master's pleasure, He knows how willingly Clement Blair will lay down a vilified
life upon earth, in humble hope of a blessed exchange hereafter. But wherefore dost thou look
northward so anxiously, my child? Thy young eyes are quicker than mine--dost thou see any one
coming?"

"I look, father, for the Highland youth, Conachar, who will be thy guide to the hills, where
his father can afford thee a safe, if a rude, retreat. This he has often promised, when we
spoke of you and of your lessons. I fear he is now in company where he will soon forget them."

"The youth hath sparkles of grace in him," said Father Clement; "although those of his race
are usually too much devoted to their own fierce and savage customs to endure with patience
either the restraints of religion or those of the social law. Thou hast never told me, daughter,
how, contrary to all the usages either of the burgh or of the mountains, this youth came to
reside in thy father's house?"

"All I know touching that matter," said Catharine, "is, that his father is a man of consequence
among those hill men, and that he desired as a favour of my father, who hath had dealings with
them in the way of his merchandise, to keep this youth for a certain time, and that it is only
two days since they parted, as Conachar was to return home to his own mountains."

"And why has my daughter," demanded the priest, "maintained such a correspondence with this
Highland youth, that she should know how to send for him when she desired to use his services
in my behalf? Surely, this is much influence for a maiden to possess over such a wild colt
as this youthful mountaineer."

Catharine blushed, and answered with hesitation: "If I have had any influence with Conachar,
Heaven be my witness, I have only exerted it to enforce upon his fiery temper compliance with
the rules of civil life. It is true, I have long expected that you, my father, would be obliged
to take to flight, and I therefore had agreed with him that he should meet me at this place
as soon as he should receive a message from me with a token, which I yesterday despatched.
The messenger was a lightfooted boy of his own clan, whom he used sometimes to send on errands
into the Highlands."

"And am I then to understand, daughter, that this youth, so fair to the eye, was nothing more
dear to you than as you desired to enlighten his mind and reform his manners?"

"It is so, my father, and no otherwise," answered Catharine; "and perhaps I did not do well
to hold intimacy with him, even for his instruction and improvement. But my discourse never
led farther."

"Then have I been mistaken, my daughter; for I thought I had seen in thee of late some change
of purpose, and some wishful regards looking back to this world, of which you were at one time
resolved to take leave."

Catharine hung down her head and blushed more deeply than ever as she said: "Yourself, father,
were used to remonstrate against my taking the veil."

"Nor do I now approve of it, my child," said the priest. "Marriage is an honourable state,
appointed by Heaven as the regular means of continuing the race of man; and I read not in the
Scriptures what human inventions have since affirmed concerning the superior excellence of
a state of celibacy. But I am jealous of thee, my child, as a father is of his only daughter,
lest thou shouldst throw thyself away upon some one unworthy of thee. Thy parent, I know, less
nice in thy behalf than I am, countenances the addresses of that fierce and riotous reveller
whom they call Henry of the Wynd. He is rich it may be; but a haunter of idle and debauched
company--a common prizefighter, who has shed human blood like water. Can such a one be a fit
mate for Catharine Glover? And yet report says they are soon to be united."

The Fair Maid of Perth's complexion changed from red to pale, and from pale to red, as she
hastily replied: "I think not of him; though it is true some courtesies have passed betwixt
us of late, both as he is my father's friend and as being according to the custom of the time,
my Valentine."

"Your Valentine, my child!" said Father Clement. "And can your modesty and prudence have trifled
so much with the delicacy of your sex as to place yourself in such a relation to such a man
as this artificer? Think you that this Valentine, a godly saint and Christian bishop, as he
is said to have been, ever countenanced a silly and unseemly custom, more likely to have originated
in the heathen worship of Flora or Venus, when mortals gave the names of deities to their passions;
and studied to excite instead of restraining them?"

"Father," said Catharine, in a tone of more displeasure than she had ever before assumed to
the Carthusian, "I know not upon what ground you tax me thus severely for complying with a
general practice, authorised by universal custom and sanctioned by my father's authority. I
cannot feel it kind that you put such misconstruction upon me."

"Forgive me, daughter," answered the priest, mildly, "if I have given you offence. But this
Henry Gow, or Smith, is a forward, licentious man, to whom you cannot allow any uncommon degree
of intimacy and encouragement, without exposing yourself to worse misconstruction--unless,
indeed, it be your purpose to wed him, and that very shortly."

"Say no more of it, my father," said Catharine. "You give me more pain than you would desire
to do; and I may be provoked to answer otherwise than as becomes me. Perhaps I have already
had cause enough to make me repent my compliance with an idle custom. At any rate, believe
that Henry Smith is nothing to me, and that even the idle intercourse arising from St. Valentine's
Day is utterly broken off."

"I am rejoiced to hear it, my daughter," replied the Carthusian, "and must now prove you on
another subject, which renders me most anxious on your behalf. You cannot your self be ignorant
of it, although I could wish it were not necessary to speak of a thing so dangerous, even,
before these surrounding rocks, cliffs, and stones. But it must be said. Catharine, you have
a lover in the highest rank of Scotland's sons of honour?"

"I know it, father," answered Catharine, composedly. "I would it were not so."

"So would I also," said the priest, "did I see in my daughter only the child of folly, which
most young women are at her age, especially if possessed of the fatal gift of beauty. But as
thy charms, to speak the language of an idle world, have attached to thee a lover of such high
rank, so I know that thy virtue and wisdom will maintain the influence over the Prince's mind
which thy beauty hath acquired."

"Father," replied Catharine, "the Prince is a licentious gallant, whose notice of me tends
only to my disgrace and ruin. Can you, who seemed but now afraid that I acted imprudently in
entering into an ordinary exchange of courtesies with one of my own rank, speak with patience
of the sort of correspondence which the heir of Scotland dares to fix upon me? Know that it
is but two nights since he, with a party of his debauched followers, would have carried me
by force from my father's house, had I not been rescued by that same rash spirited Henry Smith,
who, if he be too hasty in venturing on danger on slight occasion, is always ready to venture
his life in behalf of innocence or in resistance of oppression. It is well my part to do him
that justice."

"I should know something of that matter," said the monk, "since it was my voice that sent him
to your assistance. I had seen the party as I passed your door, and was hastening to the civil
power in order to raise assistance, when I perceived a man's figure coming slowly towards me.
Apprehensive it might be one of the ambuscade, I stepped behind the buttresses of the chapel
of St. John, and seeing from a nearer view that it was Henry Smith, I guessed which way he
was bound, and raised my voice, in an exhortation which made him double his speed."

"I am beholden to you, father," said Catharine; "but all this, and the Duke of Rothsay's own
language to me, only show that the Prince is a profligate young man, who will scruple no extremities
which may promise to gratify an idle passion, at whatever expense to its object. His emissary,
Ramorny, has even had the insolence to tell me that my father shall suffer for it if I dare
to prefer being the wife of an honest man to becoming the loose paramour of a married prince.
So I see no other remedy than to take the veil, or run the risk of my own ruin and my poor
father's. Were there no other reason, the terror of these threats, from a man so notoriously
capable of keeping his word, ought as much to prevent my becoming the bride of any worthy man
as it should prohibit me from unlatching his door to admit murderers. Oh, good father, what
a lot is mine! and how fatal am I likely to prove to my affectionate parent, and to any one
with whom I might ally my unhappy fortunes!"

"Be yet of good cheer, my daughter," said the monk; "there is comfort for thee even in this
extremity of apparent distress. Ramorny is a villain, and abuses the ear of his patron. The
Prince is unhappily a dissipated and idle youth; but, unless my grey hairs have been strangely
imposed on, his character is beginning to alter. He hath been awakened to Ramorny's baseness,
and deeply regrets having followed his evil advice. I believe, nay, I am well convinced, that
his passion for you has assumed a nobler and purer character, and that the lessons he has heard
from me on the corruptions of the church and of the times will, if enforced from your lips,
sink deeply into his heart, and perhaps produce fruits for the world to wonder as well as rejoice
at. Old prophecies have said that Rome shall fall by the speech of a woman."

"These are dreams, father," said Catharine--"the visions of one whose thoughts are too much
on better things to admit his thinking justly upon the ordinary affairs of Perth. When we have
looked long at the sun, everything else can only be seen indistinctly."

"Thou art over hasty, my daughter," said Clement, "and thou shalt be convinced of it. The prospects
which I am to open to thee were unfit to be exposed to one of a less firm sense of virtue,
or a more ambitious temper. Perhaps it is not fit that, even to you, I should display them;
but my confidence is strong in thy wisdom and thy principles. Know, then, that there is much
chance that the Church of Rome will dissolve the union which she has herself formed, and release
the Duke of Rothsay from his marriage with Marjory Douglas."

Here he paused.

"And if the church hath power and will to do this," replied the maiden, "what influence can
the divorce of the Duke from his wife produce on the fortunes of Catharine Glover?"

She looked at the priest anxiously as she spoke, and he had some apparent difficulty in framing
his reply, for he looked on the ground while he answered her.

"What did beauty do for Catharine Logie? Unless our fathers have told us falsely, it raised
her to share the throne of David Bruce."

"Did she live happy or die regretted, good father?" asked Catharine, in the same calm and steady
tone.

"She formed her alliance from temporal, and perhaps criminal, ambition," replied Father Clement;
"and she found her reward in vanity and vexation of spirit. But had she wedded with the purpose
that the believing wife should convert the unbelieving, or confirm the doubting, husband, what
then had been her reward? Love and honour upon earth, and an inheritance in Heaven with Queen
Margaret and those heroines who have been the nursing mothers of the church."

Hitherto Catharine had sat upon a stone beside the priest's feet, and looked up to him as she
spoke or listened; but now, as if animated by calm, yet settled, feelings of disapprobation,
she rose up, and, extending her hand towards the monk as she spoke, addressed him with a countenance
and voice which might have become a cherub, pitying, and even as much as possible sparing,
the feelings of the mortal whose errors he is commissioned to rebuke.

"And is it even so?" she said, "and can so much of the wishes, hopes, and prejudices of this
vile world affect him who may be called tomorrow to lay down his life for opposing the corruptions
of a wicked age and backsliding priesthood? Can it be the severely virtuous Father Clement
who advises his child to aim at, or even to think of, the possession of a throne and a bed
which cannot become vacant but by an act of crying injustice to the present possessor? Can
it be the wise reformer of the church who wishes to rest a scheme, in itself so unjust, upon
a foundation so precarious? Since when is it, good father, that the principal libertine has
altered his morals so much, to be likely to court in honourable fashion the daughter of a Perth
artisan? Two days must have wrought this change; for only that space has passed since he was
breaking into my father's house at midnight, with worse mischief in his mind than that of a
common robber. And think you that, if Rothsay's heart could dictate so mean a match, he could
achieve such a purpose without endangering both his succession and his life, assailed by the
Douglas and March at the same time, for what they must receive as an act of injury and insult
to both their houses? Oh! Father Clement, where was your principle, where your prudence, when
they suffered you to be bewildered by so strange a dream, and placed the meanest of your disciples
in the right thus to reproach you?"

The old man's eyes filled with tears, as Catharine, visibly and painfully affected by what
she had said, became at length silent.

"By the mouths of babes and sucklings," he said, "hath He rebuked those who would seem wise
in their generation. I thank Heaven, that hath taught me better thoughts than my own vanity
suggested, through the medium of so kind a monitress. Yes, Catharine, I must not hereafter
wonder or exclaim when I see those whom I have hitherto judged too harshly struggling for temporal
power, and holding all the while the language of religious zeal. I thank thee, daughter, for
thy salutary admonition, and I thank Heaven that sent it by thy lips, rather than those of
a stern reprover."

Catharine had raised her head to reply, and bid the old man, whose humiliation gave her pain,
be comforted, when her eyes were arrested by an object close at hand. Among the crags and cliffs
which surrounded this place of seclusion, there were two which stood in such close contiguity,
that they seemed to have been portions of the same rock, which, rendered by lightning or by
an earthquake, now exhibited a chasm of about four feet in breadth, betwixt the masses of stone.
Into this chasm an oak tree had thrust itself, in one of the fantastic frolics which vegetation
often exhibits in such situations. The tree, stunted and ill fed, had sent its roots along
the face of the rock in all directions to seek for supplies, and they lay like military lines
of communication, contorted, twisted, and knotted like the immense snakes of the Indian archipelago.
As Catharine's look fell upon the curious complication of knotty branches and twisted roots,
she was suddenly sensible that two large eyes were visible among them, fixed and glaring at
her, like those of a wild animal in ambush. She started, and, without speaking, pointed out
the object to her companion, and looking herself with more strict attention, could at length
trace out the bushy red hair and shaggy beard, which had hitherto been concealed by the drooping
branches and twisted roots of the tree.

When he saw himself discovered, the Highlander, for such he proved, stepped forth from his
lurking place, and, stalking forward, displayed a colossal person, clothed in a purple, red,
and green checked plaid, under which he wore a jacket of bull's hide. His bow and arrows were
at his back, his head was bare, and a large quantity of tangled locks, like the glibbs of the
Irish, served to cover the head, and supplied all the purposes of a bonnet. His belt bore a
sword and dagger, and he had in his hand a Danish pole axe, more recently called a Lochaber
axe. Through the same rude portal advanced, one by one, four men more, of similar size, and
dressed and armed in the same manner.

Catharine was too much accustomed to the appearance of the inhabitants of the mountains so
near to Perth to permit herself to be alarmed, as another Lowland maiden might have been on
the same occasion. She saw with tolerable composure these gigantic forms arrange themselves
in a semicircle around and in front of the monk and herself, all bending upon them in silence
their large fixed eyes, expressing, as far as she could judge, a wild admiration of her beauty.
She inclined her head to them, and uttered imperfectly the usual words of a Highland salutation.
The elder and leader of the party returned the greeting, and then again remained silent and
motionless. The monk told his beads; and even Catharine began to have strange fears for her
personal safety, and anxiety to know whether they were to consider themselves at personal freedom.
She resolved to make the experiment, and moved forward as if to descend the hill; but when
she attempted to pass the line of Highlanders, they extended their poleaxes betwixt each other,
so as effectually to occupy each opening through which she could have passed.

Somewhat disconcerted, yet not dismayed, for she could not conceive that any evil was intended,
she sat down upon one of the scattered fragments of rock, and bade the monk, standing by her
side, be of good courage.

"If I fear," said Father Clement, "it is not for myself; for whether I be brained with the
axes of these wild men, like an ox when, worn out by labour, he is condemned to the slaughter,
or whether I am bound with their bowstrings, and delivered over to those who will take my life
with more cruel ceremony, it can but little concern me, if they suffer thee, dearest daughter,
to escape uninjured."

"We have neither of us," replied the Maiden of Perth, "any cause for apprehending evil; and
here comes Conachar to assure us of it."

Yet, as she spoke, she almost doubted her own eyes; so altered were the manner and attire of
the handsome, stately, and almost splendidly dressed youth who, springing like a roebuck from
a cliff of considerable height, lighted just in front of her. His dress was of the same tartan
worn by those who had first made their appearance, but closed at the throat and elbows with
a necklace and armlets of gold. The hauberk which he wore over his person was of steel, but
so clearly burnished that it shone like silver. His arms were profusely ornamented, and his
bonnet, besides the eagle's feather marking the quality of chief, was adorned with a chain
of gold, wrapt several times around it, and secured by a large clasp, glistening with pearls.
His brooch, by which the tartan mantle, or plaid, as it is now called, was secured on the shoulder,
was also of gold, large and curiously carved. He bore no weapon in his hand, excepting a small
sapling stick with a hooked head. His whole appearance and gait, which used formerly to denote
a sullen feeling of conscious degradation, was now bold, forward, and haughty; and he stood
before Catharine with smiling confidence, as if fully conscious of his improved appearance,
and waiting till she should recognise him.

"Conachar," said Catharine, desirous to break this state of suspense, "are these your father's
men?"

"No, fair Catharine," answered the young man. "Conachar is no more, unless in regard to the
wrongs he has sustained, and the vengeance which they demand. I am Ian Eachin MacIan, son to
the chief of the Clan Quhele. I have moulted my feathers, as you see, when I changed my name.
And for these men, they are not my father's followers, but mine. You see only one half of them
collected: they form a band consisting of my foster father and eight sons, who are my bodyguard,
and the children of my belt, who breathe but to do my will. It would be altogether needless to enter
into the particulars of the Method we used in treating the Patients of this third Class, since
the Symptoms they were attack'd with, were the same with those which we have mention'd in
the two preceeding Classes; so that they succeeded mutually each other, and the Symptoms related
in the second Class, were the Forerunners of those described in the first; whence it is easy to
judge that we have here nothing to do but to use successively the
Medicines mentioned before.

The Observation that we thought fit to insert between the third and fourth Class, and in which it
is shown, that several infected Persons perished in a very short Time with Symptoms very moderate,
or much less violent than what we generally observe the same Symptoms to be in malignant or common
putrid Fevers.

This Observation, I say, may instruct us, that this Sort of infected Persons in whom often
there only appear a small Weakness, and a very great Consternation, demands as much Care as
those in whom the Symptoms are more considerable, and on the least
Appearance of their being seized, there ought immediately to be used,
besides generous Remedies, every Thing that is proper to sustain their
Strength and encourage them.

The Method of treating the Sick of the FOURTH CLASS.

We have nothing here to do, but to cast our Eyes back, on what we have said above, relating to
the Accidents that characterise and terminate the Plague, in order to judge that this Method should
principally turn on the Manner of treating the Buboes or Carbuncles. The Symptoms, it is true, that
appear at the Beginning in the Diseased of this Class, are nearly
the same with those that show themselves in the sick Persons of the
second Class; so we immediately employ'd the Remedies proper to oppose
them, such as are the gentle Emeticks, the diluting Catharticks and
Sudorificks of the same sort, according to the Indications that arise,
observing however a very exact Regimen.

But the Destiny of the Infected, depending principally, as we have remarked already, on the large
Emption, and laudable Suppuration of the Buboes and Carbuncles, these
Sorts of Tumours have been always the Objects of our chief Care and
Attention.

And since these Tumours have constantly appeared in the Sick of this fourth Class, and in those
of the preceeding, the Method which we are going to propose for their Management, ought to be
consider'd, as common to all the Classes.

The Method used in the Treatment of Buboes.

These Tumours were ordinarily situated in the Groin, and often below it, chiefly swelling the
lymphatick Glands, placed near the crural Vessels; they appeared also pretty frequently under
the Arm-pits, particularly under the pectoral Muscle, as also in
the Glands behind and below the Ears, in the Jugular, and under the
Chin.

The Buboes with which the Sick of the former Classes were attack'd,
often appeared at the Beginning of the Distemper, chiefly in the Groin
and Arm-pits, small at first, deep and exceeding painful, that one
could scarce touch or handle them, without causing a very uneasy Sensation;
these for the most Part made no other Alteration in the Skin, but
by swelling it, as they grew bigger, towards the End they became indolent.

In

what Time soever of the Distemper these Sorts of Tumours appeared,
we attacked them without any Delay, unless there was Reason to presume
from other Symptoms that the sick Person was at the Point of Death.

If the Tumour was small, deep, painful, and one had Time to endeavour to mollify it, we began with
the Application of emollient and anodyne Cataplasms, and as the Misery and Desertion would not
suffer us to have Recourse to choice Drogues, we prepared on the Spot, and applied warm, a
Sort of Pultice composed of Crums of Bread, common Water, Oil of Olives, Yolk of an Egg, or
a large Onion roasted in the Ashes, which we first hollowed, and filled with Treacle, Soap, Oil
of Scorpions or of Olives; using moreover, for Persons of Condition, Cataplasms made with Milk,
the Crummy Part of Bread, Yolks of Eggs; or with the Mucilage of emollient Herbs and Roots.
 Farewell, kind and excellent Father Clement. Believe I shall never forget thy lessons;
remember me in thy prayers. But how wilt thou be able to sustain a journey so toilsome?"

"They shall carry him if need be," said Hector, "if we go far without finding a horse for him.
But you, Catharine--it is far from hence to Perth. Let me attend you thither as I was wont."

"If you were as you were wont, I would not refuse your escort. But gold brooches and bracelets
are perilous company, when the Liddesdale and Annandale lancers are riding as throng upon the
highway as the leaves at Hallowmass; and there is no safe meeting betwixt Highland tartans
and steel jackets."

She hazarded this remark, as she somewhat suspected that, in casting his slough, young Eachin
had not entirely surmounted the habits which he had acquired in his humbler state, and that,
though he might use bold words, he would not be rash enough to brave the odds of numbers, to
which a descent into the vicinity of the city would be likely to expose him. It appeared that
she judged correctly; for, after a farewell, in which she compounded for the immunity of her
lips by permitting him to kiss her hand, she returned towards Perth, and could obtain at times,
when she looked back, an occasional glance of the Highlanders, as, winding through the most
concealed and impracticable paths, they bent their way towards the North.

She felt in part relieved from her immediate anxiety, as the distance increased betwixt her
and these men, whose actions were only directed by the will of their chief, and whose chief
was a giddy and impetuous boy. She apprehended no insult on her return to Perth from the soldiery
of any party whom she might meet; for the rules of chivalry were in those days a surer protection
to a maiden of decent appearance than an escort of armed men, whose cognizance might not be
acknowledged as friendly by any other party whom they might chance to encounter. But more remote
dangers pressed on her apprehension. The pursuit of the licentious Prince was rendered formidable
by threats which his unprincipled counsellor, Ramorny, had not shunned to utter against her
father, if she persevered in her coyness. These menaces, in such an age, and from such a character,
were deep grounds for alarm; nor could she consider the pretensions to her favour which Conachar
had scarce repressed during his state of servitude, and seemed now to avow boldly, as less
fraught with evil, since there had been repeated incursions of the Highlanders into the very
town of Perth, and citizens had, on more occasions than one, been made prisoners and carried
off from their own houses, or had fallen by the claymore in the very streets of their city.
She feared, too, her father's importunity on behalf of the smith, of whose conduct on St. Valentine's
Day unworthy reports had reached her; and whose suit, had he stood clear in her good opinion,
she dared not listen to, while Ramorny's threats of revenge upon her father rung on her ear.
She thought on these various dangers with the deepest apprehension, and an earnest desire to
escape from them and herself, by taking refuge in the cloister; but saw no possibility of obtaining
her father's consent to the only course from which she expected peace and protection.

In the course of these reflections, we cannot discover that she very distinctly regretted that
her perils attended her because she was the Fair Maid of Perth. This was one point which marked
that she was not yet altogether an angel; and perhaps it was another that, in despite of Henry
Smith's real or supposed delinquencies, a sigh escaped from her bosom when she thought upon
St. Valentine's dawn.

CHAPTER XV.

     Oh, for a draught of power to steep
     The soul of agony in sleep!

     Bertha.

We have shown the secrets of the confessional; those of the sick chamber are not hidden from
us. The darkened apartment, where salves and medicines showed that the leech had been busy
in his craft, a tall thin form lay on a bed, arrayed in a nightgown belted around him, with
pain on his brow, and a thousand stormy passions agitating his bosom. Everything in the apartment
indicated a man of opulence and of expense. Henbane Dwining, the apothecary, who seemed to
have the care of the patient, stole with a crafty and catlike step from one corner of the room
to another, busying himself with mixing medicines and preparing dressings. The sick man groaned
once or twice, on which the leech, advancing to his bedside, asked whether these sounds were
a token of the pain of his body or of the distress of his mind.

"Of both, thou poisoning varlet," said Sir John Ramorny, "and of being encumbered with thy
accursed company."

"If that is all, I can relieve your knighthood of one of these ills by presently removing myself
elsewhere. Thanks to the feuds of this boisterous time, had I twenty hands, instead of these
two poor servants of my art (displaying his skinny palms), there is enough of employment for
them--well requited employment, too, where thanks and crowns contend which shall best pay my
services; while you, Sir John, wreak upon your chirurgeon the anger you ought only to bear
against the author of your wound."

"Villain, it is beneath me to reply to thee," said the patient; "but every word of thy malignant
tongue is a dirk, inflicting wounds which set all the medicines of Arabia at defiance."

"Sir John, I understand you not; but if you give way to these tempestuous fits of rage, it
is impossible but fever and inflammation must be the result."

"Why then dost thou speak in a sense to chafe my blood? Why dost thou name the supposition
of thy worthless self having more hands than nature gave thee, while I, a knight and gentleman,
am mutilated like a cripple?"

"Sir John," replied the chirurgeon, "I am no divine, nor a mainly obstinate believer in some
things which divines tell us. Yet I may remind you that you have been kindly dealt with; for
if the blow which has done you this injury had lighted on your neck, as it was aimed, it would
have swept your head from your shoulders, instead of amputating a less considerable member."

"I wish it had, Dwining--I wish it had lighted as it was addressed. I should not then have
seen a policy which had spun a web so fine as mine burst through by the brute force of a drunken
churl. I should not have been reserved to see horses which I must not mount, lists which I
must no longer enter, splendours which I cannot hope to share, or battles which I must not
take part in. I should not, with a man's passions for power and for strife, be set to keep
place among the women, despised by them, too, as a miserable, impotent cripple, unable to aim
at obtaining the favour of the sex."

"Supposing all this to be so, I will yet pray of your knighthood to remark," replied Dwining,
still busying himself with arranging the dressings of the wounds, "that your eyes, which you
must have lost with your head, may, being spared to you, present as rich a prospect of pleasure
as either ambition, or victory in the list or in the field, or the love of woman itself, could
have proposed to you."

"My sense is too dull to catch thy meaning, leech," replied Ramorny. "What is this precious
spectacle reserved to me in such a shipwreck?"

"The dearest that mankind knows," replied Dwining; and then, in the accent of a lover who utters
the name of his beloved mistress, and expresses his passion for her in the very tone of his
voice, he added the word "REVENGE!"

The patient had raised himself on his couch to listen with some anxiety for the solution of
the physician's enigma. He laid himself down again as he heard it explained, and after a short
pause asked, "In what Christian college learned you this morality, good Master Dwining?"

"In no Christian college," answered his physician; "for, though it is privately received in
most, it is openly and manfully adopted in none. But I have studied among the sages of Granada,
where the fiery souled Moor lifts high his deadly dagger as it drops with his enemy's blood,
and avows the doctrine which the pallid Christian practises, though coward-like he dare not
name it."

"Thou art then a more high souled villain than I deemed thee," said Ramorny.

"Let that pass," answered Dwining. "The waters that are the stillest are also the deepest;
and the foe is most to be dreaded who never threatens till he strikes. You knights and men
at arms go straight to your purpose with sword in hand. We who are clerks win our access with
a noiseless step and an indirect approach, but attain our object not less surely."

"And I," said the knight, "who have trod to my revenge with a mailed foot, which made all echo
around it, must now use such a slipper as thine--ha?"

"He who lacks strength," said the wily mediciner, "must attain his purpose by skill."

"And tell me sincerely, mediciner, wherefore thou wouldst read me these devil's lessons? Why
wouldst thou thrust me faster or farther on to my vengeance than I may seem to thee ready to
go of my own accord? I am old in the ways of the world, man; and I know that such as thou do
not drop words in vain, or thrust themselves upon the dangerous confidence of men like me save
with the prospect of advancing some purpose of their own. What interest hast thou in the road,
whether peaceful or bloody, which I may pursue on these occurrents?"

"In plain dealing, sir knight, though it is what I seldom use," answered the leech, "my road
to revenge is the same with yours."

"With mine, man?" said Ramorny, with a tone of scornful surprise. "I thought it had been high
beyond thy reach. Thou aim at the same revenge with Ramorny?"

"Ay, truly," replied Dwining, "for the smithy churl under whose blow you have suffered has
often done me despite and injury. He has thwarted me in counsel and despised me in action.
His brutal and unhesitating bluntness is a living reproach to the subtlety of my natural disposition.
I fear him, and I hate him."

"And you hope to hind an active coadjutor in me?" said Ramorny, in the same supercilious tone
as before. "But know, the artisan fellow is too low in degree to be to me either the object
of hatred or of fear. Yet he shall not escape. We hate not the reptile that has stung us, though
we might shake it off the wound, and tread upon it. I know the ruffian of old as a stout man
at arms, and a pretender, as I have heard, to the favour of the scornful puppet whose beauties,
forsooth, spurred us to our wise and hopeful attempt. Fiends that direct this nether world,
by what malice have ye decided that the hand which has couched a lance against the bosom of
a prince should be struck off like a sapling by the blow of a churl, and during the turmoil
of a midnight riot? Well, mediciner, thus far our courses hold together, and I bid thee well
believe that I will crush for thee this reptile mechanic. But do not thou think to escape me
when that part of my revenge is done which will be most easily and speedily accomplished."

"Not, it may be, altogether so easily accomplished," said the apothecary; "for if your knighthood
will credit me, there will be found small ease or security in dealing with him. He is the strongest,
boldest, and most skilful swordsman in Perth and all the country around it."

"Fear nothing; he shall be met with had he the strength of Sampson. But then, mark me! Hope
not thou to escape my vengeance, unless thou become my passive agent in the scene which is
to follow. Mark me, I say once more. I have studied at no Moorish college, and lack some of
thy unbounded appetite for revenge, but yet I will have my share of vengeance. Listen to me,
mediciner, while I shall thus far unfold myself; but beware of treachery, for, powerful as
thy fiend is, thou hast taken lessons from a meaner devil than mine. Hearken--the master whom
I have served through vice and virtue, with too much zeal for my own character, perhaps, but
with unshaken fidelity to him--the very man, to soothe whose frantic folly I have incurred
this irreparable loss, is, at the prayer of his doating father, about to sacrifice me, by turning
me out of his favour, and leaving me at the mercy of the hypocritical relative with whom he
seeks a precarious reconciliation at my expense. If he perseveres in this most ungrateful purpose,
thy fiercest Moors, were their complexion swarthy as the smoke of hell, shall blush to see
their revenge outdone. But I will give him one more chance for honour and safety before my
wrath shall descend on him in unrelenting and unmitigated fury. There, then, thus far thou
hast my confidence. Close hands on our bargain. Close hands, did I say? Where is the hand that
should be the pledge and representative of Ramorny's plighted word? Is it nailed on the public
pillory, or flung as offal to the houseless dogs, who are even now snarling over it? Lay thy
finger on the mutilated stump, then, and swear to be a faithful actor in my revenge, as I shall
be in yours. How now, sir leech look you pale--you, who say to death, stand back or advance,
can you tremble to think of him or to hear him named? I have not mentioned your fee, for one
who loves revenge for itself requires no deeper bribe; yet, if broad lands and large sums of
gold can increase thy zeal in a brave cause, believe me, these shall not be lacking."

"They tell for something in my humble wishes," said Dwining: "the poor man in this bustling
world is thrust down like a dwarf in a crowd, and so trodden under foot; the rich and powerful
rise like giants above the press, and are at ease, while all is turmoil around them."

"Then shalt thou arise above the press, mediciner, as high as gold can raise thee. This purse
is weighty, yet it is but an earnest of thy guerdon."

"And this Smith, my noble benefactor," said the leech, as he pouched the gratuity--"this Henry
of the Wynd, or what ever is his name--would not the news that he hath paid the penalty of
his action assuage the pain of thy knighthood's wound better than the balm of Mecca with which
I have salved it?"

"He is beneath the thoughts of Ramorny; and I have no more resentment against him than I have
ill will at the senseless weapon which he swayed. But it is just thy hate should be vented
upon him. In the Course of the Dressings, the Lotions and Injections are also
employed the same as for the Buboes, according to the Exigence of
the Case.

And, if in the Process of Suppuration, the new Flesh be so sensible, that the Digestives applied
cause a very great Pain, as we have seen it often happen, then we substitute in their room
Pledgets with Unguentum Nutritum, with very good Success.

The Method relating to the Sick of the FIFTH CLASS.

We believe it will be useless to give every particular of the Method that has been followed, and
which is still actually used in the Cure of the diseased of the Fifth Class, wherewith the
Hospitals are filled; because they being afflicted with no other Symptom besides the Buboes and Carbuncles
ill looked after, or neglected, and by consequence, nothing here offers it self but the Abscesses,
Ulcers, Fistula's, Scirrhus's, and Callus's, which Negligence, or an ill Treatment have left
behind them; so that there is here nothing farther required, but to put in Use the Method laid
down above, or to employ the Means practised in the like Cases, according
to the Rules of Art.

We shall remark, in concluding, that all the Methods we have here proposed, are not so general,
or constant, as to be without Exceptions, in respect to certain particular Cases, which have
fallen under our Observation during this terrible Sickness, and which may furnish Materials for
a more exact Account.

But what we have already delivered may be sufficient to instruct
the young Physicians and Surgeons, that are employed in attending
Infected Persons; and at the same time, to let the Publick know what
Opinion ought to be had of all those singular Methods, and of those
pretended Specificks so cried up by the Populace, and by the Empericks.

FINIS.

Long

"s" has been modernized.

The following misprints have been corrected: "MARSELLIES" corrected
to "MARSEILLES" (page 5) "funish" corrected to "furnish" (page 38) Yes, I met him sneaking
through the lanes and bye passages with a common minstrel wench, with her messan and her viol
on his one arm and her buxom self hanging upon the other. What thinks your honour? Is not this
a trim squire, to cross a prince's love with the fairest girl in Perth, strike off the hand
of a knight and baron, and become gentleman usher to a strolling glee woman, all in the course
of the same four and twenty hours?"

"Marry, I think the better of him that he has so much of a gentleman's humour, clown though
he be," said Ramorny. "I would he had been a precisian instead of a galliard, and I should
have had better heart to aid thy revenge. And such revenge!--revenge on a smith--in the quarrel
of a pitiful manufacturer of rotten cheverons! Pah! And yet it shall be taken in full. Thou
hast commenced it, I warrant me, by thine own manoeuvres."

"In a small degree only," said the apothecary. "I took care that two or three of the most notorious
gossips in Curfew street, who liked not to hear Catharine called the Fair Maid of Perth, should
be possessed of this story of her faithful Valentine. They opened on the scent so keenly, that,
rather than doubt had fallen on the tale, they would have vouched for it as if their own eyes
had seen it. The lover came to her father's within an hour after, and your worship may think
what a reception he had from the angry glover, for the damsel herself would not be looked upon.
And thus your honour sees I had a foretaste of revenge. But I trust to receive the full draught
from the hands of your lordship, with whom I am in a brotherly league, which--"

"Brotherly!" said the knight, contemptuously. "But be it so, the priests say we are all of
one common earth. I cannot tell, there seems to me some difference; but the better mould shall
keep faith with the baser, and thou shalt have thy revenge. Call thou my page hither."

A young man made his appearance from the anteroom upon the physician's summons.

"Eviot," said the knight, "does Bonthron wait? and is he sober?"

"He is as sober as sleep can make him after a deep drink," answered the page.

"Then fetch him hither, and do thou shut the door."

A heavy step presently approached the apartment, and a man entered, whose deficiency of height
seemed made up in breadth of shoulders and strength of arm.

"There is a man thou must deal upon, Bonthron," said the knight. The man smoothed his rugged
features and grinned a smile of satisfaction.

"That mediciner will show thee the party. Take such advantage of time, place, and circumstance
as will ensure the result; and mind you come not by the worst, for the man is the fighting
Smith of the Wynd."

"It Will be a tough job," growled the assassin; "for if I miss my blow, I may esteem myself
but a dead man. All Perth rings with the smith's skill and strength."

"Take two assistants with thee," said the knight.

"Not I," said Bonthron. "If you double anything, let it be the reward."

"Account it doubled," said his master; "but see thy work be thoroughly executed."

"Trust me for that, sir knight: seldom have I failed."

"Use this sage man's directions," said the wounded knight, pointing to the physician. "And
hark thee, await his coming forth, and drink not till the business be done."

"I will not," answered the dark satellite; "my own life depends on my blow being steady and
sure. I know whom I have to deal with."

"Vanish, then, till he summons you, and have axe and dagger in readiness."

Bonthron nodded and withdrew.

"Will your knighthood venture to entrust such an act to a single hand?" said the mediciner,
when the assassin had left the room. "May I pray you to remember that yonder party did, two
nights since, baffle six armed men?"

"Question me not, sir mediciner: a man like Bonthron, who knows time and place, is worth a
score of confused revellers. Call Eviot; thou shalt first exert thy powers of healing, and
do not doubt that thou shalt, in the farther work, be aided by one who will match thee in the
art of sudden and unexpected destruction."

The page Eviot again appeared at the mediciner's summons, and at his master's sign assisted
the chirurgeon in removing the dressings from Sir John Ramorny's wounded arm. Dwining viewed
the naked stump with a species of professional satisfaction, enhanced, no doubt, by the malignant
pleasure which his evil disposition took in the pain and distress of his fellow creatures.
The knight just turned his eye on the ghastly spectacle, and uttered, under the pressure of
bodily pain or mental agony, a groan which he would fain have repressed.

"You groan, sir," said the leech, in his soft, insinuating tone of voice, but with a sneer
of enjoyment, mixed with scorn, curling upon his lip, which his habitual dissimulation could
not altogether disguise--"you groan; but be comforted. This Henry Smith knows his business:
his sword is as true to its aim as his hammer to the anvil. Had a common swordsman struck this
fatal blow, he had harmed the bone and damaged the muscles, so that even my art might not have
been able to repair them. But Henry Smith's cut is clean, and as sure as that with which my
own scalpel could have made the amputation. In a few days you will be able, with care and attention
to the ordinances of medicine, to stir abroad."

"But my hand--the loss of my hand--"

"It may be kept secret for a time," said the mediciner. "I have possessed two or three tattling
fools, in deep confidence, that the hand which was found was that of your knighthood's groom,
Black Quentin, and your knighthood knows that he has parted for Fife, in such sort as to make
it generally believed."

"I know well enough," said Ramorny, "that the rumour may stifle the truth for a short time.
But what avails this brief delay?"

"It may be concealed till your knighthood retires for a time from the court, and then, when
new accidents have darkened the recollection of the present stir, it may be imputed to a wound
received from the shivering of a spear, or from a crossbow bolt. Your slave will find a suitable
device, and stand for the truth of it."

"The thought maddens me," said Ramorny, with another groan of mental and bodily agony; "yet
I see no better remedy."

"There is none other," said the leech, to whose evil nature his patron's distress was delicious
nourishment. "In the mean while, it is believed you are confined by the consequences of some
bruises, aiding the sense of displeasure at the Prince's having consented to dismiss you from
his household at the remonstrance of Albany, which is publicly known."

"Villain, thou rack'st me!" exclaimed the patient.

"Upon the whole, therefore," said Dwining, "your knighthood has escaped well, and, saving the
lack of your hand, a mischance beyond remedy, you ought rather to rejoice than complain; for
no barber chirurgeon in France or England could have more ably performed the operation than
this churl with one downright blow."

"I understand my obligation fully," said Ramorny, struggling with his anger, and affecting
composure; "and if Bonthron pays him not with a blow equally downright, and rendering the aid
of the leech unnecessary, say that John of Ramorny cannot requite an obligation."

"That is spoke like yourself, noble knight!" answered the mediciner. "And let me further say,
that the operator's skill must have been vain, and the hemorrhage must have drained your life
veins, but for the bandages, the cautery, and the styptics applied by the good monks, and the
poor services of your humble vassal, Henbane Dwining."

"Peace," exclaimed the patient, "with thy ill omened voice and worse omened name! The Method
used in treating the Sick of the Second Class.

The Treatment of the Sick of this Second Class has much more employed us than the preceding,
in respect to the Multiplicity and Variety of Accidents that offer
at the same time several Indications to satisfy. There have been those among the ancient sages who have thought that there still
remained a sympathy between the severed nerves and those belonging to the amputated limb; and
that the several fingers are seen to quiver and strain, as corresponding with the impulse which
proceeds from their sympathy with the energies of the living system. Could we recover the hand
from the Cross, or from the custody of the Black Douglas, I would be pleased to observe this
wonderful operation of occult sympathies. But, I fear me, one might as safely go to wrest the
joint from the talons of an hungry eagle."

"And thou mayst as safely break thy malignant jests on a wounded lion as on John of Ramorny,"
said the knight, raising himself in uncontrollable indignation. "Caitiff, proceed to thy duty;
and remember, that if my hand can no longer clasp a dagger, I can command an hundred."

