THE BLOOD RED DAWN

by

CHARLES CALDWELL DOBIE

1920

To My Mother

Book I

CHAPTER I

The pastor's announcement had been swallowed up in a hum of truant inattention, and as the
heralded speaker made his appearance upon the platform Claire Robson, leaning forward, said
to her mother:

"What?... Did you catch his name?"

"A foreigner of some sort!" replied Mrs. Robson, with smug sufficiency.

For a moment the elder woman's sneer dulled the edge of Claire's anticipations, but presently
the man began to speak, and at once she felt a sense of power back of his halting words, a
sudden bursting fort of bloom amid the frozen assembly that sat ice-bound, refusing to be melted
by the fires of an alien enthusiasm. She could not help wondering whether he felt how hopeless
it would be to force a sympathetic response from his audience. In ordinary times the Second
Presbyterian Church of San Francisco could not possibly have had any interest in Serbia except
as a field for foreign missionaries. Now, with America in the war and speeding up the draft,
these worthy people were too much concerned with problems nearer their own hearthstones to
be swept off their feet by a specific and almost inarticulate appeal for an obscure country,
made only a shade less remote by the accident of being accounted an ally.

Claire, straining at attention, found it hard to follow him. He talked rapidly and with unfamiliar
emphasis, and he waved his hands. Frankly, people were bored. They had come to hear a concert
and incidentally swell the Red Cross fund, but they had not reckoned on quite this type of
harangue. Besides, an appetizing smell of coffee from the church kitchen had begun to beguile
their senses. And yet, the man talked on and on, until quite suddenly Claire Robson began to
have a strange feeling of disquiet, an embarrassment for him, such as one feels when an intimate
friend or kinsman unconsciously makes a spectacle of himself. She wished that he would stop.
She longed to rise from her seat and scream, to create an outlandish scene, to do anything,
in short, that would silence him. At this point he turned his eyes in her direction, and she
felt the scorch of an intense inner fire. Instinctively she lowered her glance.... When she
looked up again his gaze was still fixed upon her. She felt her color rise. From that moment
on she had a sense that she was his sole audience. He was talking to her. The others did not
matter. She still did not have any very distinct idea what it was all about, but the manner
of it held her captive. But gradually the mists cleared, he became more coherent, and slowly,
imperceptibly, bit by bit, he won the others. Yet never for an instant did he take his eyes
from her. When he finished, a momentary silence blocked the final burst of applause. But Claire
Robson's hands were locked tightly together, and it was not until he had disappeared that she
realized that she had not paid him the tribute of even a parting glance.

The pastor came back upon the platform and announced that refreshments would be served at the
conclusion of the next number. A heavy odor of coffee continued to float from the church kitchen.
A red-haired woman stepped forward and began to sing.

Already Claire Robson dreaded the ordeal of supper. The fact that tables were being laid further
disturbed her. This meant that she and her mother would have to push their way into some group
which, at best, would remain indifferent to their presence. When coffee was served informally
things were not so awkward. To be sure, one had to balance coffee-cup and cake-plate with an
amazing and painful skill, but, on the other hand, table-less groups did not emphasize one's
isolation. Claire had got to the point where she would have welcomed active hostility on the
part of her fellow church members, but their utter indifference was soul-killing. She would
have liked to remember one occasion when any one had betrayed the slightest interest in either
her arrival or departure, or rather in the arrival and departure of her mother and herself.

The solo came to an end, and the inevitable applause followed, but before the singer could
respond to the implied encore most of the listeners began frank and determined advances upon
the tables. The concert was over.

Mrs. Robson rose and faced Claire with a look of bewilderment. As usual, mother and daughter
stood irresolutely, caught like two trembling leaves in the backwater of a swirling eddy. At
last Claire made a movement toward the nearest table. Mrs. Robson followed. They sat down.

The scattered company speedily began to form into congenial groups. There was a great deal
of suddenly loosened chatter. Claire Robson sat silently, rather surprised and dismayed to
find that she and her mother had chosen a table which seemed to be the objective of all the
prominent church members. The company facing her was elegant, if not precisely smart, and there
were enough laces and diamonds displayed to have done excellent service if the proper background
had been provided. Claire was further annoyed to discover that her mother was regarding the
situation with a certain ruffling self-satisfaction which she took no pains to conceal. Mrs.
Robson bowed and smirked, and even called gaily to every one within easy range. There was something
distasteful in her mother's sudden and almost aggressive self-assurance.

Gradually the company adjusted itself; the tables were filled. The only moving figures were
those of young women carrying huge white pitchers of steaming coffee. Claire Robson settled
into her seat with a resignation born of subtle inner misery. Across her brain flashed the
insistent and pertinent questions that such a situation always evoked. Why was she not one
of these young women engaged in distributing refreshments? Did the circles close automatically
so as to exclude her, or did her own aloofness shut her out? What was the secret of these people
about her that gave them such an assured manner? No one spoke to her with cordial enthusiasm....
It was not a matter of wealth, or brains, or prominent church activity. It was not even a matter
of obscurity. Like all large organizations, the Second Presbyterian Church was made up of every
clique in the social calendar; the obscure circle was as clannish and distinctive in its way
as any other group. But Claire Robson was forced to admit that she did not belong even to the
obscure circle. She belonged nowhere--that was the galling and oppressive truth that was forced
upon her.

At this point she became aware that one of the most prominent church members, Mrs. Towne, was
making an unmistakably cordial advance in her direction. Claire had a misgiving.... Mrs. Towne
was never excessively friendly except for a definite aim.

"My dear Miss Robson," Mrs. Towne began, sweetly, drooping confidentially to a whispering posture,
"I am so sorry, but I shall have to disturb you and your mother!... It just happens that this
table has been reserved for the elders and their wives.... I hope you'll understand!"

For a moment Claire merely stared at the messenger of evil news. Then, recovering herself,
she managed to reply:

"Oh yes, Mrs. Towne! I understand perfectly.... I am sure we were very stupid.... Come, mother!"

Mrs. Robson responded at once to her daughter's command. The two women rose. By this time the
task of securing another place was quite hopeless. Claire felt that every eye in the room was
turned upon them. Picking their way between a labyrinth of tables and chairs, they literally
were stumbling in the direction of an exit when Claire felt a hand upon her arm. She turned.

"Pardon me," the man opposite her was saying, "but may I offer you a place at our table?"

Claire said nothing; she followed blindly. Her mother was close upon her heels.

The table was a small one, and only two people were occupying it--the man who had halted Claire,
and a woman. The man, standing with one hand on the chair which he had drawn up for Mrs. Robson,
said, simply:

"My name is Stillman, and of course you know Mrs. Condor--the lady who has just sung for us."

Claire gave a swift, inclusive glance. Yes, it was the same woman who had attempted to beguile
a weary audience from its impending repletion; at close range one could not escape the intense
redness of her hair or the almost immoral whiteness of the shoulders and arms which she was
at such little pains to conceal.

"Stillman?" Mrs. Robson was fluttering importantly. "Not the old Rincon Hill family?"

"Yes, the old Rincon Hill family," the man replied.

Mrs. Robson sat down with preening self-satisfaction. Wearily the daughter dropped into the
seat which Mrs. Condor proffered. The name of Ned Stillman was not unfamiliar to any San Franciscan
who scanned the social news with even a casual glance, and Claire had a vague remembrance that
Mrs. Condor also figured socially, but in a rather more inclusive way than her companion. At
all events, it was plain that her mother, with unerring feminine insight, had placed the pair
to her satisfaction. Already the elder woman was contriving to let Stillman know something
of her antecedents. She was Emily Carrol, also of Rincon Hill, and of course he knew her two
sisters--Mrs. Thomas Wynne and Mrs. Edward Finch-Brown! As Stillman returned a smiling assurance
to Mrs. Robson's attempts to be impressive, a young woman in white arrived with ice-cream and
messy layer-cake. Unconsciously Claire Robson began to smile. She could not have said why,
but somehow the presence of Ned Stillman and Mrs. Condor at a table spread with such vacuous
delights seemed little short of ridiculous. They did not fit the picture any more than her
beetle-browed, red-lipped Serbian who.... She turned deliberately and swept the room with her
glance. Of course he had gone. It was not to be expected that he would descend to the level
of such puerile feasting. A sudden contempt for everything that only an hour ago seemed so
desirable rose within her, and, in answer to the young woman's query as to whether she preferred
coffee to ice-cream, she answered with lip-curling aloofness:

"Neither, thank you.... I am not hungry."

Stillman looked at her searchingly. She returned his gaze without flinching.

Claire Robson did not sleep that night. She lay for hours, quite motionless, staring into the
gloom of her narrow bedroom, her mind ruthlessly shaping formless, vague intuitions into definite
convictions. She could not put her finger upon the precise reason for her inquietude. Was it
chargeable to so trivial a circumstance as a stranger's formal courtesy or had something more
subtle moved her? If the depths of her isolation had been thrown into too high relief by the
almost shameful sense of obligation she felt toward Stillman for his courtesy, what was to
be said of the uniqueness of the solitary position which the Serbian awarded her by singling
her out for a sympathetic response? Could it be that a vague pity had stirred him, too? Had
things reached a point where her loneliness showed through the threadbare indifference of her
glance? In short, had both men been won to gallantry by her distress? In one case, at least,
she decided that there was a reasonable chance to doubt. And that doubt quickened her pulse
like May wine.

But the humiliation of her last encounter with chivalry stuck with profound irritation. She
recalled the scene again and again. She remembered her contemptuous silence before Stillman's
obvious suavities, the high, assured laugh which his companion, Mrs. Condor, threw out to meet
his quiet sallies, the ruffling satisfaction of her mother, chattering on irrelevantly, but
with the undisguised purpose of creating a proper impression. How easily Stillman must have
seen through Claire's muteness and the elder woman's eager craving for an audience! And all
the time Mrs. Condor had been laughing, not ill-naturedly, but with the irony of an experienced
woman possessing a sense of humor.

And at the end, when the four had left the church together, to be whirled home in Stillman's
car, the sudden nods and smiles and farewells that had blossomed along the path of her mother's
exit! Claire could have laughed it all away if her mother had not betrayed such eagerness to
drink this snobbish flattery to the lees....

Claire's father had never entered very largely into her calculations, but to-night her readjusted
vision included him. Stubborn, kind, a bit weak, and inclined to copying poetry in a red-covered
album, he had been no match for the disillusionments of married life. Her mother's people had
felt a sullen resentment at his downfall--he had taken to drink and died ingloriously when
Claire was still in her seventh year. Claire, influenced by the family traditions, had shared
this resentment. But now she found herself wondering whether there was not a word or two to
be said in his behalf. Her father had been a cheap clerk in a wholesale house when he had married.
The uncertain Carrol fortunes were waning swiftly at the time, and Emily Carrol had been thrown
at him with all the panic that then possessed a public schooled in the fallacy that marriage
was a woman's only career. The result was to have been expected. Extravagance, debts, too much
family, drink, death--the sequence was complete. He had been captured, withered, cast aside,
by a tribe that had not even had the decency to grant his memory the kindness of an excuse.

Wide-eyed and restless, Claire Robson felt a sudden pity for her father. Tears sprang to her
eyes; it overwhelmed her to discover this new father so full of human failings and yet so full
of human provocation. In her twenty-four years of life she had never shed a tear for him, or
felt the slightest pang for his failure. If she had ever doubted the Carrol viewpoint, she
had never given her lack of faith any scope. She had taken their cast-off prejudices and threadbare
convictions as docilely as she had once received their stale garments. She had shrunk from
spiritual independence with all the obsequious arrogance of a poor relation at a feast. Her
diffidence, her self-consciousness, her timidity, were the outward forms of an inbred snobbery.
It was curious how suddenly all this was made clear to her....

At length she fell into a troubled sleep.... When she awoke the room's outlines were reviving
before the advances of early morning. For the first time in her life she caught the poetry
of the new day at first hand. For years she had reveled vicariously in the delights of morning.
But it had always been to her a thing apart, a matter which the writers of romantic verse beheld
and translated for the benefit of late sleepers. It never occurred to her that the day crawling
into the light-well of her Clay Street flat was lit with precisely the same flame that colored
the far-flung peaks of the poet's song. And instantly a phrase of the Serbian's harangue came
to her--blood-red dawn! He had repeated these words over and over again, and somehow under
the heat of his ardor and longing for his native land this hackneyed phrase took on its real
and dreadful value. In the sudden sweep of this vital remembrance, Claire Robson rose for a
moment above the fretful drip of circumstance.... Blood-red Dawn!... She threw herself back
upon her bed and shuddered....

She rose at seven o'clock, but already the morning had grown pallid and flecked with gray clouds.

An apologetic tap came at the door, and the voice of Mrs. Robson repeating a formula that she
never varied:

"Better hurry, Claire. If you don't you'll be late for the office!"

CHAPTER II

As Claire stepped out into the cold sunlight of early November, she smiled bitterly at the
exaggeration of last night's mood. After the first hectic flush of dawn there is nothing so
sane and sweet and commonplace as morning. The spectacle of Mrs. Finnegan, who lodged in the
flat below, slopping warm suds over the thin marble steps, added a final note of homeliness,
which divorced Claire completely from heroics.

"Well, Miss Robson, so you really got home, last night," broke from the industrious neighbor
as she straightened up and tucked her lifted skirts in more securely. "I thought you never
would come!... A package came from New York for you. The man nearly banged your door down.
I had Finnegan put it on your back stoop.... It's from that cousin of yours, I guess. I was
so excited about it I kept wishing you'd get home early so that I could get a peep at all the
pretty things. But I'll run up just as soon as I get through with the breakfast dishes."

Claire smiled wanly. "It was very good of you to take all that trouble, I'm sure, Mrs. Finnegan!"

"Oh, bother my trouble!" Mrs. Finnegan responded. "I just knew how crazy I'd be about a box.
I guess we women are all alike, Miss Robson. Anyway, your mother and I are!"

Mrs. Finnegan bent over her task again with a quick exasperated movement, and Claire passed
on. Her neighbor's abrupt rebuke gave Claire a renewed sense of exclusion. She had meant to
be warmly appreciative, but she knew now that she had been only coldly polite. But, as a matter
of fact, the prospect of delving through a box of Gertrude Sinclair's discarded finery moved
her this morning to a dull fury. She felt suddenly tired of cast-offs, of compromise, of all
the other shabby adjustments of genteel poverty. And by the time she reached the office of
the Falcon Insurance Company her soul was seething with a curious and unreasonable revolt.
The feminine office force seemed seething also, but with an impersonal, quivering excitement.
Nellie Whitehead had been dismissed!

This Nellie Whitehead, the stenographer-in-chief, was big, vigorous, blond--vulgar, energetic,
vivid; and Miss Munch, her assistant, a thin, hollow-chested spinster, who loafed upon her
job so that she might save her sight for the manufacture of incredible yards of tatting, never
missed an opportunity to lift her eyes significantly behind her superior's back.

"And what do you suppose?" Miss Munch was querying as Claire stepped into the dressing-room.
"She told Mr. Flint to go to hell!... Yes, positively, she used those very words. And I must
say he was a gentleman throughout it all. He told her gently but firmly that her example in
the office wasn't what it should be and that in justice to the other girls...."

Claire turned impatiently away. The fiction of Mr. Flint's belated interest in the morals of
his feminine office force was unconvincing enough to be irritating. For a man who never missed
an opportunity to force his attentions, he was showing an amazingly ethical viewpoint. On second
thought, Claire remembered that Miss Munch was never the recipient of Mr. Flint's attentions,
which to the casual eye might have seemed innocent enough--on rainy days gallantly bending
his ample girth in a rather too prolonged attempt to slip on the girls' rubbers, insisting
on the quite unnecessary task of incasing them in their jackets and smoothing the sleeves of
their shirt-waists in the process, flicking imaginary threads where the feminine curves were
most opulent. Not that Mr. Flint was a wolf in sheep's clothing; he played the part of sheep,
but he needed no disguise for his performance; he merely lived up to a sort of flock-mind consciousness
where women were concerned.

The group clustered about Miss Munch broke up at the approach of Mr. Flint, who gave a significant
glance in the direction of Claire Robson, intent upon her morning work. But the excitement
persisted in spite of the scattered auditors, and the fact was mysteriously communicated that
Miss Munch's interest in the event was chargeable to her hopes. It seemed impossible to Miss
Munch that any one but herself could succeed to the vacant post of stenographer-in-chief.

At precisely eleven o'clock the buzzer on Claire Robson's desk hummed three times. This announced
that she was wanted by Mr. Flint. She gathered her note-book and pencils and answered the call.

Mr. Flint was busy at the telephone when Claire entered the private office. She seated herself
at the flat oak table in the center of the room.

Mr. Flint's office bore all the conventional signs of business--commissions of authority from
insurance companies, state licenses in oak frames, an oil-painting of Thomas Sawyer Flint,
the founder of the firm, over a fireplace that maintained its useless dignity in spite of the
steam-radiator near the window. On his desk was the inevitable picture of his wife framed in
silver, a hand-illumined platitude of Stevenson, an elaborate set of desk paraphernalia in
beaten brass that bore little evidence of service. In two green-glazed bowls of Japanese origin,
roses from Mr. Flint's garden at Yolanda scattered faint pink petals on the Smyrna rug. These
flowers were the only concession to esthetics that Mr. Flint indulged. In spite of a masculine
distaste for carrying flowers, hardly a day went by when he did not appear at the office with
a huge harvest of blossoms from his country home.

Claire was bending over, intent on picking up the crumpled rose-petals, when Mr. Flint finally
spoke. She straightened herself slowly. Her unhurried movements had a certain grace that did
not escape the man opposite her. She tossed the bruised leaves into a waste-basket and reached
for her pencil. Her heart was pounding, but she faced Mr. Flint with a clear, direct gaze.

"Miss Robson, of course you've heard all about the rumpus," Mr. Flint was saying. "I had to
fire Miss Whitehead.... I think you can fill the bill."

Claire rose without replying. Mr. Flint left his seat and crossed over to her.

"I hope," he said, flicking a thread from her shoulder, "that you're game.... Some girls, of
course, don't care a damn about getting on ... especially if there's a Johnny somewhere in
sight with enough cash in his pocket for a marriage license."

"I am very much taken by surprise," Claire faltered. "You see, the change means a great deal
to me."

Mr. Flint moved closer. His manner was intimate and distasteful. "Sometimes I think we business
men ought to get more of a slant on our employees.... You know what I mean, not exactly bothering
about how many lumps of sugar they take in their coffee, or their taste in after-dinner cheese
... but, well, just how often they have to resole their boots and turn the ribbons on their
spring bonnets.... Now, in Miss Whitehead's case.... But of course you're not interested in
Miss Whitehead."

"Why, I wouldn't say that," stammered Claire. Then, as she reached for her shorthand book she
said, more confidently: "To be quite frank, Mr. Flint, I liked Miss Whitehead tremendously.
She was so alive ... and vivid."

Flint beamed. "Do you know why I picked you instead of that Munch dame?... It's because you
had all the frills of a woman and none of the nastiness. For instance, you wouldn't be bothered
in the least if I took a notion to overload the office with another pretty girl.... I've watched
you for some time. It has taken me six months to make up my mind to fire Miss Whitehead and
boost you into her job."

He stood with an air of condescending arrogance, his thumbs bearing down heavily on his trousers
pockets, his broad fingers beating a self-satisfied tattoo upon his thighs. Claire shrank nearer
the table. "You mean, Mr. Flint, that you dismissed Miss Whitehead merely to give me her position?"

Flint smiled. "Well, now you're coming down to brass-headed tacks. I'm not keen on spelling
out the whys and wherefores of anything I do.... But one thing is certain enough--if Miss Munch
had been the only available candidate I could have stood Miss Whitehead.... There ain't much
question about that."

"Oh, Mr. Flint! I'm sorry!"

He gave a wide guffaw. "That only makes you all the more of a corker!" he answered, rubbing
his hands together in narrow-eyed satisfaction.

She escaped into the outer office, flushed, but with her head thrown back in an attitude of
instinctive defense, and the next instant she literally ran into the arm of a man.

"Why, Miss Robson, but this is pleasant! I'm just dropping in to see Mr. Flint."

She drew back. Mr. Stillman stood smiling before her.

Greetings and questions flowed with all the genial ease of one who is never quite taken unawares.
Claire, outwardly calm, felt overcome with inner confusion. She passed rapidly to her desk
and sat down.

Miss Munch was upon her almost instantly.

"Do you know Ned Stillman?" Miss Munch asked, veiling her real purpose.

"Yes," replied Claire, with uncomfortable brevity.

"I have a cousin who was housekeeper for his wife's father.... You know about his wife, of course."

Claire lifted her clear eyes in a startled glance that was almost as instantly converted into
a look of challenge.

"Yes," she lied.

Miss Munch hesitated, then plunged at once into the issue uppermost in her mind. "It's too
bad you've had to be bothered with Flint's dictation, Miss Robson. It just happens I'm writing
up a long home-office report, otherwise I'm sure he wouldn't have annoyed you."

Claire Robson fixed Miss Munch with a coldly polite stare. "You've made a mistake, Miss Munch.
Mr. Flint has given me no dictation." The speech in itself was nothing, but Claire's tone gave
it unmistakable point. Miss Munch grew white and then flushed. She turned away without a word,
but Claire Robson knew that in a twinkling of an eye she had gained not only an enemy, but
an uncommon one.

       *       *       *       *       *

That night Claire took an unusually long way round on her walk home. Her path from the Falcon
Insurance Company's office on California Street to the Clay Street flat was never a direct
one, first, because there were hills to be avoided, and, second, because Claire found the streets
at twilight too full of charm for a rapid homeward flight. The year was on the wane and the
November days were coming to an early blackness. Claire reveled in the light-flooded dusk of
these late autumn evenings. To her, the city became a vast theater, darkened suddenly for the
purpose of throwing the performers into sharper relief. Most clerks made their way up Montgomery
Street toward Market, but Claire climbed past the German Bank to Kearny Street. She liked this
old thoroughfare, struggling vainly to pull itself up to its former glory. The Kearny Street
crowd was a varying quantity, frankly shabby or flashily prosperous, as far south as Sutter
Street, suddenly dignified and reserved for the two blocks beyond. To-night Claire missed the
direct appeal of the streets lined with bright shops. They formed the proper background for
her broodings, but they scarcely entered into her mood. She could not have said just what flight
her mood was taking, or upon just which branch her thought would alight. She was confused and
puzzled and vaguely uneasy. She had a sense that somehow, somewhere, a door had been opened
and that a strong, devastating wind was clearing the air and bringing dead things to ground
in a disorderly shower. She was stirred by twilights of uneasiness. It was almost as if the
monotonous truce of noonday had been darkened by a huge, composite, masculine shadow, made
up in some mysterious way of the ridiculous Serbian and his blood-red dawn, and this man Stillman,
who had a wife, and Flint, with hands so ready to flick threads from her sloping shoulders.
Yesterday her outlook had been peaceful and unhappy; to-day she felt stimulation of an impending
struggle. She was afraid, and yet she would not have turned back for one swift moment. And
suddenly the words of Mrs. Finnegan recurred, "I guess we women are all alike." Were they?

At which point she came upon a pastry-shop window and she went in and bought a half-dozen French
pastries. The thought of her mother's pleasure at this unusual treat brought her in due time
smiling to her threshold.

Mrs. Robson was not in her accustomed place at the head of the stairs; about half-way up the
long flight her voice sounded triumphantly:

"Oh, Claire, do hurry and see what Gertrude has sent! Everything is perfectly lovely."

Claire quickened her pace and gained the cramped living-room. Thrown about in a sort of joyous
disorder, Gertrude Sinclair's finery quite lit up the shabbiness. Hats, plumes, scraps of vivid
silks, gilded slippers, a spangled fan--their unrelated vividness struck Claire as fantastic
as a futurist painting. Her mother seemed suddenly young again. Claire wondered whether, after
the toll of sixty-odd years, she could be moved to momentary youth by the mere sight of the
prettiness that was quickening her mother's pulse.

Mrs. Robson held up a filmy evening gown of black net embroidered with a rich design of dull
gold. "Isn't this heavenly?" she demanded. "And it will just fit you, Claire. I think Gertrude
has spread herself this time."

"Yes, on finery, mother. But didn't she send anything sensible? What possessed her to load
us up with a lot of things we can never possibly get a chance to wear?"

Claire had not meant to be disagreeable, but there was rancor in her voice. Mrs. Robson cast
aside the dress with the carelessness of a spoiled favorite; she always adapted her manner
to the tone of her background.

"Claire Robson!" she cried, good-naturedly. "You're a regular old woman! I'm sure I haven't
much to be cheerful about, but I just won't let anything down me!... If I wanted to, I could
give up right now. Where would we have been, I'd like to know, if I hadn't held my head up?
Goodness knows, my folks didn't help me. If they had had their way, I'd been out manicuring
people's nails and washing heads for a living. And you in an orphan-asylum! That's what my
people did for me! As it is, they shoved you out to work. What chance have you of meeting nice
people? No, Claire, I don't care how they have treated me, but they might have given you a
chance. I'll never forgive them for that!... I thought last night when I was talking to Mrs.
Condor and watching you and Mr. Stillman how nice it would have been if.... Oh, that reminds
me! Who do you think has been here to-day?... Mrs. Towne! She came to apologize about asking
us to move our seats the other night. She knows the Stillmans well. The old people were pillars
of the Second Church in the 'sixties. I fancy he is dancing about that Mrs. Condor's heels
a bit. Of course, as Mrs. Towne said, she wouldn't be likely to make herself a permanent feature
of Second Church entertainments. But now in war-times anything is possible. Mrs. Towne was
telling me all about Stillman and his wife. I should have remembered, but somehow I forgot.
Get your things off and I'll tell you all about it."

Claire handed her mother the package of pastries. "I heard about it to-day," she said, coldly.

"But Mrs. Towne knows the whole thing from A to Z," insisted Mrs. Robson, genially.

"I'm not interested in the details," Claire returned, doggedly.

Mrs. Robson's face wore a puzzled, almost a harried, expression. Claire moved away. Her mother
gave a shrug and renewed her efforts to drag further finery from the mysterious depths of the
treasure-box. Her daughter cast a last incurious glance back. The glow on Mrs. Robson's face,
which Claire had mistaken for youth, seemed now a thing hectic and unpleasant, and gave an
uncanny sense of a skeleton sitting among gauds and baubles.

A feeling of isolation swept Claire, such as she had never experienced. The person who should
have been closest suddenly had become a stranger.... She went into her room and closed the door.

CHAPTER III

The following week Claire was surprised to find a letter on her desk at the office. The few
written favors that came her way usually were addressed to the Clay Street flat, so that she
was puzzled by this innovation and the unfamiliar handwriting. Glancing swiftly at the signature,
she was surprised to see the name "Lily Condor," scrawled loosely at the foot of the note.
It seemed that Mrs. Condor was giving a little musicale in Ned Stillman's apartments on the
following Friday night, and, if one could believe such a thing, the lady implied that the evening
would scarcely be complete without the presence of Claire Robson--or, to put it more properly,
Claire Robson and her mother.

As Claire had scarcely said a half-dozen words to Mrs. Condor on the night of the Red Cross
concert, this invitation seemed little short of extraordinary. But, as Claire thought it over,
she recalled that there had been some general conversation about music, in which she had admitted
a discreet passion for this form of entertainment, even going so far as to confess that she
played the piano herself upon occasion. Her first impulse, clinched by the familiar feminine
excuse that she had nothing suitable to wear, was to send her regrets. At once she thought
of the scorned finery that Gertrude Sinclair had included in her last box, and the more she
thought about it the more convinced she became that she had no real reason for refusing. But
a swift, strange regret that her mother had been included in the invitation took the edge off
her anticipations. She tried to dismiss this feeling, but it grew more definite as the morning
progressed.

For days Claire had been striking at the shackles of habit with a rancor bred of disillusionment.
She had been on tiptoe for new and vital experiences, and yet, for any outward sign, her life
bid fair to escape the surge of any torrential circumstance. Particularly, at the office, things
had gone on smoothly. The other clerks had accepted Claire's advancement without either protest
or enthusiasm. Even Miss Munch had veiled her resentment behind the saving trivialities of
daily intercourse. She had gone so far as to introduce Claire to her cousin, a Mrs. Richards,
who had come in at the noon hour for a new tatting design. This cousin was a large, red-faced
woman, with an aggressively capable manner. She had the quick, ferret-like eyes of Miss Munch
and the loose mouth of a perpetual gossip.

"She's the one I told you about the other day," Miss Munch had explained later--"the housekeeper
for your friend Stillman's father-in-law." She gave nasty emphasis to this trivial speech.

Flint had been direct and business-like almost to the point of bruskness. But Claire knew that
such moods were not unusual, so she took little stock in the ultimate significance of his restrained
manner.

Perhaps the most indefinable change had come over Claire's home life. Her mother's unfailing
string of trivial gossip, formerly not without a certain interest, now scarcely held her to
even polite attention. Indeed, her self-absorbed silence, while Mrs. Robson poured out the
latest news about Mrs. Finnegan's second sister's husband's mother--who was suddenly stricken
with some incurable disease, made all the more mysterious by the fact that its nature was not
divulged--was so apparent that her mother, goaded on to a mild exasperation, would ask, significantly:

"What's the matter, Claire? Have you a headache?"

Mrs. Robson was never so happy as in the discovery of some one with a mysterious disease, particularly
if the victim's relatives were loath to discuss the issue.

"They think they fool me!" she would say, triumphantly, to Claire, "but I guess I know what
ails her.... Didn't her mother, and her uncle, and her sister's oldest child die of consumption?
I tell you it's in the family. The last time I saw her she nearly coughed her head off."

Not that Mrs. Robson was unsympathetic; brought face to face with suffering, she blossomed
with every impulsive tenderness, but her experiences had confirmed her in pessimism, and every
fresh tragedy testified to the soundness of her faith. Her pride at diagnosing people's ills
and pronouncing their death-sentences was almost professional. And she had an irritating way
of making comments such as this:

"Well, Claire, I see that old Mrs. Talbot is dead at last!... I knew she wouldn't live another
winter. They'll feel terribly, no doubt; but, of course, it is a great relief."

Or:

"Why, here is the death notice of Isaac Rice! I thought he died years ago. My, but he was a
trial! What a blessing!"

This was the type of conversation that Claire was finding either empty of meaning or illuminating
to the point of annoyance. What amazed her was the fact that she had remained blind so long
to the slightest of the conversational food upon which she had been fed.

Claire did not tell her mother about the invitation to Mrs. Condor's musical evening.

"I'll wait," she said to herself. "Thursday will be time enough." Although why delay would
prove advantageous was not particularly apparent.

On Wednesday night at the dinner-table, Mrs. Robson, as if still puzzled at her daughter's
altered mood, said, rather cautiously:

"There's to be a reception at the church on Friday night."

"For whom?" inquired Claire, with pallid interest.

"I didn't quite catch the name.... Some woman back from France. She's been nursing in one of
the British hospitals. She's to get Red Cross work started at the church. It seems San Francisco
is a bit slow over taking up the work, but, then, you know, we're poked off here in a corner
and I suppose we don't quite realize yet.... Anyway, Mrs. Towne wants us to help with the coffee.
She says you should have been in the church-work long ago. You look so self-contained and efficient....
I told her we would be there at half past seven and get the dishes into shape."

Claire's heart beat violently. "Friday night? I'm sorry, mother; I have another engagement."

"Another engagement? Why, Claire, how funny! You never said anything about it. I don't know
what to say to Mrs. Towne."

Claire felt calm again. "Just tell her the truth."

"But she'll think so strange that I didn't know ... that I...."

"You shouldn't have spoken for me until you found out whether I was willing."

"Willing! Willing! I didn't suppose you'd be anything else. I've been trying to get you in
with the right people at the church for the last fifteen years. I've tried so hard...."

"Yes, mother, I know," said Claire, patiently. "But don't you see? That's just it. You've tried
too hard."

Mrs. Robson began to whimper discreetly. "How you do talk, Claire! I declare I don't know what
to make of it. I suppose you're bitter about Mrs. Towne the other night. I felt so at first,
but I can see now we were at the wrong table. And, after all, everything came out beautifully.
We sat with Mr. Stillman, and that had a very good effect, I can tell you. Especially when
everybody saw us leave with him. Why, it brought Mrs. Towne to her feet."

"Yes, and that's the humiliating part of it."

"Well, Claire, when you've lived as long as I have you won't be so uppish about making compromises,"
flung back Mrs. Robson. "Of course, if you've got another engagement, you've got another engagement,
but if...."

"I wouldn't have gone, anyway. I'm through with that sort of thing."

"Why, Claire, how can you! It's your duty, now!--with your country at war--and ... and ...
Even that dreadful Serbian the other night made that plain."

"I'll go with you to church on Sundays, of course, but--"

"What am I to do?" wailed Mrs. Robson. "At least you might think of me! I've not had much pleasure
in my life, goodness knows, and now just as I...."

Mrs. Robson broke off abruptly on a flood of tears. Two weeks ago these tears would have overwhelmed
Claire. As it was, she sat calmly stirring her tea, surprised and a little ashamed of her coldness.
The truth was that Claire Robson was feeling all the fanatical cruelty that comes with sudden
conviction. The forms of her new faith had hardened too quickly and left outlines sharp and
uncompromising.

For years Claire had found shelter from the glare of middle-class snobbery beating about her
head, by shrinking into her mother's inadequate shadow as a desert bird shrinks into the thin
shadow of a dry reed by some burned-out watercourse. Now a full noon of disillusionment had
annihilated this shadow and given her the courage of necessity. And there was something more
than courage--there was an eagerness to stand alone in the commonplace words with which she
sought to temper her refusal to assist at the coming church reception:

"I can't see any good reason, mother, why you shouldn't go and help Mrs. Towne.... What have
my plans to do with it?"

To which her mother answered:

"I do so hate to be seen at such places alone, Claire."

Claire made no reply. She did not want to give her mother's indecision a chance to crystallize
into a definite stand. She knew by long experience that if this happened it would be fatal.
But in a swift flash of decision Claire made up her mind for one thing--she would either go
to Mrs. Condor's evening alone or she would send her regrets.

CHAPTER IV

By a series of neutral subterfuges and tactful evasions Claire Robson won her point--she went
to the Condor musicale at Ned Stillman's apartments alone, and on that same night her mother
wended a rather grudging way to the Second Presbyterian Church reception.

Acting under her mother's advice, Claire timed her arrival for nine o'clock, an hour which
seemed incredibly late to one schooled in the temperate hour of church socials. Mrs. Condor
herself opened the door in answer to Claire's ring.

"Oh, my dear, but I am glad to see you!" burst from the elder woman as she waved her in. But
she did not so much as mention the absence of Mrs. Robson, and Claire was divided between a
feeling of wounded family pride, and gratification at the intuition which had warned her to
leave her mother to her own devices. More people arrived on Claire's heels, and in the lively
bustle she was left to shed her wraps in one of the bedrooms. Her heart was pounding with reaction
at her outwardly self-contained entrance. She let her rather shabby cloak slip to the floor,
revealing a strange, new Claire resplendent in the gold-embroidered gown that had once so stirred
her rancor. For a brief instant she had an impulse to gather the discarded wrap securely about
her and make a quick exit. A swooning fear at the thought of meeting a roomful of people assailed
her. But there succeeded a courage born of the realization that they all would be strangers.
With a sense of bravado she stepped out into the entrance hall again.

Ned Stillman came forward. She halted and waited for him. His face had lit with a sudden pleasure,
which told Claire that for once in her life her presence roused positive interest. He inquired
after her health, why her mother had not come, whether the abominable fog was clearing. His
easy formality put her, as usual, completely at ease.

It was only when he asked her, with the most inconsequential tone in the world, "whether she
could read music at sight" that a sinking fear came over her. And yet she found courage enough
to be truthful and say yes.

"That's fine!" he returned. "Our accompanist hasn't come yet and we want to start off with
a song or two."

From this moment on the evening impressed itself on Claire in a series of blurred hectic pictures....
She knew that Stillman was leading her toward the piano, but the living-room and its toned
lights gave her a curious sense of unreality. She seated herself before the white keyboard
and folded her hands with desperate resignation while she waited for Stillman to dictate the
next move.

"My dear Mrs. Condor," Stillman explained, as that lady came up to them, "we sha'n't have to
wait for Flora Menzies. Miss Robson will accompany you."

Claire sat unmoved. She was beyond so trivial a sensation as anxiety. Stillman drifted away;
Mrs. Condor began to run through the sheet music lying on the piano.

"Of course you know Schumann, Miss Robson. Shall we start at once? How is the light? If you
moved your stool a little--so. There, that's better."

Claire did not reply. She looked at the music before her. She was conscious that it was a piece
she knew, although its name registered no other impression. She began to play. The opening
bars almost startled her. She felt a hush fall over the noisy room. Her fingers stumbled--she
caught the melody again with staggering desperation. Mrs. Condor was singing.... The room faded;
even the sound of Mrs. Condor's voice became remote. Claire had a desire to laugh.

All manner of strange, disconnected thoughts ran through her head. She remembered a doll she
had broken years ago and buried with great pomp and circumstance, a pink parasol that had been
given her as a child, the gigantic and respectable wig which had incased the head of her old
German music-teacher, Frau Pfaff. And as she played on and on the music further evoked the
memory of this worthy lady who had given her services in exchange for lodgings in an incredibly
small hall bedroom, with certain privileges at the kitchen stove. And pictures of this irritating
woman rose before her, stewing dried fruit, or preparing sour beef, or borrowing the clothes
boiler for a perennial wash. What compromises her mother had made to give her child the gentle
accomplishments that Mrs. Robson associated with breeding! It came to Claire that it was almost
cruel to have denied this mother a share in the triumphs of that evening. And with that, she
realized that Mrs. Condor had ceased singing. A hum broke loose, followed by applause. Claire
grew faint. Her head began to swirl. She clutched the piano stool and by sheer terror at the
thought of creating a scene she managed to keep her consciousness as she felt Mrs. Condor's
hand upon her shoulder and heard a voice that just missed being patronizing:

"My dear, you did it beautifully."

Claire longed to burst into tears....

The concert was over shortly after eleven o'clock. Besides Mrs. Condor, there had been a 'cellist,
very masculine in his looks but rather forceless in his playing, and a young, frail girl who
brought great breadth and vigor to her interpretations at the piano. The summary of the past
seems to be as follows:--

I. From the earliest history of the world there seems to have been an effort on the part of those
who pretended to control the consciences and religious views of others to preserve in their own
hands, the predominant political power.

1. The first government recorded is that of Nimrod. He discarded patriarchal instruction; united
tribes in cities; and formed their combination into an empire. The Magi controlled him, and, at his death,
under the pretence of his deification, preserved his power in the
priesthood.

2. In the extension of the Magi, every great leader, or king, was one of them; and obedient to
the rules and instructions of their general, the Hierophant.

3. When, in the assertion of popular right, Pythagoras was driven away by Cylon, the then imperfect
effort of self-government fell through. But little understood, its then dim light faded.

4.

The society of the Kabbalistæ, part of whom {108} were afterward known as the Pythagorean league,
as the Collegio fabrorum of Numa Pompilius, as the Liberi Architectonici
of the middle ages, and as the Free-Masons of the present day; this
society, I repeat, never interfered in politics.

5. The Christian church was tempted to forget, that Christ's kingdom was not of this world.
And its two great branches, that of Rome and England, were seduced
into the error of seeking to obtain power through public policy.

Rome exerted her influences through her prætorian cohorts, the confraternities of mendicants and
of Jesus--the Jesuits. Unknown, and in silence, they were domiciliated in courts and in families,
throughout all nations; and some roamed as itinerants. The will of their general, on their
unconditional subserviency to his behest, seemed to create an almost omnipresent power to be
controlled by Rome alone. Has not the exercise of it been exemplified in the inquisition?
Was it not felt in the massacre of St. Bartholomew? I will not stop to ask the power and control
of a Madame Maintenon, or Du Barry: nor whose influences controlled them. Does not all history
portray their one effort?

But has not the Church of England endeavored to obtain temporal power, also, by interference in
the affairs of this world, politically?

Shame! shame!! If the priesthood
are honest in giving an undivided allegiance to HIM, whom they {109}
have taken an oath only to serve; and yet, whose "kingdom is not of
this world;" how dare they violate that obligation? "Ne sutor ultra
crepidam," &c.

But we in the United States are not better than our
neighbors. Man is the same everywhere, but for education.

And this
brings us to the great, practical lesson, to which end all that has
thus far been detailed has been directed.

Americans! no matter of
what nation you came, consider this lesson.

We have ignored and thrown
aside the priestly fable of an anointment by a man conferring an hereditary
right to rule his brother man, by any family. This jus divinum regum
is an absurdity, practically discarded by those who assert it. What
divine right has been granted either to Napoleon the Great, or to
Napoleon the little? Whence came it? By whose hands? How is it preserved?


"How do you manage your hair, Miss Robson?" the other had said, digging viciously at her shifting
locks with a hairpin. "I do declare you're the only woman in the room that looks presentable."

But it was Edington's words to Stillman while they stood waiting for the hotel attendants to
prepare the table that brought a quickened beat to her heart. The conversation was low and
not meant for her ears, but her senses were too sharpened to miss Edington's furtive words
as he whispered to Stillman:

"Where did ... amazing.... Miss Robson?"

Claire did not catch the reply which must have also been something of a query, but she heard
Edington continue.

"Well ... a little too silent, I must admit.... No, I don't dislike 'em that way ... but I'm
afraid of them."

Stillman answered with a low laugh.

They sat down. Edington ordered wine. The crowd at the tables was rather a mixed one. There
was plenty of elaborate gowning among the groups of formal diners who had prolonged their feasting
into the supper hour, but many casuals, drifting in for a few drinks and a dance or two, robbed
the scene of its earlier brilliance.

The orchestra struck up a one-step. Claire denied Stillman the dance, explaining that she knew
none of the new steps, and he whirled away with Mrs. Condor. Edington, robbed of his chance,
pouted unashamed.

"I say, Miss Robson, can't you do a one-step--really? There isn't anything to it! Come on--try;
I'll pull you through."

Claire's knowledge of dancing was instinctive, but not a matter of much practice, yet his distress
was so comic that she relented. She wondered if he could feel her trembling as they swung into
the dance. She stumbled once or twice from timidity, but Edington guided unerringly. Half-way
round she suddenly struck the proper swing.

"There--that's it," cried Edington, enthusiastically. "Now you've got it! Fine!"

His praise mounted to her brain like a heady wine, and suddenly, in the twinkling of an eye,
all the repressed youth within her awoke with a sweet and terrible joy.... They danced madly,
perfectly, the rhythm entering into them like something at once fluid and flaming. Her ecstasy
awoke a vague response in her partner, who bent forward as he kept repeating, monotonously:

"And you said you couldn't, Miss Robson! Fancy, you said you couldn't!"

The music stopped abruptly with a crash. Some of the dancers made their way leisurely back
among the tables, but the most of them wandered about the polished' floor, clapping insistent
hands for an encore. In this brief interlude, groups arrived and departed. The musicians lifted
their instruments to chin and lip, struck an opening chord; couples began to whirl and glide.
Claire Robson, palpitant and eager, followed Edington's lead, but almost at the first moment
of their rhythmic flight they came crashing into the overcoated bulk of a man cutting across
the corner of the ballroom in an attempt at a swift exit. A smothered protest escaped Edington,
and Claire detached herself from her partner long enough to see the offender bow very low and
hear his apology in a voice and manner that seemed curiously familiar:

"I beg your pardon. Pray forgive me! I should have known better."

In the twinkling of an eye the interrupted dancers were sweeping on again, and the apologetic
stranger, hat in hand, turning for a farewell look at the pair. Claire Robson felt an up-leap
of the heart; a fresh ecstasy quickened her. It was the Serbian!

They finished the dance almost opposite their table and were met by a patter of applause from
Mrs. Condor and Stillman, who were already seated.

Claire was flaming with embarrassment as she faced Stillman.

"I hope you'll understand, Mr. Stillman," she faltered. "But Mr. Edington seemed willing to
risk my ignorance."

Mrs. Condor turned Claire's plaintive apology into a covert attack upon Stillman's courage,
but Stillman rescued Claire from further confusion by laughing back:

"Well, I'll have my revenge on Edington. I'll grant him all the one-steps, but he can't have
any of the waltzes, Miss Robson."

The waiter began to pour out the champagne. Claire settled back in her seat with a feeling
of delightful languor. The dance had released all the pent-up emotions that a night of vivid
sensations had called into her life. She had come into the Rose Room of the Palace Hotel quivering
in the leash of a restrained enjoyment; it had taken the quick lash of opportunity to send
her spirits hurtling forward in wild and headlong abandon. She lifted her wine-glass in answer
to the upraised glasses of her companions, and the thought flashed over her that it would be
impossible for her to have quite her old vision again. In every life there are culminating
moments of joy or sorrow which either clear or dim the horizon, and Claire felt that such moment
was now hers.

Stillman rose promptly in his seat at the first strains of the waltz, which proved to be the
next number. Claire stepped out upon the floor with confidence.

She did not need any word of reassurance this time to tell her that her dancing was more than
acceptable, and, true to her brief experience with Stillman, he refrained from voicing the
obvious. They had begun the dance promptly and for the first whirl about they had the floor
almost to themselves. Claire's discreet sidelong glances detected many approving nods in their
direction; people were noticing them and making favorable comment.... The floor filled, but
even in the crowd Claire had a sense that she and her partner were standing out distinctly.

The very nature of the waltz contrasted sharply with the one-step. There was less abandon and
more art. The first dance had expressed a primitive emotion; the present slow and measured
whirl a discriminating sensation. And slowly, under the spell of Stillman's calm and yet strangely
glowing manner, Claire recovered her poise. All night she had been inhaling every fresh delight
rapturously with the closed eyes and open senses that one brings to the enjoyment of blossoms
heavy with perfume. It took Stillman's influence to rob the hours of their swooning delight
by recapturing her self-consciousness. Things became at once orderly and reasonable. And as
he led her back to their table she felt the flame within cease its flarings and become steady,
with a pleasurable glow. For a moment she felt uneasy, as if she were being trapped by something
sweetfully insidious. Slowly, almost cautiously, she withdrew her arm from his. He made no
comment; it was doubtful if he really noticed her recoil.

       *       *       *       *       *

Long past its appointed time the hall light in the Robson flat continued to burn dimly. Mrs.
Robson, sleepless and a bit anxious, waited alertly for the sound of Claire's key in the door.
The welcome click came finally, succeeded by the unmistakable slam of an automobile door and
the sharp, quick note of a machine speeding up.

"She's come home in Stillman's car," flashed through Mrs. Robson's mind, as she sat up in bed.
At that moment Mrs. Finnegan's cuckoo clock, sounding distinctly through the thin flooring,
warbled twice with a voice of friendly betrayal. "Mercy! it's two o'clock!" she muttered. "I
wonder if Mrs. Finnegan is awake?... I do hope she heard the automobile!..."

Seated at the foot of her mother's bed, Claire tried her best to give a satisfactory report
of the evening, but she found that she had overlooked most of the details that her mother found
interesting. Who was there? What did Mrs. Condor wear? Did they have an elaborate spread?--the
questions rippled on in an endless flow.

Under the acceleration of Claire's recital, Mrs. Robson found her experiences at the church
reception left far behind. Even with scant details, Claire had managed to evolve a fascinating
picture of a life robbed sufficiently of puritanism to be properly piquant. There was a tang
of the swift, immoral, fascinating 'seventies in Claire's still cautious reference to champagne
and cigarettes. It was impossible for any San Franciscan who had lived through those splendid
madcap bonanza days to deny the lure of gay wickedness. At least it was hard to keep one's
eyes on a prayer-book while the car of pleasure rattled by. And a coffee-and-cake social was,
after all, a rather tame experience in the face of beverages more sparkling and eatables distinctly
enticing.... Of course, if Claire had been introduced to any of these questionable delights
by anybody short of a survivor of the Stillman clan, Mrs. Robson might have had a misgiving.
As it was, she was not above a certain forewarning sense that made her say with an air of inconsequence
as Claire finished her recital:

"Mrs. Towne tells me that there is a chance that Mr. Stillman's wife may get well. She's in
a private sanitarium, at Livermore, you know." She stopped to draw up the bedclothes higher.
"I do hope it's so!... But I'm always skeptical about crazy people ever amounting to anything
again. Seems to me they're better off dead."

CHAPTER V

For Claire Robson, there followed after the memorable Condor-Stillman musicale a period of
slack-water. It seemed as if a deadly stagnation was to poison her existence, so sharp and
emphasized was her boredom. On the other hand, Mrs. Robson seemed to have contrived, from years
of living among arid pleasures, the ability to conserve every happiness that she chanced upon
to its last drop. Claire's invitation to be one of a distinguished group fed her vanity long
after her daughter had outworn the delights of retrospection. The memory of this incident filled
Mrs. Robson's thoughts, her dreams, her conversation. Gradually, as the days dragged by, bit
by bit, she gleaned detached details of what had transpired, weaving them into a vivid whole,
for the entertainment of herself and the amazement of her neighbor, Mrs. Finnegan.

Formerly Mrs. Finnegan's information regarding what went on in exclusive circles was confined
to society dramas on the screen and the Sunday supplement. The personal note which Mrs. Robson
brought to her recitals was a new and pleasing experience. After listening to the authentic
gossip of Mrs. Robson, Mrs. Finnegan would return to her threshold with a sense of having shared
state secrets. On such occasions Mrs. Robson's frankness had almost a challenge in it; she
exaggerated many details and concealed none.

"Yes," she would repeat, emphatically, "they served cigarettes along with the wine. They always
do."

"Well, Mrs. Robson," Mrs. Finnegan inevitably returned, "far be it from me to criticize what
your daughter's friends do. But I don't approve of women smoking."

As a matter of fact, neither did Mrs. Robson, but she felt in duty bound to resent Mrs. Finnegan's
narrow attacks upon society.

"Well, Mrs. Finnegan, that's only because you're not accustomed to it. Now, if you had ever...."

"Did Claire smoke?"

"Why, of course not! How can you ask such a thing? I hope I've brought my daughter up decently,
Mrs. Finnegan."

And with that, Mrs. Robson would deftly switch to a less exciting detail of the Condor-Stillman
musicale, before her neighbor had a chance to pick flaws in her logic. But sooner or later
the topic would again verge on the controversial. Usually at the point where the scene shifted
from Ned Stillman's apartments to the Palace Hotel, Mrs. Finnegan's pug nose was lifted with
tentative disapproval, as she inquired:

"How many did you say went down to the Palace?"

"Only four--Mr. Stillman, Claire, Mrs. Condor, and a young fellow named Edington."

"I suppose that Mrs. Condor was the chaperon. Finnegan knows her well! She used to hire hacks
when Finnegan was in the livery business years ago. She's a gay one, I can tell you. When only
the steam-dummy ran out to the Cliff House...."

"That's nothing. Everybody who was anybody had dinners at the Cliff House in those days. I
remember how my father...."

"Yes, Mrs. Robson, maybe you do! But I'll bet you never went to such a place without your husband
... and ... with a strange man."

Mrs. Robson never had, and she would tell Mrs. Finnegan so decidedly. This always had the effect
of switching the subject again and Mrs. Robson found her desire to know the real details of
Mrs. Condor's questionable gaieties offered up on the altar of class loyalty. For it never
occurred to Mrs. Robson to doubt that her social exile had nothing to do with the inherent
rights of her position.

When everything else in the way of an irritating program failed to rouse Mrs. Robson's dignified
ire, her neighbor fell back upon the fact that Stillman was a married man. Mrs. Finnegan really
worshiped Mrs. Robson to distraction, but she had a natural combative tendency that was at
odds with even her loyalty.

"Mr. Stillman is a married man," Mrs. Finnegan would insist, doggedly. "And I don't approve
of married men taking an interest in young girls. Who knows?--he may spoil your daughter's
chances."

This statement always had the effect of dividing Mrs. Robson against herself. She resented
Mrs. Finnegan's insinuations concerning Stillman, because it was not in her nature to be anything
but partizan, and at the same time she was mollified by her neighbor's recognition of the fact
that Claire had such things as chances. She always managed cleverly at this point by saying,
patronizingly:

"Why, how you talk, Mrs. Finnegan! Mr. Stillman is just like an old friend. Not that we've
known him so long ... but the family, you know ... they're old-timers. Everybody knows the
Stillmans! Really one couldn't want a better friend."

Thus did Mrs. Robson take meager and colorless realities and expand them into things of blossoming
promise. She was almost creative in the artistry she brought to these transmutations. In the
end she convinced herself of their existence and she was quite sure that Mrs. Finnegan shared
equally in the delights of her fancy.

Meanwhile November passed, and the first weeks of December crowded the old year to its death.
November had been shrouded in clammy fogs, but no rain had fallen, and everybody began to have
the restless feeling engendered by the usual summer drought in California prolonged beyond
its appointed season. The country and the people needed rain. Claire, always responsive to
the moods of wind and weather, longed for the cleansing flood to descend and wash the dust-drab
town colorful again. She awoke one morning to the delicious thrill of the moisture-laden southeast
wind blowing into her room and the warning voice of her mother at her bedroom door calling to her:

"You'd better put on your thick shoes, Claire! We're in for a storm."

She leaped out of bed joyously and hurried with her dressing.

As she walked down to work the warm yet curiously refreshing wind flung itself in a fine frenzy
over the gray city. Dark-gray clouds were closing in from the south, and in the east an ominous
silver band of light marked the sullen flight of the sun. People were scampering about buoyantly,
running for street-cars, chasing liberated hats, battling with billowing skirts. It seemed
as if the promise of rain had revived laughter and motion to an extraordinary degree. At the
office this ecstasy of spirit persisted; even Miss Munch came in hair awry and blowsy, her
beady eyes almost laughing.

Mr. Flint had not been to the office for two days. A sniffling cold had kept him at home. Claire
had rather looked for him to-day, and had prepared herself for a flood of accumulated dictation.
But the threat of dampness evidently dissuaded him, for the noon hour came and went and Mr.
Flint did not put in an appearance. At about three o'clock in the afternoon a long-distance
call came on the telephone for Miss Robson. Claire answered. Flint was on the other end of
the wire. He wanted to know if she could come at once over to Yolanda and take several pages
of dictation. His cold was uncertain and he might not get out for the rest of the week. He
realized that it was something of an imposition on her good nature, but she would be doing
him a great favor if.... She interrupted him with her quick assent and he finished:

"I'll have the car at the station, and of course you'll stay for dinner."

Claire hung up the receiver and looked at her watch. It was just half after three. The next
ferryboat connecting at Sausalito with the electric train for Yolanda left at three-forty-five.
She had no time to lose; it was a good ten minutes' walk from the office to the ferry and little
to be gained by taking a street-car. She managed her preparations for departure successfully,
but in the end she had to ask Miss Munch to telephone her mother. Miss Munch assented with
an alarmingly sweet smile.

Claire walked briskly down California Street toward the ferry-building. No rain had fallen,
but the air was full of ominous promise. The wind was even brisker than it had been in the
morning, and its breath almost tropically moist.

"At sundown it will simply pour," thought Claire, as she exchanged fifty cents for a ticket
to Yolanda.

She presented her ticket at the entrance to the waiting-room and passed in. The passageway
to the boat was already open; she went at once and found a sheltered corner outside on the
upper deck. A strong sea was running and already the ferryboat was plunging and straining like
a restless bloodhound in leash. The air was full of screaming gulls and the clipped whistling
of restless bay craft. Claire was so intent on all this elemental agitation that she took no
notice of the people about her, but as the boat slid lumberingly out of the slip she was recalled
by a voice close at hand saying:

"Why, Miss Robson, who would think of seeing you here at this hour!"

Claire turned and discovered Miss Munch's cousin sitting beside her, intent on the inevitable
tatting.

"Oh, Mrs. Richards, how stupid of me! Have you been here long?"

"About ten minutes. But I get so interested in my work I never have eyes for anything else.
How do you put in the time? A trip like this is so tiresome!"

Claire delved into her bag and brought out knitting-needles and an unfinished sock.

"I'm trying a hand at this," she admitted, holding her handiwork up ruefully. "But I'm afraid
I'm not very skilful."

Mrs. Richards inspected the sock with critical disapproval.

"Oh, well," she encouraged, "you'll learn ... practice makes perfect. I've just finished a
half-dozen pairs. I suppose I'm laying myself out for a roast doing tatting in public these
war days! But it's restful and I'm not one to pretend. As long as my conscience is clear I
can afford to be perfectly independent.... You don't make this trip every night, do you?"

"Oh my, no! I'm going over to Mr. Flint's to take some dictation. He's home sick."

"I saw Mrs. Flint and the children coming off the boat just as I got on." Mrs. Richards's voice
took on a tone of casual directness.

"You know Mrs. Flint?"

"My dear girl, a trained nurse knows everybody--and everything about them, too. You never get
a real line on people until you live with them. I've never nursed any of the Flint family,
but I wouldn't have to to get their reputation--or perhaps I should say, old Flint's."

"Old Flint's?" echoed Claire.

"Well, of course he isn't so awfully old, but men like him always give that impression. They're
so awfully wise--about some things. I was so relieved when Gertie didn't get that dreadful
Miss Whitehead's place. Being in the general office is bad enough, but in his private office...."
Mrs. Richards lifted and dropped her tatting-filled hands significantly.

Claire felt the blood rush to her face. "I'm in the private office, Mrs. Richards.... No doubt
you forgot it."

"Well now, you know I had ... for the moment. But with a girl like you it's different. Some
women can handle men, but Gertie would be so helpless!"

The humor of Mrs. Richards's remark saved the situation for Claire. She changed the subject
deliberately. But somehow, with the conversation forced from the particular to the general,
Miss Munch's cousin lost interest, and by the time the boat had passed Alcatraz Island Claire
was deep in her thoughts again and the other woman following the measured flight of the tatting-shuttle
with strained attention.

The boat was romping through the stiff sea like a playful porpoise, dipping and plunging. A
half-score of adventuresome gulls were still following in the foam-churned wake. In the face
of all the pitching about, Mrs. Richards had quite a battle to direct her shuttle to any efficient
purpose, and Claire was almost amused at the grim determination she brought to the performance.

Presently a warning whistle from the ferryboat betrayed the fact that they were nearing Sausalito.
Mrs. Richards began to gather up her numerous bundles, and Claire and she made their way down
the narrow stairs to the lower deck. Their progress was slow and uncertain. The southeaster
was tearing across the open spaces and bending everything before it; the lumbering boat dipped
sideward in a stolid encounter with its adversary.

"Mercy! What a night!" gasped Mrs. Richards, clutching at Claire's arm.

A gust of wind struck them with its force just as they reached the lower deck. Mrs. Richards
staggered and wrestled vainly with tatting-bag and bundles and a refractory skirt. For the
moment both women were stalled in a desperate effort to retain their equilibrium.

"Come!" gasped Claire. "Let's get over there in the shelter of that automobile."

They made the leeward side of the automobile in question, and while Mrs. Richards began to
recover her roughly handled dignity Claire turned her attention to the car. It was a huge dark-red
affair, evidently fresh from the shop. Claire knew none of the fine points of automobiles,
but this one had unmistakable evidences of distinction. She was peering in at its opulent depths
when who should surprise her but Ned Stillman.

"My dear Miss Robson!" he cried, in a tone of delight, as he faced her from the opposite side
of the car. "What do you think of it?"

"Yours?" she queried.

"Just out of the shop to-day. I couldn't wait until it cleared. I just had to get out with
it. And this kind of weather always puts me up on my toes. Where are you going--to Ross? If
you are, don't bother with the train. Come along with me."

He circled about the machine and came up to her with a frank, outstretched hand. "Oh, I beg
your pardon!" he murmured as Mrs. Richards came into view.

Claire began an introduction, but Mrs. Richards cut in with her odd, challenging way.

"Oh, I know Mr. Stillman! But I guess he's forgotten me. It's been some years, of course. At
Mr. Faville's--your wife's father's house."

Stillman paled for the briefest of moments, but he recovered himself cleverly. "Mrs. Richards--of
course! How do you do? It has been some years."

"I'm going to Mr. Flint's--at Yolanda," said Claire, "to take some dictation. He's been ill,
you know."

"Ill? No, I hadn't heard it. Nothing serious, I hope."

"Not serious enough to keep Mrs. Flint at home, anyway," volunteered Mrs. Richards, in her
characteristically disagreeable way.

"Mrs. Richards saw Mrs. Flint and the children coming off the boat...."

"As I got on," interrupted the lady again.

"Oh, indeed, is that so?" Claire fancied that Stillman's tone held something more than polite
acceptance of what he had just heard. "I can take you ladies to Yolanda if you'd like a spin
in the open better than a stuffy ride in the train."

"Thank you," Mrs. Richards returned, "but I get off at Sausalito. I've no doubt Miss Robson
will be delighted."

"I think I'd better not," said Claire. "Mr. Flint is sending his car to the train for me. I
shouldn't want to change my program and cause confusion. But I'd like nothing better! The air
is so bracing!"

"You can excuse me!" put in Mrs. Richards, moving toward the forward deck. "It's going to pour
in less than ten minutes. I'm not one of those amphibious creatures who like to get wringing
wet just for the fun of it!"

Stillman lifted his hat. Claire stood for a moment undecided whether to follow Mrs. Richards
or remain for a chat with Stillman.

"I'm an awful fool, I suppose," Stillman smiled at Claire, "bringing the car out on a night
like this. But the truth is Edington promised to catch this boat and I wanted him to try out
the new plaything. I might have known he wouldn't make it. We're running over for dinner with
Edington's sister."

At this moment the boat crashed clumsily against the Sausalito ferry-slip, and in the sudden
confusion of landing Claire was swept along without further ado.

She looked back. Stillman waved a genial good-by to her. She felt glad that he was behind her,
in a vague, impersonal, thoroughly inexplainable way.

CHAPTER VI

Claire was disappointed that Mrs. Flint was not to be at home. She had caught glimpses of her
now and then coming into the office and she was interested in the hope of seeing her at closer
range. Mrs. Flint was a rather frumpish individual, who always gave the impression of pieced-out
dressmaking.

"She must subscribe to the Ladies' Home Journal," Nellie Whitehead had commented one day. "You
know that 'go-up-into-the-garret-and-get-five- yards-of-grandmother's-wedding-gown' column.
Well, she's a walking ad for it. She's no raving beauty, but if she would throw out her chest
and chuck those flat-heeled clogs of hers, and put a marcel wave in her hair, maybe the old
man would sit up and take notice."

To which Miss Munch had replied:

"Well, she's a mighty sweet woman, anyway!" in a tone calculated to freeze the irrepressible
Nellie Whitehead into silence.

"Who says she isn't? And at that, a good tailor-made suit and a decent-looking hat won't spoil
her disposition any...."

The children, too, were what Nellie Whitehead had termed "perfect guys." On warm days Mrs.
Flint would drag these two daughters of hers into the office, dressed in plaid suits and velveteen
hats; and when a cold north wind blew it seemed inevitable that they would appear in gay and
airy costumes up to their knees, with impossible straw bonnets trimmed with daisies and faded
cornflowers, reminiscent of the white-leghorn-hat era.

"Men don't marry women for their clothes," Miss Munch used to say, challengingly, to Nellie.

"Oh, don't they, indeed! Well, I've lived longer than sixteen and a half years and I've noticed
that it's the up-to-the-minute dame that gets away with it and holds onto it every time, just
the same. And any woman silly enough to work the rag-bag game when her husband can afford seven
yards of taffeta and a Butterick pattern is a fool!"

Claire knew women who looked dowdy on dress-parade and yet managed to be quite charming in
their own houses. She was wondering whether this might not be Mrs. Flint's case; anyway, she
had hoped for a chance to decide this point, and now Mrs. Flint was not at home.

As she settled into her matting-covered seat in the train she began to wonder just who would
be home at the Flint establishment. And she thought suddenly of the disagreeable emphasis that
Mrs. Richards had seen fit to give the fact that Mrs. Flint was bound cityward. At this stage
she became lost in discovering so many points of contact between Mrs. Richards and her cousin,
Miss Munch. Then the train started with a quick lurch, and a view of the rapidly darkening
landscape claimed her utterly.

Claire always took a childish delight in watching the panorama of the countryside unroll swiftly
before the space-conquering flight of a train. And to-night the quick close of the December
day warned her to make the most of her opportunity. The wind was whipping the upper reaches
of the bay into a shallow fury, and the water in turn was beating against the slimy mud and
swallowing it up in gray, futile anger. This part of the ride just out of Sausalito was always
more or less depressing unless a combination of full tide and vivid sunshine gave its muddy
stretches the enlivening grace of sky-blue reflections. Worm-eaten and tottering piles, abandoned
hulks, half-swamped skiffs, all the water-logged dissolution of stagnant shore lines the world
over, flashed by, to be succeeded by the fresher green of channel-cut marshes. The hills were
wind-swept, huddling their scant oak covering into the protecting folds of shallow canons.
At intervals, clumps of eucalyptus-trees banded together or drew out in long, thin, soldier-like
lines.

Presently it began to rain. There was no preliminary patter, but the storm broke suddenly,
hurling great gray drops of moisture against the windows. Claire withdrew from any further
attempt to watch the whirling landscape. It was now quite dark, the short December day dying
even more suddenly under a black pall of lowering clouds.

She began to have distinctly uncomfortable thoughts about her visit to the Flints'. But the
more uncomfortable her thoughts became, the more reason she brought to bear for conquering
them. Surely one was not to be persuaded into a panic by any such person as Mrs. Richards!
And by the time the brakeman announced the train's approach to Yolanda, Claire had recovered
her common sense. What of it if Mrs. Flint had gone to town? There must be other women in the
household--at least a maid. It was absurd! The train stopped and Claire got off.

Flint's car was waiting, and Jerry Donovan, the chauffeur, stood with a dripping umbrella almost
at Claire's elbow as she hopped upon the platform.

As they swished through the inky blackness, Claire said to Jerry, with as inconsequential an
air as she could muster:

"I thought I saw Mrs. Flint get off the boat in town. But I guess I was mistaken. She wouldn't
be leaving Mr. Flint alone ... when he's ill."

"Ill?" Jerry chuckled. "Well, he ain't dead by a long shot. Just a case of sniffles, and a
good excuse for hitting the booze. He's in prime condition, I can tell you."

Claire had never seen Flint in "prime condition," but she had it from Nellie Whitehead that
there were moments when the gentleman in question could "go some," to use her predecessor's
precise terms.

"About twice a year," Nellie had once confided to Claire, "the old boy starts in to cure a
cold. I helped him cure one ... but never again!"

Jerry's observations aroused fresh anxiety, but they did not settle the issue for Claire. She
felt that she could not turn back at the eleventh hour. There was nothing else for her to do
but go through with the game. Yet she still hoped for the best.

"Did Mrs. Flint go to town to-day?" she finally asked, point-blank.

"Sure thing," said Jerry, swinging the car past the Flint gateway.

Claire refused to be totally lacking in faith.

"There must be a maid," flashed through her mind, as Jerry stopped the car and swung down to
help her out.

A Japanese boy threw open the door as they scrambled up the rain-soaked steps. But the fine,
orderly, Colonial interior reassured Claire. The few country homes she had seen had been of
the rambling, unrelated bungalow type, with paneled redwood walls either stained to a dismal
brown or quite frankly left to their rather characterless pink. This home was different. Even
the pungent oak logs crackling in the fireplace did so with indefinable distinction. The general
tone of the surroundings was as little in keeping with the patchwork personality of its mistress
as one could imagine. It was as if the singular completeness of Mrs. Flint's home left no time
nor energy for a finished individuality. Claire got all this in the briefest of flashes, just
a swift, inclusive glance about the entrance hall and through the doorways leading into the
rooms beyond. Particularly did she sense the severe opulence of the dining-room, twinkling
at a remoter distance than the living-room--its perfectly polished silver, its spotless linen,
its wonderfully blue china, not to mention the disconcerting fact that the table in the center
was laid for but two.

And then Flint himself came forward with a very red face and an absurdly cordial greeting.

"Well, I began to wonder whether you'd risk it. This will be a storm and no mistake.... Here,
let me have your coat. Come, you're quite wet.... Shall you warm up on a hot toddy or something
cooler--a cocktail?"

She felt his hand sliding down her arm as she released the coat to his too-eager fingers. "Oh
no, Mr. Flint! Thank you, nothing. It's only a bit of rain on the surface. I'm quite dry."

"Quite dry!" He echoed her words with a guffaw. "Well, then, we'll have to moisten you up.
I always say everything's a good excuse for a drink. If you're cold you take a drink to warm
up; if you're warm you take one to cool off. You dry out on one, and you wet up on one. I don't
know of any habit with so many good reasons back of it. I'm dry, too.... We'll have a Bronx!
That's a nice, ladylike drink."

Claire weighed her reply. She did not want to strike the wrong note; she wanted to let him
have a feeling that she was accepting everything in a normal, matter-of-fact way, as if she
saw nothing extraordinary in the situation.

"You're very kind, but really you know ... if I'm to get my dictation straight...."

"Well, perhaps there won't be any dictation. We're not slaves, you and I. Maybe it will be
much pleasanter to sit before the fire and listen to the storm. What do you say to that?"

She turned from him deliberately, under the fiction of fluffing up her hair before a gilt mirror
near the door. She was thinking quickly and with a tremendous, if concealed, agitation. "Why,"
she laughed back, finally, "that would be pleasant. But I came to take dictation, Mr. Flint.
And women ... women, you know, are so funny! If they make up their minds to one thing, they
can't switch suddenly to another idea."

He was paying no attention to her remark, a remark which she felt would have fallen flat in
any event, since it was so palpably studied.

"The living-room is in there," he said, pointing. "Make yourself at home."

She went in and sat before the fire. Flint disappeared. She tried hard to analyze the situation.
It was unthinkable that Mr. Flint had deliberately planned this piece of foolishness. He must
have had some idea of work when he had telephoned her; perhaps he still had. It was his way
of being facetious, she argued, this fine pretense that it was all to be a pleasant lark, or
it may have been his idea of hospitality. Of course he had been drinking, but she took comfort
in the thought that there must be instinctive standards in a man like Flint that even whisky
could not swamp. At least he must respect his wife--surely it was not possible for Flint, drunk
or sober, to offer such an affront to her, however little he respected the women in his employ.
She dismissed Mrs. Richards's exaggerated insinuations with their well-deserved contempt, but
she could not thrust aside quite so readily the eye-lifting tone with which Stillman had met
the announcement of Mrs. Flint's absence from home.

This was the first time that Claire had seen Stillman since the musicale. She had thought a
great deal about him and particularly about his problem. She felt a great desire to know everything--all
the details of the unfortunate circumstance that had driven his wife into a madhouse, and yet
whenever her mother broached the subject Claire changed the topic with curious panic. She seemed
to dread the hard, almost triumphant manner that her mother assumed in tracking misfortune
to its lair and gloating over it. She began to wonder whether Stillman would be swinging back
to the city on a late boat ... or would the storm keep him at Edington's sister's home all night?

She was in the midst of this speculation when Flint came into the room.

"We'll eat early and have that off our minds," he announced. His manner was brusk and business-like
again. Claire felt reassured.

But she was disturbed to find a cocktail at her place at the table.

"Well, here's glad to see you!" Flint raised his glass and tilted it ever so slightly in her
direction. Claire lifted the cocktail to her lips and set it down untasted. "What's the matter?
Getting unsociable again?"

"No, Mr. Flint. I don't care for cocktails."

"Oh, all right! We'll send down-cellar and get some wine."

"Thank you, not for me."

"I suppose you don't care for wine, either?" His voice had a bantering quality, with a shade
of menace in it. "Or maybe the right party isn't here. I've noticed that makes a difference.
Females are damned moral with the wrong fellow."

His attack was so direct and insolent that Claire missed the trepidation that might have come
with a more covert move. She was no longer uncertain. There was a sharp relief in realizing
that all the cards were on the table. She felt also that there was no immediate danger. Flint
was far from sober, but he was in his own home. She had the conviction that he was merely skirmishing,
testing the strength or weakness of the line he hoped to penetrate. Her reply was rather more
of a challenge than she could have imagined herself giving under such a circumstance.

"And if I were to tell you that I don't care for wine, Mr. Flint?"

He threw open his napkin with a flourish. "You'd be telling me a damned lie! You drink wine
at the Palace with Stillman and Edington."

She had felt that he was going to say some such thing and for a moment it amused her. It was
so ridiculous to find this rather wan and wistful indiscretion assuming damaging proportions.
But a nasty fear succeeded her faint amusement. Could it be possible that Stillman had gossiped?

"Who told you?" she demanded.

"Oh, don't be afraid; it wasn't Stillman! You're like all women, you moon about sentimentalizing
over Ned until it makes a man like me sick! I like Ned; I always have. But even when we went
to college together it was the same way. Everybody ... yes, even the men ... always gave him
credit for a high moral tone. Not that he ever took it.... I'll say that for him.... Ned Stillman
didn't tell me, for the simple reason that he didn't have to. Nobody told me. I go to the Palace
myself under pressure, and I've got two eyes. As a matter of fact, there isn't any reason why
Edington or Stillman or the waiter who drew the corks shouldn't have mentioned it. A glass
of wine is no crime. But the thing that makes me hot is to see any one pretending. If you drink
with Stillman, you haven't any license to refuse a glass with me."

There was something more than wine-heated rancor back of his harangue. Claire guessed instinctively
that he both loved and hated Stillman with a curious confusion of impulses. It was a feeling
of affection torn by the irritating superiority of its object. One gets the same thing in families
... among children. It was at once subtle and extremely primitive.

"My dear Mr. Flint, this isn't quite the same thing. I've work to do for one thing and, and...."

"And ... and.... Why don't you say it? You're alone with me and all that sort of rubbish! Want
a chaperon, I suppose. Mrs. Condor, for instance.... Good Lord!"

Claire dipped her spoon into the steaming bouillon-cup in front of her. She was growing quite
calm under the directness of Flint's attack.

"It isn't the same," she reiterated, stubbornly. "I've work to do, Mr. Flint."

"I tell you that you haven't!" Flint brought his fist down upon the table.

"Well, then, why did you send for me?"

"I had something to say to you.... Gad! one can't talk in that ramping office of mine. We've
never even settled the matter of an increase in salary for you. By the way, how much money
do you get?"

Claire had never seen any man look so crafty and disagreeable. He gave her the impression of
a petty tyrant about to bestow largess upon an obsequious and fawning slave.

"Sixty-five dollars a month."

"Well, I don't exactly know.... I've been trying to figure out just how valuable you are to
me, Miss Robson. Or, rather, how valuable you're likely to be." He thrust aside his soup and
leaned heavily upon the table. "That's why I invited you over to-night. I wanted to see you
at a little closer range. You live with your mother, don't you?"

"Yes, Mr. Flint."

"You ... you support your mother, I believe?"

"Yes, Mr. Flint."

"Well, sixty-five dollars don't leave much margin for hair ribbons and the like, does it, now?"

"No, Mr. Flint."

"No, Mr. Flint.... Yes, Mr. Flint...." he mocked. "Good Lord! can't you cut that school-girl-to-her-dignified-guardian
attitude. I'm human. Dammit all, I'm as human as your friend Ned Stillman. I'll bet you don't
yes-sir and no-sir him.... You know, that night I saw you at the Palace you quite bowled me
over. I'd been thinking of you as a shy, unsophisticated young thing. But you were hitting
the high places like a veteran. Even old lady Condor didn't have anything on you. Except, of
course, that she looks the part. By the way, where did you meet Stillman?"

"At ... at a church social," Claire stammered.

"At a church social! Say, I wasn't born yesterday. Ned Stillman doesn't go to church. Tell
me something easy."

"It was really a Red Cross concert. He went with Mrs. Condor," Claire found herself explaining
in spite of her anger. "We sat at the same table when the ice-cream was served."

Flint was roaring with exaggerated laughter. Even Claire could not restrain a smile. What made
the statement so ridiculous, she found herself wondering. Was she unconsciously reflecting
Flint's attitude or had she herself changed so tremendously in the last few weeks? 

A general dispersion, then, of the members throughout society with the most entire union and subordination,
formed the basis of their constitution.

{96}

In the education of youth, there has been a very unjust charge against
them, that is, that they mutilated the classics.

Would to God that every pure Christian would follow such an example; and that we might thereby present
such an expurgated edition, as would create all the good they may contain, devoid of evil.
Any who have read Virgil, Ovid, Terence, or other classic works,
must acknowledge this necessity.

Even Shakespeare's plays can not be read, as printed, in a modest company. There is not, either,
any prudery in this. And, accordingly, a family expurgated edition has been published by Dr. Bowdler,
demanding a far greater circulation than it may have as yet received. Praise, then, be awarded
to all instructors of youth who will promote such expurgation from the classics as will blot
out their immorality!

The latitude in which this society has understood its rights and immunities has given occasion
to fear an unlimited extension and exercise of them, dangerous to
all existing authority, civil and ecclesiastical, as the constitution
of the order, and its erection into an independent monarchy in the
bosom of other governments, have assumed a more fixed character.

This society seems to have been divided into different ranks or classes. The novices, chosen
from the most talented and well-educated youths, and men without regard to birth or external
circumstances; and who were tried for two years, in separate {97} novitiate houses, in all imaginable
exercises of self-denial and obedience, to determine whether they would be useful to the purposes
of the order, were not ranked among the actual members, the lowest
of whom are the secular coadjutors, who take no monastic vows, and
may, therefore, be dismissed. Two or three months without
salary meant debts piling up, clothes in ribbons, and no end of hectic worries.

"I think you've got a decidedly wrong impression of my friendship for Mr. Stillman," she said,
after some deliberation. "I really know him only slightly. He was good enough, or rather I
should say Mrs. Condor was good enough, to include me in a little musical evening. That was
on the night you saw me at the Palace. We dropped down for a dance or two after the music was
over. I'd never been to such a place before, and I dare say I'll never go again. It was just
one of those experiences that come to a person out of a clear sky. It's over as quickly as
a shower."

"Oh, don't you worry! There'll be other showers. I'm going to see to that. You know, the more
I talk to you the more amazing you are.... Fancy your graduating from dinky church things into
Stillman musicales, and Palace dansants, and young Edington, and old lady Condor, all of a
sudden ... and getting away with it as if you were an old hand at the game. Say, if you're
that apt I'll give you a post-graduate course in high life that'll make your hair curl forty-seven
ways. I don't mean anything vulgar or common ... you understand. I'm a gentleman, Miss Robson,
at that."

He stopped for a moment to ring the bell for the Japanese boy. Claire maintained a discreet
silence. She had a feeling that it would be just as well to let him take his full rein. The
servant came in and cleared away the empty bouillon-cups. Fish was served.

Flint took one taste of the fish and shoved it away impatiently. "You know, a fellow like me
gets awfully bored at all this sort of thing." He swept the room with an inclusive gesture.
"Not that my wife isn't the best little woman in the world, but you know. She's got standards
and convictions and all that sort of rot. I can't bundle her off for dinner and a little lark
at the Red Paint or Bonini's or some other Bohemian joint like them.... You know what I mean,
no rough stuff ... but a good feed, and two kinds of wine, and a cigarette with the small black.
Just gay and frivolous.... Of course I can get any number of girls to run around and help eat
up all the nourishment I care to provide. But, good Lord! that isn't it! I'm looking for somebody
with human intelligence. Not that I want to discuss free verse and the Little Theater movement.
But I like to feel that if I took such a crazy notion the person sitting opposite me could
qualify for a good comeback.... I like my home and everything, but.... Oh, well, what's the
use in pretending? I'm just as human as your friend Ned Stillman and I've got just as keen
an eye for class."

He sat back in his seat with an air of satisfaction, waiting for Claire's reply. She had been
calm enough while he talked, but under the tenseness of his silent expectancy she felt her
heart bound.

"Dammit all! Why don't you say something?" he blurted out. "I know, you need a little wine.
I'm going down-stairs and pick out the best in the cellar ... myself."

She did not attempt to dissuade him; as a matter of fact, she felt relieved to be left alone
for a moment. She must leave as soon as dinner was over. She began to wonder about the trains.
The storm was raging outside. She could hear the frenzied trees flinging their branches about
and a noisy flood of rain against the windows. She spoke to the Japanese boy as he was carrying
away Flint's unfinished fish course.

"Do you know what time the next train leaves?"

He laid the tray on the serving-table. "Please.... I telephone. Please!" He bobbed at her absurdly
and went out into the hall. She listened. He was ringing up the station-master. He came back
promptly.

"Please," he began, sucking in his breath, "please ... no train to-night."

"No train to-night? Why, what do you mean?"

"Please ... very much water. Train track washed out. No train to-night. To-morrow morning, maybe."

"Oh, but I must go home to-night! I really must! I...."

She broke off suddenly, realizing the futility of her protest.

"To-morrow morning," replied the Japanese, blandly. "All right to-morrow morning. You stay
here.... I fix a place. You see.... I fix a very nice place for young lady."

He went out with the tray and Claire rose and walked to the window. Flint broke into the room
noisily. She turned--he had two dusty bottles in his hand, and an air of triumph.

"Mr. Flint, it seems that there has been a washout. I understand that no trains are running.
What can I do? I must get back; really I...."

"Who says so?" Flint laid the bottles down with an irritating calmness.

"The station-master. Your ... your servant just telephoned for me."

"Oh, well, we should worry! Sit down."

"Mr. Flint, really, I must.... You know I can't.... I...."

"Sit down!"

His tone was a dash of cold water thrown in the face of her rising hysteria. She sat down.
Flint ignored the bottles on the table and, crossing over to the Sheraton sideboard, poured
himself a stiff drink of whisky. His hair-towsled condition stood out sharply against the precise
background.

He made no further comment, but he began to open the bottles of wine deliberately. Then he
rummaged in the china-closet for the wine-glasses and set four, two at his place and two at
Claire's, upon the table.

"White wine with the entree and red wine with the roast," he muttered. And he poured out the
white wine without further ado.

The servant came in with creamed sweetbreads. Claire forced herself to make a pretense of eating,
although her appetite had long since deserted her. She was thinking, and thinking hard.

She should never have come, in the first place--at least she should have turned back upon the
strength of Jerry's announcement. But she saw now, with a clearness that surprised her, that
the situation had really challenged her imagination. She had been too calm, too collected,
too well-poised, full of smug over-confidence. She had read in the current novels of the day
how hysterically unsophisticated heroines conducted themselves in tight corners and she had
followed their writhings with ill-concealed impatience. She never had really put herself in
their place, but she had had a vague notion that they carried on absurdly. Her fear all evening
had been not what Mr. Flint would do or say or even suggest--she had been anxious merely to
have the impending storm over, the air cleared, and her position in the office assured upon
a purely business-like basis. She had really welcomed the forced issue; for weeks her mind
had been entertaining and dismissing the idea that Mr. Flint had any questionable motives in
yielding Nellie Whitehead's place to her. With this fleeting trepidation had come the realization
of her dependence, the importance her sixty-five dollars a month in the scheme of things, the
compromises that she might be forced into accepting in order to insure its continuance; not
definite and soul-searing compromises, it was true, but petty, irritating trucklings which
wear down self-esteem.

It had been the primitive violence of Flint's commanding, "Sit down!" to thrust the issue from
the economic to the elemental. For the first time in her life Claire was face to face with
unstripped masculine brutality. She had wondered why women of a lower order took men's blows
without striking back, without at least escaping from further torment. But she was beginning
to see, as her spirits tried to rise reeling from Flint's verbal assault, the fawning submission,
half admiration, half fear, that could follow a frank, hard-fisted blow. And she had a terror,
sitting there trying to thrust food between her trembling lips, that the sheer physical force
of the male opposite her might shatter in one blow a will that could have withstood any amount
of spiritual or material attrition. She had never seen Flint so clearly as at this moment;
in fact, she had never seen him at all. Formerly, he had been a conventionalized masculine
biped in a blue-serge covering who paid her salary and struck attitudes that were symbols of
predatory instincts rather than an indication that such instincts existed. Life had, after
all, been peopled by the precisely labeled puppets of a morality play; they came on, and declaimed,
and made gestures--but they remained abstractions, things apart from life, mere representations
of the vices and virtues they impersonated. She had entertained this idea particularly with
regard to Flint. She had felt that the day would come when he and she would occupy the stage
together. He would speak his part with a great flourish of the hands and much high-sounding
emphasis, and when he had finished she would reply with a carefully worded retort, setting
forth the claims and rewards of virtue. Thus it would continue, argument succeeding argument,
a declamatory give and take, dignified, passionless, theatrical.

They were occupying the stage now, it was true, but there was something warm and human and
ragged about the performance. Flint was not a mere spiritless allegory in red-satin doublet
and hose to give flame to his conventionality. Instead, she saw sitting opposite her a ponderous,
quick-breathing, drunken male, handsome in a coarse, rough-hewn way, speaking in the quick,
clipped speech of passion and striking her to the ground with the energy of his stage business.
She was afraid, almost for the first time in her life, with a primitive, abandoned fear. And
suddenly her vista of womanhood narrowed to include the ugly foreground of life that youth
had looked over in its eager, far-flung scanning of the horizon beyond. Suddenly she felt all
the oppression and sorrow of the sex bear down upon her and mark her with its relentless finger.
Because she was a woman she would pay for every joy with a corresponding sorrow; receive a
blow for every caress; know courage and fear with equal intimacy.... She stopped eating and
she began to realize with a vivid terror that Flint was looking at her fixedly and beginning
to speak.

"What's the matter with the sweetbreads? Don't you like 'em?... And the wine?... Say, I'm going
to get peeved in a minute. You don't suppose we serve this French-restaurant style of meal
every day do you? I should say not! That's another one of the frau's convictions. Plain living
at home so as to set the right example to the girls!" Flint threw his head from side to side,
mincing out his last statement. "Gad! I'm tired of setting a good example!... And even Sing
gets tired. Chinks, you know, like to cook a bang-up meal once in a while. They like a chance
to show their speed and put in all the fancy trimmings."

His mood, during this speech, had changed with drunken facility from irritability to good humor.
Claire, still attempting to marshal her wits, picked up her fork again and murmured:

"Oh, you have a Chinese cook, then? I had no idea.... The Japanese boy, you know. They say
that the two never get along."

"That's a fairy-tale. Besides, it's next to impossible, these days, to get a Chinese second-boy.
And the missus won't hire a girl." He winked broadly. "Can't get one ugly enough, I guess.
Sing's a wonder. I copped him from the Tom Forsythes. You know--young Edington's in-laws. They've
never quite forgiven me. Though they will come back and tuck away one of his dinners occasionally."

Claire's mind closed nimbly over Flint's statement. "The--the Tom Forsythes of Ross?" she asked.

He nodded and tossed a glass of wine off in one gulp. The Tom Forsythes of Ross ... Edington's
sister ... Ned Stillman! The sequence of ideas flashed through Claire's mind with flashing
detachment. She leaned back in her seat and raised the wine-glass in obvious pretense to her
lips. Flint was watching her keenly: an ugly gleam was in his eyes.

"Well, Miss Robson, you might just as well make up your mind to finish that glass of wine first
as last. We're not going to have the next course until you do."

She measured him deliberately. She knew now that it was to be a fight to a finish. She was
honestly afraid and full of the courage of realization.

"I've had enough as it is, Mr. Flint. Besides, we must either be getting to work or figuring
how I am to make the boat at Sausalito. I suppose you could send me in the car ... with Jerry."

"Oh, with Jerry? So that's it!... No, not on your life! He's too good-looking a boy for a job
like that. No, Miss Robson, you are going to stay right here.... Now, understand me, I'm not
a damn fool! You seem to have an idea that because I've had a glass or two that I've lost my
reason. You're an attractive girl and all that, Miss Robson, and I am interested in you! But
please don't flatter yourself that I'm staking everything on a throw like this. As a matter
of fact, I'll see that you are properly chaperoned. We've plenty of neighbors. You've got the
best excuse in the world for staying here and...."

"But, my dear Mr. Flint, can't you see, I...."

"No, I can't. I want you to stay here. My reasons are as good as yours. Now let's get that
off our mind and enjoy the meal."

His manner struck her protests to the ground again. She was no longer fearing the immediate
outcome, in fact, she never had, but she knew that if he broke her to his will now, all the
safeguards, all the chaperons, all the conventions in the world wouldn't save her from ultimate
consequences. This was the try-out that was to establish her pace in the final contest; she
would stand or fall upon the record she made at this moment. For she was trying out something
more than Flint's temper, something greater than a mechanical adjustment of human relationships--she
was trying out herself. She sat for some moments, thinking hard, one hand fingering the slender
base of the wine-filled glass in front of her, the other dropped in pensive limpness at her
side. Flint had cleared the space in front of him of everything but his two wine-glasses. He
had slipped down in his seat and his two bloodshot eyes were fixing her with a level stare.

She stirred finally and rose.

He was on his feet in an instant.

"I'm going to telephone," she said, calmly.

"Telephone ... where?... What's the idea?"

"Mr. Flint," she answered, a bit wearily, "at least I'm a guest in your house, am I not?"

He settled back in his seat with a grunt of acquiescence. She stood dazed for a moment, surprised
at the chance that had put such telling words into her mouth. She had been fingering timidly
for the key to his chivalry; quite by accident she had hit upon it in the shape of this appeal
to her expectations of him in the rôle of host. She could have lied, of course, and told him
that she wished to telephone her mother, but she had not yet been cornered sufficiently to
resort to so distasteful a weapon.... As she left the room she found herself wondering whether
Stillman had by any chance left the Tom Forsythes. She looked at the clock. It was not quite
eight o'clock. She felt reassured, yet she was tremendously frightened.... Especially as she
realized that the telephone was in the entrance hall within earshot of the dining-room....

She was decidedly more frightened when she got back from her telephoning, and looked at Flint.
He was clutching at the table with both hands, his body tilted slightly forward, his lips ominously
thin.

"You telephoned to the Tom Forsythes, didn't you?"

"Yes."

"And you asked for Stillman.... Did you get him?"

"Yes."

"What did you want with him?"

"If you heard that much, I guess you heard the rest, Mr. Flint."

Claire stood at her place at the table. She decided not to sit. Flint bore down on both hands
until things began to creak.

"Yes, I heard everything, but, dammit all, I couldn't believe my own ears. You're like every
woman I ever knew ... you don't play fair. You appeal to my instinct as host and then you go
and outrage every privilege you've got me to concede. You're a pretty guest, you are! And I
sit here and let you 'play me for a fool.' Let you ring up Ned Stillman and ask him to fetch
you away from my house in his car!" He stopped and took a deep breath; his words were no longer
passionate; instead, they were precise and cool and venomous. "Understand me, young lady, I'm
through with you. I wouldn't care, if I thought you were really virtuous. But you're too clever
for a virtuous woman.... Oh, I dare say you subscribe to the letter of the law, all right.
For instance, you take care not to run around with married men whose incumbrances are in plain
view of the audience.... Oh, I've seen lots of clever women in my time, but in the end they
always took too much rope. Remember, you'll have your bluff called some day."

He pushed back his chair noisily and rose. The Japanese servant came bobbing along.

"Clear away the things!" Flint bellowed. "We're through!... Good night, Miss Robson, and a
pleasant journey to you--you and your immaculate friend Stillman."

He left the room with a melodramatic flourish.... Presently Claire heard him mounting the stairs.

"He's drunk!" flashed through her mind, as if the idea had just struck her. "Of course, he
must be drunk, otherwise he wouldn't have dared to...."

She went out into the entrance hall and put on her hat.

CHAPTER VII

Midway between Yolanda and Sausalito Stillman's machine died with disconcerting suddenness
The rain was coming down in sheets. Stillman got out.

"It's no use," he announced, lifting himself back into his seat. "I can't do anything in this
deluge."

This was the first word that had been said since he and Claire had left Flint's.

"The worst will be over in a few moments," replied Claire, easily. But she was far from reassured.

The deluge was not over in a few moments. It kept up with an ever-increasing violence, until
it seemed that even the stalled car would be compelled to yield to its force. Claire had never
seen it rain harder; the storm had a vindictive fury that reminded her of the dreadful tempest
in "King Lear."

Stillman maintained his usual well-bred calm and smoked cigarettes while he chattered. He touched
on every conceivable subject but the one uppermost in Claire's mind, until she began to wonder
whether delicacy or contempt veiled his conversation. A half-hour passed ... an hour ... two.
Still the rain swept from the sullen sky. Twice Stillman made a futile attempt to remedy the
trouble with his engine, and twice he retired defeated to the shelter of the car. Claire was
relieved that she was in the company of a man who did not emphasize the monotonous hours by
indiscriminate raillery against the tricks of chance. At first he dismissed the situation with
the most casual of shrugs; later he acknowledged his annoyance by an expression of regret at
his companion's discomfort, but he stopped there.

As the hours went on, with no abatement of the storm's devastating energy, Claire grew less
and less pleased at the prospect. She began to wonder whether the shelter of Flint's roof had
not been, after all, the discreet thing. Was not her headlong flight in company with Stillman
more open to criticism than the frank acceptance of her employer's hospitality? But these vagrant
questions were the spawn of a colorless spirit of social expediency which fastens itself on
weak natures, and in Claire's case they died still-born. She had been too well schooled in
loneliness to lean heavily on the crooked stick of public opinion. Accustomed to standing alone,
she had something of the spiritual arrogance that goes with independence. People could think
what they liked. And it was more a realization of her mother's anxiety than any thought of
self which made her suggest to Stillman that they might get out and walk into Sausalito.

"I think the last boat leaves there at twelve-thirty," she finished. "Surely we could make
it if we keep going."

Stillman thrust his arm out into the drenching rain, and withdrew it instantly. "I'm afraid
that's out of the question, so long as the rain keeps up, Miss Robson," he said, in a tone
of implied objection. "Perhaps if it should stop...."

Claire settled back in her seat. Stillman was right. The storm was too furious to be lightly
braved.

It was eleven o'clock before a quick veering of the wind brought a downpour so violent that
what had gone before seemed little better than a rather weak rehearsal.

"It will clear presently," Stillman assured Claire. "Southeaster always break up in a flurry
like this from the west."

In ten minutes the stars were peeping brilliantly through rents in the torn clouds. Pungent
odors floated up from the rain-trampled stubble of the hillsides, the air was cleared of its
stifling oppressiveness, the first storm of the season was over.

Both Claire and Stillman clambered out at the first signs of the storm's exhaustion. Stillman
switched on his pocket-light and began to investigate the trouble with the engine. His decision
was swift and conclusive.

"It's hopeless," he announced, turning to Claire with a slight grimace. "We're stalled absolutely
and no mistake. I guess we'd better strike out and walk. No doubt we'll get a lift into Sausalito
before we've gone very far, but I dare say it's well to be on the safe side."

They rolled the machine to one side of the roadway and struck out hopefully. The rain had made
a thin chocolate ooze of the highway, and before they had gone a hundred yards their shoes
were slimy with mud. It appeared that Stillman had been something of an aimless wanderer for
many years, and as he talked on and on, giving detached glimpses of the remote places he had
visited, Claire had a curious sense of futility.

She read between his clipped and vivid sentences the tragedy of a personality worsted by the
soft hands of circumstances. This man might have done things. As it was he was an idler. He
gave her the impression of a man waiting vaguely for opportunity--like some traveler pacing
restlessly up and down a railway station platform in expectation of the momentary arrival of
a delayed train. She tried to imagine him as she felt sure he must once have been--youthful,
eager, ardent, a man of charming enthusiasms that just missed being extravagances, who could
bring zest to his virtues as well as to his follies.

"Surely," she thought, "something more than inclination must have pushed him into this deadly
stagnation."

And at once Miss Munch's insinuating question leaped up to answer:

"You know about his wife, of course!"

Were men put out of countenance by such impersonal tricks of fortune? Impersonal?... this domestic
tragedy?... Yes, Claire felt that it must be, otherwise the man tramping at her side would
have wrestled so passionately against fate as to have come away at least spattered with the
mud of defeat. No, Stillman was not defeated, he was merely arrested, restrained, held for orders.

He had been in London when the war broke out. He had stayed long enough to watch the stolid,
easy-going British public awake to the seriousness of the encounter, coming home after the
first air raids.

"I didn't mind being killed," he laughed, in explanation of his sudden flight. "But I didn't
like being so frightfully messed up in the process. I want a chance to strike back when I'm
cornered. The Zeppelin game was too much like a rabbit-drive to suit me."

As he spoke of these experiences, Claire listened with a quickening of the spirit. The prospect
of finding Stillman vibrant was too stirring to be denied. But he was still sober on this colossal
subject of war ... a bit judicial, always well poised. He had his sympathies, but they did
not appear vitalized by extravagances of feeling. Yet here and there Claire was conscious of
truant warmths, like brief flashes of sunlight through a somber forest.

"And the draft--what do you think of that?" The question rose to her lips as if his answer
might unlock the door to something deeper in the way of convictions.

He began with a shrug that chilled her; then his reply broke with sudden refreshment:

"It helps ... some of us. There are many who can't decide for themselves. The obvious duty
isn't always the correct one. In my case...."

He did not stop speaking suddenly, but his voice trailed off into a dim region of musing. They
both fell silent. But Claire knew. There was that haunting hope, almost like a fear, that his
wife might some day get better. That was what he was waiting for! It might come to-morrow ...
next week ... in a year ... never! But when it did come he felt that he must be there, ready.
She wondered whether he loved his wife very much, and she found herself hoping that he did....
It would help, somehow ... yes, if that were so his sacrifice gained point. On the other hand....
She put the thought away with a quick thrust, feeling that she had no right to such a speculation,
and presently she was aware that they were swinging into Sausalito.

Stillman looked at his watch. Twelve-thirty-five ... just five minutes late for the boat! She
could see that he was disturbed.

"I thought sure we'd get a lift," he railed, tossing aside a mangled cigar. "This is luck!...
I guess we'll have to rout out the Sherwins. It's something of a pull up the hill, but any
safe port in a storm, you know."

"The Sherwins?"

"Another one of the Edington girls. They have a bungalow at the very dizziest point in Sausalito."

But Claire objected and held firm. "I couldn't think of it, Mr. Stillman. No, really!... Please
don't insist."

They agreed on a lodging for Claire in a freshly painted but otherwise rather decrepit lodging-house,
just north of the ferry-slip. Its chief advantage was that it seemed quite too stagnant to
be anything but respectable, and the suppressed grumbling of the old shrew whom they routed
out confirmed their estimate. She didn't approve of couples who dragged God-fearing old women
out of bed at unholy hours in the morning, and it was only the generous tip from Stillman and
the assurance that he intended looking elsewhere for quarters for himself that reconciled her
to her loss of sleep and the compromise with her convictions.

For a good half-hour Claire sat with folded hands peering out from her room upon the damp hillside
to the west. From across the street came the bawdy thumping of a mechanical piano and the swish
of a sluggish tide. Her encounter with Sawyer Flint had forced the door of her virginal seclusion
and thrust her at once into the primitive and elemental open. She felt like one who was coming
out of voluntary exile to the pathos of a deferred heritage. Before her stretched the eagle's
horizon, but she had only the fledgling's strength of wing. She longed for the faith and courage
and daring to take life at its word, longed with all the dangerous fierceness of one who had
fed too long upon the husks of existence. And, longing, she fell asleep, sitting in a chair
before the open window, without thought or preparation....

       *       *       *       *       *

The morning broke cloudless. All traces of the night's fury were obliterated as completely
as sorrow from the face of a smiling child. The sun touched the open spaces with a tender,
caressing warmth, but the shadows held a keen-edged chill.

Claire decided upon an early boat to town.

"I'll be less likely to meet any of the California Street crowd," she said to herself, as she
picked her brief way toward the ferry.

The boat was crowded, especially the lower cabin. It was the artisans' boat and the air was
heavy with the smoke of pipe-tobacco. Claire passed rapidly to the dining-room. Perched upon
the high revolving chairs surrounding a horseshoe counter, a score or more of soft-shirted
men sat devouring huge greasy doughnuts and gulping coffee. The steward, taking note of Claire's
hesitation, came forward and led her to a seat at one of the side tables. She was about to
take advantage of the chair which he had drawn out for her when she heard her name called.
She turned. Miss Munch's cousin, Mrs. Richards, was sitting alone at the table just behind.
Claire's first feeling was one of relief--she was glad to discover an acquaintance. She thanked
the steward for his trouble and abandoned the proffered seat for the one opposite Mrs. Richards.
Almost at once she regretted her impulsive decision.

"I didn't know you intended staying at Flint's all night," Mrs. Richards began, fixing Claire
with a challenging gaze.

"I didn't intend to," returned Claire, her voice sharpened slightly.

Mrs. Richards took the lid off the sugar-bowl and powdered her grapefruit sparingly. "Have
they a nice home?" she questioned.

"Yes, very nice."

"They gave you an early start, didn't they?... It's almost impossible to get servants these
days to consider such a thing as serving breakfast much before eight o'clock."

Claire glanced at the bill of fare. Mrs. Richards's tone was a trifle too eager. "I suppose
it is," Claire assented, placing the menu-card back in its place between the vinegar and oil
cruets.

Mrs. Richards remained unabashed at her vis-à-vis's palpable indirectness. "I guess I'm old-fashioned,
but, servants or no servants, I don't believe I could let a guest of mine leave the house without
breakfast. It seems to me that if I'd been Mrs. Flint I'd have gotten up and made you a cup
of coffee myself."

Claire's growing annoyance was swallowed up in a feeling of faint amusement. "Perhaps Mrs.
Flint wasn't home," she said, beckoning the waiter.

"Oh!" Mrs. Richards exclaimed with shocked brevity.

It was not until the arrival of Claire's order of toast and coffee that Mrs. Richards found
her voice again.

"This business of wives staying from home all night gets me," Mrs. Richards hazarded, boldly.
"Why, I never remember the time when my mother remained away overnight ... not under any circumstances.
My father expected her to be there, and she always was."

Claire distributed bits of butter over the surface of her toast. She felt that in justice to
the Flint family it was not right for her to give Mrs. Richards's dangerous tongue any further
scope, however tempting was the prospect of leaving such venomous inquisitiveness ungratified.

"I think you misunderstood me, Mrs. Richards. I didn't say that Mrs. Flint remained away from
home last night. As a matter of fact I didn't stay at Yolanda, so I don't know anything about it."

"Oh!" faintly escaped Mrs. Richards for the second time that morning, but Claire was conscious
that there was more incredulity than surprise registered in the lady's tone.

"As a matter of fact," Claire continued, stung to incautious exasperation, "I spent the night
in Sausalito."

Mrs. Richards met this information with a disarmingly bland smile. "I didn't know you had friends
in Sausalito," she said, letting a spoonful of coffee trickle back into her cup.

"I haven't. I spent the night in a lodging-house ... on the water-front...."

"My dear Miss Robson, really I.... Why, I hope you don't think I was inquisitive!"

It was the simplicity of the challenge that made it impossible to be ignored. Claire knew that
she was trapped, but she was angry enough to decide on some reservation.

"The storm put the track between Yolanda and Sausalito out of commission," Claire found herself
snapping back too eagerly at her tormentor. "We tried to make the last boat by auto, but we
got stalled and missed it. We had to walk a good half of the way."

"I shouldn't think that would have done Mr. Flint's cold any good," Mrs. Richards said, drawlingly.

"Mr. Flint's cold?... I don't quite see what that has to do with it."

"Oh, you said 'we' I somehow got the impression...."

"No, Mrs. Richards, you've misunderstood me again." Claire threw a cool, even glance at her
antagonist. "I made the trip from Yolanda to Sausalito in Mr. Stillman's car."

"Oh!" said Mrs. Richards for a third time, and in this instance her voice was warm with gratification.

Claire directed her attention to her plate of buttered toast and her cup of coffee. She was
chagrined to think that she had fallen so easily into Mrs. Richards's very obvious traps. Not
that it mattered. She was quite sure that the truth could not harm Stillman, and she was equally
sure that her position in life was too obscure to stand out conspicuously against the darts
of Mrs. Richards's vindictive tongue. But she had the pride of her reticences and she did not
like to surrender these privileges at the point of insolent curiosity. The two continued to
eat in silence.

It was Mrs. Richards who finished first, and she dipped her fingers hurriedly into the battered
metal finger-bowl which the Japanese bus-boy thrust before her.

"Do you mind if I go along?" she inquired of Claire, with an air of polite triumph. "I think
I'll go forward where I can get a quick start ... before the crowd gets too thick. I've got
a million errands to do before nine o'clock. And I do want to run into the office before Gertie
settles down to work. I haven't seen her for a week and I've got more things to tell her!"

CHAPTER VIII

"Why, Miss Claire, how could you! Where have you been? And your mother in such a bad way!"
Mrs. Finnegan broke into sudden tears.

Claire, fumbling in her bag for the front-door key, looked up. Mrs. Finnegan had swung open
the door to the Robson flat and she stood like a vision of disaster upon the threshold.

"What has happened?" Claire's voice rose with a note of swift apprehension.

"Your mother ... she's paralyzed! She was taken last night. The doctor says it would have happened,
anyway. But I say it was worry, that's what it was. With you away all night and never a word!"

Claire climbed the stairs in silence, aware that Mrs. Finnegan was following at a discreet
distance. Already the house seemed permeated with an atmosphere of tragedy and gloom in spite
of the morning light pouring in unscreened at every window. Mrs. Robson's room was the only
exception to this unusual excess of cold radiance--unusual, because it was one of Mrs. Robson's
prides to keep her window-shades lowered to a uniform and genteel distance.

Until Claire came face to face with her mother she almost had fancied that her neighbor was
indulging in a crude and terrible joke, but one look sufficed. Mrs. Robson lay staring vacantly
at the ceiling; she could not move, she could not speak, and her spirit showed through the
veiled light in her eyes like a mysterious spot of sunshine in a shaded well. Above a swooning
sense of calamity Claire felt the strength of a tender pretense struggling to communicate its
vague hope to the stricken form. She raised the window-shade slightly and sat down upon the bed.

"Why, mother, what's all this?" she began, in a tone of gentle banter, as she stroked the helpless
hands. "Were you worried? I'm so sorry! I asked Miss Munch to let you know. Didn't she?...
I went over to Mr. Flint's to take dictation. The storm washed out the track. I tried to make
the boat in Mr. Stillman's car, but we broke down and missed it.... I had to stay all night
in Sausalito."

Mrs. Robson, stirring faintly, attempted to speak. Claire turned helplessly to Mrs. Finnegan.
"I can't make out what she is trying to say."

Mrs. Finnegan bent an attentive ear. "It's about Stillman," she explained. "Your mother don't
understand why...."

The speaker stopped with significant discretion. It was plain to Claire that nobody understood,
and she felt a dreary futility as she answered both her mother and Mrs. Finnegan with:

"It's a long story. Some other time, when ... when you're feeling better."

A look of gray disappointment crossed Mrs. Robson's face. Mrs. Finnegan's upper lip seemed
shaped suddenly with a suspicion that died almost as quickly as it began. There was a ring
at the bell. "That's the doctor," said Mrs. Finnegan, and she left to open the door.

The doctor chilled Claire with his steely nonchalance as she stood apart while he went through
the usual forms of a professional visit that was obviously futile. She followed him to the
front door. He answered her eager inquiries with the cold triumph of authority.

"How long will she last?... Well, Miss Robson, that is hard to say. She might go off to-night.
Then, again, she might live twenty years. She'll scarcely get any better, though. No, a nurse
isn't essential, unless you can afford one. But you ought to have another woman about. If you
have any relatives you'd better send for them and let them help out."

Claire did not find the doctor's announcement that her mother might die at once nearly so brutal
as his assurance that she had an equal chance for existing twenty years. Twenty years! Claire
closed the door and sank upon the steps overwhelmed.

But there was scant leisure on this first dreadful day of Mrs. Robson's illness for theatrical
exuberances. Claire, unaccustomed to the routine of household duties, took a thousand unnecessary
steps. She tried to work calmly, to bring an acquired philosophy to her tasks, but she went
through her paces with a feverish, though stolid, anxiety. The long night which followed was
inconceivably a thing of horror. Her wakeful moments were dry-eyed with despair, and when she
slept it was only to come back to a shivering consciousness.

Mrs. Finnegan found her next morning fresh from an attempt to rouse her mother into accepting
a few swallows of milk, which had ended in pathetic and miserable failure. She had thrown herself
in an abandon of grief across the narrow kitchen table, and the coffee from an overturned cup
was trickling in a warm, thick stream to the floor. But the paroxysm did her good. She rose
to the kindly caresses of her neighbor like a flower beaten to earth but refreshed by a relentless
torrent. After this, custom and habit began to reassert themselves in spite of the crushing
weight of circumstance. She 'phoned to the office. Mr. Flint had returned, they told her. She
explained her trouble to the cashier. "I'll try to be back the first of the week," she finished,
in a burst of illogical hope.

Later in the day Mrs. Robson's two sisters arrived in answer to Claire's summons. Claire's
impulse to send for them had been purely instinctive--an atrophied survival of clan-spirit
that persisted beyond any real faith in its significance. Perhaps she had a feeling that her
mother wished it; certainly she had no illusions as to the manner in which the unwelcome news
of Mrs. Robson's illness would be received by these two self-centered females.

It was Mrs. Thomas Wynne who came in first, bundled mysteriously in her furs and holding a
glass of wine jelly as a conventional symbol of the rôle of Lady Bountiful which she had for
the moment assumed. Claire could almost fancy how conspicuously she had contrived to carry
this overworked badge of the humanities, and the languid drawl of her voice as she explained
to her friends en route:

"So sorry I can't stop and chat. But, as you see, I'm running along to a sick-room.... Oh no,
nothing serious, I hope! Just my sister.... Mrs. Ffinch-Brown? Oh, dear no! A younger sister.
I don't think you know her. She's had a great deal of trouble and hasn't been about much for
a number of years."

Mrs. Thomas Wynne had the trick of intrenching a stubborn family pride by throwing back her
head and daring all comers to uncover any of the Carrol clan's shortcomings. But her selfishness
had at least the virtue of a live-and-let-live attitude that contrasted with the futile aggressiveness
of Mrs. Edward Ffinch-Brown. She asked Claire no questions concerning her life or her prospects;
she did not even pry very deeply into the chances that her sister had for an ultimate recovery.
Her philosophy seemed to be founded on the knowledge that uncovered cesspools were bound to
be unpleasant, and, since she had no desire to assist in their purification, she was quite
content to keep them properly screened. She came and deposited her wine jelly and patted her
sister's hand and went away again without leaving even a ripple in her wake. As she departed
she gave further proof of her insolent insincerity by calling back at Claire:

"Remember, Claire, if there is anything I can do, just let me know." 

172), was first introduced by Danaus; who brought it from Egypt to the Peloponnesus.[28] One
writer says that mysteries were, among the Greeks, and afterward also among the Romans, secret
religious assemblies, which no uninitiated person was permitted to
approach.

They originated at a very early period. They were designed to interpret those mythological fables
and religious rites, the true meaning of which it was thought expedient to conceal from the people.
They were perhaps necessary in those times, in which the superstitions, the errors, and the prejudices
of the people, could not be openly exposed without danger to the public peace. Upon this ground
they were tolerated and protected by the state.

Their first and fundamental law was a profound secrecy.


"You should braid your mother's hair, too. And why don't you pull the window down from the top?"

Claire stood in sullen silence while her aunt vented a personal annoyance on the nearest objects.
But when Mrs. Ffinch-Brown's ill-natured ministrations brought a dumb but protesting misery
to the sufferer's face, Claire found the courage to say, as gently as she could:

"Why bother, Aunt Julia? Mother is really too sick now to care much about appearances?"

This was just what Claire's aunt had hoped for. It gave her a chance for escape without any
strain upon her conscience. She did not remain long after what she was pleased to consider
a rebuff.

"Well, Claire, I see I can't be of much help," she announced as she powdered her nose before
the shabby hat-rack mirror and drew on her gloves.... After she was gone Claire found a five-dollar
bill on the living-room table. She opened the gilt-edged copy of Tennyson that, together with
a calf edition of Ouida's Moths, had stood for years as guard over the literary pretensions
of the household, and thrust the money midway between its covers. Doubtless a time was coming
when she would find it necessary to use this money, but the present moment was too charged
with the giver's resentful benevolence to make such a compromise possible.

For three consecutive days Mrs. Ffinch-Brown swooped down upon the Robson household and gave
vent to her pique. She had been divorced so long from these melancholy relations of hers that
she had really forgotten their existence, and she displayed all the rancor of a woman who discovers
suddenly a moth hole in the long undisturbed folds of a treasured cashmere shawl. Her precisely
timed visits had not the slightest suspicion of attentiveness back of them, and Claire guessed
almost at once that they were more in the nature of assaults carried on in the hope that she
would meet enough opposition to insure an honorable retreat. Unlike Mrs. Thomas Wynne, Aunt
Julia inquired minutely into family matters, insisted on knowing Claire's plans, and was aggressively
free with advice.

"You ought to be making plans, Claire," she said, at the conclusion of her second visit. "You
can't go on like this. I'd like to be able to do more, but of course I can't spare much time.
And next week you'll have to be getting into harness again. You'd better think it over."

And on the next day, finding that Claire obviously had not thought it over, she threw out a
hint that was little save a thinly veiled threat. She came in with a more genial manner than
she was accustomed to waste upon the desert air of penury, and Claire, well schooled in reading
the significance of proverbial calms, had a misgiving.

"I've been talking to Miss Morton ... about your mother," Mrs. Ffinch-Brown began, without
bothering to lead up to the subject. "You know Alice Morton.... Well, your mother does, anyway.
I bumped into her yesterday, quite by accident ... at a Red Cross meeting. It seems she's one
of the directors of The King's Daughters' Home for Incurables!" Claire was sitting opposite
her aunt, nervously fingering a paper-cutter. Mrs. Ffinch-Brown eyed her niece sharply, and
with an obvious determination to drive her thrusts home before her victim recovered from the
first vicious stabs she continued: "It seems they haven't a great deal of room out there, but
she thinks she could arrange things. They'll raise the price to two thousand dollars after
the fifteenth of the month, so I thought that--"

"Oh, not quite yet, Aunt Julia!... Mother has a chance. Surely...."

"Now, Claire, don't get hysterical. You're a business woman and you ought to be practical if
any of us are. The price to-day is one thousand dollars. Think of it! Care for life in a ward
with only three others! Now I can't ask your uncle for any more than is necessary in a case
like this. If we make up our mind promptly we can save just one thousand dollars."

For the moment Claire felt the harried desperation of a cornered animal. She had never seen
anything more disagreeable than her aunt's sidelong glance. She felt herself rise from her
seat with cold dignity.

"I'm afraid, Aunt Julia, I can't make up my mind as quickly as you wish. It isn't so simple
as it seems. I'm not above a plan like this if I'm convinced it's necessary. But somehow....
Oh, I know what you're thinking--you're thinking that beggars shouldn't be choosers. Well,
I'm not quite a beggar yet. But when I am, I won't choose.... I'll promise you that."

Mrs. Ffinch-Brown rose also. She was in a position to triumph in any case, and she was washing
her hands of the situation with eager satisfaction. "Oh, indeed! I'm glad you can say that
now. But you weren't always so independent. I suppose it never occurs to you to thank me for
what I did when you were younger."

Claire felt quite calm. The events of the past twenty-four hours had wrung her emotions dry.
"Yes, Aunt Julia," she said, with an air of cool defiance, "it occurred to me many times....
Perhaps if I'd had any choice...."

Mrs. Ffinch-Brown grew pale. "It's plain that I'm wasting my time here!" she sneered.

Claire went with her aunt to the door....

Mrs. Ffinch-Brown did not cross the threshold of the Robson home again, and when on the following
day Claire saw the figure of Mrs. Thomas Wynne outlined against the lace-screened front door
she let the bell ring unanswered.

       *       *       *       *       *

The dismissal of the last of the Carrol clan from any participation in the Robson destinies
gave Claire a feeling at once independent and solitary. There had been a vague hope that this
crisis might germinate some stray seeds of kinship, shriveled by the drought of uneventful
years. But the poisonous nettles of memory were the only harvest that had sprung from the presence
of Mrs. Robson's sisters, and Claire was glad to uproot the arid product of their shallowness.

The week came to a close with a rush of visitors. Suddenly it seemed as if everybody knew of
Mrs. Robson's illness. Fellow church members, old school friends, casual acquaintances began
to ring the front-door bell insistently. Knowing her mother's instinctive craving for recognition,
it struck Claire that it was the height of irony to see this belated crowd come swarming in
on the heels of calamity at the moment when Mrs. Robson was unable to so much as see them.
Mrs. Robson would have so liked to sit in even a threadbare pomp and receive the homage of
her visitors, but fate had been scurvy enough to withhold this scant triumph.

Nellie Whitehead breezed in on Saturday afternoon just as Mrs. Finnegan's cuckoo clock cooed
the stroke of three; immediately the air began to move out of adversity's tragic current. It
was impossible to be wholly without hope under the impetus of Nellie Whitehead's flaming good
humor.

"I'm all out of breath," she began, as she flopped into the first chair that came handy. "I
keep forgetting I ain't sweet sixteen any more and never been kissed. I hate to walk slow,
though. Don't you? Say, but you are up against it, ain't you! I saw that Munch dame on the
street and she nearly broke her old neck trying to catch up with me. I wondered what was the
matter, because she ain't usually so keen about flagging me. But, you know, she never misses
a trick at spilling out the calamity stuff, especially if it isn't on her.... 'Oh, Miss Whitehead,'
she called out before I had a chance to beat it, 'have you heard about Miss Robson's mother?'
...When she got through I fixed her with that trusty old eye of mine and I said, 'I suppose
you see her quite often.' And what do you think the old stiff said? 'Oh, I'd like to, Miss
Whitehead, but I really haven't had time. You know I'm doing all Mr. Flint's dictation now.'
And she had the nerve to try and slip me a hint that she was going to keep on doing it. But
I just said to myself: 'You should kid yourself that way, old girl! When Flint picks a bloomer
like you to ornament the back office it will be because his eyesight's failed him.' ...By the
way, how do you manage to stand him off--with religious tracts or a hat-pin?"

She hardly waited for Claire's reply, but plunged at once into another monologue.

"Do you know what I'm up to? I got my eye on the swellest fur-lined coat you ever saw ... at
Magnin's. But you can bet I'm going to keep my eye on it until after the holidays. They want
a hundred and a quarter for it now, but they'll be glad to take sixty-five when the gay festivities
are over, or I miss my guess. I go in every other day to have a look at it, and when the girl's
back is turned I hang it back in the case myself--'way back where everybody else will overlook
it. Oh, I know the game all right. I did the same thing with a three piece suit last summer.
But I say, All is fair in war and the high cost of living. Maybe you think I haven't had a
time scraping the wherewithal for that coat together. But I brought the total up to seventy
the other day by getting Billy Holmes to slip me a ten in advance for Christmas. I never trust
a man to invest in anything for me if I can help it. They usually run to manicure sets in satin-lined
cases or cut-glass cologne-bottles. Billy Holmes?... Oh, you know him! He ran the reinsurance
desk at the Royal for years. They put him on the road last week. He's some live wire. And what's
better, he has no incumbrances. I'll tell you what it is, Robson, I'm getting kind of tired
of the goings. I'm just about ready to settle down by the old steam-radiator. And as long as
I've got eyesight enough to look the field over, I've decided on a traveling-man or a sea-captain.
They'll be sticking around home just about often enough to suit me.... Not that I'm a man-hater,
but I've never had 'em for a steady diet and I'm not going to begin to get the habit this late
day."

Nellie Whitehead stayed about an hour, and, as Claire opened the front door upon her friend's
departure the letter-man thrust an envelope into her hands. She opened it hastily and turned
suddenly white.

"Well, Robson, what's wrong now?" inquired Nellie.

"Flint ... he's let me out ... Miss Munch was right!"

CHAPTER IX

On the selfsame Saturday of Claire's dismissal from the office ranks of the Falcon Insurance
Company Ned Stillman was the recipient of an early telephone message from Lily Condor. It appeared
that Flora Menzies, the young woman who usually accompanied her in her vocal flights, had been
laid low with pneumonia and she wanted Stillman to persuade Claire Robson to succeed to the
honorary position.

"She did so famously on that night of our musicale," Lily Condor had explained, "and Flora
won't be in shape again for a good three months. Of course, there isn't anything in it but
glory. I'm just one of those 'sweet charity' artists. But I think she is a dear, and I know
that you have influence."

Stillman pretended to be annoyed at Mrs. Condor's assumption that his word would carry any
weight in the matter, but as a matter of fact he felt pleased in secret masculine fashion.
Chancing to pass Flint's office at the noon hour, he dropped in. It happened that Miss Munch
was standing near the counter, and she answered his inquiries with suave eagerness.

"Oh, Miss Robson isn't with us any more. She hasn't been here for over a week--not since her
mother was taken sick. Oh, I thought you knew. You're Mr. Stillman, aren't you? I've heard
my cousin, Mrs. Richards, speak of you. Miss Robson went over to Mr. Flint's on that night
of the storm and she missed the boat or something--you know! And when she got home next morning
she found that her mother had worried herself into a stroke. They say she is quite helpless....
I'm sure I don't know what she intends doing. We mailed her check yesterday. It's always hard
to land another position when one is dismissed."

Stillman escaped quickly. Miss Munch's venom was a thing too crude and unconcealed to face
with indifference. Her emphatic "you know" was pregnant with innuendo and malice. Still, it
did not occur to Stillman that he had any part in Claire Robson's misfortune. But he did know
from Miss Munch's tone that the unfortunate situation, growing out of the automobile ride from
Yolanda to Sausalito, had received due recognition at the hands of those who made a business
of blowing out bubbles of scandal from the suds of chance. It was useless for him to deny that
Claire Robson from the first had been of more or less interest. She seemed to rise in such
a detached fashion from her environment.

He had to admit, as later he sat in the cloistered silences of his club library and blew contemplative
smoke-rings into the air, that a certain idle curiosity had been the mainspring of his concern
for her. He had been like a boy who captured a strange butterfly and clapped it under a glass
tumbler where he could watch how easily it would adapt itself to its new surroundings. But,
having caught the butterfly and held it a brief captive, the dust from its wings still lingered
upon the hands that imprisoned it. He had made the mistake of imagining that one is always
master of casual incidents. To meet a young woman by the most trivial chance, to extend a brief
courtesy to her, these were matters which hold scarcely the germs of a menacing situation,
not menacing to him, of course--they never could be menacing to him; he was still thinking
of things from the viewpoint of Claire Robson.

To tell the truth, he was annoyed at having been mixed up in Claire's flight from the Flint
household. Had Flint been a complete stranger he would not have minded so much. He was still
divided by the appeal to his chivalry and the sense of loyalty that a man feels to the masculine
friends of his youth. In her telephone message Claire had put the matter very casually--the
track was washed out and she was wondering whether he contemplated returning to town that evening.
But he guessed at once what lay back of her matter-of-fact boldness. He had guessed so completely
that he had decided not only to return to town, but to start at once.

He wondered now whether he had answered the appeal because a woman was in a desperate situation
or because that woman was Claire Robson. All through the dinner hour at the Tom Forsythes he
had thought about her, had speculated vaguely what mischance or effrontery had been responsible
for her ill-timed visit to Flint's. He remembered trying to decide whether the young woman
was extraordinarily deep or extraordinarily simple and frank. He did not like to concede that
he could be influenced by anything so transparently malicious as Mrs. Richards's statements
regarding the absence of Mrs. Flint, but he was bound to admit that they did nothing to render
the situation less innocent; what had particularly annoyed him was the fact that he should
have given the matter a second thought. To begin with, it was none of his business and he was
not a man who presumed to judge or even speculate on other people's indiscretions. Claire Robson
was no sheltered schoolgirl. She was a full-grown woman, in the thick of business life. Such
women were not taken unawares. He had just dismissed the whole affair from his mind on this
basis when Claire's telephone message came to him. Even now he marveled at the sense of satisfaction
that her appeal had given. But he had found no savor in a situation that compelled him to interfere
in Flint's program. Such a move on his part was contrary to his standards, to his training
in comradeship, to all his acquired philosophy. He had the well-bred man's distaste for getting
into a mess. He abhorred scenes and conspicuous complications.

He had come through the incident with steadily waning enthusiasm and a decision to wash his
hands in the future of all such unprofitable trifling. But the sudden knowledge that the young
woman was in desperate trouble revived his interest. He had no idea how serious Mrs. Robson's
illness was or whether Claire had any hopes for a new position. But Miss Munch's words had
been significant. Claire had been dismissed, and Stillman knew enough about present business
stagnation to conclude that for the time, at least, Claire Robson faced a bleak outlook. He
realized the indelicacy of any definite move on his part, but it occurred to him that it might
be well to talk the situation over with some one--preferably a woman. As he tossed his cigar
butt aside, Lily Condor appealed to him as just the person for the emergency. Therefore he
looked her up without further ado.

He found her at home, curled up among the cushions of a davenport that did service as a bed
when the scenes were shifted. She was living in a tiny apartment consisting of one room and
a kitchenette that gave Stillman the impression of a juggler's cabinet. Nothing in this room
was ever by any chance what it seemed. Things that looked like doors led nowhere; bits of stationary
furniture usually yielded to the slightest pressure and revealed strange secrets. He had seen
Mrs. Condor deftly construct a card-table out of an easy-chair, and he had no doubt that the
oak table in the center of the room could have been converted into a chiffonier or a chassis-lounge
at a given signal.

In repose, it struck Stillman that Mrs. Condor seemed very much like a purring cat. He had
never seen her quite so frankly behind the scenes, robbed of both her physical and mental make-up.
She was one of those women in middle age who adapt themselves to the tone of their background
and while she contrived to strike a fairly vivid note, she took care not to be discordant.
She was clever enough to realize that her talents were not sensational and that she could only
hope for an indifferent success as a professional. But in the rôle of a gracious amateur she
disarmed criticism and forced her way into circles that might otherwise have been at some pains
to exclude her. For, if the truth were known, there had been certain phases of Mrs. Condor's
earlier life which were rather vaguely, and at the same time aptly, covered by Mrs. Finnegan's
term of "gay." A perfectly discreet woman, for instance, would have made an effort to live
down her flaming hair and almost immorally dazzling complexion, but Mrs. Condor had been much
more ready to live up to these conspicuous charms. In fact, she had lived up to them pretty
furiously, until time began to take a ruthless toll of her contrasting points. From the concert-platform
she still seemed to discount, almost to flout, the years, but in secret she yielded unmistakably
to their pressure.

It was this yielding, pliant attitude that struck Stillman as he came upon her almost unawares
on that early December afternoon, a yielding, pliant attitude which gave a curious sense of
tenacity under the surface. And he thought, as he dropped into the chair she indicated, that
she was a woman who gained strength in these moments of relaxation.

"Fancy your catching me like this!" she said, "I thought when the bell rang that you were my
dressmaker.... If you want a highball you'll have to wait on yourself. Phil Edington brought
an awfully good bottle of Scotch last night. I declare I don't know what I'd do if I didn't
have a youngster or two on my staff. Old men are such bores, anyway, and, as a matter of fact,
they never waste time on any woman over thirty. Well, I don't blame them. We're a sorry, patched-up
mess at best.... Tell me, did you get hold of Miss Robson?"

"I dropped in, but she wasn't at the office," Stillman replied, tossing his hat on the center-table.

Mrs. Condor withdrew to the relaxation of her innumerable sofa pillows again. "Wasn't at the
office? How thrilling! Is she one of the Sultan's favorites?... I've heard Sawyer Flint was
an easy mark if you know how to work him. Miss Robson didn't strike me that way, though. But
I ought to have known that silent women are always cleverer than they appear."

Stillman caught the barest suggestion of a sneer in Mrs. Condor's tone--the sneer of a woman
relinquishing a stubborn hold upon the gaieties.

"Well, I guess Miss Robson didn't know how to work him, as a matter of fact," Stillman said,
quietly. "She lost her job to-day. I'm a little bit worried about her.... I came here on purpose
to talk the situation over with you."

His directness brought Lily Condor out of her languidness with a sharp turn. She wriggled up
and sat erectly on the edge of the davenport, one slippered foot dangling just above the other.
"Why, Ned Stillman, what an old fraud you are! They are entirely exempt, on the other hand, from
the care of the education of youth.

None but the professed have a voice in the election of a general, who must himself be of their
number, and who has the right of choosing from them the assistants, provincials, superiors,
and rectors. The general holds his office for life, and has his residence in Rome, where he
is attended by a monitor, and five assistants or counsellors, who
also represent the five chief nations: the Italians, Germans, French,
Spanish, and Portuguese. For a moment he had an impulse to bow himself out of her presence without further
explanation, but already she seemed to have a proprietary interest in him. Her smile was full
of friendly malice.

He ended by telling her everything, in spite of the conviction that he had approached the wrong
person.

"Of course," she hazarded, boldly, when he had finished, "you mean to help her out."

Her presumption annoyed but rather refreshed him. "I'd like to do something, but, hang it all,
what can be done?"

"What can be done? If that isn't like a man! Or I should say, a gentleman!... Why don't you
plunge in boldly and damn the consequences?... It's just your sort that sends women into the
arms of men like Flint. You're so busy keeping an eye on the proprieties that you miss all
the danger signals."

Her tone was extraordinarily familiar, and, to a man who rather prided himself upon his ability
to keep people at arm's-length, it was not precisely agreeable. Yet he knew that it would be
folly to give any hint of his irritation.

"Well," he contrived to laugh back at her, "so far as I can see, Miss Robson's problems are
quite too simple. After all, it's largely a question of money.... I can't go and throw gold
in her lap as if she were some beggar on a street corner."

"You mean, I suppose, that you are afraid to risk the outraged dignity of this ward of yours.
I think that's a lovely name for her. Don't you?... You're acquiring such a benevolent old
attitude. The only thing to be done, I fancy, is to adopt some transparent ruse--some sort
of Daddy-Long-Leggish deception." She closed her eyes thoughtfully--"Hiring her as my accompanist,
for instance." She rose to dispense Scotch and soda. Stillman sat in thoughtful silence, while
Mrs. Condor talked to very trivial purpose. She seemed suddenly to have grown tired of the
subject of Claire Robson. The arrival of the expected dressmaker broke in upon the rather one-sided
tête-à-tête.

"You'll have to go," Lily Condor announced with an intimate air of dismissal to Stillman. "It
would never do to let a mere man in on the secrets of the sewing-room."

At the door he hesitated awkwardly over his good-by. "I was wondering," he said, "whether you
were serious about ... about hiring Miss Robson as your accompanist. You know I think the plan
has possibilities."

She threw back her head and smiled with hard satisfaction. "I've been trying to figure if you
had killed your imagination. Think it over."

She gave him the tips of her fingers. He returned their languid pressure and departed.

As he drifted down the hall he heard her calling, half gaily, half derisively, after him:

"Don't decide on anything rash now.... Sleep over it!..."

       *       *       *       *       *

He thought it over for three days and when he called on Lily Condor again he found her divorced
from her languishing mood. She was dressed for dinner down-town, and he had to confess she
had made the most of what remained of her flaming hair and dazzling complexion.

He felt that she guessed the reason for his visit, although she took care to let him force
the issue.

"About Miss Robson," he said, finally, "I've concluded to take you at your word."

Lily Condor smoothed out her gloves and laid them aside. "Take me at my word? You're welcome
to the suggestion, if that is what you mean. As a matter of fact I wasn't serious."

He was annoyed to feel that he was flushing. He could not fathom her, but he had a conviction
that she had been serious and that this attitude was a mere pose. "Nevertheless, I think it
can be managed," he insisted. "And I want you to help me."

She listened to his plan. "What you will call a Daddy-Long-Leggish pretense," he explained
to her with an attempt at facetiousness. "You to do the hiring and ... and yours truly to provide
the wherewithal. Until things look up a bit. Of course then ... why, naturally, when things
look up a bit for her...."

But Lily remained lukewarm. She wasn't quite sure that it would be ... oh, well, he knew what
she meant! It seemed too absurd to think that he had given an ear to anything so extravagant.
She would like to be of service to Miss Robson, of course, but, after all, she felt that it
was taking an unfair advantage of the girl.

"If she's everything you say she is, she'd resent it all tremendously," she put forth as a
final objection.

"But she isn't to know! That's the point of the whole thing," he explained, with absurd simplicity.

"Oh, my dear man, she isn't to know, but she will, ultimately. You don't suppose the secret
of a woman's meal-ticket is hidden very long, do you? And, besides, you couldn't offer her
enough to live on. That would be absurd on the very face of it."

"Oh, well, I could offer her enough to help out a bit, anyway, and half a loaf you know...."

He broke off, amazed at the determination her opposition had crystallized. She looked at him
sharply and rose.

"I must be running along," she commented as she drew on her gloves. "I tell you, I'll go call
on Miss Robson--some day this week. A woman can always get a better side-light on a situation
like this. There are so many angles to be considered. She must have relatives. You wouldn't
want to make a false move, would you, now?"

He was too grateful to be suspicious at this sudden compromise with her convictions.

"You're tremendously good," he stammered. "It will be a favor. And any time that I can...."

"You can be of service to me right now," she interrupted, gaily. "Order me a taxi ... that's
a good boy! I always do so like to pull up at a place in style."

Stillman paid Lily Condor a third visit that week--this time in answer to the lady's telephone
message. She had been to see Claire Robson and her report was anything but rosy.

"Her mother's perfectly helpless and will be for the rest of her life," Lily volunteered almost
cheerfully. "And, frankly, I don't see what is going to become of them. It seems that Mrs.
Robson is a sister of Mrs. Tom Wynne and that dreadful Ffinch-Brown woman. They both have about
as much heart as a cast-iron stove. Miss Robson didn't say so in words, but I gathered that
she had called both of them off the relief job. I almost cheered when I realized that fact.
I threw out a hint about there being a possibility of my needing an accompanist. I said Miss
Menzies was ill and perhaps ... and I intimated that there was something more than glory in it."

"And what did Miss Robson say to that?"

"Oh, she was more self-contained than one would imagine under the circumstances. She said she
would like to think it over. She put it that way on the score of leaving her mother alone nights.
But, believe me, that young lady is more calculating than she seems. Of course I didn't mention
terms or anything like that. I left a good loophole in case you had changed your mind."

For the moment Stillman was almost persuaded to tell Lily Condor that he had changed his mind.
Not that he had lost interest in Claire, but already he had another plan and there was something
disagreeably presumptuous in Mrs. Condor's tone. He never remembered having taken anybody into
his confidence regarding a personal matter. The trouble was that he had begun the whole affair
under the misapprehension that it was a most impersonal thing. He still tried to look at it
from that angle, but Lily Condor's manner seemed bent on forcing home the rather disturbing
conviction that he had a vital interest in the issue. She had cut in upon his reserve and he
would never quite be able to recover the lost ground. He felt that she sensed his revulsion,
for almost at once she adroitly changed the subject and it did not come to life again during
the remainder of his call.

But when he was leaving she thrust an idle finger into the lapel of his coat and said:

"I think it's awfully good of you, Ned, to be human enough to want to do something for others.
I watched you as a young man, and when you married...." His startled look must have halted
her, for she released her hold upon him and finished with a shrug.

He said good-by hastily and escaped. But he wondered, as he found his way out into the street,
how long it would be before Mrs. Condor would acquire sufficient boldness to discuss with him
what and whom she chose.

CHAPTER X

Christmas Day came and went with a host of bitter-sweet memories for Claire Robson. Not that
she could look back on any holiday season with unalloyed happiness, but time had drawn the
sting from the misfortune of the old days. Through the mist of the years outlines softened,
and she was more prone to measure the results by the slight harvest that their efforts had
brought. For instance, they had never been too poor to deny themselves the luxury of a tree.
And a tree to Mrs. Robson meant none of the scant, indifferent affairs that most of the neighbors
found acceptable strung with a few strands of dingy popcorn and pasteboard ornaments. No, the
Robson tree was always an opulent work of art, freighted with bursting cornucopias and heavy
glass balls and yards of quivering tinsel. The money for all this dazzling beauty usually came
a fortnight or so before the eventful day in the shape of a ten-dollar bill tucked away in
the folds of Gertrude Sinclair's annual letter to Mrs. Robson. As Claire had grown older she
had grown also impatient of the memory of her mother squandering what should have gone for
thick shoes and warm plaid dresses upon the ephemeral joys of a Christmas tree. But now she
suddenly understood, and she felt glad for a mother courageous enough to lay hold upon the
beautiful symbols of life at the expense of all that was hideously practical. Shoes wore out
and plaid dresses finally found their way to the rag-bag, but the glories of the spirit burned
forever in the splendor of all this truant magnificence, and the years stretched back in a
glittering procession of light-ladened fir-trees.

Then some time between Christmas and New-Year came the Christmas pantomime at the Tivoli, with
its bewildering array of scantily clad fairies and dashing Amazons and languishing princes
in pale-blue tights; to say nothing of the Queen Charlottes consumed between acts through faintly
yellow straws. How Claire would mark off each day on the calendar which brought her nearer
to this triumph! And what a hurry and bustle always ensued to get dinner over and be fully
dressed and down to the box-office before even the doors were opened, so that they could get
first choice of the unreserved seats which sold at twenty-five cents. Then there would ensue
the long, tedious wait in the dimly lighted cavern of the playhouse, smelling with a curious
fascination of stale cigars and staler beer, and the thrill that the appearance of the orchestra
produced, followed by the arrival of all the important personages fortunate enough to afford
fifty-cent seats, which gave them the security to put off their appearance until the curtain
was almost ready to rise. And when the curtain really did rise upon the inevitable spectacle
of villagers dancing upon the village green! And Mrs. Robson carefully picked out in the chorus
the stout sister of a former servant who had worked for her mother! And the wicked old witch
swept from the wings on the traditional broomstick! From that moment until the final transformation
scene, when scintillating sea-shells yielded up one by one their dazzling burdens of female
loveliness and a rather Hebraic Cupid descended from an invisible wire to wish everybody a
happy New-Year in words appropriately rhymed, there was no halt to the wonders disclosed. With
what sharp and exquisite reluctance did Claire remain glued to her seat, refusing to believe
that it was all over! Even at this late date Claire had only to close her eyes to revive the
delights of these rather covert excursions into the realm of fancy--covert, because a Tivoli
pantomime had not precisely the sanction of such a respectable organization as the Second Presbyterian
Church. Mrs. Robson, while not definitely encouraging Claire to wilful dishonesty, always managed
to warn her daughter by saying:

"I wouldn't tell any one about going to the Tivoli, Claire, if I were you ... unless, of course,
they should ask about it."

Claire, in mortal terror lest any indiscretion on her part would put a stop to this annual
lapse into such delightful immoralities, held her peace in spite of her desire to spread abroad
the beauties which she had beheld. She had a feeling that all the participants in the pantomime
must of necessity be rather wicked and abandoned creatures, and half the pleasure she had felt
in viewing them arose from a secret admiration at the courage which permitted human beings
to be so perfectly and desperately sinful. Although she was almost persuaded that perhaps it
did not take quite such bravado to be wicked in blue-spangled gauze and satin slippers as it
did to lapse from the straight and narrow path in a gingham dress and resoled boots.

The only thrill that the present Christmas Day produced came in the shape of a pot of flaming
poinsettias bearing the card of Ned Stillman. These were the first flowers that Claire ever
remembered having received. It pleased her also to realize that Stillman had been delicate
to the point of this thoroughly unpractical gift, especially as he had every reason to assume
that something more substantial would have been acceptable. She was confident that by this
time he had heard through Mrs. Condor of her mother's illness and her loss of position. Claire
was still puzzled at Mrs. Condor's visit. For all that lady's skill at subterfuge, there were
implied evasions in her manner which Claire sensed instinctively. And then Claire was not yet
inured to the novelty of being in demand. To have been forced by circumstance upon Mrs. Condor
as an accompanist was one thing; to be desired by her in a moment of cold calculation was quite
another; and there had been more uncertainty than caution in Claire's plea for time in which
to consider the offer. But as the days flew by it became more and more apparent to Claire that
she was in no position to indulge in idle speculation. She had long since given up the hope
of fulfilling the demands of a regular office position, even if one had been open to her. Mrs.
Finnegan's enthusiasm to be neighborly and helpful was more a matter of theory than practice,
and it did not take Claire many days to decide that she had no right to impose upon a good
nature which was made up largely of ignorance of a sick-room's demands. Claire's final check
from Flint was dwindling with alarming rapidity; indeed, she was facing the first of the year
with the realization that there would be barely enough to pay the next month's rent, let alone
to settle the current bills. She had no idea what Mrs. Condor intended paying, but she fancied
that it must be little enough. Surely Mrs. Condor did not receive any great sum for her singing
and there must be any number of gratuitous performances. She decided quite suddenly, the day
after Christmas, to take Mrs. Condor at her word, and she was a bit disturbed at both the lady's
reply and the manner of it.

"Oh," Mrs. Condor had drawled rather disagreeably, "I thought you'd given up the idea. I spoke
to somebody else only this morning. But, of course, I'm not certain about how it will turn
out. I'll keep you in mind and if the other falls through.... By the way, how is your mother?
I keep asking Ned Stillman every day what the news is, but he never knows anything. All men
are alike ... unless they've got some special interest. Sometimes I marvel that he looks me
up so regularly, but then I've known him ever since.... But there, I'll be telling more than
I should! Do come and see me. I'm always in in the morning.... Yes, I can imagine you do have
a lot to do. I'm so sorry you didn't call up sooner. But one never can tell. Good-by.... I
hope you'll have a happy New Year."

Claire hung up the receiver. Well, she had lost an opportunity to turn an easy dollar or two
and she had no one to thank but herself. Why had she delayed in accepting Mrs. Condor's offer?

Fortunately the unexpected arrival of Nellie Whitehead cut short any further repinings. Claire
was frankly glad to see her and at once she thought, "She has come to show me her new coat."

But Nellie Whitehead was incased in a wrap that showed every evidence of a good six months' wear.

"My new coat?" the lady echoed, in answer to Claire's question. "There ain't no such animal.
Somebody else copped it. I didn't shove it back far enough the last time I took a look at it,
I guess. Oh, well, I should worry! I can get along very well without it...."

When Nellie Whitehead rose to leave, dusk had fallen and Claire was fumbling for matches to
light the hall gas, when she felt her friend's hand close over hers. There followed the cold
pressure of several coins against Claire's palm and the voice of her visitor sounding a bit
tremulous in the dusk.

"You'll need some extra money, Robson, or I miss my guess."

Claire fell back with a gesture of protest. "Why, Nellie Whitehead, how could you? It's your
coat money, too! Well, I never!"

And with that they both burst into tears.... When Claire recovered herself she found that Nellie
Whitehead had escaped. She lit the gas and opened her palm. Four twenty-dollar gold pieces
glistened in the light.

       *       *       *       *       *

Next morning Claire received a telephone message from Mrs. Condor. The position of accompanist
was hers at forty dollars a month if she desired it.

"It won't be hard," Mrs. Condor had finished, reassuringly. "Some weeks I've something on nearly
every night. And then again there won't be anything doing for days.... How can I afford to
pay so much? Well, my dear, that is a secret. But don't worry, you'll earn it...."

And toward the close of the week there came another surprise for Claire in the shape of a letter
from Stillman, which ran:

    MY DEAR MISS ROBSON.--I am going to take a little flier at the bean
    market.

    That was my father's business and I know a few things about it--at
    least to the extent of recognizing the commodity when the sack is
    opened. Do you fancy you could arrange to give me a few hours a week
    at the typewriter? If so, we can get together and arrange terms.

    Cordially,

    EDWARD STILLMAN.

"At last," flashed through Claire's mind, "he's going in for something worth while."

This time she decided promptly. Over the telephone she made an appointment with Stillman, in
his apartments, for beginning work on the second Wednesday in January.

CHAPTER XI

Shortly after the first of the year Claire received her initial summons from Lily Condor--they
were to appear at a concert in the Colonial Ballroom of the St. Francis for the Belgian relief.
Mrs. Condor had intimated that the affair was to be smart, and so it proved. It was set at
a very late and very fashionable hour, and all through the program groups of torpid, though
rather audible, diners kept drifting in. Claire was not slow to discover that Lily Condor was
first on the bill, and she remembered reading somewhere in a newspaper that among professionals
the first and last place were always loathsome positions. Judging from the noise and confusion
that accompanied their efforts, Claire could well understand why this was so, and she expected
to find Lily Condor resentful. But to her surprise Mrs. Condor merely shrugged her shoulders
and said:

"What difference does it make? They don't come to listen, anyway. Besides, I always open the
bill. I like to get it over quickly."

But Claire had reason to suspect, as she followed the remainder of a very excellent program,
that the choice of position did not rest with Mrs. Condor. Claire began to wonder how much
money Mrs. Condor received for an effort like this. And she became more puzzled as she gathered
from the conversation of the other artists about her that the talent had been furnished gratuitously.

"I understand," she heard a woman in front of her whisper to her companion, "that Devincenzi,
the 'cellist, is the only one in the crowd who is getting a red cent. But he has a rule, you
know--or is it a contract? I'm sure I don't know. At any rate, they say that the Ffinch-Browns
donated his fee.... The Ffinch-Browns? Don't you know them?... See, there they are ... over
there by the Tom Forsythes. She has on turquoise pendant earrings.... Oh, they're ever so charitable!
But they do say that she is something of a...."

Claire lost the remainder of this stage whisper in a rather tremulous anxiety to catch a glimpse
of her aunt before she moved. Claire had to acknowledge that at a distance her aunt gave a
wonderful illusion of arrested youth as she stood with one hand grasping the collar of her
gorgeous mandarin coat. But Claire was more interested in the turquoise pendants than in her
aunt. She had never seen the jewels before, but she had heard about them almost from the time
she was able to lisp.

"They're mine," Mrs. Robson had repeated to Claire again and again. "My father bought them
for me when I was sixteen years old. I remember the day distinctly, and how my mother said:
'Don't you think, John, that Emily is a little young for anything like this? I'll keep them
for her until she is twenty.' I nearly cried myself sick, but of course mother was right, then....
But like everything else, I never got my hands on them again. And what is more, Julia Carrol
Ffinch-Brown knows that they are mine as well as anybody, because she stood right alongside
of me when I handed them over to mother. Not that I care.... It's the principle of the thing!"

Claire felt disappointed in the pendants. They seemed so insignificant--to fall very far short
of her mother's passionate description of them, and she began to wonder which was the more
pathetic, Mrs. Robson's exaggerated notion of their worth or the pettiness that gave Aunt Julia
the tenacity to hold fast to such trivial baubles.

Ned Stillman was in the audience, also. Claire saw him sitting off at the side. Indeed, she
spotted him on the very moment of her entrance upon the stage. She had been nervous until his
friendly smile warmed her into easy confidence; and though, while she played, her back had
been toward him, she felt the glow of his sympathy. As Lily Condor and she swept back upon
the stage for their rather perfunctory applause, and still more perfunctory bouquets provided
by the committee, Claire could see him gently tapping his hands in her direction, and she was
surprised when the usher handed her a bouquet of dazzling orchids.

"They must be for you," Claire said, innocently enough, to Mrs. Condor. "I don't find any name
on them."

"That shows that you've got a discreet admirer, at any rate," Lily Condor returned with that
bantering sneer which Claire was just beginning to notice. And the thought struck her at once
that Stillman had sent the flowers. She was pleased, but also a little annoyed to think he
had so deliberately ignored Mrs. Condor.

The Flints were there, too; Flint looked uncomfortable and warm in his scant full-dress suit
and his wife frankly ridiculous in a low-cut gown that exhibited every angle of a hopelessly
scrawny neck. Claire did not see them until she was leaving the stage, and she smiled as she
saw Flint lean over and pick up the opera-glasses from his wife's lap. But this was not all.
In a far corner sat Miss Munch and her cousin, Mrs. Richards, their ferret eyes darting busily
about and their tongues clicking even more rapidly. Doubtless Flint had invested in a number
of tickets at the office for business reasons and passed them around for any of the office
force who felt a desire to see society at close range.

Claire had not meant to stay beyond one or two numbers following her own appearance, but she
kept yielding to Mrs. Condor's insistent suggestions that she "stay for just one more," until
she discovered, to her dismay, that it was past midnight. The last artists were taking their
places upon the stage. Claire resigned herself to the inevitable and sat out the remainder
of the performance. She was making a quick exit into the dressing-room when she came face to
face with her aunt. Mrs. Ffinch-Brown betrayed her confusion by the merest lift of the eyebrows,
and she stepped back as if to get a clearer view of her niece, as she said with an air of polite
surprise:

"You--here?"

Claire carried her head confidently. "I was on the program," she returned, consciously eying
the turquoise pendants.

Mrs. Ffinch-Brown rested a closed fan against her left ear as if to screen at least one of
the earrings from Claire's frank stare. "Oh, how interesting! I must have missed you--I came
in late. It's rather odd. I thought I knew everybody on the program.... I helped arrange it."

"Well," Claire smiled, "I wasn't what you would call one of the head-liners. I played Mrs.
Condor's accompaniments."

"That accounts for it ... my not knowing, I mean. I dare say your mother is better, otherwise
you wouldn't be here."

Claire met her aunt's thrust calmly. "No, mother is worse, if anything. As a matter of fact,
I'm here...."

She broke off abruptly, realizing suddenly that she had left her orchids behind. She turned
to discover Stillman making his leisurely way toward her. He had the orchids in his hand.

"My dear Miss Robson," he said, gently, "Mrs. Condor came very near appropriating your flowers."

She could feel the color rising to her forehead. "I see you came to my rescue again," she said,
simply, taking them from him. "I think you know Mr. Stillman, Aunt Julia."

Mrs. Ffinch-Brown forced a too-sweet smile as she gave Stillman a nod of recognition. "Fancy
any girl forgetting so much gorgeousness!" she exclaimed with an attempt at lightness, but
Claire caught the covert rancor in her voice, and as her aunt made a movement of escape she
put out a restraining hand and said:

"I wanted you to know, Aunt Julia, that I'm here merely as a matter of business. Mrs. Condor
has hired me to play her accompaniments."

Mrs. Ffinch-Brown shook off Claire impatiently. "Hired you!" she sneered. "How extraordinary!"

And with that she swept past, giving Stillman a glance of farewell.

Claire turned to Stillman. "What must you think of me? Leaving my flowers behind. Confess--it
was you who sent them.... I was in such a rush to get away, though. I shouldn't have stayed
so long. My mother is alone.... Of course there are neighbors just below and they will look
in on her, but just the same...."

His smile reassured her. "Are you forgetting about to-morrow?" he asked. "Remember we are to
begin business promptly at two o'clock. I hired a typewriting-machine yesterday. I'm really
thrilled at the idea of--of going into business."

She looked at him steadily as she gave him her hand: "My dear Mr. Stillman," she said, quite
frankly, "you are very kind."

He answered by pressing her hand warmly and she covered her face with the purple orchids. They
were interrupted by Lily Condor sweeping rather arrogantly toward them.

"Haven't you gone yet?" she asked Claire. "I thought you were in a hurry! I hope you've persuaded
Ned to get us a taxi. I hate street-cars at this hour." And in answer to Claire's embarrassed
protest that she had never given such a thing a thought, Mrs. Condor finished: "Well, I've
given it a thought, and don't you forget it. Come, Ned, is it a go?"

Claire fancied that a flicker of annoyance passed over Stillman's face as he answered, with
a dry laugh:

"You might at least have given me time to prove my gallantry."

"I'm not taking any chances," was the prompt reply.

Claire turned away. What had contrived to give Mrs. Condor this disagreeable air of assurance
toward Ned Stillman, she found herself wondering. It had not been apparent at the Condor-Stillman
musicale....

She arrived home dismayed to find the front room illuminated, but the rattle of the departing
taxi brought Mrs. Finnegan to the top of the stairs with a laughing apology.

"I just looked in to see how your mother was, Miss Claire, and I found a book on the front-room
table"--Mrs. Finnegan held up Ouida's Moths--"and I got so interested in it that I just naturally
forgot to go home. Finnegan's out, anyway. I was telling him about your good fortune. And all
he said was: 'Well, it beats me how an old crow like Mrs. Condor gets paid for singing. I remember
five years ago, when she wasn't so uppish, we had her for a benefit performance of the Native
Sons, and she didn't get paid then. Her singing may be over my head. Anyway, it didn't get
to my ears.' But Finnegan is always like that. He just likes to contradict. I got back at him.
I said, 'Well, if she can afford to pay Miss Claire forty a month for playing the piano, she
must get a good piece of money every time she opens her mouth.' ...Mercy, look at the orchids!
Well, you must have had a swell time. I'll bet you wouldn't like to tell who sent them....
There wasn't any card? That's not saying you don't know, Miss Claire.... I hope you won't think
I'm a meddler, but I'm an older woman and.... Well, just you keep a sharp eye on the feller
that sends you orchids, Miss Claire."

She went down-stairs without further ado. Claire put the orchids in water and set them on a
sill near an open window. She did not feel in the least resentful of Mrs. Finnegan's warnings.
She was too confident to be anything but faintly amused at her neighbor's middle-class anxiety.
But Finnegan's skepticism concerning Mrs. Condor annoyed her and she remembered the disagreeable
words of her aunt:

"Hired you? How extraordinary!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Two o'clock sharp!" The memory of Stillman's air of delicate banter as he emphasized the hour
for beginning his business venture struck Claire ironically the more she pondered his words.
She had a feeling that there was something farcical in the prospect, and yet there seemed nothing
to do but to go through with the preliminaries. She presented herself, therefore, at the appointed
time at the Stanford Court apartments.

She found Stillman quite alone, his hands blue-black with the smudge from a refractory typewriter
ribbon which he was vainly endeavoring to adjust. It took some time for him to get his hands
clean again, and Claire sharpened her pencils while she waited. But there really proved to
be nothing to do.

"I'm all up in the air over this bean business," Stillman confessed, nonchalantly. "The government,
you know ... they're taking over all that sort of thing ... regulating food and prices. Of
course, in that case...."

Claire felt an enormous and illogical relief. "Then you really won't need me," she ventured.

"Oh, quite the contrary.... I have a certain amount of business, of a sort. And I'm tired of
dropping checks along the trail of public stenographers.... Suppose we talk terms. We haven't
fixed on any salary, yet."

Claire felt a rising impatience. His subterfuge seemed too childish and obvious. "That will
depend on how much of my time you expect, Mr. Stillman."

"Well, three times a week, anyway ... to start with. Say Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays from
two to five.... I was thinking that something in the neighborhood of fifteen dollars a week
would be fair."

He turned a very frank gaze in her direction and she quizzically returned his glance.

"That's rather ridiculous, don't you think?" she said, trying to disguise her furtive annoyance.
"You can hire a substitute through any typewriting agency on the basis of three dollars a day."

"Yes, and I can buy two cigars for a nickel, but I shouldn't want to smoke them."

She clicked the keys of her machine idly. "That is hardly a fair comparison. You can get any
number of competent girls for three dollars."

He rested his chin on his upturned palm. "But, my dear Miss Robson, I happen to want you."

She thought of any number of cheap, obvious retorts that might have been flung back at his
straightforward admission, but instead she said, with equal frankness:

"That's just what I don't understand."

He threw her a puzzled look and the usual placid light in his eyes quickened to resentful impatience.

"Is that a necessary part of the contract, Miss Robson?"

She caught her breath. His tone of annoyance was sharp and unexpected. There was a suggestion
of Flint's masculine arrogance in his voice. She felt how absurd was her cross-examination
of him, of how absurd, under the circumstances, would have been her cross-examination of anybody
ready and willing to give her work to do and an ample wage in the bargain, and yet, for all
the force of his reply, she knew it to be a well-bred if not a deliberate evasion.

"You mean it is none of my business, don't you?" she contrived to laugh back at him.

His reply was a further surprise. "Yes, precisely," he said, with an ominous thinning of the lips.

She rose instinctively to meet this thrust and she was conscious that even Flint had never
managed so to disturb her. She glanced about hastily as if measuring the room in a swift impulse
toward escape. Stillman had chosen the dining-room for a temporary office, and upon the polished
surface of the antique walnut table the typewriter struck an incongruous note; indeed, it was
all incongruous, particularly Stillman and his assumed business airs. Yes, it was absurd for
her to either cross-examine or protest, but it was equally absurd for him to pay her such an
outlandish sum for nine hours a week.

"He's doing it for me," she thought, not without a sense of triumph. While the multitude was
permitted to gaze at them, it learned to believe that there was something
sublimer than anything with which it was acquainted, revealed only
to the initiated; and {40} while the worth of that sublimer knowledge
did not consist in secrecy alone, it did not lose any of its value
by being concealed.

Thus the popular religion and the secret doctrines, although always distinguished from each other,
united in serving to curb the people.

The condition and the influence of religion on a nation were always closely connected with the
situation of those persons who were particularly appointed for the service of the gods, the
priests. The scholar will readily call to mind a Calchas, a Chryses, and others. The leaders
and commanders themselves, in those days, offered their sacrifices (see the description which
Nestor makes to Pallas, Od. iii., 430, &c.), performed the prayers, and observed the signs which indicated
the result of an undertaking. In a word, kings and leaders were at the same time PRIESTS.[43]

How
far may this have been a reason why Pharaoh did not call on a priest for help, but rely on
the supposed superior knowledge of the Magi? a higher grade of secret instruction, perhaps,
than he had received.

So far as the children of Shem and Japheth are concerned, it is believed
true religion was preserved, except where tradition became adulterated
with extraneous matter.

And for the preservation of that religion, Almighty God, in his mercy,
established of that lineage a certain race, with rules, partly signifying
his truth, partly merely political, which should thereafter shine
as a moral light to the world, no matter how dim the light might be,
through the imperfection of human nature under peculiar circumstances
of temptation or otherwise.

 He wondered whether this new trick was the result of his business ventures,
his sly charities, or his approach toward the suggestive age of forty. Associating the name
of Lily Condor with his covert charities, he was almost persuaded that they lay back of this
preposterous habit. And the more he thought about it the more he muttered and became convinced
that Lily Condor was usually the topic of these vocal self-communings.

Ned Stillman had always prided himself upon his sense of personal freedom concerning the trivial
circumstances of life. Of course, like any man of sensibility, he was bound by the chains that
deeper impulses forge, but he had never been hampered by any restraints directed at his ordinary
uprisings and downsittings. In short, he had answered the beck and nod of no man, much less
a woman, and he was not finding Lily Condor's growing presumptions along this line altogether
agreeable.

He would not have minded so much if there was any personal gratification in yielding to the
lady's whip-hand commands. There are certain delights in self-surrender which give a zest to
slavery, but there is no joy in being held a hostage. Looking back, Stillman marveled at the
indiscretion he had committed when he handed over not only his reserve, but Claire Robson's
reputation into the safekeeping of Lily Condor. Had he ever had the simplicity to imagine that
a woman of Mrs. Condor's stamp would constitute herself a safe-deposit vault for hoarding secrets
without exacting a price? Well, perhaps he had expected to pay, but a little less publicly.
He had not looked to have the lady in question ring every coin audibly in full view and hearing
of the entire market-place, and yet, if his experience had stood him in good stead, he must
have known that this was precisely what she would do. Stillman's hidden gratitude, his private
beneficences, did not serve her purpose, but the spectacle of him in the rôle of her debtor
was a sight that went a long way to establishing a social credit impoverished by no end of
false ventures.

Her command for him to take her to luncheon--and it had been a command, however suavely she
had managed to veil it--bore also the stamp of urgency. Usually she was content to lay all
her positive requests to the charge of mere caprice, but on this occasion she took the trouble
to intimate that there was a particular reason for wanting to see him. It did not take him
long to conclude that this particular reason had to do with Claire Robson. That was why he
yielded with a better grace than he had been giving to his troublesome friend's disagreeable
pressure.

Stillman knew that while Lily Condor was not precisely jealous of the younger woman, she was
distinctly envious--with the impersonal but acrid envy of middle age for youth. The episode
of the orchids still rankled. He had to admit that in this instance his course had been tactless,
but he had ignored Mrs. Condor as a challenge to the presumption which he had already begun
to sense. She, while seeming definitely to evade the real issue, had answered the challenge
and he had paid for his temerity a hundredfold. She had reminded him again and again in deft
but none the less positive terms that she was keeping a finger on the mainspring of any advantage
that came her way. Sometimes Stillman wondered whether she would really be cattish enough to
betray his confidence and bring Claire Robson crashing down under the weight of the questionable
position into which his indiscretion had forced her. Would she really have the face to publish
abroad the pregnant fact that Ned Stillman was providing what she had been pleased to designate
as a meal-ticket for a young woman in difficulty? For himself he cared little, except that
he always shrank instinctively from appearing ridiculous.

He had been thinking a great deal of late as to the best course to pursue in ridding himself
and Claire of this menacing incubus. He had a feeling that Claire, having exhausted the novelties
of her position as accompanist to Lily Condor, was beginning to find the affair irksome.

The business venture had progressed in quite another direction from his original intention.
Suddenly, without knowing how it had all come about, he found his plans clearly defined. The
government needed him. Somehow, it had never occurred to him that he could be of service at
a point so far from the center of war activities. He had been a good deal of an idler, it was
true, but the seeds of achievement were merely lying in fallow soil.

At first, he had been stung into action more by Claire's accusing attitude than anything else.
She used to come every other afternoon at the appointed time and almost challenge him by her
reproachful silence to do something, if only to provide her with an illusion. It was as if
she said:

"See, I have given in to you. I know that you are doing this for me, and I am deeply grateful.
But won't you please make the situation a little less transparent? Won't you at least justify
me in the eyes of those who are watching our little performance?..."

It had all ended by his offering his services to the Food Administration. He knew something
of his father's business. He felt that he had a fair knowledge of beans, and he could learn
more. He merely asked a trial, and it surprised him to find what a sense of humility suddenly
possessed him. He was really overjoyed when a place was assured him. But he had to admit that
his acceptance was not accorded any great enthusiasm. The newspapers mentioned it in a scant
paragraph that was not even given a prominent place. He had received greater recognition for
a brilliant play upon the golf-links! Well, in such stirring times he was nobody. He did not
complain, even to himself, but the knowledge subconsciously rankled.

He hired an office down-town, joined the Commercial Club, religiously attended every meeting
that had to do with food conservation, hunted out, absorbed, appropriated all the economic
secrets that served his purpose.... Suddenly he found himself engrossed, enthusiastic, busy!
Finally Claire said to him one day:

"Don't you think I ought to come to you every afternoon?"

"If you can arrange it," he almost snapped back at her.

She did arrange it, how he took no pains to inquire, and a little later she said again:

"You ought to have some one here all day. I guess you will have to look for another stenographer."

He remembered how menacingly he had darted at her. She was dressed for the street, on her way
home, and she had halted at the door.

"Do you want to desert the work that you've inspired?" he demanded.

"Inspired?... By me?" Her voice took on a note of triumph.

"You didn't fancy that I inspired it, did you?" he sneered at her.

His vehemence confused her. "I hadn't thought.... Really, you know.... Well, as you say....
But, of course, it is absurd when you can get any number of girls to...."

"But suppose I want you?" he demanded of her for a second time.

She left without further reply.

When she was gone he found himself in a nasty panic. It was as if the lady who had called him
to her lists had suddenly decided upon a new defender.

"Is she tired of it all ... or is there some one else? Can it be possible that Flint...."

He had stopped short, amazed to find his mind descending to such a vulgar level. What had come
over him? And he began to fancy things as they once had been--empty, purposeless days, and
nights that found him too bored to even sleep. It seemed incredible that he could go back to
them again. What lay at the bottom of his sudden deep-breathed satisfaction with life? For
an instant, the truth which he had kept at bay with his old trick of evasion swept toward him.

"No ... no," he muttered. "Oh no!... That would be too absurd!"

But when he had gone to the mirror to brush his hair before venturing on the street he found
thick beads of perspiration on his forehead and his hand shook as he lifted the comb.

The next day he told Claire that in the future her salary would be twenty dollars a week. He
stood expecting her to rail against the increase, to try to put him to rout by explaining that
she had received less for a full day's work at Flint's. But to his surprise she thanked him
and went on with her work.

It was shortly after this that he began to haunt the various performances in which Lily Condor
and Claire appeared. He always contrived to slip in during the first number, which as a rule
happened to be Mrs. Condor's offering, and he sat in a far corner where nobody but that lady
could have chanced upon him. But he never knew her to fail in locating him, or to miss the
opportunity to sit out the remainder of the program at his side, or to suggest crab-legs Louis
at Tait's, particularly if Claire were determined upon an early leave-taking. The effect of
all this was not lost upon the general public, and it was not long before men of Stillman's
acquaintance used to remark facetiously to him over the lunch-table:

"What's new in beans to-day?... Are reds still a favorite?"

Stillman would throw back an equally cryptic answer, thinking as he did so:

"What a wigging I must be getting over the teacups! I guess I'll cut it all out in the future."

But he usually went no farther than his impulsive resolves.

Sometimes he wondered what Claire thought of his faithful appearance. Did she fancy that he
came to bask in the smiling impertinences of Lily Condor?

As he made his way to a street-car on this vivid February afternoon, he called to mind that
of late Claire had been bringing a fagged look to her daily tasks. He hoped again that Mrs.
Condor's desire to see him had to do with Claire--more particularly with her dismissal as accompanist.
Miss Menzies had quite recovered and there was really no reason for Claire to continue in her
service. It struck him as he pondered all these matters how strange it was to find him concerned
about these feminine adjustments--he who had always stared down upon trivial circumstances
with cold scorn.

He arrived at Lily Condor's apartments almost upon the lady's heels. Her hat was still ornamenting
the center-table and her wrap lay upon a wicker rocker, where, with a quick movement of irritation,
it had been cast aside.

Her greeting was not reassuring. "Oh...." she began coldly. "Isn't this rather late for lunch?"

"I'm really very sorry," Stillman returned as he took a chair, "but to be frank, I quite forgot
about you."

"Well," she tried to laugh back at him, "there isn't any virtue as disagreeable as the truth.
I expected you would at least attempt to be polite enough to lie."

"I hope you were not too greatly inconvenienced," he said, in a deliberate attempt to ignore
her irritation.

"I waited two hours, if that is what you mean. But then, my time isn't particularly valuable."

He rose suddenly. "I've told you that I was sorry," he began coldly, reaching for his hat.
"But evidently you are determined to be disagreeable. I fancied you wanted to see me about
something urgent, so I came almost as soon as I remembered."

She snatched the discarded wrap from its place on the wicker rocker as she glared at him. "You're
in something of a hurry, it seems.... Well, I sha'n't detain you. The truth is there's a pretty
kettle of fish stewed up over this young woman, Claire Robson.... I want you to tell her that
she can't play at the Café Chantant next Friday night."

"Want me to tell her? I don't see where I come in.... Why don't you tell her yourself?"

"Because I don't choose to.... Besides, I think you might do it a little more delicately. I
can't tell her brutally that she isn't wanted."

"Isn't wanted? Why, what do you mean?"

"The committee informs me that she isn't the sort of person they are accustomed to have featured
in their entertainments. It seems that Mrs. Flint...."

"Mrs. Sawyer Flint?"

"Precisely."

"What is her objection?"

"Do you really want me to tell you?"

"Why not?"

"It appears that some time last fall Miss Robson tried to get her husband into a compromising
position. She came over to the house one night when Mrs. Flint was away. Flint promptly ordered
her out. It seems she went ... to be quite frank ... with you. And what is more, she...."

"It isn't necessary for you to go any farther. Tell me, do you mean to say that you believe
this thing? Didn't you lift a hand to defend her?"

Lily Condor narrowed her eyes. "Oh, come now, Ned Stillman, don't be a fool! You know as well
as I do that I'm hanging on to my own reputation by my finger-nails. I'm not taking any chances.
As to whether it is so ... well, if I were to tell the committee everything I know it wouldn't
help her cause any. I could wreck her reputation like that," she snapped her fingers, "with
one solitary fact. If she hasn't wrecked it already with her senseless chatter.... Only last
week her aunt, Mrs. Ffinch-Brown, said to me: 'So you're hiring my niece! I must say that is
handsome of you!' You were sitting talking to Claire and she looked deliberately at you when
she said it. Remember how I warned you, last December. I told you then that the secret of a
woman's meal-ticket was never hidden very long."

During this speech Mrs. Condor's voice had dropped from its original tone of petty rancor to
one of petulant self-justification. Stillman knew at once that her ill-temper had caught her
off-guard and she was already trying to crawl slowly back into his favor. She had meant, no
doubt, to soften her news over a glass or two of chilled white wine which she had counted on
sipping during the noon hour. She might even then have gone farther and decided to cast her
fortunes with Stillman and Claire if she had seen that her advantage lay in that direction.
He was not sure but that she still had some such notion in her mind. But he felt suddenly sick
of her past all hope of compromise, and he was determined to be rid of her once and for all.

"No doubt," he said, frigidly, "you will be glad to be relieved of Miss Robson's presence permanently.
I take it that you don't consider her association exactly ... well ... shall we say discreet?"

Her eyes took on a yellow tinge as she faced him. She must have sensed the finality of his
tone, the well-bred insolence that his query suggested.

"Discreet?" she echoed. "Well, I wouldn't say that that was quite what I meant. Desirable--that
would be better. I don't find her association desirable.... I don't want her, in other words."

He had never been so angry in his life. Had she been a man he would have struck her. He felt
himself choking. "My dear Mrs. Condor," he warned, "will you be good enough to take a little
more respectful tone when you speak of Miss Robson?"

"Oh, indeed! And just what are your rights in the matter? You're not her brother ... you're
surely not her husband. And I didn't know that it was the fashion for a...." His look stopped
her. She trembled a moment, tossed back her head, and finished, defiantly, "Yes, that is what
I want to know, what are your rights?"

He took a step toward her. Instinctively she retreated.

"A woman like you wouldn't understand even if I were to tell you," he flung at her.

She covered her face with both hands.

He left the room.

He himself was trembling as he reached the street--trembling for the first time in years. As
a child he had been given to these fits of emotional tremors, but he had long since lost the
faculty for recording physically his intense moments. Or had he lost the faculty for the intense
moments themselves, he found himself wondering, as he walked rapidly toward his home. The evening
was warm with the perfume of a bit of truant summer that had somehow escaped before its time
to hearten a winter-weary world against the bitter assaults of March. Birds of passage sang
among the hedges, the sun still cast a faint greenish glow in the extreme west.

His first thought was of the cowering woman he had just left. He had meant to lash her keenly
with his verbal whipcords, but he had not expected to find her quite so sensitive to his cutting
scorn. He remembered the gesture with which she had lifted her hand as if to screen herself
from his insults. There was a whole life of futile compromise in just the manner of that gesture,
a growing helplessness to give straightforward thrusts, a pitiful admission of defeat. But
he knew that this surrender was temporary--a quick lifting of the mask under a relentless pressure.
To-morrow, in an hour, in ten minutes, Lily Condor would be her dangerous self again, lashed
into the fury of a woman scorned. For a moment he did not know whether to be relieved or dismayed
at the prospect of Mrs. Condor for an enemy. How much would she really dare?

He thought with a lowering anger of Flint. He had been ready to concede everything but this
former friend in the rôle of a cheap and nasty gossip. No--gossip was a pale, sickly term.
Flint was a malignant toad, a nauseous mud-slinger, a deliberate liar. He had heard of men
who had justified themselves with vile tales to their insipid, disgustingly virtuous wives,
but he had not counted such among his acquaintances. By the side of Flint, Lily Condor loomed
a very paragon of the social amenities.

Stillman was conscious that his mental process was keyed to the highest pitch of melodrama.
It was not usual for him to indulge in mental abuse. He had never quite understood the dark
and moving processes of red-eyed anger. There had been something absurd in the theatrical hauteur
of his manner in this last scene with Mrs. Condor--that is, if it were measured by his own
standards. His growing detachments from life had claimed him almost to the point of complete
indifference. But now, suddenly, as if Fate had dealt him an insulting blow upon the face with
her bare palm, he felt not only rage, but a sense of its futility, its impotence.

"Flint!" he thought again. And immediately he spewed forth the memory of this man in a flood
of indiscriminate epithets.

       *       *       *       *       *

Later, in the refuge of his own four walls and under the brooding solace of an after-dinner
cigar, he lost some of the intensiveness of his former humor. But the force of the vehemence
which had shaken him filled him with much wonder and some apprehension. He was too much a man
of experience to deny questions when they were put to him squarely by circumstances.

"You're not her brother ... you're surely not her husband. And I didn't know it was the fashion
for a...."

Lily Condor's clipped question struck him squarely now. Just what were his expectations concerning
Claire Robson? The thought turned him cold. Essentially he was of Puritan mold, but he had
always had a theory that love of illicit pleasures must have been uncommonly strong in a people
who found it necessary to fight the flesh so uncompromisingly. Battling with the elements upon
the bleak shores of New England contributed, no doubt, to the gray and chastened spirits that
these grim folks had won for themselves; spirits that colored and sometimes seeded swiftly
under the softer skies of California. San Francisco was full of these forced blooms consumed
and withered by the sudden heat of a free and traditionless life. He knew scores of old-timers--his
father's friends--who had been gloriously wrecked by the passion with which they met freedom's
kiss. They had pursued pleasure with an energy overtrained in wrestling with the devil and
had paid the penalty of all ardent souls lacking the prudence of weakness. There was at once
something fine and unlawful about the spirit of adventure: it implied courage, impatience of
restraint, wilfulness--in short, all the virtues and vices of strength. He had felt at times
the heritage of this strength, shorn of its power by the softness of a wilderness that had
been wooed instead of conquered. His forefathers had found California a waiting, gracious bride,
but there had been almost a suggestion of the courtezan in the lavishness of this land's response
to the caresses of the invaders.

There was something fantastic in the memory of his father, fresh from the austere dawns of
the little fishing village of Gloucester, transplanted suddenly to the wine-red sunsets of
the Golden Gate. Maelzel's automata, or Vaucanson's duck, will attract the world, when Bacon's, or
Newton's, or Laplace's works may remain in dust on the book-shelves. Human nature is always the
same, and thus it was in the days of Moses and Pharaoh.
 Ezra Stillman came from a long line of salt-seasoned tempters of
the sea; their virtues had been rugged and their vices equally robust; sin with them had been
gaunt, sinewy, unlovely; there was nothing insinuating and soft about the lure of pleasure
in that silver-nooned environment. Ezra had been the first of this long line to turn his back
upon the sea, and the land had rewarded him lavishly as if determined to make his capture complete.
Yet, he was not landsman enough to wrest a living direct from the soil; instead, he set up
his booth in the market-place of the town and tr

